The Federal Open Market
Committee decided today to raise its
target for the federal funds rate by
25 basis points to 51⁄2 percent.

[Same as A]

Readings on core inflation have
been elevated in recent months.
The moderation in the growth of
aggregate demand and anchored
inflation expectations should help to
contain inflation in coming quarters.
However, the high levels of resource
utilization and of the prices of
energy and other commodities have
the potential to sustain inflation
pressures.

The extent and timing of any
additional firming that may be
needed to foster a moderation in
inflation pressures will depend on
the evolution of the outlook for
both inflation and economic
growth, as implied by incoming
information.

[None]
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to keep its target for the
federal funds rate at 51⁄4 percent.

Economic growth was moderate during
the first half of the year. Financial
market conditions have deteriorated in
recent weeks, leading to tighter credit
and an intensification of the housing
correction. These developments have
the potential to restrain growth in
economic activity. Nonetheless, the
economy seems likely to continue to
expand at a moderate pace over coming
quarters, supported by solid growth
outside the housing sector and a robust
global economy.

Readings on core inflation have
improved modestly this year. However,
a sustained moderation in inflation
pressures has yet to be convincingly
demonstrated. Moreover, the high level
of resource utilization has the potential
to sustain those pressures.

In the current circumstances, the
Committee judges that the downside
risks to economic growth are now
roughly balanced by the upside risks to
inflation. Future policy adjustments will
depend on the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to keep its target for the
federal funds rate at 3-1/2 percent.

Financial markets remain under
considerable stress, and the tightening of
credit and the deepening of the housing
contraction could weigh further on
economic growth. However, recent
policy actions should promote moderate
growth over time.

The Committee expects inflation to
moderate in coming quarters. However,
upward pressure on inflation could result
from several factors, including further
increases in energy, commodity, and
other import prices. Therefore, it will be
necessary to continue to monitor
inflation developments carefully.

Appreciable downside risks to growth
remain. The Committee will continue to
assess the effects of financial and other
developments on economic prospects
and will act in a timely manner as needed
to address those risks.
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to keep its target for the
federal funds rate at 3 percent.

Growth in consumer spending has
slowed, labor markets have softened,
and financial markets remain under
considerable stress. Although
downside risks to growth remain,
recent policy actions should help to
promote moderate growth over time.

Inflation has been elevated, and upward
pressure on inflation could result from
several factors, including further
increases in energy, commodity, and
other import prices. Although the
Committee expects inflation to
moderate in coming quarters, the
upside risks to the outlook for inflation
have increased. The Committee will
continue to monitor inflation
developments carefully.

The Committee will continue to assess
the effects of financial and other
developments on economic prospects
and will act in a timely manner as
needed to promote price stability and
sustainable economic growth.