









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

November 16, 1976 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

 
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 

the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 
or past members of the Committee. 

 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 

involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 

 
Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 

 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

Content last modified 01/11/2011.



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

November 16, 1976 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 16, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Par tee 
Wallich 
Winn 
Guffey, Alternate for Mr. Balles

Messrs. Baughman, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Davis, Kichline, Reynolds, 

and Zeisel, Associate Economists



11/16/76

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Scheld, and 
Sims, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Chicago, and San 
Francisco, respectively 

Messrs. Burns, Davis, and Snellings, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Kansas City, and 
Richmond, respectively 

Mr. McNees, Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hall, Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
November 16, 1976 

 
 

[Executive session] 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  [Two items] I thought it best to take up in executive session.  One 
is to discuss a little [unintelligible] the Mexican situation and what [unintelligible] the 
subcommittee of this Committee has been up to.  And the second item that I wish to discuss with 
the [Committee] is Mr. Reuss’s request for the minutes of Reserve Bank board meetings.   

Now let me say a little about the Mexican situation and then call on Mr. Wallich to talk to 
you about developments there and our own relation to those developments, and perhaps in detail.  
As you may recall, we have a swap facility for Mexico.  Mexico can draw on us for up to $360 
million; such a drawing was made earlier this year, and that amount was later repaid, or repaid 
recently.  The original loan to Mexico of $360 million was not made by us with due deliberation, 
with due care.  We acted, I think, a little mechanically.  There was this arrangement, they asked 
for the money, and we asked a few questions, grumbled a little, and just went along.  The fact of 
the matter is that we are very poorly informed about Mexico’s financial condition, and I’m not 
proud of the way in which we have conducted ourselves.  I’m not talking about the decisions.  
I’m talking about the degree of knowledge, the amount of information we had at the time we 
made the decision.   

Since then, we have taken strong steps to familiarize ourselves not only with the situation 
in Mexico on a current basis but to keep up-to-date records, as thorough as we can make them, 
for each of the countries with which we have a swap arrangement.  And we are far better 
organized today to deal with a request for a loan or a swap drawing than we were previously.   

There was a time when swap drawings were virtually automatic.  Our attitude has changed; 
mine certainly has.  When Britain came in earlier this year, the initial request was for $3 billion.  
Without going through the details, I agreed with the British on the sum of $2 billion and 
indicated we would not go above that.  And then I went to the Treasury and asked the Treasury 
to become our partner, the reason being that Britain is no longer as creditworthy as it once was.  
And I’m afraid that is the kind of world we live in as far as foreign borrowing from us--much of 
it--is concerned.  We have not said anything about that publicly, and I don’t think we should.  
We would only add to anxiety and uncertainty.  But I no longer regard the swap facility as being 
quasi-automatic.  I don’t think it should be.   

Now, I haven’t found anyone who anticipated a depreciation of the Mexican peso of 50 
percent or more.  The financial policies conducted by that country have been scandalous--we 
were inadequately informed.  Well, we now understand, I think, the situation in Mexico with 
reasonable thoroughness.  The Mexicans have now come in for a request for a new borrowing.  
That request was studied with the utmost care by your subcommittee.  We had one meeting after 
another on the issue, raised one question after another, one kind of conversation after another 
with the Mexicans, one conversation after another with the Treasury.  The long and short of it is 
that Mexico may be very close to bankruptcy.  I mean by that the enormous foreign debts 
Mexico has contracted--it is by no means clear that Mexico will be able to service these debts, 



11/16/76 - 2 - 
 

  
 

and a moratorium may need to be declared, [with] the debts being rescheduled.  Now that would 
be a most unfortunate development because our banks are heavily involved in lending to Mexico.  
And of course it could set off moratoria elsewhere around the world.   

Taking things all and all, recognizing that Mexico is not a good borrower, recognizing that 
any amount that we might loan to Mexico may not be repaid for some time, the subcommittee 
still decided unanimously to make a loan of $150 million and not go above that.  That is exactly 
what the Treasury has made available to the Mexicans, so we’re being partners in that deal just 
as we were on the British case.  Now, you might wonder why would we make a loan in the case 
of a country the prospects of which are so gloomy and the prospects of which in any event are so 
highly uncertain?  The factor that led me finally to conclude that it was desirable, I believe--and 
other members of the subcommittee were governed by similar thoughts--was that if Mexico were 
to declare a moratorium in the near future, having received no help at all from this central bank, 
then we would inevitably share a certain responsibility for the collapse and for the difficulties 
that would be caused to our commercial banks.   

Now, if you ask me, am I at all sure that a loan of a $150 million by us would prevent such 
a default, the answer is, oh, no, by no means.  It’s really a drop in the bucket, considering 
Mexico’s enormous need to borrow.  But a new government will come into power, and that, of 
course, influenced our thinking to a degree.  And if a reflow of capital took place, Mexico could 
straighten out its affairs; if a reflow doesn’t take place, then I am afraid Mexico will go down the 
drain.  Now I am going to call on Mr. Wallich to add to my comments in any way he sees fit. 

MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t think there’s a great deal I can add to what you 
say.  You’ve adequately, accurately described the situation of Mexico.  Going into a little more 
detail, they have moved into a period of uncertainty about the exchange rate after many years in 
which it was taken for granted that the exchange rate was stable.  As a result, there developed in 
Mexico a great degree of ease of moving between dollars and pesos; there is no exchange 
control, people can maintain dollar deposits in Mexican banks, they can take their dollars out of 
the country, of course.   

This system, once stability has been abandoned, becomes very troublesome.  The dollars 
deposited in Mexican banks can be sent abroad very easily, or they can be withdrawn in 
currency.  That’s the reason why we have these heavy currency shipments to Mexico.  It’s a form 
of capital flight that is difficult to manage by means of interest rate policy.  Interest rate policy 
affects the corporate borrower, but it is not, on the whole, the corporate borrower who is taking 
his money out of Mexico; it’s the individual who has dollar deposits, or even has peso savings, 
and cashes those in and buys dollars.   

Now, in the face of that, the Bank of Mexico, in my opinion, has tried far too long and far 
too hard to hold up the rate.  The Fund [IMF] told them at the beginning of the negotiations that 
led to the last agreement--the Fund has had three missions there this year--the Fund told them 
that they had concluded that a 50 percent depreciation would be needed.  The initial depreciation 
was much less than that.  They held the rate at this level, which cost about $1 billion of reserves.  
Finally, they had to let go and went to what is, in effect, close to 50 percent depreciation.  The 
peso used to be 8 cents, and now it is around 4.  Even then, the Mexican central bank has tried to 
manage the rate and convey a sensation of upward trend in order to reduce the capital flight.  



11/16/76 - 3 - 
 

  
 

They have invested less money in this effort than before, but they needed additional reserves, 
and that is one reason for the drawing.   

The other reason for the drawing on Treasury and the Federal Reserve is that they need 
compensating balances.  They typically keep 1.2 billion to 1.6 billion of compensating balances 
with their various banks--these are their exchange reserves.  Now these are down into the low 
hundreds [of millions].  The Treasury examined the possibility of a swap that would give the 
Mexicans only compensating balances that they couldn’t in effect draw out, but it was 
abandoned because it would create legal problems, and there are no particular strings attached to 
either the Treasury’s or our drawing.   

We had, in the new drawing that was agreed, a sharp cutback from the original level of the 
swap.  That level remains as being a general authorization, but then in this particular case, 
instead of 360, we said a limit of 150.  This they were to take down in two tranches of 75 each, 
the second one to occur after they had secured a loan from Bank of America, which is being 
negotiated--800 million--and which, according to reports from the Mexicans, is being signed 
today.  So that would create the conditions in which the second drawing could be made.  The 
first drawing was made right after the agreement.   

We had a new wrinkle in this swap, which gives us a little added protection, although I 
would caution not to overrate it.  They had to agree to a maintenance-of-value clause.  If the 
peso, which fluctuates in the market, should go down during the period of the 90-day drawing, 
then, in the first place, they’re expected to repay; but second, if it is [mutually] agreed not to 
repay, to extend the swap. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You mean repay at the end of three months. 

MR. WALLICH.  Three months.  But if we agree that it is to be rolled over, and if the peso 
has depreciated at that time, they have to put in additional pesos so that the dollar value of 
collateral is maintained.  In the back of this there is the thought--which I am sure is obvious to 
them, although we have not made it overt--that we could go into their market and sell these pesos 
for what they would bring.  Now this, of course, could [unintelligible] by blocking this account, 
and it is a thing that we would hardly do except in extremes, but the fact that they would have to 
take further action to keep us from doing so, I think, will slightly weight the scales in their mind 
in favor of doing what they can to meet their obligation.  The Treasury tried to get a similar 
arrangement into their swap, but they found again the legal problems defeated them, so they are 
going without this little added protection.   

Now as to the future, the Chairman has described the situation.  A new government is 
coming in, and the President is a former finance minister.  It is hoped that he will inspire 
confidence.  His views are not 100 percent known, and there is some apprehension even that they 
might lean in the direction of the agricultural reform, and other things, that would certainly not 
add to confidence.  The Fund thinks that the situation is manageable if they decide to do the right 
things, that is, cut down government expenditures and keep wages from rising unreasonably.  On 
both fronts, so far, they have not performed very well.  The government deficit looks as if it 
might be larger than expected and will have to be renegotiated with the Fund to preserve the 
standby.  On wages, the increases were larger than were seemingly agreed with the IMF.   



11/16/76 - 4 - 
 

  
 

Other than that, there is as yet no obvious impediment to the continued viability of Mexico.  
They claim that this $800 million loan, negotiated after the devaluation, was oversubscribed.  It’s 
being signed apparently on schedule, to the date that they have said, although they’re getting the 
money a little later than they had led us to believe.  They have not yet negotiated for next year, 
on the ground that when one is negotiating one big loan, one must not be negotiating something 
else.  They do have to borrow something on the order of $250 million a month, given that they 
will have something like, at best, a $2 billion current account deficit, and ought to restore their 
reserves by about a billion.  That does not yet allow for any reflows.  If they get reflows, their 
situation will be very materially improved.  Total outflows just during this year were roughly 
guessed to have been at $2-1/2 billion.  So very large Mexican amounts abroad could come back 
if there’s confidence of great profit in pesos to the owners, and it depends entirely on the attitude 
of the new government. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you very much.  There is one additional word that I’d like 
to say before exposing myself and Mr. Wallich and other members of the subcommittee to 
questioning.  These conversations with Mexico were practically concluded by Sunday evening, 
November 7.  On the morning of November 8, we [the FOMC] had a telephone conference, at 
which time we took up our longer-range monetary targets--the subject on which I had to testify 
on the 11th.  Therefore it would have been possible for me to take up this subject of the Mexican 
loan on the morning of November 8 with members of the Committee.   

Now, I thought long and hard about that.  It certainly would have been my intention, my 
strong preference.  But this is such a highly sensitive subject, and I’m told that our telephone 
hookup is not absolutely secure.  Therefore, I decided that if any leak occurred, it could cause 
great convulsions that would cause waves all around the world, and I decided therefore not to do 
it.  Now your subcommittee met continuously, with the exception of Mr. Volcker, who was out 
of the country part of the time.  Mr. Volcker was fully informed, and the subcommittee was 
entirely unanimous, but I did want you to know that this technically could have come before the 
Committee at the meeting on the 8th and my reason for not bringing it up [then]. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  A clarification:  $150 million [from the] Federal Reserve and $150 
[from the] the Treasury? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s right. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Any magic in those numbers that they arrived at? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no magic--hard bargaining.  We started out being reluctant to 
do anything, but afterward, you know, [in] our own discussions [with the Treasury]--the attitude 
of the Treasury, taking into account repercussions on the world at large, on our own banks, the 
position that we would be in if we ignored entirely the difficulty of another central bank--the 
Treasury previously reached this agreement of 150 and indicated [to us] that they would be 
receptive to--in view of the possible consequences--increasing their loan.  We went along with a 
150 and indicated to the Mexicans that we don’t have any intention of going beyond that.  Mr. 
MacLaury. 



11/16/76 - 5 - 
 

  
 

MR. MACLAURY.  As I remember our last spot takeout--in fact, for a short time, at least, 
it was the ESF--the Exchange Stabilization Fund--that took us out.  Were they then funded by a 
drawing on the IMF?  Is that the sequence of events, that’s, in other words-- 

MR. WALLICH.  The Mexicans paid us; it might have gone the other way. 

MR. MACLAURY.  But it didn’t go that way, and at the moment, what is the status of the 
Mexican ability to draw on the IMF?  Can we look to that as a takeout this time around, or are 
we on a limb? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We have made no such condition this time. 

MR. WALLICH.  The effect of doing that is the Mexicans are going to get $235 [million] 
a year for three years from the Fund.  The first year, 1977, the Treasury is going to prefinance in 
tranches of three pieces again, not the next two years, so there is nothing for us to get our teeth 
into. 

SPEAKER(?).  Mr. Chairman, what is the extent of the exposure of the commercial 
banking industry in this country?  That’s something you mentioned. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t have the figure in mind--$8 billion, I think. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think it’s a little over, I think it’s 9, close to 9. 

SPEAKER (?).  So this is merely a drop in the bucket? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you see, their borrowing needs as best we can judge are 
about $250 [million] per month. 

MR. PARTEE.  Do they remain in debt to the Treasury for that earlier, what was it, $300 
[million]? 

MR. WALLICH.  That was repaid out of the IMF. 

MR. PARTEE.  So that all the debt to the United States officially [will be] this 300, and we 
have indicated to them that they can’t use any of the remaining part of the swap.  Is that right? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Henry and I had the initial conversations, and Henry carried 
on a conversation later on.  My understanding is that that’s what you communicated to the 
Mexicans.  Would you answer that question precisely? 

MR. WALLICH.  They were told that we wouldn’t go over 150 even though the swap 
remained at its original level of 360, and it’s geared to be the same as to the Treasury; that’s 
because the Treasury went to 150. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Henry, who are the banks besides Bank of America, Citicorp--I don’t 
mean by name, not many, not at all. 



11/16/76 - 6 - 
 

  
 

MR. WALLICH.  All I can tell you is that the bank that usually heads syndicates with 
them did not do it, and that’s how Bank of America got into it. 

MR. COLDWELL.  You don’t know how many other banks are involved? 

MR. WALLICH.  No, I don’t.  I was told by them that it was oversubscribed, which 
suggests that it was more than a very small number, but I can’t tell you. 

MR. PARDEE.  It’s a goodly number, I think 10 or a dozen. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I understood there’s a number of regional banks waiting in the wings 
to participate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There are plenty of sheep in this country. 

SPEAKER(?).  Is this $9 billion all government debt, I mean to the Mexican government? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh, no, their total debt, total known indebtedness is well over 20 
billion.  That is known indebtedness abroad. 

SPEAKER (?).  I’m thinking of the American banks. 

MR. WALLICH.  To American banks [unintelligible,] in part government, part 
nationalized enterprises, and part private enterprises.  In Mexico, the proportion of private 
borrowers out of total Mexican foreign indebtedness is particularly high because it’s that kind of 
a country. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me call on Mr. Gardner, Mr. Gardner may want to comment, 
and then, I know, [Mr.] Volcker. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, my only comments, gentlemen--you have heard a complete 
review of the conditions surrounding the request.  I’ll only attempt to again put it in a time and 
schedule structure.  It’s early November.  We know there is a negotiation going on for $800 
million credit.  We know also that Mexico must begin rolling over and arranging for rollovers for 
this enormous amount of credit they already have outstanding in our country and internationally.  
The Echeverría government goes out of office on December 1.  The IMF conditions which were 
so carefully drawn do not go into effect until January 1.  The tourist season in Mexico begins on 
November 15.  The U.S. foreign policy position as expressed by the Treasury is one in which 
they very clearly indicated they would like us to consider whether or not we could do something 
with them, move [unintelligible] the Administration for foreign policy consideration.  So we end 
up with a small, carefully constructed interim bit of aid. 

MR. PARTEE.  Interim? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that’s uncertain. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, 90 days. 



11/16/76 - 7 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s awfully important, I think, because of the comparison with the U.S. 
situation. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I must say I hope it’s interim, but if this turned out to be one of 
these loans that stretches out uncomfortably, I would not to be too surprised, unfortunately, 
under the circumstances. 

MR. GARDNER.  I agree, I understand Governor Partee’s comment.  My point was 
probably poorly expressed.  This amount of swap under our regular and some special conditions 
is a very small part--as has already been expressed here--of the external indebtedness of Mexico.  
It seemed to me, as a member of the subcommittee, quite wise to proceed in this small, cautious 
way with the schedule that I have outlined for you.  And the earnest hope [is] that a new 
government headed by a former finance minister, the IMF conditions and their further drawings 
as Henry has described, and--as we all know now--a further depreciation in the peso, give 
Mexico a fighting chance to manage this situation without an official moratorium.  I think that 
persuaded me that it was important for us to be a part, or a small part, of this picture. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Was there a consideration that our participation as an official body 
might have encouraged other people to lend? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no; oh no.  But, well, we thought long and hard about that, and 
the last thing that we would have wanted to do or did do was to give Mexico a loan and have 
Mexico use that as a basis for borrowing from the commercial banks and therefore be indirectly 
responsible for drawing in the commercial banks.  We did not fall into any such trap.   

Now, we could have gotten, for example, also an agreement out of the Mexicans--I think 
this would have been easy--under which, getting 800 million or 800 million plus from the 
commercial banks now, they would use some of that money to repay us.  We talked about that, 
but we didn’t have to spend much time debating that.  That would have put us in an impossible 
position, you see.  Here the other banks come in and we get our money back out of funds that 
they supplied.  I don’t think a central bank can ever put itself in that position.  So we could have 
secured our loan, but we decided not to.   

One other point--possibly you covered that, Henry, I know I didn’t--we have reemphasized 
repeatedly to the Mexicans that they must use the funds supplied very sparingly and in the 
process of foreign exchange transactions, and they must not try to peg the peso, that they must 
husband their resources.  We have all kinds of assurances from the Mexicans that they will do 
just that.  These assurances were made initially voluntarily.  They have repeated those assurances 
as we raised the question, but having said that, I must go on to say that my confidence in these 
assurances being respected is very limited.  And my confidence in their central bank operations 
is very limited.   

MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes. 

MR. MAYO.  Where does this, what is our position in relationship to the supervision of 
our domestic commercial banks if we have a feeling such as you just expressed?  Do we, 



11/16/76 - 8 - 
 

  
 

policywise--is this related in any way to our member banks in order to avoid a possible problem 
that they might have if there were a debt moratorium on the credit extended?   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now let me talk about that just a little in a more comprehensive or 
rather a more general way.  We could advise the banks strongly to cut back on their foreign 
lending.  If we did that, we run the risk [of] the very crisis in international finance that we are 
seeking to prevent.  I’m not talking about Mexico, I’m talking about all around, because our 
banks have, in my judgment, been rather imprudent once again in lending abroad.  That is my 
judgment; I may be wrong about that, but that’s the way I feel.  If we gave them strong advice to 
that effect, we could bring on an international financial crisis.  On the other hand, if they 
continue lending on the scale that [they] have been doing, then I think it’s only a matter of time 
before such a crisis will occur.   

Now, what I have done, really, well, let me go back.  [IMF Managing Director] Mr. 
Witteveen issued a word of warning, and that was done after consultation with us.  He issued his 
word of warning in Manila, which you may have seen.  [Treasury Secretary] Mr. Simon did the 
same, and that was done after careful consultation with us.  In some meetings with private 
bankers, I tried to deal with the question lightly and indicated this is an area that bankers must 
consider carefully.   

I thought about taking stronger measures, but here is the difficulty.  There are two 
difficulties.  The one that I just mentioned, namely that they might take that advice too strictly 
and then bring on a crisis.  But there is a second difficulty:  If we start telling banks publicly just 
to whom to lend, for what purpose to lend, we would be getting into the business of credit 
allocation.  And you may recall the difficulties we had with the Congress in connection with the 
REITs.  We did a little of that and all hell broke loose on Capitol Hill, the point being, well, now 
you are in the credit allocation business now, and what’s wrong with the credit allocation bill 
that has been submitted.   

So we have been quite cautious.  I don’t know if that is--it’s as good a reply as I can make 
to the question.  I would not want to say, and I have never said to anyone, to answer your 
question specifically, that banks should not lend to Mexico.  I haven’t singled out Mexico.  I 
have talked generally about the LDCs, and honestly, in the world that we live in, the category of 
LDCs badly needs redefinition, in my judgment.  Great Britain and Italy in today’s world belong 
in a category of LDCs for every practical financial purpose.  Yes, Mr. Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN.  I have heard some talk that the peso may now be undervalued.  Is this 
optimistic? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, I rather think it is [undervalued].  But the way in which they 
have been handling their wage problems also makes me wonder how long that condition will 
continue. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think that is an accurate assessment.  The Fund, surprisingly to me, 
concluded [that, in seeking a] 50 percent depreciation, at least 40 was what they needed.  They 
didn’t believe it.  They finally got it.  The price impulses are somewhat stronger than was 
anticipated, so the undervaluation is probably temporary. 



11/16/76 - 9 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Do we have an impression as to what the policy of the government or 
the central bank will be with respect to shoring up private business firms that find the 
devaluation places them in an untenable debt situation? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I, I don’t know the general-- 

MR. WALLICH.  Yeah, this was one of the 12 or 13 points in the original program to take 
care of firms that were in that condition.  If they’re doing this, they are not doing it on a very 
generous scale, because one of the strong objections that are raised to further depreciation--for 
instance, one [wants to say] why don’t you let the rate go, let it find its own level--is the threat of 
bankruptcy to firms that owe dollars but have been invested in pesos.  How they got themselves 
into that position is the history of the last 12 years of stability, in which it was cheap to borrow in 
dollars and dear to borrow in pesos, and they did not properly as individual firms manage their 
exchange rate exposure. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Volcker, would you like to comment? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t think I have anything to add specific to the 
Mexican situation other than reiterate a comment that has already been made, that Mexico is 
basically a country that could manage the situation if they are able to economically.  It should be 
a manageable situation.  I do think what we’re seeing here is the symptom of general strains and 
tensions around the world that are going to be difficult to manage.  They will be difficult in this 
case, they may be difficult in other cases, and I feel very strongly there is nothing we can walk 
away from.   

And we will be called upon from time to time for this kind of difficult operation in 
Mexico--maybe there won’t be any others, but I suspect there could be.  It seems to me to be a 
very modest kind of effort on our part.  It’s got some risks, but the risks are limited in view of the 
risks from the situation not being managed correctly.  I think we need to exert a little leverage 
here.  A little help from us from time to time, and this is a manifestation of it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would second that comment, that it’s a situation we can’t walk 
away from.  Now, I think you all know that the British have applied to the IMF, but the British 
are putting on a very powerful political campaign to accomplish two things.  First, no conditions 
by the IMF--in effect, have the IMF bless British financial policy.  Second, to work out some 
arrangement whereby the sterling balances--which, in the aggregate, amount to about $10 billion, 
but of which the sensitive part is held by central banks, and that part amounts to $4 
billion--would [be] somehow taken care of by other countries.   

Now, this is a problem that has concerned me very deeply for some time.  In response to a 
direct question from the Bank of England, and in response to an emissary sent by other central 
banks and to Mr. Leaver, who is an emissary of the British government--Mr. Galagan and Mr. 
Leaver are seeing the President today--I have taken a very hard position, saying that I, for one, 
will not even talk about the sterling balances until the IMF arrangement has been concluded.  But 
while I have taken this very tough position in talking to the British--and a similar position, 
fortunately, I think, is being taken by the Treasury, and I’ve talked to the President about this, 



11/16/76 - 10 - 
 

  
 

both before the election and since then, and to others, Mr. Kissinger, etc.--while I’ve taken as 
tough a position as one could, internally some work is being done by our staff, and some of us 
are considering various possibilities, but we’ve not indicated even one word that this is 
happening.   

In a very uncertain world, it is difficult--well, worse than difficult, I think it’s unwise to 
take a hard position and stick to it no matter what the probable or likely consequences may be.  I 
think that the New York City problem was in the end handled quite appropriately.  The position 
taken was, not one cent for New York.  And that position was repeated so often that New York 
City finally came to believe it.  New York City, New York State started doing something by 
themselves to solve their problem.  In the end, some help was extended by the government, and I 
played a certain part in making that possible.  But there was no hint ever given that help was 
going to be forthcoming, because we wanted New York to help itself as far as possible.   

And that, I think, is our problem with the British today.  And there will be other problems 
around the world, as Mr. Volcker has indicated.  It’s in the nature of planning really.  You don’t 
plan for success.  Well, if success comes along you enjoy it.  It’s in the nature of good planning 
to try to think through how to prevent disaster; in other words, to make unfavorable assumptions 
and try to think through at as early a stage as possible how to prevent disaster, how to prevent the 
unfavorable event from occurring.  And I want this Committee to know that very careful thought 
is being given to the entire world scene.   

Let me say one final word.  This meeting is an executive session.  I wanted to share my 
concerns with my colleagues, not only about the Mexican situation:  We’ve been actively at 
work and have been energizing this government to do something to prevent an increase in the 
price of oil.  What will come of it, I don’t know, but at last this government is awake.  Now, my 
advice to all of you, and I can’t put that too strongly, is to say as little as possible about any of 
these problems because they are so extremely sensitive. 

MR. WALLICH.  Could I make one comment going back to Mexico?  The word 
“moratorium” has been used, and that is one way of describing something that might happen.  
The arrangements, however, that the Mexicans have in place in case one of their major units 
should be unable to roll over--and they’re all actively engaged in rolling over, during the last two 
months of the year, some $600 million or $800 million of indebtedness--are that there would be a 
degree of central control so that one would not suddenly be confronted with sporadic 
nonpayment, but rather that it would be possible to enter into negotiations so that what otherwise 
might be a moratorium would look more like a rescheduling, and I guess would be a 
rescheduling.  This is something, of course, that has happened to other countries--Argentina has 
been rescheduled more than once; Brazil has been rescheduled repeatedly, and today these 
countries enjoy a great amount of credit.  So the world has not come to an end, because countries 
don’t come to an end when that happens.  There is a new situation with respect to what the 
accountants might do to reschedule loans today.  In that regard, we’re in a different ball game. 

MR. JACKSON.  Let’s don’t say “enjoy” that much credit; they just have that much credit.  
It’s an important difference. 

MR. WALLICH.  You get $25 billion credit. 



11/16/76 - 11 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  The way you put it Henry, it makes me sympathetic with the position of 
the accountants. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question or comment on--  

MR. JACKSON.  Just how long do you think this will hold the Mexicans, if I could use 
that expression? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  My judgment is very simple.  If you have reflows of capital, this 
will all turn out very happily.  If you don’t, I don’t see how a moratorium or rescheduling can be 
prevented very long. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I just might report that the qualitative types of thing 
that one picks up indicate that the uncertainty--and I guess I could even use the word “tension” 
now--is still building up rather than leveling off with respect to the people who move across and 
do business across the border on a rather personal sort of basis.  There is coming into these 
conversations now hints of concern about personal security as well as financial security.  This 
comes to my mind in connection with the reference to the possibilities of some agricultural 
reforms or something like that coming into the picture.  I heard reports, after the initial 
devaluation, of a number of people approaching border banks and inquiring as to whether they 
could borrow funds to take a speculative position in the peso.  I’ve not heard such reports 
following the further devaluation, notwithstanding the fact that the value’s a good deal lower 
now.  It may be that there’s less confidence in the current value than there was in the earlier one. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There is one item that will come up at our regular meeting that I 
think I should mention, and you correct if I’m wrong, Mr. Pardee.  I believe you will be 
recommending to the [FOMC] that the present swap schedule be reaffirmed. 

MR. PARDEE.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think we ought to reach that decision here, rather than in open, 
that is, at our formal meeting.  My own view is that we certainly ought to do that, but we ought 
to do that with the understanding that the swap facility no longer has the automatic meaning that 
it had previously.  For us not to reaffirm the present swap schedule would cast doubt and 
uncertainty and it could have very serious repercussions.  I think we definitely ought to reaffirm, 
but we ought to understand among ourselves that the swap facility no longer has quite the 
meaning that it did.  Now, actually, historically, it never was completely automatic, but it is 
definitely less so now than before. 

MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s getting increasingly understood in the world 
that the swap facilities are a framework within which one negotiates, rather than an automatic 
drawing right, and to that extent I think your wishes are being met.  We have to bear in mind that 
we, too, draw on swaps, although on a very small scale, when we engage in open market 
operations, so that we wouldn’t want to build up the resistance, for instance, of the Germans, 
who usually ask questions or may put limits on what we can draw.  We wouldn’t want to build 
that resistance up any more than we have to. 



11/16/76 - 12 - 
 

  
 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, my comments are similar to this type.  The question is, 
what does this mean in operational terms--to make less automatic? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, in operational terms, what it means is that when a request 
comes along and we have doubts about the creditworthiness of the borrower, or we have doubts 
about the purpose of the borrowing, as in the Austrian case recently--you know, what the 
Austrians were doing, essentially, was really arbitraging on interest rates, and I don’t see why we 
should lend money for that purpose.  What it means operationally is that we’re far more cautious, 
far more deliberate, as to country and as to purpose, than we used to be. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Are there elements in our present swap network which you believe are 
either unnecessary or undesirable? 

MR. PARDEE.  No, I think the swap arrangements, as they are set forth now, cover the 
ground well.  I think in the context of the recent experience we’ve had with Italy, Britain, and the 
Mexicans, we can, on a case-by-case basis, make the adjustments we need in swap arrangements 
to appropriate provisions at the time.  We have thought very carefully in New York that there 
might be some suggestion of changes in the swap arrangement itself, but at this stage I see no 
reason to do so.  Rather, I would prefer to continue it as now, on a case-by-case basis, to make 
determinations of conditions to fit the situation. 

MR. PARTEE.  Mexico is the only LDC member. 

MR. PARDEE.  And Britain and Italy. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, only-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, they’re not exactly overdeveloped countries. 

SPEAKER(?).  They’re not basket cases. 

SPEAKER(?).  Overdeveloped. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s a nice term. 

MR. COLDWELL.  We have no further requests for drawings of swap arrangements? 

MR. PARDEE.  No, nothing formal at this stage.  Feelers from time-to-time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think we will be more circumspect about any such requests 
than we have been.  I was not enthusiastic at all, in fact resisted for some time, the request of the 
Mexicans to double the amount of the swap facility going up from $180 to $360.  Well, we did it, 
and that kind of resistance or that kind of question would be greater in the future, I assure you.  
This isn’t a happy picture, gentlemen, not the best way to start our deliberations, but I felt that 
it’s only proper to advise the members of the Committee on what your subcommittee, and in 
certain areas, I myself, have been doing.   



11/16/76 - 13 - 
 

  
 

Any further questions?  If not let me turn to the second item for this executive session, and 
that is the request that Mr. Reuss made some time ago that we deliver to him by 5 p.m., October 
15, the minutes of all our Reserve Bank meetings for the past five years.  Now just before I went 
off on my foreign trip, I advised Mr. Reuss that I was going abroad, that it would be impossible 
to comply with the request by October 15, and that the matter is being explored with our Reserve 
Banks, and that I would be in touch with him soon after my return.  I had a meeting with Mr. 
Reuss and subsequently received a letter from him indicating his understanding of our 
conversation.  I would prefer not to go into detail on that and merely say that my understanding 
is not the same as Mr. Reuss’s understanding of that conversation.  Now, I have before me a 
letter that I haven’t yet sent, which I do intend to send today.  I’ll read this letter to you and then 
we can discuss that on whatever scale you wish.   

Dear Henry: 

In accordance with our conversation last Friday, I shall advise the Reserve Bank boards to send you the 
minutes of their meetings. 

As you and I agreed at our meeting, the following highly sensitive items will be omitted:  those pertaining 
to borrowing or prospective borrowing by individually named banks at the discount window; those pertaining to 
transactions with foreign central banks; and those pertaining to real estate plans or negotiations in process.  Also, 
items pertaining to individual personnel matters or to safety measures at the banks will be put in a separate file, 
and you and I alone will sit down and go over them.  Let me say once again that I am pleased that this matter has 
been resolved and that I shall do what I can to expedite the delivery of the minutes for 1972, 1974, and 1975. 

Now I hope that this will end the matter, but I cannot be entirely sure. 

MR. BLACK.  You omitted 1973, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well I omitted--I have three years here instead of five, you see.  I 
tried to persuade Mr. Reuss--really, since his purpose is apparently to see what the Reserve 
Banks do; it’s some kind of fishing expedition--that a one-year sample would probably serve his 
purpose.  If he finds that it doesn’t, well, he could come back and ask for another year.  We 
reached this compromise on three years instead of five, which will cut down the labor, since this 
editing process will be not a small burden for the Reserve Banks.   

Now, I tried to persuade Mr. Reuss to follow another course, namely that since his interest 
originally was on the question of how much control do the Reserve Banks and the directors of 
those Banks have over the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy--I thought that was his interest, 
and earlier correspondence did indicate that that was his interest--I tried to persuade him that that 
interest could be met quite adequately without turning to the Reserve Banks at all, and I 
indicated to him that I would be pleased to make available to him every communication from 
each of the Reserve Banks with respect to the discount rate; second, that I would make available 
to him all petitions that we receive from time to time from the boards of directors of individual 
Banks; and that I would be willing, further, to make available to him all letters that I had 
received from individual members of our Bank boards.  Mr. Reuss indicated that would not meet 
his need because his need was to determine what the Reserve Banks really do, and that he or his 
committee was entitled to that information.   

And then we turned to the expurgated minutes--that was the next point that I took up, the 
sensitive areas and how they’re to be dealt with.  Now, if all of this is acceptable to Mr. 



11/16/76 - 14 - 
 

  
 

Reuss--which I devoutly hope will be the case--then at the time when these minutes are 
transmitted, I will express the hope that they will be treated confidentially by his committee.  I 
don’t want to do that in this letter.  I don’t think this is the time to take up that question.   

I’d be glad to answer any questions about this at whatever length members of the 
Committee may wish.  I assure you that a great deal of thought and trouble has gone into this at 
the [Federal Reserve] Board’s end and my personal end, as well as at the individual Banks.  And 
if this agreement stands, I do think that it is a very reasonable and a very good resolution of a 
very difficult problem that unfortunately has arisen, which need not have arisen.   

Now, at some stage, I’m going to call on Mr. O’Connell to talk about technical 
arrangements with the Banks with regard to the understanding as described in the letter that I’ve 
just read to you.  But are there any questions first?  Yes, Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN.  Obviously, this does not include Branch board minutes? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the answer to that question is yes.  That question was not 
asked, and we’re not going to volunteer. 

MR. GUFFEY.  Are these being submitted to Mr. Reuss as chairman of the committee or 
as an individual congressman? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  These will be submitted, the letter will be addressed to “The 
Honorable Henry S. Reuss, Chairman.” 

SPEAKER(?).  Does he have the backing of his committee?  Do we know that, or is it an 
individual request? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That has not been tested, and I thought that it would be far better 
to work something out with Mr. Reuss rather than subject this question to methodical testing, 
which would have created the spectacle, at least, of a confrontation, which would have seriously 
exacerbated feelings.  Whether he would have the backing of his committee or not on this 
question, I simply do not know.  What I can be sure of is that, if we refuse and ask for an 
expression by the entire committee, this would certainly be hotly debated, fought over, and no 
matter how the matter was resolved by the committee, scars would be left. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I don’t think this is a matter which I’d want to go into that kind of 
fight on, Mr. Chairman, but there may be some down the road which I hope we would not accede 
to his request just as a chairman or a congressman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I can assure [you], first, that your judgment about the future 
is something I share--and your word of caution, I also share that feeling completely.  Yes, Mr. 
Morris. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, do we [unintelligible] just the bare minutes or [also the] 
supporting documentation and reports that would be referred to in the minutes? 



11/16/76 - 15 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think this is one of the technical matters that Mr. 
O’Connell will take up with the officers of your Banks, and Mr. O’Connell will comment on that 
presently.  My own feeling is that the attachments should not be, or need not be, submitted.  But 
I would not be surprised if that question were asked.  This question I deliberately omitted from 
our discussion, and Mr. Reuss did not raise the question.  But as your question recognizes by its 
very nature, this is a gray area.  However, certainly in the case of certain attachments pertaining 
to individual banks or their names, you see, well, that’s covered by the agreement.  Any 
attachment pertaining to relations with foreign central banks--now this may apply solely to the 
New York Bank--any such attachment would be omitted. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, I think perhaps the reference is to such as executive 
committee minutes, audit committee minutes, established committees of the Reserve Bank board, 
as to which each keeps separate minutes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, there again, my own feeling is--I may be mistaken--that 
these need not be submitted. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  That would be my recommendation. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But I would not be too surprised if that question were raised by 
Mr. Reuss in due course. 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, is there a vulnerability to us if there’s great variance [across 
Reserve Banks], which I would assume there will be, in the style and depth in which minutes 
[are written]--we’re stars, at present, in having taken minutes over the years that are absolutely 
meaningless.  Now, would he ridicule this and say that Presidents of the Reserve Banks do 
nothing? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Probably.  Certainly possibly--I even think probably.  I would 
hope that, in due course, Mr. Reuss will become interested in other questions of [unintelligible].  
He’ll not pursue this [unintelligible]. 

MR. MACLAURY.  The treatment of the separate file on personnel matters and protection 
at the Banks--are those minutes to be held here at the Board of Governors? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. O’Connell will talk about the technical aspect.  Well, let me 
say a word about that as I visualize the matter at this stage.  You have your minutes.  Now there 
are at least five categories, and you have technical procedures under which certain lines or 
paragraphs can be omitted.  That is, you have a Xerox, but certain parts are covered up.  Now 
just how that’s done, I don’t know, but we are engaged in this kind of business, unfortunately, 
too often.  Now then, the parts relating to these two categories, personnel items and [Bank 
safety] items--those parts will be omitted in the first instance, you see, wiped out, but then 
included in a separate folder.  And that separate folder--the arrangement is that Mr. Reuss and 
I--this will not go to his staff--but Mr. Reuss and I will go over that; what will happen at such a 
meeting or will result from such a meeting, I’m not able to predict.  My guess is that, after 
looking it over, Mr. Reuss will show no further interest. 

SPEAKER(?).  Do the boards of directors [know of] this? 



11/16/76 - 16 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The Reserve Bank directors have been informed about this 
correspondence, and to what degree the Reserve Bank boards have considered it is something 
that our colleagues can advise us.  I don’t know, but let me indicate that my letter’s worded 
carefully.  It says:  “In accordance with our conversation last Friday, I shall advise the Reserve 
Bank boards to send you the minutes of their meetings,” and this is what I’m doing.  I very much 
hope, in view of this, that the advice will be taken by the Bank boards, but this is something that 
the Bank boards will have to take up themselves, and I personally feel that this is as good a 
resolution as we could have gotten.  I only hope that it stands. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Won’t you be having the chairmen and the deputy chairmen [of the 
Reserve Bank boards] here in a couple of weeks?  Would you feel at liberty to discuss this with 
them at that time? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh yes.  But I do think, having said what I’m saying in this letter, 
I shall do what I can to expedite the delivery.  I do think that if the Bank boards are going to do 
this, as I now hope they will, that this will get under way and that we’ll not delay unduly. 

MR. EASTBURN.  I’d like to mention, Mr. Chairman, some of us have board meetings 
this coming Thursday.  Did you say you intended to send this today? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I intend to send this today, and copies will be made available to all 
of you, that is, the Bank Presidents, today, before you leave. 

MR. WALLICH.  I wonder if I could get the view of the Reserve Bank Presidents on this?  
Is this likely to lead to a change in the way the minutes are going to be written hereafter? 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, I would respond in this way, that I don’t think that this should 
be interpreted to our boards in any way other than a ridiculous request coming--I refer not to our 
Chairman--in other words, I think that the reaction of our directors will be one of great 
indignation and that I would do little to disabuse them of that feeling.  I would also think that if 
this involves a lot of work, which it will, needless work, that someone on Mr. Reuss’s 
committee, a friendly individual, should know what we’re being called upon to do.  Because I 
think this can be used against Mr. Reuss if we react intelligently.  And, as I see it in the St. Louis 
case, it’s appalling how skimpy or meaningless our minutes are.  I’m sure we did this with great 
wisdom knowing that a man named Reuss would ask for them.  The minutes are really terribly 
shallow.  Tell nothing. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Mayo, please. 

MR. MAYO.  To what extent do you visualize coordination to be sure that we all read the 
agreement in the same way?  I can see a possibility of one Bank including something, then Reuss 
coming back and saying, “Well, where’s this from the other 11?”  And this sort of thing.  Should 
the Conference of Presidents [of the Reserve Banks] be involved directly in terms of, shall we 
say, monitoring this, or should O’Connell--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I was thinking of having Tom O’Connell do the monitoring, 
in the process achieving a substantial uniformity among the Banks.   



11/16/76 - 17 - 
 

  
 

MR. MAYO.  We think it is very important that it be done. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes.  You see, these five categories that I mentioned are the five 
categories that turned up in the course of conversations of Mr. O’Connell with officers of the 
individual Banks.  Now, I’m not at all sure that these five categories are comprehensive enough.  
But if they’re not, or if it appears that they’re not, that will turn up in the course of Mr. 
O’Connell’s work with the officers of the Banks, and then, with your consent, I will try to 
resolve the matter.  And the way in which I think I would resolve the matter would be that if, let 
us say, there’s a sense that a sixth category [is needed]--you might handle that in the same way 
that the personnel items and the security items are being handled.  However, that, of course, 
would become another subject for possible negotiation and possible confusion.  I’m very hopeful 
that Mr. Reuss will become very busy as the weeks and months roll on.  I certainly will be, but 
that will not stop Mr. Reuss.  He must be busy.  If he can discover ways of keeping busy on other 
items--but I think he’s good over [unintelligible].  He has a staff that he-- 

MR. COLDWELL.  His staff-- 

MR. JACKSON.  Are references to actions [unintelligible] personnel issues of matters of 
substance? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I’m going to leave that for Tom O’Connell to work out, you 
see, and that may become a sixth category put into a special file.  I would not want to treat any 
sixth category that may arise the same way that the first three categories are being treated.  It’s 
because the last thing that I can ever do or will ever do is to go back on an explicit 
understanding.  But this is a possible gray area, and I think that my concept of a third file is 
perhaps as good a way as any of handling that if that problem arises.  Mr. O’Connell, would you 
like to comment now on technical issues. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, with the permission of you, Mr. Chairman, and 
the Presidents, who are so closely involved in this.  Subject to the action of your Banks [in 
accordance with] the Chairman’s advice that would be contained in the letter that would be 
transmitted, I would like, even as you’re returning to the Banks today, to be on the telephone in 
the conference call with the secretariats of your respective boards and the first vice presidents of 
your Banks, exclusive of John [Williams]--if it’s appropriate, I’ll get from you a designation, 
John, of an individual to whom I might speak at your Bank in this conference call.  The purpose 
of [my call]--after the Chairman’s letter is mailed to Mr. Reuss--[will be to read aloud] the letter 
and to give an outline indication of what I perceive to be the intention of the phraseology 
contained in the Chairman’s letter.   

And I intend, with your foreknowledge, to make a request to the people to whom I’ll be 
speaking that the minutes for the periods designated be transmitted in their whole form to me 
here at the Board [and that they be marked] using a method that will capture the categories the 
Chairman will reference in his letter.  Namely that we bracket--and I’ll describe methods to the 
people to whom I’m talking--the categories one, two, and three that we are going to remove as 
sensitive.  That a different designation be placed on those items in each of your minutes that 
don’t meet this first general removal category but [that] in your judgment [meet] the second 
category [of] individual personnel matters and matters relating to security measures of the Banks, 



11/16/76 - 18 - 
 

  
 

[which] will receive a separate designation.  And then thirdly, the group that the Chairman last 
addressed--namely, highly sensitive matters that don’t appear, in the judgment of your Banks, to 
fall in either of the two categories mentioned in the letter [but] which you feel, for stated reasons, 
should be kept out of the transmittal.   

By a separate marking of each [of these categories], I’ll be able to see and coordinate the 
precise identical measurement of those withdrawals and deletions.  Then I’ll return to your 
Banks a simulated copy that will be identical--hopefully, we’ve coordinated it, then, throughout 
the System.  And a separate method of placing in a separate file this third category [not yet 
covered in the agreement with Mr. Reuss].   

In total, what I intend to achieve, Mr. Chairman, is a uniform method of removal and 
deletion--a uniform method of closeting that which we will not disclose to Mr. Reuss pursuant to 
the Chairman’s letter and hopefully to do it as quickly and in a short a period of time as possible.  
Initially it will require, as has now been done in my conversation with respect to Reserve 
Banks--I’m of the impression that most of the minutes had been combed for all five years, 
through 1975.  I’m grateful that we can remove two of these years from consideration and that 
our efforts then will bend toward the three years mentioned in the letter.  I’ll undertake this effort 
of coordination by telephone conference today and then I’ll be in contact with your Banks as this 
process goes on. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I should add one detail, that is, in getting Mr. Reuss to cut back his 
request from five years to these three selected years, I do have an understanding with him, that I 
don’t refer to in this letter, but he does refer to in his letter, and that part of his letter is accurate.  
Namely, that if he should find that these three years do not satisfy his needs, he can come back 
and ask for those two additional years.  For that matter, he can come back if he wants to and ask 
for, well--when was the Federal Reserve established?--1913, ’14; who knows.   

This is really an outrage, I think.  You know, it’s a fishing expedition pure and simple.  
Because if he really were interested simply in assessing the influence that the Reserve Banks 
have on policy--monetary policy--then my offer to him was, I think, very generous.  Every 
communication with regard to the discount rate--not just, you know, the actual communication as 
it came and the telegram that you sent us or the letter--plus any petitions by individual Bank 
boards, plus any correspondence from individual directors.  I thought I was very generous.  But 
as I say, that did not satisfy his need as he expressed it, and the closest that [he] came to 
expressing his need was to say, well, he’d like to know what the Reserve Banks do, and he feels 
he’s entitled to it. 

MR. MAYO.  If he were to have any of his staff people contact any of us directly to get 
further information, what would our posture be, Tom? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  It would be my recommendation, once we’ve coordinated the 
undertaking, that, unless it was a question of information that you could readily give, namely, did 
you mail, what was included, and so forth, that you refer the question back to me here at the 
Board.  I’m saying that only as a matter of coordinated policy because as it’s now proposed, 
subject to the affirmation of your Banks, we would use this office and certainly the Chairman’s 
signature in transmitting this material to Mr. Reuss.  Then I think it would be appropriate that 



11/16/76 - 19 - 
 

  
 

any inquiry be directed to us.  I would say, Mr. Chairman, that, responding to a question earlier 
raised, I would intend to recommend exclusion from the transmittal of separately incorporated 
minutes, even though referred to at the initial transmission, that they’re not subject-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You mean separate various attachments, appendices, and the like? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Correct, sir.  Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL.  What about audit committee minutes? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I would intend, Governor--my recommendation [would be] negative. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would say at this stage that only full board meeting minutes be 
covered by this request.  At this stage, I think that’s a fair interpretation, but I would not be 
surprised if further requests were made, unless Mr. Reuss becomes busy with other problems. 

MR. MAYO.  In other words, you would eliminate all executive committee meetings that 
act on the discount rate? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  That would be my--at this point, President Mayo, I would recommend 
that we exclude from transmittals anything but the main minutes of your board of directors, even 
though reference may be made to executive committee minutes, audit committee minutes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me just pause for a minute.  Each Bank has a range of 
committees--as I think about the matter now, I am not sure that omission of executive committee 
minutes is really wise because, so often, discount rate questions, you know, will be taken up.  
You see, there’s Mr. Roos’s problem that he mentioned, these minutes being so slender in his 
Bank.  And the chances are that that is true of a number of our Banks, possibly all of them.  And 
since discount rate applications are, or discount rate decisions by a Bank board will, frequently 
be taken up at executive committee meetings, and other vital business handled by executive 
committee--as I’m thinking out loud with you, in going back on earlier statements and in 
questioning Mr. O’Connell’s advice of this point--on second thought, I believe that probably 
executive committee minutes should be included. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My reaction is the same yours, Mr. Chairman.  There’s 
no distinction basically between the executive committee meeting and our regular board meeting 
in the Bank.  If there are not enough directors there, we have an executive committee meeting, 
and I think we would leave irregular gaps that would just raise questions. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That would [not apply] to special other committees.  They are in a 
very different category. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, may I urge then, that to the extent executive 
committee minutes would be included, that the same right and function of withdrawal and 
exclusion from those be followed? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh yes, absolutely. 



11/16/76 - 20 - 
 

  
 

MR. ROOS.  How do we protect ourselves from the reverse of giving meaningful 
information to him?  If he has too little information, he comes back and says one of two things, 
either we’re highly [unintelligible] in the case we do nothing, or we are so secretive in our 
activities that we don’t dare put down our nefarious activities.  I mean, it seems to me he’s got us 
either way if he wants to play that game, and I don’t know-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t know if there is any protection, and I would not be at 
all surprised if a by-product of this fishing expedition turned out to be a strong recommendation 
by Mr. Reuss, possibly by his entire committee, possibly of a piece of legislation that he would 
introduce as to the character of minutes.  I would not be surprised in the future--first, a 
condemnation, laying the basis, you see, for this request as to the future.  Well, gentlemen, that’s 
the kind of world we live in, and I don’t think that this environment in which we function, that 
it’s going to change very quickly, nor am I ready to predict that it’s going to improve this year.  
Any question, comment, criticism of this procedure?  I haven’t sent this letter yet. 

MR. PARTEE.  I would consider it very fortunate if we can, get it off, and get it accepted-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, the important thing to protect here is the 
attachments to the minutes--in our case, they’re very long minutes and they include a great many 
sensitive, as well as a great many dull, things. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you see if a question were raised about attachments, later on, 
then these understandings, if they hold--and I assure you that I’ll do everything in my power to 
achieve that objective that would apply to the attachments.  In other words, if, let’s say, Reuss 
asks later on for the attachments, [then] these categories of exclusion and separate filings--these 
attachments would be handled in exactly the same way as the body of the minutes.  But let’s not 
anticipate too much.  There is still, I’ve said this three, four, five, times already, there’s still a 
possibility Mr. Reuss will acquire other interests in the course of the year.  One of the difficulties 
here, of course, is--you know, that’s part of the world we live in.  Mr. Reuss may well acquire 
other interests.  He has a very large staff.  I think they’ve put in long hours thinking up ways, you 
see, of harassing, etc. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The trouble is, he’s got a big enough staff so one of 
them could make this his personal interest. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh yes. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Before closing, may I touch on a matter that Mr. Volcker has 
remarked, about the attachments again?  It’s quite possible that board of directors minutes will 
contain a reference to that board’s recent action in recommending a discount rate for the Board 
and the Board’s response thereto, attached as Exhibit A.  Mr. Chairman, it’s quite possible that’s 
the very type of attachment you would want to exhibit to Mr. Reuss, consistent with the position 
you’ve taken all along with respect to the role that the Bank directors play in this action of 
monetary policy.  So that at the very outset, we may be including specific attachments as we 
review these minutes.  I didn’t want--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, let’s think very carefully about that.  If you start including 
some attachments, but not others, then, to the extent that Mr. Reuss’s staff is less imaginative 



11/16/76 - 21 - 
 

  
 

than I hope they will be, you will ignite the imagination of one or another of his numerous 
troublemakers. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  In a way, you’ve done that when you’ve included the executive 
committee minutes, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well executive committee meetings are different, as I think that 
Mr. Volcker explained that better than I did, that the [unintelligible] are an executive committee 
function for the board and at times, meetings of the executive committee are virtually 
indistinguishable from full board meetings.   

MR. O’CONNELL.  All right, sir. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Anything else, gentlemen?  On this we’ve had two unsavory 
subjects for discussion, and if there is no further question or comment, let’s drink coffee and that 
would fortify us perhaps for-- 

[Coffee break] 

[End of executive session] 

[GAP IN TRANSCRIPT AT OPENING OF REGULAR MEETING] 

MR. MAYO.  [Unintelligible] is an even bigger question mark.  They have no familiarity 
with, nor have they paid as much attention, as usual, to the statements that have been made in the 
campaign or to the extent that they have, they write some of it off as campaign rhetoric.  They’re 
waiting for a philosophy to be expressed.  It doesn’t mean that they expect that to be against their 
interest, it’s just another element of uncertainty, and I think that’s [unintelligible] the stock 
market which again [unintelligible] has heightened the uncertainties. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Baughman please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I simply reiterate the references that have been made 
to the conservative outlook or feeling of caution that businessmen seem to be expressing at the 
present time, and this notwithstanding the fact that those that I have come in contact with are for 
the most part sitting in a rather vigorous economic setting.  I find a rather widespread expectation 
that there will be a move to more stimulation of the economy, and along with that, or shortly 
thereafter, a need for bringing into the picture some form of price-wage restraint or control.   

And there is amongst the groups that I have contact with a widespread feeling that it is 
important that the anti-inflation posture be maintained.  And I think flowing from that is this 
concern that this may not be maintained and is the reinforcement for this feeling of conservatism 
with respect to commitment on future economic activity.  And, of course, in the petroleum 
industry, there is so much concern as to what the government policy is going to be.  And so 
much of business there is related to the developments in petroleum.  So just more of a feeling of 
sitting and waiting than I have observed, I think, [than at] most any time that I can recall in any 
particular setting.   



11/16/76 - 22 - 
 

  
 

With respect to our economic forecast, it seems to me that there is reason for doubting the 
relationship between interest rate developments and the projected general economic 
developments.  And [that is] particularly [so] if we should not see the indications of some 
strengthening of inflationary forces.  With the amount of slack that there would still appear to be 
in the economy, [then] quite a few months in the future, if our projection of economic activity is 
realized, it seems a bit odd that there should be associated with that higher levels of interest rates 
than prevail at the present time.   

So I would raise the question whether there is not a distinct possibility that, for some 
period of time yet, we may not see a continuation of what we’ve seen in the past month.  Some 
gradual rise in economic activity associated with some gradual decline in interest rates--it seems 
to me that that would be a fortunate situation if it were to develop.  It seems to me, further, that it 
might be appropriate for us, as far as we can, to encourage this development. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Who would like to speak next?  Yes, 
Mr. Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  As we see the same softness in retail sales, we have one unique feature 
in California; we have experienced a drought, at least until the last weekend or so.  We have 
[had] summer continuously through November, and this is resulting in [unsold] goods that would 
normally be sold as weather changes in the fall. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Would you just pull up the microphone please. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  We see the same softness that the others see in retail sales.  One unique 
feature in California has been the weather--we have been experiencing a drought.  We’ve had 
summer weather practically through the present time except until the last weekend.  Several of 
the retail stores have mentioned [that] they have stocked goods for fall and winter that are not 
moving at all.  One other feature that one of our directors mentioned, which is a very good short-
term indicator--corrugated containers and envelope stocks have dropped rather precipitously in 
the last 35 days, and this is usually a good indicator of business conditions.  This has really 
changed in the last month. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now what about, are you referring to production or sales of 
corrugated paper? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  This would be the orders that they are receiving from buyers. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Orders they are receiving?  I see.  That’s a very good point there.  
Well--yes, Mr. Volcker. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  One short preliminary question with respect to the 
wholesale price index in particular.  My impression is that that has been decidedly affected by 
some fuel prices, including gas prices, in the last couple of months, where there have been some 
administrative decisions.  Is that correct or incorrect? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  That’s correct.  There were two things that were big elements in the 
wholesale price index in October.  One was the rise of natural gas prices and other was the 



11/16/76 - 23 - 
 

  
 

inclusion in the index of the increased prices of new cars.  I have a figure, if I can find it quickly.  
The increase in wholesale prices of industrial commodities, take out the energy items, in October 
was 7/10.  Whereas the total was 1.0.  A fairly large part of that increase was for energy items, 
and in particular, natural gas. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That was my impression, and that explains some of the 
seeming puzzle, I think.  But in general, my comments are very much parallel to those of Mr. 
Baughman, I think.  What I find in all the areas that he has mentioned, Mr. Chairman, is 
substantial uncertainty.  It’s not so much that people are outright gloomy as that they feel 
substantially more uncertain about things than they did earlier, whether you are talking about 
retail sales or investment--where they were never very optimistic, particularly on our board of 
directors, anyway--and the price thing seems a little inexplicable to some of them under the 
circumstances.   

In terms of the outlook, I just want to emphasize the point that he really concluded on.  
Some of this uncertainty--to some degree, I suppose, a more restrained outlook--is related to 
concern about inflation itself.  And the uncertainty is particularly emphasized by the coming to 
office of the new Administration that we don’t feel so sure about, and some concern that an 
increase in inflationary pressures will eventually [emerge] that will not be healthy for our own 
investment plans or for the economy in general.  So while the uncertainty is there, the policy 
implications of the uncertainty are not all that clear in terms of that concern about relaxing on the 
inflation front. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Anyone else like to speak now?  Mr. 
MacLaury and then Mr. Roos. 

MR. MACLAURY.  I wish I had a better reason to feel that we may be overly pessimistic 
in our comments.  The one thing that John Williams mentioned was the drought in his 
areas--[our drought] has colored the sentiment in the upper Midwest particularly.  It has persisted 
and it is now really very severe.  It affects a couple of our states in particular, two or three.  
Certainly retail sales, agricultural implement sales--I think I said this last month--have been very 
seriously affected by the drought per se, which is not a national phenomenon.  That was coupled, 
of course, [with] the large harvests [which] have generally put their considerable squeeze on 
agriculture in our District.   

Retail sales--I think you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] and his figures, perhaps 
in the last two or three weeks, I guess three or four weeks, those have softened a little bit.  In 
other words, that steady uptick from two years ago that had impressed him has now faltered 
slightly.  I think that’s the only way to put it, faltered slightly.  It’s not a downturn by any means, 
but it’s not the persistent uptrend that he had mentioned to us a month ago.   

I say all of that, and that’s sort of on the downside, and yet I say my feeling is that, 
[although] this uncertainty is pervasive, it seems to me that it could go either way, and I guess I 
would disagree with Lyle’s feeling.  I would have a different feeling.  With the markdowns that 
have now taken place in the Board’s staff estimates of the outlook over the last two 
months--those markdowns are really quite substantial, $16 billion or so, I think, in final product 
at the end of ’77--I think it could as likely turn out that that now is on the too-bearish side; and 



11/16/76 - 24 - 
 

  
 

the foundation in terms of income, liquidity in the economy, is there.  And if we can get some 
confidence started one way or another, it seems to me that it’s very uncertain which way we go.  
I would not consider it more likely to be bearish than to be bullish. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. MacLaury.  Mr. Roos. 

MR. ROOS.  I would very briefly like to report, Mr. Chairman, that the head of one of the 
largest retail food market chains in our part of the country reported that, for the first time in 
several years, their industry is seeing a reemergence in artificial increases in prices, which he 
attributed totally to an anticipation of the possible reimposition of price controls, with all types of 
discount deals being offered as a means of keeping prices at their proper level but hedging 
against the possibility of controls.  And this was echoed in one or two of the other industrial 
reports at our recent board meeting.  I think it’s just interesting to put on the record. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Roos.  Mr. Partee now, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have any first-hand information, but just observing 
the data and reading the Redbook and looking at the staff projection and that kind of thing, I 
conclude that the economic setting [has been] weakening progressively over the last several 
months.  And it’s circular.  The difficulty is that the sales haven’t come in in a strong way.  In 
real terms over the last six months, retail sales are not up at all.  And as that has occurred, 
inventories, which should have seemed moderate, have looked rather heavy, and output has been 
cut.  And as output has been cut, income has been lost.  The increase in nonfarm personal income 
from April to September in real terms has been at only a 2 percent annual rate.  So the income 
stream in fact does seem to be getting narrower, weaker, and that troubles me very much.   

And I can’t help but wonder, when you have sales, production, and income all working in 
tandem to restrain the expansion in the economy and where that makes inventories look rather 
heavy rather than light, whether the next development won’t be a general backing away from 
capital spending plans.  We often around here said that, well, in an up year, what you generally 
find is that the surveys underestimate the increase in capital spending.  We, I think, intended 
[unintelligible] to look that way, even if the risk is assuming that it was going to be an up year.  
It’s also true that in a down year the spending surveys can overestimate capital spending.   

I sense the possibility that we’re shifting in that direction, and in fact our next major 
disappointment may very well be what has been in the figures--some increase in capital spending 
is going to lose momentum.  I think that would be the next development that would convince me 
that in fact we may well have a smaller rate of real growth than the staff is projecting now.  I still 
can’t see the basis for an absolute decline.  I can’t see it in inventories, although I’m disturbed 
about--they raised the level of retail stocks by 3 percent? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Right.  This is an annual revision of the retail inventory numbers that 
takes into account principally the annual census survey of retailers, and the revisions went all the 
way back to ’74.  But the ’74 numbers were not materially different.  They were affected mainly 
by some changes in seasonal adjustments, which they do at the same time.  But beginning in ’75, 
the new estimates indicate the progressively larger level of inventories than earlier had been 



11/16/76 - 25 - 
 

  
 

indicated in the data, such that by March, and still today, the level of inventories is about 3 
percent higher than indicated in the earlier statistics. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  An interesting question.  You say progressively larger.  I don’t 
quite understand.  I understand that as an arithmetic thing, but what I want to get at is whether 
this is mathematics, or data, or experience.  I assume that this revision is based on one or two 
new benchmark figures and that what happens in between is pure arithmetic. 

MR. PARTEE.  I think we need to reveal the stock-sales ratios. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  The stock-sales ratios have all been increased by that. 

MR. PARTEE.  Up to that point, I had not really thought there was really any chance of 
inventory shake-out.  And for that matter, I thought capital spending couldn’t go down very 
much--it hadn’t gone up very much.  It didn’t seem likely that it could go down very much.  And 
I would expect that there could very well be a stronger fiscal policy than we have assumed in the 
staff projection, though I would note that that probably wouldn’t occur before early next 
year--maybe March or April or the first of May, but it is very distant-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Unless there is-- 

MR. PARTEE.  This catch up for-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is still a cloudy--  

MR. PARTEE.  Just to conclude, Mr. Chairman, I have to say that the figures to me have 
been very disappointing, almost unbelievable in terms of my prior perception of what would 
probably occur as we went through the fall.  And so I find myself quite concerned. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Yes, Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well it’s most natural that one should search for signs of weakness at a 
time like this.  I note one that I think has not been commented on much.  Projections involved a 
slight reduction in the saving rate from the second to third quarter and then it stays [put] on out.  
It goes from about 7 to 6-1/2 [percent] and stays there.  But as I look at the data, the main reason 
why this seems to happen is that, in the third quarter, personal income indeed did not rise very 
much, an assumption more or less carried on, and so that automatically cut the saving rate.  But 
now I ask myself, is there any good reason not to up it again after this quarter?  Was there any 
reason why it should have come down in the third quarter, however slightly, and stayed down 
thereafter?  It’s about 1/2 percentage point--that’s more than $6 billion--I think that’s not 
altogether small.   

The second point ties in with the discussion of the shortfall.  We have now more or less 
inadvertently slipped into a continuous full-employment surplus, with the exception of next 
quarter, where there is a minute deficit, but in general there is a small but not rising surplus.  I 
would have thought that this is rather early, for this stage of the cycle, to reach that condition, 
although I realize that at some point we ought to get there.  But given that we don’t have a very 
strong recovery, it makes me think a little about 1958-59, when the budget also turned out to be 



11/16/76 - 26 - 
 

  
 

stronger, in the sense of less of a deficit than one anticipated, and I realized that we may be doing 
something similar again here.  I realize, of course, it’s a hypothetical computation on the 
benchmark full employment, something other than 4 percent, and you get a deficit.  
Nevertheless, compared with what we thought earlier, the same benchmark, this is, I think, a 
significant change, unless it’s made up by a catch-up in the shortfall. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  May I ask you a question?  Has the staff explored with the Budget 
Bureau people what they see in the figures they’re now compiling--what the level of federal 
expenditures for fiscal 1978 might be? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Not to my knowledge, Mr. Chairman, no.  We have certainly looked at 
the recent release of the current services budget figures, but I don’t think we have talked 
explicitly with them about probabilities for fiscal 1978. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, our current services budget, I have not really looked into this 
myself, but I have the impression that shows an increase of some 8 percent.  Is that correct? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  That’s correct. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And as of today it seems unlikely that the new budget that will be 
presented by the incoming Administration will be lower than that.  A reasonable guess as of 
today will be that it would be higher, isn’t that true? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I think that’s a real possibility, yes, that the new Administration will be 
moving toward higher budget expenditures. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It may or may not, but that is certainly a real possibility.  Who’d 
like to speak now?  Yes, Mr. Gardner. 

MR. GARDNER.  I think it’s been well stated around this table that there’s a natural 
caution at the time of significant change in Administration.  Sitting and waiting is a kind of 
exercise that brings on worry; it hardly ever brings on optimism.  I am very interested in some of 
the comments that have been made.  Clearly our concerns as to whether or not we have a pause 
have been answered.  We do indeed have a pause, and we have considerable doubts in the minds 
of our Committee members.  It is entirely justified by events.   

But I also have to take some of the messages that I’ve heard appraise it.  Bruce says things 
could go either way, and, Bruce, I absolutely agree with that.  Chuck has described some of the 
underlying economic basis that has led me for a month or so to conclude that it’s rather difficult 
to perceive higher unemployment, basically lower production, basically a sharp or even a 
significant drop.  We have ample liquidity in the economy, as you all know; we seem to have 
avoided, at least for the time being, mass hysteria about the return of inflation.  Indeed, there are 
concerns, but basically the country is not convinced that they are going inevitably into inflation.  
Capital investment which has been very modest to date in this recovery, understandably so, has 
an added value and the added value is the backlogging, or postponement, of things that business 
firms know they need to do, to a period where their vision is a little clearer.   



11/16/76 - 27 - 
 

  
 

Foreign investment is rising in this country.  I think this country is going to experience 
significant foreign investment considering the size of our economy.  The importance of our 
currency as the world’s trading currency and the figures occasionally encourage me it’s coming 
up quite significantly.   

The point I guess I’m trying to make is that it’s my view that we are in a period of 
maximum concern about the policies of the new Administration.  And as the months ahead come 
by, I think we must remember that the Administration coming into power has announced that 
they will balance the budget in four years, that they will attack unemployment, and as these 
events unfold and a mindless trivia of interim press conferences gets put aside for real 
pronouncements, I think you are more likely to find some points of confidence in these 
announcements rather than further concerns.  In substance, I’m willing to accept the clear fact 
that our signals are very unclear.  We are in a period of, not only pause--I wish I could coin 
another phrase, but I don’t read-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you know, I’ll give you nice long phrase, which I hope you 
never use:  a “mid-expansion retardation”--what we used to call it at the National Bureau [of 
Economic Research]. 

MR. GARDNER.  The National Bureau calls it a mid-expansion retardation.  My basic 
concern is of more [significance than] what the new President is going to say at tomorrow’s press 
[conference], and that is what the OPEC countries are going to do in December.  That is a 
condition of uncertainty, and that augments our fears and concerns.  But, you know we are going 
to shortly find out, and most [of what] has been suggested is unacceptable to us, but at least it’s 
finite, and therefore Americans will get about their business when they learn the outcome of 
those deliberations--perhaps in compact with the Administration policy--and try to do something 
about it.   

So I’m not altogether pessimistic, gentlemen, and I would expect the position we’re in 
today is very understandable.  I do think it’s a very understandable condition, but I do not take 
from it the inevitable conclusion that we are in a period of significant and important decline. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well I might add a word at this stage.  Any talk about a recession, 
I think, is absolutely premature.  With housing starts moving up rather sharply, with orders for 
nondefense capital goods in real terms rising at a moderately good clip, with the formation of 
new businesses moving steadily upward this year--I think talk about recession has very little 
foundation at the present time.   

Of course, there’s a very big pause in the expansion of the economy.  The question we’re 
discussing or that should concern us is where we’re going, and in my judgment, unless some 
very serious mistakes [in economic policy] and in the rhetoric of economic policy are made in 
the near future--and I don’t [think] they will be made, I think they’ll go the other way--I think the 
expansion will continue.  Now, a new report on housing will be released sometime today.  That 
report will show that last month’s spectacular increase in housing starts has been revised upward, 
and that there is some decline in the October figure--but that’s a small decline, whereas a rather 
large decline has been largely anticipated. 



11/16/76 - 28 - 
 

  
 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, is that in single-family or multifamily? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The multifamily figure has been revised down for September.  I 
don’t really remember what the October figure is; the strength appears in one [that is, single] 
family.  Mr. Morris, please. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I share your feeling that it’s premature, to say the least, to 
be talking about recession.  I don’t think the numbers suggest that.  I think the issue is whether 
the rate of expansion of the economy is going to be anywhere near what we consider to be 
optimal.  It seems to me that the projections the staff had given us are, I think, not unrealistic, 
and they are well below the rate any of us would describe as the optimum rate of expansion for 
the economy next year.  It seems to me this is the issue we ought to be concerned about in 
formulating the policy for the next period. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think you are entirely right.  It’s so difficult for us.  I don’t attach 
very much importance ordinarily to rhetoric, but if there ever was a time when good rhetoric 
would have an effect on business and consumer psychology and propel the economy upward, I 
think this is the time.  My own guess is that good rhetoric will be forthcoming.  It is a guess, and 
the good rhetoric will be accompanied, I think, in due course by rather constructive action.  That, 
too, is a guess.   

So it’s so difficult.  You take our staff forecast--these poor fellows, they struggle to do 
what they can.  They know nothing about the budget, they know nothing about other policies.  
They are very honest in keeping score on themselves, and on the basis of data now available, I 
think that our staff projection is a very respectable one.  One that certainly deserves respect.  I’m 
more optimistic than the staff, but the uncertainties are peculiarly great right now.  And if the 
outlook were no better than in our staff projection, the future would look very, very grim to me.  
Mr. Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’m not [unintelligible] pessimistic about our 
economy, and I agree with you that declaring a recession now is way too premature.  I am very 
concerned, however, about the state of confidence, and I’m afraid we may get a couple of 
additional shocks.  One which I keep saying--and I haven’t found anybody that agrees with me 
yet, but I will continue to say--is that I am wandering around this country and believe that we are 
getting Christmas sales very early this year.  We may get a severe shock in terms of the rate of 
sales when Christmas gets here. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You’re more pessimistic about sales than Mr. Lilly. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Perhaps so, but I keep wandering around, going into stores to see if I 
can buy Christmas presents for myself, and I find Christmas sales going on at a pretty good clip, 
and yet I don’t see a major movement in the sales.  And if we are really borrowing from the 
Christmas sales level, we may find ourselves greatly disappointed. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But, you know, our statistics on retail sales are scandalously poor.  
Exaggeration, Lyle? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  No, not at all.  The only thing [worse] that I know are the inventories. 



11/16/76 - 29 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Look what you get.  You get weekly figures, and then you 
get--what do you call it--the advance, and then you get something called preliminary, then 
something called, very much in quotation marks, final, and they keep on jumping around.  You 
don’t quite know where you are, and by this time our government ought to have vastly better 
statistics on retail sales.  Would you agree with that, Chuck? 

MR. PARTEE.  Yes, and I would remind you that the program was beefed up a few years 
ago.  Quite a lot of money was spent on it--four or five years [ago] or so, I don’t remember quite 
when that occurred.  It is a very hard thing to measure, with new stores opening--  

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, for whatever reason, I still think we have a problem with that.  I 
think the uncertainty that I feel in talking to people around the country not only relates to this but 
also to no real incentive to expand purchasing.  On the capital spending side, in talking to 
businessmen, I find they are still quite hesitant about it and [have] no real push behind it and they 
are still looking at an interest rate level which they consider to be quite high for commitments in 
the long run.   

On the employment side of it, I also feel [that] is an area of potential shock.  Just a very 
random piece of information--even some of the banking openings are not very plentiful right 
now.  I’m talking about the lower level, not [about] the people sitting around this table.  I find 
some people out in the streets, which surprises me a little bit in the banking field.  And I wonder 
if, not only this, but the potential of our foreign banking problems, might constitute some 
difficulty for us in the next few months.  All in all, this is a kind of psychological problem I think 
we face and one which needs some [unintelligible]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the hour has come for somebody to speak of, not shocks, 
but of pleasant surprises.  Can someone affect the gloom Mr. Coldwell has passed over us, over 
this meeting, at least over my own life in the past minute?  Mr. Wallich, he has volunteered for 
the purpose; make it good, now. 

MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, this isn’t going to relieve your gloom, I fear, but that of 
some people--which seems to be the increasing probability of a tax cut of some kind.  More and 
more, the newspapers are full of not only political but economists’ statements pointing in that 
direction, and I think one has to begin making one’s forecast, to begin to think what kind of a tax 
cut this might be.  I would very much hope that it would be something that is at least in part 
oriented toward investment, not all oriented toward consumption.  I hope it would be something 
short-lived.  I think it would have some negative confidence elements, but on balance I would 
think it would be expansionary if it isn’t made permanent.  If it’s made permanent, I think the 
confidence element would become more serious.  Well, this cannot be in our projections here, 
obviously, but I do suggest that it’s not an unrealistic expectation. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  In that connection, have you ever given a lot of thought to that, 
and--well, maybe I live in a strange world, or my thoughts dwell in isolation, possibly--when I 
hear of proposals concerning a tax rebate, I just scratch my head.  What does it mean?  It means 
that our government, which is heavily in debt, will now go out and borrow more--$10 billion, 
$15 billion, figures like that are being thrown around--and then a check will be written to each 
one of a certain category we’ve talked about, poor, or poorer, people, and how do you build?  



11/16/76 - 30 - 
 

  
 

And if this is the best that we can think of as a way of building the strength of our economy, then 
I’m going to join the gloomy fellows, and I’ll become gloomier than Phil Coldwell, really.   

If you want to build the economic strength of our country, there are ways of doing it.  Now 
one of the very best ways of doing it, one that I think recognizes the need to avoid social conflict, 
one that also recognizes the limitations of our economic knowledge, is the technique that was 
used by President Kennedy and by the Congress.  Kennedy proposed in 1962 some refinements 
that became law in 1964, but what kind of tax reduction was it?  It was a tax reduction that 
applied across the board for individuals and that applied to corporations as well as to individuals, 
and therefore a tax reduction that met two basic criteria--there are others, but it met two:  
minimization of social conflict and, second, recognition that, well, we don’t quite know [what 
would be best]--we have [only] theories, we have ideas, [about what] is the most advantageous 
way of stimulating--and therefore, you see, the bets were being hedged with this across-the-
board tax reduction, individuals and corporations.  I thought that was a stroke of political genius 
at the time, and there was a tax cut that proved--I think “proved” may be too strong a word--in 
my judgment, it worked extremely well.   

A rebate, it’s like an aspirin pill to my mind [unintelligible], just a little bit, and what you 
want through a tax bill, if this is conceived of as a measure to stimulate the economy, you want 
to change peoples’ minds about themselves and about the future.  And how you can do that with 
a rebate, I don’t know--even if the rebate applied to everyone, you see, rather than being 
concentrated at one end of the income scale.  But maybe I have a 19th century mind and don’t 
understand the world we live in.  But I do think, really, that better counsel will prevail, and I’m 
quite optimistic about that.  Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN.  I’d just like to pick up Steve Gardner’s point, which I certainly share.  I think 
this uncertainty is going to disappear in a way that will be constructive before the trees come into 
blossom in Washington in the spring.  And again, we have our old cliché, perhaps maybe we are 
worried too much about it at this point--we have nothing to fear but fear itself.  And, indeed, 
when we discover a little more about the philosophy of a new government, we will find that 
business confidence will have a resurgence that will make our present projections look very 
conservative. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Anyone else like to speak?  Mr. Guffey, please. 

MR. GUFFEY.  You were looking for optimism, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no I wasn’t.  I was a moment ago; now perhaps it’s time to 
become a little more pessimistic. 

MR. GUFFEY.  Well, I’d like to report that, in the Tenth District, retail sales are holding 
up quite well, and as a matter of fact, looking toward the Christmas season, retailers are 
anticipating a very good season.  But to also, I guess, endorse what President Mayo and 
Governor Gardner just said, it seems to me--and you will excuse me for not relying upon figures, 
because I am not a trained economist--it shouldn’t be surprising that businessmen and even 
consumers are in a period of uncertainty.  And it seems to me fairly certain, also, that, without 
regard to what the final outcome when the new Administration [unintelligible], it may be that 



11/16/76 - 31 - 
 

  
 

businessmen are going to accommodate those, and this inactivity is going to burst out.  And 
whether the timing is by the blooming season in Washington, I don’t know.  But I think it’s fairly 
quickly into the year 1977. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, if I may join Mr. Coldwell in the interest of balance, I 
feel as he does about an increase in the price of oil at the present time.  The world has not yet 
adjusted, not by a long shot, to the quadrupling in the price of oil that occurred toward the end of 
1973 and the subsequent increase in 1975.  I feel very strongly about that and had some quiet--I 
don’t know how quiet--something to say about that in the recent testimony as one of the major 
uncertainties facing our country [and], for that matter, the world economy, at the present time.  
And if that can be prevented--I think it can be prevented--I think all of us will have very good 
cause to feel much more cheerful about the economy.  And on the other hand, if it goes into 
effect, then I think that the words of gloom that have been heard around this table might well be 
intensified.   

Anyone else like to speak before we break for luncheon?  Very well, we’ll do that now, 
and we’ll be back, let’s say--what is your preference, 2:15?  It’s 1:15 now, 2:15 or 2:30?  Let’s 
have a show of hands for 2:30.  A show of hands for 2:15.  2:15 is agreeable. 

[Lunch recess] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we should be resuming our deliberation, and let us 
give the floor now to Mr. Sternlight. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  [Statement-- see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Sternlight, any new questions? 

MR. EASTBURN.  Peter, what would be the market reaction to a 1/4 percentage point cut 
in the discount rate? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think it would be fairly moderate.  There’s been talk of a 
possibility of a discount rate cut.  It was a little more active a few weeks ago.  It is dampened 
down in the last couple of weeks as the market perceived stronger aggregates.  But I think it 
would be a fairly moderate reaction at this point, even so. 

MR. PARTEE.  A 1/2 point would come as a great surprise. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think a 1/2 point would be rather a surprise, and that would 
generate a sizable reaction, yes. 

MR. BLACK.  What would be the nature of the reaction? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, I think it depends on what accompaniment of open market 
operations there were at the same time.  If we were still around the 5 percent funds rate, I think 
the 1/4 percentage point--unless the market perceived that we’re going to be edging down from 5 
percent funds--that would be a rather mild reaction, with bill rates not moving any more [than], 
perhaps not as much as, that 1/4 percentage point, and lesser rate moves in the longer end of the 



11/16/76 - 32 - 
 

  
 

[curve].  If there were any accompanying lower federal funds rate atmosphere, depending on just 
how much lower and over and what time path, whether it could be a little more reaction on the 
discount rate-- 

MR. BLACK.  Suppose you did lower the federal funds rate and simply announce the 
discount rate changes as a realignment of the discount rate to minimize the [unintelligible] 
effects. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well I think it could be a fairly moderate reaction, and perhaps if the 
funds rate were down 1/8 to 1/4 below the 5 percent, and the discount rate came down 1/4 
percentage point with accompanying announcements of technical realignment, then the market 
rate might be at the short end in the same order of 1/4 percentage point, perhaps. 

MR. BLACK.  What I was really getting at, I guess, was Chairman Burns’s remark earlier 
today about the good rhetoric. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any other questions for Mr. Sternlight?  Well, thank you 
Mr. Sternlight.  We will now hear from Mr. Axilrod, who also will be brief. 

MR. AXILROD.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Axilrod, any questions?  Well, you’ve been so 
lucid, Mr. Axilrod, there’s no need for questioning.  We’re ready to turn now to our monetary 
policy discussions.  We hope that, as we go around the table, members of the Committee would 
address themselves, among other things, to the question whether our economy is now short of 
liquidity and what economic gain, if any, members of the Committee would or might expect 
from some easing in credit conditions.  I hope also that the Bank Presidents would express their 
view on the desirability of a reduction in the discount rate.   

I would like to say just a few words, not about the discount rate but about what I think is 
the basic question:  Is our economy short of liquidity?  I don’t see it really.  The banks are 
hungry for customers, and savings banks, particularly savings and loan associations, have 
enormous inflows of funds.  I doubt, really, if the easing of the monetary conditions would have 
any significant influence on the behavior of the economy at the present time.  However, I do 
think that, in view of the economic information that has come our way and that we expressed at 
this table, some easing is presently indicated.  But I also think that the easing should be slight.  
And I say that for several reasons.   

First of all, the very high rate of growth of the monetary aggregates in October has been 
noticed, and while it appears that the November figures will show moderation, the exceptionally 
high numbers in October are still in the minds of many people who watch statistics on the money 
supply.  [Also] I think that the easing, if any, should be slight in view of the very large increases 
in price indexes that have recently been published--though the interpretation of these indexes 
leaves something to be desired.  [And] I think the easing should be slight in view of the 
possibility that the discount rate may be adjusted downward.  Finally, I feel that the easing 
should be only slight because there is a widespread view around the country among 
businesspeople, financial people, that the Federal Reserve more than ever is the main bulwark 



11/16/76 - 33 - 
 

  
 

against inflation and that the basic monetary policy received by the Federal Reserve has served 
our country well and should be continued.   

Now as for specific numbers, to give you something to shoot at, I lean toward alternative B 
with some modifications--some slight modifications:  M1 range as designated; M2 shaded down 
slightly to 9 to 13; and the federal funds rate at 4-1/2 to 5-1/4, the midpoint being 4-7/8--the 
intention being to move down to the midpoint this week unless the figures that appear on 
Thursday show extraordinary growth in monetary aggregates, which seems rather unlikely from 
the preliminary indications that we have.   

Now as I say, these are suggestions for the Committee to shoot at, to oppose one way or 
another or possibly to endorse.  Who might speak first?  Mr. Kimbrel, Mr. Guffey, Mr. Morris, 
Mr. Black, Mr. Mayo, Mr. MacLaury, Mr. Wallich, Mr. Partee, Mr. Winn, Mr. Coldwell, Mr. 
Jackson, Mr. Williams, Mr. Baughman, Mr. Volcker, Mr. Gardner.  [Mr.] Volcker will definitely 
be last.  Mr. Gardner will speak whenever he wants to.  Mr. Kimbrel please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I think [there is] not much more to be added because I’m 
prepared to accept almost literally just what you concluded.  I think there is adequate liquidity, I 
see no indication of any lack of liquidity in the system, so I do not foresee the need for easing for 
that reason.  I remain considerably concerned, as do our directors, about inflationary 
expectations.  I would also hope that consideration of the discount rate could be favorable, 
maybe of 1/4 point, and I say that mainly because of the announcement effect that might have 
with the market.  Obviously, it isn’t being used a great deal, but I think it might have some 
favorable influence from the announcement.   

As for the numbers you assigned to alternative B, I am prepared to accept all of them.  I 
guess I feel very strongly, though, that if we could, I would hope we could operate almost 
[always] in the range of 4-3/4 to 5 percent.  During this period, I would be reluctant to see the 
rate come below [4]-3/4 and I most assuredly would not like to see the rate going up.  I am 
prepared to accept the numbers you assigned there.  I would hope actually it would be somewhat 
more constrained. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you very much, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Guffey. 

MR. GUFFEY.  Well, I would share that feeling [about] moving to 4-7/8 and fairly 
quickly--what we tried to do a month ago and were not successful.  It seems to me that the case 
is as good now as it was then.  The only question about the numbers that you propose, Mr. 
Chairman, with respect to M2--if we’re going to give equal weight to the two of them [M1 and 
M2] as we have in the past, I would just as soon adopt the numbers [for M2] in alternative B, 
which are 9-1/2 to 13-1/2, in view of the staff’s projections.   

With respect to liquidity, everything that we see would indicate that liquidity is very good 
and that most of the financing that’s going on in the business community is out of cash flows, 
which indicates that liquidity is there.  With respect to easing credit, I wouldn’t think it would 
have a great deal of effect at the moment to go only to 4-7/8, and it seems to me that the public 
needs sort of a stroke or boost, which this might provide.  And with respect to the discount rate, 
it would be that additional kick, coupling the two together.  It seems it does very little damage in 



11/16/76 - 34 - 
 

  
 

terms of the aggregate growth rates as projected by the Board’s staff, and I think it may be vitally 
important. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Morris, may we hear from you? 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, with respect to the three points you asked us to comment 
on--this issue of shortage of liquidity, I think you really have to say, “compared to what?”  I 
think, certainly, the economy is more liquid than it was a year ago, but if you ask about the state 
of liquidity relative to where it has been in corresponding periods of the business cycle, earlier 
business expansions, I think you would find that the answer to the question is that the economy is 
less liquid than it has been in corresponding periods of expansion.  Certainly this is true of the 
corporate sector, [which] is nowhere near as liquid as it was in the earlier economic expansions. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Of course, you’ve had a secular trend there that complicates 
interpretations. 

MR. MORRIS.  Yes, I know that it has a secular trend, but I think, nonetheless, if you 
would ask the question, is the corporate sector more or less liquid than it was in corresponding 
states of business expansions, you would have to say-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All that I mean to say is, that’s a very fair question, but you have 
to interpret it, I think, in the light of the secular trend.  Now, whether your statement will still be 
correct, I don’t know.  You’re probably right; I’m just not sure. 

MR. MORRIS.  The other dimension of it is that if you think of liquidity in terms of the 
availability of money, I think quite clearly money is available, but here again, money is available 
at substantially higher interest rates than was the case in corresponding phases of business 
expansion.  I think it’s particularly important for the housing market.  That is, mortgage money is 
available, but it’s available at rates considerably higher than we have encountered in other 
periods when housing was expanding. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You say that about the real rate of interest? 

MR. MORRIS.  Well, no but I don’t think the real rate of interest is particularly important 
to the individual buying a home.  I don’t think he thinks in terms of real interest.  I think he 
thinks in terms of the amount of the monthly payment relative to his salary.  And I think that the 
increase in interest rates we have seen over the past five years has required, say, the young adult 
buying a home for the first time-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I not only agree with that, but I’m making a speech on Thursday, 
and I’ll make a great deal of this very point. 

MR. MORRIS.  He has to pay a higher percentage of his income than we did when we 
bought our homes.  Would it make a difference if we moved to a different policy?  I think yes.  I 
think it would certainly be helpful to the securities markets; I think it would be moderately 
helpful to the stock market as well as the bond market.  And to the extent that it would promote a 
trend toward lower mortgage rates, I think that would be helpful.   



11/16/76 - 35 - 
 

  
 

On the discount rate, I think we ought to move.  I’ve been restraining my board from 
moving, but I think that the time has come.  I think in moving, though, I would recommend that 
we move a 1/2 rather than a 1/4.  That is, if we move a 1/2, that would only bring the discount 
rate down to where the federal funds rate is at present.   

I am pleased that you propose that we do move to a somewhat more expansionary policy, 
but I think I would move a little further than you suggest, Mr. Chairman.  I would propose a 
4-1/2 to 5 range on the funds rate, instructing the Manager to move to 4-3/4.  This is a marginal 
difference, but I think the evidence is persuasive enough to me that we need to move more than 
1/8.  And therefore I’d like the specifications of alternative A better.  It seems to me, for us to be 
publishing specifications showing a range [with a lower bound] as little as 2-1/2 percent on M1 
in this context bothers me a bit.  I’d rather see the range on M1 be 4 to 8.   

And it seems to me in this context that we ought to give more weight, at least temporarily, 
to M1.  Because I think it’s pretty clear to me that if you have to ask yourself which series, M1 
or M2, is more descriptive of what appears to be going on in the real economy, I think that you’d 
have to argue that M1 should be given, in this context, more weight than we normally would 
give it.  That’s all I have to say. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Black now, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, when the aggregates spurted in October, I think it was quite 
wise to resist overreacting by pushing up the federal funds rate.  Now that we see the aggregates 
are likely to come in less rapidly than they have been, I was hoping that you would show similar 
precaution, not overreacting to the downdrift in M1.  Regardless of what happened to M1, I think 
your time and savings deposits are going to continue to grow pretty fast.  Thrift institution 
deposits are going to grow, with the interest rate relationship [being] what it is, and I think this 
means that there’s going to be a continuous amount of liquidity added to the economy, and I 
believe that the liquidity level is very adequate [unintelligible].   

I feel that the economy is a little stronger than the staff thinks, but I must confess that I 
have growing doubts about my position on that, whereas I think that liquidity is adequate.  I 
think Governor Coldwell made a very important point:  Most businessmen think interest rates are 
too high in order to commit on plant and equipment [unintelligible].  So I’d like to see us move 
gradually downward a little bit.  I emphasize that word “gradual.”  I ordinarily favor an 
aggregate directive; at this time, I am leaning toward a money market directive.  And I would set 
a ceiling of 5 percent on that.  I just don’t think we should dare move above 5 percent; the risk’s 
on the other side.  I would put 4-3/4 on that and go down to 4-7/8, like you suggested.   

Having done that, I think the stage would then be set for perhaps a 1/4 percentage point 
decrease in the discount rate.  I think this is a good chance for some of us to use some of that 
rhetoric you talked about.  If the [Federal Reserve] Board thinks it wise, I’d hope you would 
consider what you might do on reserve requirements, expressing that this is not really a change 
in policy but a structural change, the same way we would change the discount rate to bring it in 
line.  Because I think part of the lack of confidence we must not [forget] stems from fears of 
inflation.  If they think we’ve thrown in the towel [with] this little easing now, actually it could 
be counterproductive. 



11/16/76 - 36 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Mayo next, please. 

MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman, I’m prepared to accept a repetition of our range at this time 
on federal funds for a 4-1/2 to 5-1/4.  I feel strongly about the 5-1/4.  I do not want to see a 5-1/2; 
I think it gives the wrong impression all the way along.  I could be talked into a 4-1/4 on the low 
range as against a 4-1/2, but I think my preference is the 4-1/2.  It gives a feeling of stability, and 
yet, the midpoint being 4-7/8, I think this is something that we can gradually work toward.  It 
would give a little feeling of ease to go along with what I agree, too, should be perhaps a 1/4 
point change in the discount rate.  I wouldn’t go as far as Frank.  I, too, have resisted movement 
within my board to lower the discount rate.  It’s been quite a vocal and articulate response, 
interestingly enough, by the bank members [of my board], not by the nonbank members.  I don’t 
know how you would explain that to the chairman of the House Banking Committee.  But I find 
that this is the way the sentiment runs. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s the nice thing about our country.  We don’t all think alike.  
Everyone does his own thinking in his own way. 

MR. MAYO.  I have already indicated to our board of directors that my recommendation is 
still firmly in favor of keeping the discount rate where it is, but I’m not guaranteeing that there 
would be no change in that recommendation as we look to the next full board meeting, which 
would be a week from tomorrow.   

On the M1 and M2, however, I guess I split a little here.  I think I prefer the 3 to 7 [for M1] 
and the 10 to 14 [for M2] as the points to watch on our ranges for November-December.  I share 
some of Frank’s problem with the 2-1/2 [lower bound for M1growth] looking awful [skimpy], 
and I haven’t that much confidence in the figures.  I’d rather just round them, and I’d round up 
rather than down in both cases. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. MacLaury now. 

MR. MACLAURY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I find myself in virtually total agreement 
with the specifications you gave and the reasoning for those specifications.  On the discount rate, 
I would certainly favor, at this point, a 1/4 point reduction.  I realize that there are a number of 
interpretations that one could give to a discount rate reduction.  But I would see it as a modest 
stimulus to confidence, and it seems to me that’s [what] we are talking about at the moment, 
trying to find ways in which we can bolster confidence [so] that the future will be less bleak than 
the staff projections or others are predicting.   

And in that context, I guess, given Mr. Gardner’s comment about my wishy-washiness on 
my earlier intervention, I ought to say that I share Bob Black’s feeling, and yours, I guess, Mr. 
Chairman, that the staff projections are too low.  That doesn’t mean that I’m far above them, but 
it indeed says that if I were at a 5-1/2 percent kind of real GNP rate for ’77, then you’d still argue 
that that’s too low given the circumstances.  So it does not trouble me at all to see us indulge in a 
mild easing at the moment, and that’s I guess how I’d interpret your specifications. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. MacLaury.  Mr. Wallich now. 



11/16/76 - 37 - 
 

  
 

MR. WALLICH.  As I look at the liquidity, Mr. Chairman, first, I share Frank Morris’s 
feelings that, in technical terms, using the usual measurements of liquidity applying to the 
working capital, liquid assets, debt/equity and so forth, we are not in a very liquid condition.  
We’ve made some improvement, but it’s small improvement compared to long-term 
deterioration.  Liquidity at the present time exists in the sense of plenty of funds around--could 
very well be the result of slack business rather than a cause of better business.  That is always a 
possibility.  So the fact that there are seemingly idle funds around does not suggest to me 
necessarily that these funds are going to go to work.   

As for the gains from easing, I think that they’re probably not likely to be that great.  
There’s even a danger at this time.  To start easing late in an expansion--after all, it’s a year and a 
half, now, into this--could get us to the point where, if this took and really were effective, it 
could cause us to hit the capacity ceiling a year or two from now with too much speed.  We made 
that mistake before.   

Well, saying all this, I come out for a slight easing.  I’m not too much concerned by the 
longer-term interest consequences of something like alternative A--that we would have to raise 
rates substantially later on.  Aside from the fact that we can change the one-year target, I think 
base drift alone, if it occurs, would take care of this and not necessarily drive us into higher 
interest rates.  So I would recommend a 3 to 7 on M1; 9-1/2 to 13-1/2 on M2; and 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 
on the funds rate, bearing in mind that I think we are slipping into a dangerous habit if we narrow 
the funds rate.  We’ve put ourselves into a box, and I’d like to keep us at least at a 1 percentage 
point [range for the funds rate] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Partee please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree to a very considerable extent with Governor 
Wallich.  I don’t know whether there’s enough liquidity or not, and the statistics seem to show 
considerable improvement, but the economy is not performing well.  And so, in terms of defining 
what we want in the economy, why, I think we could use some more liquidity.  The idea used to 
be expressed as “you can’t push on a string,” but I don’t think we are in that soggy a situation.  
And I think that liquidity would improve borrowing and lending attitudes.  One positive effect of 
some increase in liquidity would be the downward pressure on short-term interest rates.  Lower 
short-term interest rates, it seems to me, would present institutional managers, particularly the 
banks and thrifts, with the portfolio problem of deciding whether to continue to put their funds 
disproportionately into very liquid assets at a possibly negative carry or whether to push more 
aggressively to make longer-term loans and investments.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is where they have been now for a while, but you mean it 
would intensify them? 

MR. PARTEE.  This would intensify them.  Their third alternative is to reduce the inflows 
of funds by cutting rates off on savings.  Some, I think, would go in every direction.  But at least 
some institutions would move more aggressively and try to make long-term loans and 
investments and thereby communicate some easing in the long-term markets, some downward 
pressure in the long-term rates.   



11/16/76 - 38 - 
 

  
 

Now, as far as the aggregates are concerned, I’m not terribly concerned about that October 
number on M1 because I do think now that we have to look at September and October combined.  
And if we look at that combined, if we look at the year to date, the expansion rates don’t seem 
excessive to me.  But in any event, if we choose an aggregates directive, which I think we 
definitely want to do, we protect ourselves against the possibility that the aggregates will go up 
quite strongly in November and December.  Because if they do, we’ll move the funds rate, we’ll 
be up at the top end of the range--and maybe above the top end of the range, and perhaps it will 
be a reason for an additional instruction to the Manager if the aggregates do grow strongly.   

Now, I’m more inclined to think that the aggregates are going to grow quite weakly in 
November and December because of the state of the economy.  But then, that could be wrong 
too.  If they do, however, grow weakly, then having the aggregates target would mean that we 
would be moving down in the funds rate and perhaps again have a special meeting.  So I think 
it’s an important time to have the directive stated in terms of the aggregates simply because of 
our total state of ignorance of what is going to be shown in the aggregates performance in this 
and the next couple of months.   

Well, I would support alternative A, but I would support it with the variations that 
Governor Wallich suggested.  That is, I think we could cut the M2 growth rate a little bit, and  
then--I think you said we’d cut it a 1/2 percentage point on each end, didn’t you, Henry? 

MR. WALLICH.  That’s right, up to 3 to 7 percent. 

MR. PARTEE.  I’m speaking of M2. 

MR. WALLICH.  Oh, M2, 9-1/2 to 13-1/2. 

MR. PARTEE.  I think I would buy that, and I think I would also buy the 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 
funds rate range, which means that the midpoint is 4-3/4, and it would presume a move to 4-3/4 
unless the aggregates were performing quite unusually, quite abnormally high or low.  We would 
move, say within a week or so, to 4-3/4, so that would be my view.  And I won’t say anything 
about the discount rate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Gardner now. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, in hopes that I can conform to what I said earlier, I would support 
some easing, as you’ve suggested, Mr. Chairman--modest, responsible easing--because I’m 
convinced that developments will unfold in this period and give us further indications of what 
the real underlying situation is.  I feel a little like somebody with a surgeon’s scalpel attempting 
to treat a patient with hives--mysteries of the formulae compounded by the staff are still new to 
me.  Nevertheless, I don’t want to overlook the fact that, while November aggregates may indeed 
bring the October burst into better perspective, we did, in fact, have a very substantial growth in 
October--very substantial, much more than I’ve seen since I’ve been on this [Committee].   

Well, the aggregates, even with a modest November, appear to be growing satisfactorily 
for this stage of the economic cycle that we find ourselves in.  And in short, I would support a 
modest easing.  Governor Partee picked alternative A and modified it, when I thought, really, 
Governor Wallich modified B.  I therefore end up a little more comfortable with 3 to 7, 9-1/2 to 



11/16/76 - 39 - 
 

  
 

13-1/2, and I don’t want to go down to 4 percent on the funds rate.  I think that’s prejudging far 
too early.  [Unintelligible] so I would stay with the 4-1/2 to 5-1/4. 

[GAP IN TRANSCRIPT] 

MR. WINN.  I found the Greenbook this time terribly depressing reading.  It seems to me 
that we have to show some concern in that area, whether you accept it or not.  I would be 
interested to know whether we have run the projections on the basis of the high end and the low 
end of the aggregates to see what difference it made in the outcome, in contrast with the median 
figure we used for our monetary estimate, because I feel flying blind is [not] knowing what the 
implications would be. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I found out, but the question as to blindness or good vision 
still remain open.  Mr. Gramley, since-- 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We make our estimates taking the aggregate growth of the midpoint at 
the longer-term range.  I have presented, on various occasions, estimates of the impact of moving 
from one end of the range to the other.  We did not do that at the time of the last long-term 
projection meeting because my feeling is that, given the uncertainties about what’s happening to 
velocity and what’s likely to happen to it in the future, and given the effects that traditionally are 
associated with 1 percentage point more or less money growth, that we’re not giving the 
Committee information that’s particularly valuable.  That is, the uncertainties are sufficiently 
large that these tiny differences in GNP growth that we get adding 1 percentage point more 
money growth, 1 percentage point less, are insignificant. 

MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible] I think my feeling would be to associate 
myself with alternative A modified to the funds rate of 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 as an indication of concern 
over the current outlook.  The second is, by changing the rate, hopefully we’ll change some of 
what I consider some of the sticky market rates and get the effect both in the short-term area and 
in the long-term area, which I think would be conducive at this time.   

I think my preference would be to take advantage of an easing situation to move the 
reserve requirements because I think we’re going to be faced more and more with [Federal 
Reserve System] membership problems as [banks] look at their earnings.  On the other hand, a 
change in the discount rate would have a psychological [unintelligible].  Rather than 
complicating the Desk management problems in a series of changes, I would be in favor of the 
4-1/4 to 5-1/4 [for the federal funds rate] and a move down [in] the discount rate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Mr. Coldwell please. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve been accused of being a harbinger of gloom today 
already, a couple of times, but I really think that our economic prospects have dimmed over the 
last couple of months.  And whether we accept the staff projection or not, the unemployment 
levels predicted in those projections are unacceptable, gentlemen.  I think the only question that I 
face here is a question of stimulus.  Do we stimulate this economy in fiscal or monetary [ways] 
or both?  I have a great reservation about leaving all stimulus to the fiscal side of life.  If we’re 
going to hold monetary policy and leave it to Congress to stimulate this economy, I think we’ll 



11/16/76 - 40 - 
 

  
 

come out much worse than if we attempt to do some ourselves.  I think the policy can provide a 
little bit of help in easing rates.   

As a consequence, that’s where I come out.  I would prefer to see the federal funds rate of 
4-1/4 to 5, and I would stop at 5, because I think we are at 5, and I would prefer that we not go 
down to the midpoint of that range--that it be asymmetrical, as we’ve done before--go down to 
4-3/4 and then look and see.  But I would not prefer to have an upper [limit] over the 5 unless we 
reconsidered the matter.  On the monetary growth rates, there’s been a suggestion of 3 to 7 [for 
M1]; I would hope that we would not go down as low as 3.  I would prefer to put a bottom of 4 
on it, but I suspect I’m going to be in the minority here.  But nevertheless, I would prefer a 4 to 8 
range.  As far as the other matters of policy on discount and reserve requirements, I will not 
comment at the moment. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Jackson please. 

MR. JACKSON.  I share Governor Coldwell’s feeling about the economy and particularly 
the unemployment rate.  At the same time, while [the unemployment rate] may be unacceptable, 
I think the real question is, what are you going to do about it, if [there is] anything you can do 
about it?  To that extent, it’s my conclusion that there’s a relatively limited amount that monetary 
policy can do about it.  There may be only slightly different action that fiscal policy can take, and 
I’m inclined to believe that there are limits as to what fiscal policy can do about it.  To that 
extent, I think that our action in this country in that particular area lies in fields as yet untried, in 
the area of structural changes to which we’ve been addressing ourselves in various speeches and 
so forth.  And until the country does address itself to some of these structural changes, we will 
continue to be frustrated in our conclusions.  And the consequences may be counterproductive 
rather than effective.   

Nonetheless, having said that, I do feel that in the general environment in which our 
country is operating today, that some ease in nominal rates of interest are appropriate.  I really 
wonder whether lower interest rates necessarily will produce the more expansive growth in 
monetary aggregates, particularly over the short run, that we’re discussing today.  At the same 
time, I’m inclined to think that if we only ease 1/8, it will not be sufficiently [evident] to the 
general public to accomplish the goals that we’re really trying to [accomplish].  It’s my judgment 
that, to a significant degree, these are cosmetic rather than substantial, and properly so--only 
cosmetic.   

To that extent, I would be more inclined to have a federal funds rate of 4-1/4 to 5, or 4-1/2 
to 5-1/4.  I’d be inclined toward 4-1/2 to 5-1/4 with an asymmetrical 4-3/4 [midpoint] rate, but I 
think these are mechanics.  The main thing is, I’d like to see us go to 4-3/4.  [For M1 and M2], I 
would be inclined to use [alternative A]--3 to 7 for M1 and 10 to 14 for M2.  It appears that the 
staff’s projections--and we’re a quarter of the way into the two-month projections--lead us to 
believe that we’ll have about a 12 percent rate of growth in M2, anyway, and it strikes me that 
the portion of the market where M2 rates of growth are so sensitive are the places where we do 
continue to need an assurance of liquidity, if I can put it that way--the housing market being one 
of them.   



11/16/76 - 41 - 
 

  
 

I share Governor Partee’s feeling that we may be getting close to the place where 
managers, particularly in the thrift institutions and savings departments of commercial banks, 
may be having a reassessment of what they can continue to pay and at what rates they may 
reinvest their funds in order to stay in business.  It strikes me that if we view the housing market 
as being one of the basic strengths, a significant reduction in interest rates on long-term home 
mortgages, and by that I mean 1/4 or a 1/2 point, as a result of continued liquidity that thrift 
industries [unintelligible], would be a method of sustaining that demand.  I don’t think it would 
help the multifamily side of that market at all.  I think it takes something substantially more than 
that, and, in fact, the inflationary trend in construction probably will outrun even any change in 
interest rates that are likely to take place, so I don’t see much change in that.   

But it strikes me that, if we’re hanging onto two things right now as being signs of 
strength, namely housing and hopefully final consumer demand, these two areas strike me as 
being a good place where we might have some genuine impact from a monetary policy point of 
view.  And to that extent I would be inclined to [put] M2 [at] the 10 to 14 range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Williams now, please. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  We would favor a 1/2 percentage point reduction in the discount rate.  
This could probably be done in two steps of 1/4 each.  We think this would give a better 
alignment with the federal funds rate, and it would also give a lift to business expectations.  We 
would also support a slight easing of policy.  We think that this can be done under the 
established or the existing ranges rather than changing the ranges.  We would favor alternative B, 
although we could support alternative B as modified by Chairman Burns. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Williams.  Mr. Baughman please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I can find quite acceptable your suggestions on 
modified alternative B.  I’m a little uncomfortable with a 2-1/2 on the bottom side of M1.  And 
so far as the fed funds rate is concerned, I guess I’d be a little more inclined toward 4-1/4 to 
5-1/4 than the 4-1/2 to 5-1/4.  With respect to the directive, I would endorse Governor Partee’s 
very appropriate arguments in favor of an aggregates directive.  It seems to me that that applies 
to most circumstances, but I’d agree that it applies particularly well at the present time.   

I would agree also with those who indicated that they would welcome seeing some change 
in reserve requirements.  With respect to the discount rate, I would argue as strongly as I can that 
we make a change of 1/2 [point] at the present time.  I think 1/2 is justified for a number of 
reasons.  I think it’s superior to 1/4 on the grounds that a change of 1/4 now probably would need 
to be followed by another change of 1/4 before very long, and I think two such changes coming 
in sequence would tend to carry more of a suggestion to the public that the economy was 
continuing to weaken.  For five weeks now, the average of the three-month bill, the three-month 
CD, and the three- to six-month finance paper rates have been more than 50 points above the 
discount rate. 

MR. PARTEE.  Below. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Below the discount rate.  And it seems to me that the rationale for 
changing the discount rate should be aligning it with the market.  And it seems to me that that 



11/16/76 - 42 - 
 

  
 

rationale cannot be used unequivocally if the change is only 1/4 point at the present time.  
Another observation I would toss in, I would qualify it before doing it as possibly not being very 
significant.  We’ve had 19 banks make arrangements for seasonal borrowings this year.  
Fourteen of them have borrowed, but as the differential between the market rates and discount 
rate has widened, the numbers dropped off.  We have three [banks] borrowing at the present 
time.  Now, of course, that’s not the only reason, and probably not even the preponderant reason, 
for the change in the number of these little country banks that have been borrowing, although 
information available to us from surveys indicates that there is a pretty strong demand for credit 
out in the country down there.  So, as I say, I would argue as vigorously as I can that we move 
the [discount] rate 1/2 point.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Lilly now, please. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, there’s been a lot of conversation here, and some of the remarks 
[indicate] that businessmen think the rate structure is too high.  I agree with that, and the reason 
that I do is that, in the short-term rates, it’s part of the cost of the product, and it’s too high.  It’s 
related to cost of sales, and if it came down, it certainly would have some impact on pricing the 
product.  The long-term rate is related to capital investment.  The lower that long-term rate is, the 
more likelihood there is of a surge of capital investment.  So, on that kind of a basis, I would like 
to see the funds rate at 4-3/4.  How you get there, I don’t know.  I kind of liked Phil Coldwell’s 
4-1/4 to 5, and I concur in Henry’s and Chuck’s M1 and M2 numbers. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Lilly.  Now, Mr. Volcker has, well, he’s 
preempted the last place. 

MR. ROOS.  Second from last. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Third from last. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Volcker has preempted the last place, and therefore that place 
is reserved for him.  And the question is, who else would like to speak now?  Mr. Eastburn and 
then Mr. Roos and then anyone else who wants to speak again, because Mr. Volcker definitely 
speaks last.  Mr. Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Well, Governor Partee has expressed my views.  I think the economy 
needs some stimulation and that monetary policy ought to play a role in that.  I find it difficult to 
accept the idea that there isn’t [anything] that monetary policy can do.  We don’t have a liquidity 
trap operating in the economy at the present time, and I think some modest easing is in order.  I 
would prefer alternative A as far as the aggregates are concerned, and I would prefer a funds rate 
of 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 administered on the asymmetrical downside.  And I would like to see the 
discount rate cut [unintelligible]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Roos, please. 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, if one of our purposes is to throw out signals and to affect 
sentiment, I think it’s terribly important that we do not adopt a posture of very recognizable ease.  
Regardless of what we do, I think the primary attention of the economic community will be on 
what the incoming Administration is going to do.  I think the confidence of the business 



11/16/76 - 43 - 
 

  
 

community basically will depend on the determination--should the incoming Administration 
move toward ease--[of] the willingness or a demonstration of the fact that the Federal Reserve is 
going to stick by its guns.  For us to feel that there would be a constructive reaction to a 
recognizable easing by this [Committee], I think, is misjudging the ball game.  I think that if we 
were to signal something that amounts to significant ease, it would destroy confidence and would 
be a deterrent to positive activity on the part of the business community.   

Structurally, I think that alternative A is less than acceptable if we believe in our long-
range targets, because if we do accelerate the growth of M1 over the next two quarters, and if 
we’re going to stick within our target range, it’s going to mean a substantial deceleration of M1 
growth in the second and third quarters of next year.  And a corresponding rise in the fed funds 
rate--if we take this action today, if we do go the [alternative A] route, I think we could at least 
say to ourselves that we will be prepared to bite the bullet in the middle of next year to correct 
this course.  I wonder whether we’re really prepared to do that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Roos.  Does anyone want to speak before Mr. 
Volcker?  You won’t [have] another chance after Mr. Volcker.  A promise is a promise.  I made 
Mr. Volcker a promise.  There are a few things that I could ever do for Mr. Volcker or, for that 
matter, for anyone else.  It’s within my power now to make him the last speaker.  I’ve given him 
that promise.  I must deliver on it. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I’d rather trade being the last speaker for some other 
things you gave me. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Partee. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I just want to say, in response to President Roos’s last comment, that 
I think he’s referring to the fact that alternative A, given the long-term ranges that we have 
adopted, implies a firming later next year.  And I would just want to point out that that presumes 
that the staff projection of nominal GNP growth is correct.  If, in fact, the staff projection of 
nominal GNP growth was too high and it came in lower, you wouldn’t have as much money 
growth and there wouldn’t necessarily need to be a tightening--so, that sort of a construct in the 
way the Bluebook is put together.  If that staff projection comes out right, and if we should hold 
[for] four quarters to the ranges that we adopted in the telephone meeting, then you would need 
to tighten some, later on in the period.  But only under those conditions. 

MR. JACKSON.  Conversely, if they are low, we’d tighten earlier. 

MR. PARTEE.  Yeah, sure. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  For the sake of symmetry only, if the staff projection is too low--  

MR. PARTEE.  Then we would be faced with the issue sooner. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Sooner and on a larger scale; and/or on a larger scale. 

MR. WALLICH.  Provided there’s no base drift. 



11/16/76 - 44 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we are ready for Mr. Volcker. 

SPEAKER(?).  Do you wish to stand up? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  So I could pronounce the benediction, maybe I should.  
The advantage of coming last, of course, is that everything you agree with has already been said, 
but a few things you may not agree with have been said too, so you’re still forced to say 
something.   

One way or another, we’ve all been talking about how we can sustain a more satisfactory 
pace of economic expansion next year.  And I would just say, as a preliminary to the comment 
on monetary policy, that [as] I look at the situation, and following some of the analysis that 
Governors Partee and Wallich had earlier, the case becomes stronger for some fiscal action in 
terms of weaknesses and personal income and declines in savings rates and feedback effects we 
may be getting on the rest of the economy.  I do [think] that case is growing [stronger], and I 
suspect we may get some [fiscal action].  I hope it’s not of a rebate type, for the reasons you 
suggested, Mr. Chairman.  I once testified that I thought it was a bad precedent when it was done 
by a Republican Administration before--this idea that you just give away the money without any 
relation [to] a tax burden itself.  It doesn’t seem to me to be very helpful.   

But in that context, we have the question of monetary policy at the moment and how these 
two fit together.  And partly for the reasons that Mr. Roos has just described and that you 
described earlier, I think, it should be a measured move and not a feeling that we are now 
embarking on a rather aggressive course of ease.  And I quantify that, in my mind, anyway, that 
through open market operations, I wouldn’t want to see the federal funds rate pushed down by 
something like 1/2 percentage point, prospectively, over this next month, based upon what I 
know now.  I don’t particularly want to see it pushed down 1/4 percentage point right away.  On 
the other side of it, I share the view of those who don’t want to see it go above 5 percent, either.  
I think that would give entirely the wrong signal at the moment.   

On the particular questions that you asked about liquidity, I don’t think there is any certain 
answer.  Frank Morris has spoken my piece about that.  I think, really, it’s all relative to what 
you want.  The kind of action that I would talk about isn’t going to produce any very substantial 
change in liquidity anyway.  But I think what we are looking for is a little encouragement for 
long-term financing and a little encouragement perhaps to [get] some of the longer-term rates 
down a bit to help the investment and housing side of the economy.  And that point has already 
been made.   

I end up on the open market side of the thing--right about where you began all this, Mr. 
Chairman, with the focus on the federal funds rate--contrary, I guess, to what some other people 
have said.  What I don’t quite understand is why we emphasize the aggregates at this particular 
time, a point I want to pick up in a second.  It seems to me this is a time when we are particularly 
sensitive to what the federal funds rate is doing, and I came in with the kind of spread that you 
suggested, of 4-1/2 to 5-1/4.  I don’t really want to use the upper quarter of that, but I would 
move to 4-7/8, and pretty promptly here, based upon what we know now.  I really don’t want to 
go down to 4-1/2 either, as I suggested earlier.  So I’m symmetrical in the sense of not wanting 
to use either side of the range, but get a little easing pretty promptly.   



11/16/76 - 45 - 
 

  
 

So far as the aggregates ranges are concerned, I should point out I don’t attach any great 
weight to any of these estimates, but the New York Bank estimates for some reason are 
substantially lower this time than the Board estimates, which are already, at least in M1, fairly 
low.  Partly that seems to be for reasons--they don’t believe the seasonal, and they think we may 
be entering a period where, without reflecting any basic weakness, we may be running into some 
fairly low M1 figures and M2 figures relative to what we’ve been having--and really 
significantly lower than the Board’s projection.  Well, I don’t know what importance to attribute 
to that, except it lends a little weight to Mr. Partee’s feeling.  They may come in on the low side 
rather than the high side.  It is a reason why, consistent with my feelings about interest rates, I’d 
like the [alternative] B specification; and I thought the M2 one was a little high, as you did, Mr. 
Chairman, relative to our longer-term objectives.  I was prepared to suggest even a percentage 
point lower there.  You suggested a 1/2 percentage point lower.  I’m perfectly content with that.  
I do get a bit frightened as to the public reaction in terms of our general posture if we begin 
publishing 10 to 14 percent figures after the rate of growth that we have had there.   

One of the objects of the strategy we ought to have now--and this is where the discount 
rate comes in--is to, in a sense, [jawbone] institutions.  I’m not sure they’re right on the edge--as 
much on the edge as I would like to see them--but I think there is some possibility of getting a 
reduction in the administered deposit rates here.  And a discount rate change could help in that 
connection by putting our own feelings in the matter a little bit more out in the open.  I think the 
time has come for a change in the discount rate.  I even find the arguments rather persuasive for 
going 1/2 on technical and other grounds, if, in fact, the open market policy was as moderate as I 
am suggesting.  If we gave a much louder signal to open market operations, as some people have 
suggested, I guess I would want to mute the signal on the discount rate.  And I think the other 
combination might be a little more helpful--not really go overboard on the open market 
operations but bring the discount rate more into line with where the federal funds rate is in fact.   

It seems to me a more logical combination of moves, but I still find myself with a 
somewhat open mind about whether that should be 1/4 or 1/2.  But in any case, the effort here, 
and I think the major contribution we can make, is providing a little incentive to get some of 
these interest rates down without really drastically changing our policy and without arousing 
fears that we are going overboard with increasing the liquidity of the economy against the 
prospect of a possible tax decrease shortly following.  I think there is some real danger of 
overdoing it, in fact, and maybe more so psychologically in terms of the balance of concern 
about inflation and expansion.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, thank you, Mr. Volcker.  I think we’ve had a very 
interesting discussion.  The main conclusion I’ve developed from this discussion is that the 
differences that have been expressed within and by members of this Committee are 
preponderantly very small indeed, so there is a substantial degree of unanimity on the part of the 
Committee.  And all that we have to do now is refine these numbers slightly, recognizing that 
very little sanctity attaches to any of these numbers.   

Now, the thinking of the Committee, as I read it, is as follows with regard to our numerical 
specifications.  There is a slight preference for a range of 3 to 7 for M1, over against 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2; there’s more dispersion with regard to M2--very few would want to go above 13-1/2, and 
some want to go below 13-1/2.  I therefore, on balance, think 9-1/2 to 13-1/2 is perhaps fairly 



11/16/76 - 46 - 
 

  
 

representative [for M2].  With regard to the federal funds rate, there is a margin in favor of the 
4-1/2 to 5-1/4 percent range as over against 4-1/4 to 5-1/4.   

Now that’s my reading of the views that have been expressed by the Committee.  If any 
members of the Committee have changed their minds because of what they’ve heard from their 
colleagues, you might advise me of that at this time.  In the absence of that, I think we should 
vote on the following specification:  the 3 to 7 percent for M1; 9-1/2 to 13-1/2 for M2; and 4-1/2 
to 5-1/4 for the federal funds rate. 

MR. PARTEE.  That last rate, the midpoint would be 4-7/8, is it, rather than being 
skewed? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that is--we could discuss that-- 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, what would you read as the consensus on where we would 
move the federal funds rate, say, in the next week--4-7/8? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I would say yes, that is to say, the only thing to hold it up 
would be--well we don’t want to move immediately after the meeting.  Now, on Thursday our 
figures will be in, and unless the figures are outside the range very high, I think the Desk 
definitely would want to move toward 4-7/8 on Friday.  Whether they actually get there or not, I 
think that’s something we ought to leave to the Desk.  If you don’t get there on Friday, you ought 
get there next Monday. 

MR. PARTEE.  I have expressed the preference for 4-1/4 to 5-1/4.  I would be prepared to 
buy 4-1/2 to 5-1/4, but if so, I’d like to have it understood that the midpoint is 4-3/4.  That is, that 
we move in a timely way down to 4-3/4 and then look for further reductions from that point.  So 
in that sense, I would shift it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let’s have a show of hands on that. 

SPEAKER(?).  That’s a 4-3/4 midpoint. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we’ll call it a midpoint.  We put quotation marks around it 
and we will have a show of hands on 4-3/4 versus 4-7/8.  That is the midpoint--they’re in 
quotation marks.  Those who prefer 4-3/4 will kindly raise their hands. 

MR. BROIDA.  Seven. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that’s the way we’ll do it.  That is to say, we still have to 
vote on it.  Let me repeat what we will be voting on. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Mr. Chairman, could I ask on that whether, in going for a 4-3/4 
target within this range, we contemplate the similar timing-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, you would want to do it more gradually. 



11/16/76 - 47 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  4-7/8 Friday, maybe, and then 4-3/4 midweek of next week--something 
like that. 

[LAUGHTER] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that isn’t very gradual.  I think the way to do it gradually is 
to do [the first] one within a week, and the other within two weeks.  So if you do it by Friday, 
let’s say by the following week-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My question about this whole thing, Mr. Chairman, 
would be, obviously there’s very little difference in these ranges, whether you move them up or 
down 1/2 percentage point on paper.  But I am looking at at least one set of projections that says 
we’re going to come straight in under the low point anyway, as it is.  Now, I don’t know what 
the reliability of these projections are, but what happens-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, you do.  You know it’s low.  The hour is late Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Do you go to 4-1/2, is what I’m asking, under those 
conditions?  Fairly readily, that’s a-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We have to live by rules or we have a communication, an 
interchange, by telegram or otherwise, between meetings.  If you’re saying that you would be 
uncomfortable going down to 4-1/2, so would I.  But I would think this is--the rule now, we 
could now choose another limit, and--well, there are circumstances you know, with regard to the 
economy that might clearly make it undesirable to go as low as 4-1/2 so promptly, if the figures 
do come in low.  That’s the rule we operate under, and this is not the time to change the rule.   

Should I specify what we’ll be voting on?  All right, M1, 3 to 7 percent range; M2, 9-1/2 to 
13-1/2 percent; and the federal funds rate, 4-1/2 to 5-1/4, with the understanding that 4-3/4 will 
be interpreted as the midpoint in quotation marks. 

MR. PARTEE.  And which directive? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, we still have to decide that, and let’s have a show of hands.  
Those who would prefer a monetary aggregates directive will kindly raise their hands. 

MR. BROIDA.  Six. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Those who would prefer a money market directive? 

MR. BROIDA.  Five. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I will join the monetary aggregates group.  Now, and the 
language, well, the language, yes.  The staff has given us no choice of language in the monetary 
aggregates directive.  Well, I think we’re ready to vote.  Any further comment? 

MR. JACKSON.  I gather we’ll have the revised version of our testimony on the new 
[monetary aggregate ranges]; that the Committee will discuss it? 



11/16/76 - 48 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, no, we really ought not to.  We’re not ready for that. 

MR. PARTEE.  This would say moderate monetary growth. 

MR. JACKSON.  This is the old-style version, Chuck. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Still, we’re not going to change any rules this meeting.  However, 
I assure you, we’ll change it at the next meeting, and I’ll have a word to say about that presently.  
Would you be good enough to call the roll. 

MR. BROIDA. 
Chairman Burns           Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker    Yes 
President Black     Yes 
Governor Coldwell    Yes 
Governor Gardner    Yes 
President Guffey    Yes 
Governor Jackson    Yes 
President Kimbrel    Yes 
Governor Lilly    Yes 
Governor Partee    Yes 
Governor Wallich    Yes 
President Winn    Yes 

Unanimous. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, now, item 7 on the agenda, we will not take up today.  
The date of the next meeting is Tuesday, but I think we need a little more time, and I would 
suggest that we make personal plans for a late afternoon meeting on the Monday preceding the 
Tuesday meeting.  Then we’ll take up item 7 and a few other matters--a foreign currency 
directive--and there’s much more we’ll be ready for at that time.  Thank you very much for the 
meeting, gentlemen.  Have a good week. 

END OF MEETING 

 




