









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

August 17, 1976 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

 
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 

the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 
or past members of the Committee. 

 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 

involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 

 
Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 

 
Mr. Holmes, Manager 

Mr. Gramley, Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Content last modified 01/11/2011.



8/17/76

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

August 17, 1976 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 17, 

1976, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn 
Guffey, Alternate for Mr. Balles

Messrs. Baughman, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal 
Open Market Committee 

Messrs. MacLaury, Eastburn, and Roos, Presidents 
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, and St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley, Economist (Domestic Business) 
Messrs. Brandt, Keran, Kichline, Parthemos, 

and Reynolds, Associate Economists



8/17/76

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Pizer, Adviser, Division of International 

Finance, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 

Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, First Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Messrs. Balbach, Doll, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas 
City, and Boston respectively 

Mr. Green and Kaminow, Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia respectively 

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York 

Messrs. Fousek, Kareken, and Mrs. Nichols, 
Economic Advisers, Federal Reserve 
Banks of New York, Minneapolis, and 
Chicago respectively 

Mr. Hall, Economist and Director of Domestic 
Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Acceptances and 
Securities Departments, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

  

-2-



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
August 17, 1976 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We are ready to start our meeting this morning.  The first item of 
business, as always, is to act on the minutes of the last meeting.  Motion to approve.  [Seconded.]  
The motion has been made and duly seconded.  No objections heard. 

MR. HOLMES.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 

MR. BLACK.  Alan, do you think that, through realignment of currencies, [the European 
Community] will be able to preserve the [exchange rate] snake for any appreciable period of 
time? 

MR. HOLMES.  There are two alternatives.  One, that everybody goes off and floats 
[separately].  Second, they do have a realignment in the snake, as they talked about last March, 
in which perhaps the dollar-mark relationship would not be much changed, but the other 
countries would depreciate in terms of the mark. 

MR. BLACK.  Which do you think would be more likely? 

MR. HOLMES.  I don’t know.  I think there will be a lot of sentiment in [favor of] trying 
to keep the snake together somehow, but there have been some real problems. 

MR. PARDEE.  The snake is essentially a political animal, and if the governments make a 
political commitment to continue it, then it will continue.  It surprises a lot of people that it has 
lasted as long as it has.  It’s hard to make any projection simply on a market orientation or on an 
economic orientation. 

MR. BLACK.  I realize that.  What would your assessment of it be, Scott? 

MR. PARDEE.  The small countries want to continue the snake.  They feel very strongly 
[about it] and want to have a fixed relationship with the German mark.  But the continued 
repetitive blowouts in the exchange market make it very difficult for them to continue it.  It could 
break up. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Alan, are we making any move at all on Swiss franc repayment? 

MR. HOLMES.  We have not.  That seems to be an insoluble problem at this time. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Or any Treasury bailout? 

MR. HOLMES.  From time to time we hear some noise from the Treasury that they would 
like to pay off and go out and buy Swiss francs in the market.  It’s not a very practical thing to be 
doing right now; it’s also a little bit expensive. 

MR. PARTEE.  Did I understand you to say, Alan, that you think that the dollar will stick 
with the mark and therefore that the other currencies will depreciate against the dollar? 



8/17/76 - 2 - 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I wouldn’t say that the mark will not appreciate against the dollar to some 
extent.  But not a great amount.  I would think [there would be] a larger depreciation of the other 
EC currencies in terms of the mark and against the dollar. 

MR. PARTEE.  And against the dollar.  So that our terms of trade will deteriorate to some 
extent against those countries.   

MR. EASTBURN.  Alan, what prospects do you see that we are going to be out of the 
Belgian franc situation? 

MR. HOLMES.  I think we are going to make it before year-end, certainly. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What is the remaining debt in this, Alan? 

MR. HOLMES.  On the Belgian francs, about 62 million, Mr. Chairman.  I think maybe 
we have accumulated 2 or 3 million in balances so it may be around 60, I would say. 

MR. BLACK.  You plan to notify Governor Holland immediately when we release the 
information? 

MR. HOLMES.  I think maybe we should. 

MR. BLACK.  It’s his problem now. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are we carrying on conversations with the Treasury with regard to 
the Swiss franc? 

MR. HOLMES.  I know of no new conversation. 

MR. WALLICH.  We have one other difficult conversation with Treasury, Mr. Chairman, 
and ’til that’s concluded, I think we’d weaken our position by also asking to be taken out of the 
Swiss swap. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’m not sure that is the case.  I’d like to talk to you and Mr. 
Holmes, possibly this afternoon, about that problem. 

MR. JACKSON.  It might be more appropriate to talk now than at some other time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question about that?  Very well, Mr. Holmes, we thank 
you for your report, and now is there a motion to approve the transactions at the Foreign Desk?  
The motion has been made.  Hopefully seconded.  Inaudibly seconded.  The Desk operations are 
approved.  Do you have any recommendation, Mr. Holmes? 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, Mr. Chairman, there are no swaps maturing in the period before the 
next Committee meeting, so I have no recommendation at this time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Can you tell us anything about our arrangements with the 
Mexicans? 



8/17/76 - 3 - 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I think Governor Wallich has had more conversations on that than I have. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Do you think [you have] anything that the Committee ought to 
know about our conversation with the Mexicans? 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, we haven’t had any direct conversation with the Mexicans so far.  
They’re coming into town this afternoon--contrary to what we have heard before, that they were 
coming yesterday--and what seems likely to happen is that the Treasury will make a more 
modest offer than they had contemplated--on the order of activating the 300 million swap, plus 
maybe 100 million additional.  In that case they would want us to roll over the swap that matures 
on October 9, unless by that time rate changes have taken place in Mexico--which is not at all 
impossible--that would make that unnecessary. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Would there be any serious concern on the part of the Committee 
about the rollover of the Mexican indebtedness? 

MR. COLDWELL.  First or second rollover? 

MR. PARDEE.  It would be the second time, coming early October. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Second rollover? 

MR. PARDEE.  Yes, that would be the end of six months. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, I’m basically opposed to the idea, Mr. Chairman, but we could 
be in the same boat ourselves with Swiss francs.  I know no other way but to speak out of both 
sides of my mouth. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think there may be some foreign policy considerations involved 
that I think we should respect.  No one is enthusiastic about a rollover--I take that for 
granted--but I hear no serious objection. 

MR. GARDNER.  I think it’s important, Mr. Chairman, that, as Governor Wallich has 
suggested, the Mexicans are attempting to do something with the Treasury position.  Depending 
on their success there, we will be only one part of a two-part system in the rollover, if I’m not 
mistaken.  It’s a little different in my mind than our being approached directly with no other 
effort being made by the Mexicans. 

MR. WALLICH.  Right.  I think that if the Treasury did not come into this operation, the 
situation would be quite different for us and we would not now agree to roll over. 

MR. JACKSON.  Do we have any current estimate yet as to the degree of U.S. private 
investment in Mexican CDs?  I noticed that in a consumer-type advisory service in the 
Washington papers yesterday they were continuing to recommend to U.S. investors that they buy 
Mexican CDs at 12 percent.  But do you have any idea of the nature of it and, if the devaluation 
occurred, the potential ratifications? 

MR. HOLMES.  I think it would pay for us to look into that very closely. 



8/17/76 - 4 - 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  These are CDs repayable and in what currency now? 

MR. HOLMES.  Mexican pesos. 

MR. JACKSON.  My understanding was all pesos. 

MR. PARDEE.  There are some in dollars as well. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That may be more of a problem for the SEC than for us. 

MR. JACKSON.  I don’t know whether it would have domestic implications or not for our 
relationship with Mexico.  I don’t have any idea what size it is. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Are we still supplying currency? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Yes, it’s still going out at about 10 million a week.   

MR. PARTEE.  It’s about the same rate as before, Ernie? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Yes.  They refuse to take anything smaller than 50s.  We have tried 
to pawn off 20s on them but . . .  We did undertake to get people of our Branch to get a little 
indication of what their future expectations were as to need, and they said they could not project 
their needs.  They also volunteered that most of this currency is paid out at the airport branch of 
their bank, and [they] suggested that from there it may go to many places in addition to Mexico. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I take it we are ready to change the subject and move on to the 
economic outlook for the whole country.  Mr. Gramley, please. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Winn, please. 

MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, the thing that bothers me is when you look at all of the 
projections in economic activity, you come out with about the same picture [from each one], and 
the unanimity of opinion frightens me.  And I can’t say that I disagree with what’s said.  But just 
as a sort of probing effort, take some of the factors that we’re looking to for support [of 
economic activity].  Take consumer demand and you’re struck by the average weekly earnings 
flattening out, and you don’t see much kick-out of [unintelligible] settlements in areas of that 
type.   

Take automobile out of retail sales and you get [what is] not the most exciting kind of a 
picture.  Automobile sales are stimulated by this extension of maturities of consumer credit, and 
I don’t see how you can really project that continuing or expanding.  When you look at the prices 
of services, utilities, taxes, insurance, that area, you really don’t see much opportunity for the 
commodity side, the goods side, to come back because it is really a quite sharp increase that has 
taken place there.   



8/17/76 - 5 - 
 

When you look at what the decline in the oil tariff did and the dependence we have on the 
one supplier for oil, you get frightened as to what this means in terms of consumption over a 
period of time.  And you can’t really see too much stimulus coming in from deficits or other 
items, and so are we really going to get this upswing in consumer demand that we’re sort of 
looking for?   

State and local purchases of goods and services have gone up from 7 percent to 14 percent 
of GNP over the last year, roughly.  And I can’t see much stimulus coming in this area, with the 
New York City situation sort of typifying problems in that area.  The solution of their medical 
problem struck me as being a Band-Aid because [the hospital workers] gave up their cost of 
living increase in exchange for what they think is not going [to be] any more layoffs.  And I 
don’t see how they can have layoffs that can come within that scope.  You’ve got the New York 
state court decision in October possibly affecting them.  It looks like they are playing for time, 
for the election, to get another solution for their problem, and so I can’t really see any big 
increase in expenditures in the state and local area.   

In investment demand, you’re struck by the tremendous increase in construction costs.  
And I don’t know whether we have elasticity of demand in this area or not.  But look what 
happened in the postal service; they increased prices, but revenue hasn’t really gone up as they 
projected.   

And I wonder if more and more companies aren’t looking at this in a more critical sense.  
On the capacity side, the steel companies are not really having a boom period, except for 
automobile steel, and more and more of them are talking about pushing back their expansion 
program.  The utility companies had a cool summer, and so they’ve more than handled any 
demand coming out of the industrial sector, and their projections now look like they are being 
pushed back.  Raw materials costs are going up, with some squeeze on working capital in spite 
of the huge [amount of] liquidity that corporations have acquired.  And with the shift in the 
composition of output, with steel going down next year--[even though] the automobile industry 
booms--you surely don’t have as much need for steel.   

And so I’m really wondering if we can expect the support from the investment side that 
we’ve factored in.  I’m really searching for what’s going to be the push here for carrying us on, 
even though I agree with [the assessment that] I’m questioning. 

MR. PARTEE.  Joke. 

MR. WINN.  No, I’m trying to go to the extreme, Chuck, probing at the forecast. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that was a moderately comprehensive recital of 
doubts and uncertainties, and now would you want someone to comment on that?  Mr. Gramley. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I was going to say, President Winn, you got up on an awfully 
bearish side of the bed this morning.  I think you have put your finger on a lot of different 
problems that affect the economy.  I think these problems are more numerous now than they 
have been in many past periods of cyclical expansion.  But I believe I could recite every bit as 
long a list of positive factors as you have a series of negative ones.   



8/17/76 - 6 - 
 

Take the profitability of business investment, which I think is critical in this outlook, and 
let me focus my comments there.  We have had, over the past four quarters, a very substantial 
improvement in business profits.  That’s still going on, and that’s what I think is involved in the 
price increases we’re seeing in the metals area and elsewhere--efforts to make sure that rising 
costs do not prevent a further substantial increase in profits as the economy recovers.   

These profit increases have been large enough now, I think, so that a lot of businesses are 
convinced that they can go ahead with their capital spending programs and finance them more 
heavily internally than they could for many years.  This is beginning to show up, I think, in the 
indicators of business fixed investment.  This string of six increases in new orders for nondefense 
capital goods is the longest string in the history of that series, which goes back to 1968 as 
presently defined.  And it’s solid.  It’s a 25 percent annual rate of increase in real terms.  If you 
crank that into our economic model, that model shows a larger increase in real business fixed 
investment than what we are projecting judgmentally for the next several quarters.   

We’re also seeing now for the first time what I think is rather solid evidence of a pickup in 
construction contract awards for commercial and industrial buildings.  They’re up about 
25 percent on average in the second quarter over the first quarter, albeit from a quite low level.  
So I think business fixed investment is going to move forward.   

I don’t think we’re in for a big boom.  What we’re forecasting is not a big boom in overall 
economic activity.  It’s a moderate rate of economic expansion consistent with, I think, the sorts 
of uncertainties and problems that you enumerated as well as the underlying strength which we 
see there. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you Messrs. Winn and Gramley.  Mr. Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, maybe mine is an extension of Mr. Winn’s interest, but 
maybe a slightly different concern with compensation and with the pressures he outlines for price 
moves.  I wonder, though, on the other side, if I read the Greenbook numbers correctly, they’re 
projecting a rise in compensation of about 8 percent over the next half year and  7-1/2 percent by 
the end of 1977.  Just wondering, with wage settlements and the experience in prices Mr. Winn 
relates to, whether these modest numbers may very well be a reflection or feeling that inflation is 
not going to be a tremendous factor through 1977.  You can expect to see some reduction. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, we perhaps are guilty of over-optimism on our projections of 
compensation per man-hour, but over the past year the record has been that we have been 
forecasting increases which generally speaking have been too high.  The actual increases have 
come in less than what we have been forecasting since the recovery began.   

There is, I acknowledge, an element of circularity in our projections, in the sense that past 
price increases tend to be very important in future wage bargains.  If exogenous forces such as 
those affecting food and fuel were to come in much stronger than we have allowed for in our 
projections, then our wage forecast would probably also be wrong.  We’ve projected an increase 
over the next six quarters roughly at about 4 percent for food prices.  And I think that’s a 
reasonable forecast given the supply outlook in the agricultural area.  If something should 
happen to prove that wrong, then I think the wage forecast could turn out to be too low. 



8/17/76 - 7 - 
 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, may I be permitted to slip in one extra question for 
reassurance? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  [Unintelligible], interest rates are sure to remain low, and maybe drift 
even lower, through at least the first half of next year.  The reasoning is that corporate earnings 
are much higher, and that corporations are not making their [unintelligible] payments until the 
first and second quarters of next year.  At that time, this will increase the payments of 
[unintelligible] will not need [unintelligible] no reason to expect that interest rates will be 
pressing up.  I need some reassurance. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Reassurance that our projection of rising interest rates is correct?  Well, 
I wouldn’t want to try to offer you too much assurance on that.  Perhaps Mr. Axilrod will want to 
amplify, but as you know, the pattern of interest rate movements in this recovery has not been at 
all typical.  And one reason has been a very substantial improvement in corporate profits, which 
has held down the need for external financing.  Now that external financing gap has begun to 
grow and is projected to increase further.  We anticipate that normal cyclical patterns of interest 
rate movement are going to reemerge.  And as much as we’ve been wrong for the past five 
quarters, it is not entirely inconceivable that we might be wrong again.  Mr. Axilrod may wish to 
amplify. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, I’m going to have some comments on that at the time of my talk. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the final answer then will come a little later.  Meanwhile, 
let’s turn to Mr. Black. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know whether I’ve got a quarrel or not.  I think what 
I’m really seeking is some elucidation of this large growth in the labor force last month.  Does 
this look like a one-shot fluke, or are there fundamental forces at work there that are encouraging 
greater labor force participation? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Before you get a scientific reply, let me say to you that I just don’t 
trust that figure.  And all the statisticians I’ve had, you know, that’s something I’ve lived with.  I 
can tell you a lot about that--what I’ve learned from statisticians.  How they’ve assured me about 
the sanctity of their small sample and what has happened over the years, but I just don’t believe 
that figure.  But now, put that to one side.  You’re going to get it. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  May I pass? 

MR. BLACK.  I’m inclined to agree with you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess the reason that I 
raised the question is the unemployment rate looks kind of high for me for the projection period, 
and I am just wondering what they assume in the way of discouraged or encouraged worker 
effects or the rates of participation in the labor force for the balance of the year. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  This is a one-month increase.  I wouldn’t assign any significance to a 
one-month increase, particularly when you can’t associate it with something like improving job 



8/17/76 - 8 - 
 
opportunity, which might encourage more people to go into the labor force.  What we’re 
assuming is a return to a more normal rate of increase in the civilian labor force.   

What we have over the latter half of the year as a whole--well, let me project the third 
quarter to the first quarter of next year, which will be the next half year.  We [have] just a half 
million increase from the high third-quarter average level.  But if you take a longer-range period, 
so that you can see what the trend rate of projection is, we’re projecting an increase at roughly a 
1-3/4 million annual rate.  Have I answered your question?. 

MR. BLACK.  Well, not in exactly the terms I was hoping, really.  I can think of a couple 
of reasons why you might have a high participation rate.  One would be that inflation has made 
the earnings of one breadwinner inadequate in many families, and two people have been driven 
into the labor force. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, well, that would be a trend or longer-term phenomenon. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  That has been a definite factor.  We have reported on that repeatedly as 
a factor influencing labor force growth over the period since the recession began.  The labor 
force developments during the recession and recovery have been quite abnormal.  We’ve had 
much larger increases in the labor force than we would have anticipated.  And this inflation 
factor is clearly one of them.  But that certainly does not explain what happened in July. 

MR. BLACK.  No.  I didn’t--I’m sorry if I misled you on that--I was trying to get at your 
projections for the balance of the year.  Another thing that I can think of is the changing attitude 
of women toward permanent work.  I think that is considerable. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  That has been an even longer-range trend, and it continues, and the 
recent increases in the labor force over the past several months have been heavily in the adult 
female component. 

MR. BLACK.  Do you assume a continuation of this for the balance of the year?   

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yeah, well, not over the balance of the year.  The fact that we have had 
this big jump means that the average from the third quarter to the fourth probably will be small.  
But what we project for the projection period as a whole is a continuation of fairly high rates of 
growth of the labor force relative to long-term trends.  A long-term trend would be something 
like a million and a half at an annual rate.  We are projecting a million and three quarters.  So the 
participation rate continues to rise. 

MR. BLACK.  The participation rate continues to rise, right?  Well, this is the kind of 
thing I was trying to get at in trying to come to grips with those projections. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Eastburn now, please. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Lyle, you touched on the elusive question of confidence, and as I heard 
you, I get the impression that you think confidence will continue and perhaps build.  We do a 
survey of business opinion and so on in the area once a month.  And one of the questions we ask 
is the outlook for the next two quarters ahead.  The latest month shows that only two out of three 



8/17/76 - 9 - 
 
executives see better business conditions over the next two quarters.  Previously, that was about 
four out of five.  So there has been by this qualitative measure some deterioration in confidence 
about the outlook.  Of course, nobody knows what’s going to happen to that, but I think that this 
does suggest some question as to whether confidence is going to hold and what this might mean 
for capital expenditures. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We noted that in your District’s response in the Redbook this time.  I 
think the other responses in the Redbook are not closely correlated with that.  That is, generally 
speaking, I think the tone [in the Redbook] is that the degree of confidence in the future is about 
the same as it was a month or two ago.  Although there are some more question marks.  Now if 
in fact the slowdown in consumer spending were to continue through August and on into 
September, then I think there would be some serious question as to whether confidence would 
not deteriorate.  But my feeling is that we are going to see an improvement in consumer 
spending, so these concerns which are building, which are obvious factors in businessmen’s 
thinking, are going to be allayed. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Partee now please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, I think that Willis Winn has done us a great service today 
by pointing out the pessimistic views.  And I think I agree with him that that’s not the most 
probable course, though I think that the odds of a disappointment have increased in the last 
couple of months’ figures.  There is no question in my mind that a pause of some considerable 
dimension has occurred recently, largely in the retail area, although I’ve been bothered for some 
months by the lack of more strength in housing.   

But it’s largely retail, and I note from the Greenbook--it’s only one month--but we have a 
substantial decline in the rate of increase of personal income in June.  That may be reversed in 
July or August but, of course, the whole danger in a pause of any size is that you will retard 
income streams.  And thus what looked like the prospect for a rebound in retail sales and 
consumer spending is impaired because the income won’t be there to support it.   

And it’s true that the labor force figures and the unemployment figures are highly volatile 
month by month--and we’re having particular difficulty with them this year, I think, because of 
the seasonal adjustment problem--but from May to July there’s been a considerable increase in 
the unemployment rate for the adult man, household heads, married men--that is, for the stable 
components of the employment force.  And we also see a considerable increase in insured 
unemployment over the last three months or so.   

So something is a little bit amiss in the way things have been going in the last two or three 
months.  I agree with Lyle that we should have an increase in capital spending, and the new order 
figures do look better.  The Redbook doesn’t seem to pick that up very well.  It hasn’t for a long 
time.  The big Districts where machine tools are important, like Cleveland and Boston and 
Chicago, haven’t mentioned real strength in that-- 

MR. WINN.  If you take autos out of that, what does it look like? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  The autos are not in the new orders for nondefense capital spending. 



8/17/76 - 10 - 
 

MR. PARTEE.  You mean new orders-- 

MR. WINN.  Related to the automobile industry. 

MR. PARTEE.  I don’t think we know what that would be. 

MR. MAYO.  You mean the tool purchases? 

MR. WINN.  That’s right. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think the order figures do look pretty good, and furthermore, I’ve 
always felt that if the profits were there, capital spending would follow.  And the profits do seem 
to have come back quite a way.  One could say on Willis’s point that businessmen are much 
more conservative than they were during the previous cyclical recovery.  Their attitude both 
toward inventory accumulation and toward extending themselves in any way on capital spending 
is going to be conservative, particularly in an election year and all that that brings up.  And 
therefore it could be that we won’t see returns to normal rates of inventory accumulation of the 
desired strength.  It could be that we see continued slowness in the recovery in capital goods.   

And if that did occur, along with a less rapid increase in personal income and a 
sluggishness in retail sales, why, we could have a pause that will even turn into a small decline.  
Probably not a decline of cyclical portions, but one more like, say, in the spring and summer of 
1962, a year or so after the beginning of the recovery.  [Or] one that started perhaps to show 
itself in mid-1959, although the steel strike complicates that comparison.  There have been times 
during the course of a recovery when there was a pause that became rather elongated, rather 
extended.  We could be seeing the start of that now.   

I guess what it comes down to as far as I’m concerned is that I would still have to put my 
bets about with the kind of patterns that the staff projection shows.  But that is a rather 
significant [change for] me because, all year, I’ve expected the recovery to be stronger than the 
staff projections.  And now I would have to say that my own expectations have deteriorated to 
the point where I would say that maybe that’s about the most probable number, and there is a 
significant minority possibility of a softness that Willis has described.  I think there has been a 
change in the character of the situation that we ought to recognize. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I’d like to comment on this issue.  I think it is wise for us to 
keep in mind, in our search for objectivity, the negative elements as well as the positive 
elements.  I fundamentally agree with the staff, and if I interpret Mr. Winn and Mr. Partee 
correctly, they agree with the staff as well, although they are more concerned now about negative 
possibilities than they were a month or two ago.  That is also my own feeling.   

But I would like to make two supplementary comments.  In addition to the lift that is 
occurring in orders for capital goods, we’ve seen for the first time, really, in this recovery some 
life during the past three months in the physical volume of construction contracts for industrial 
and commercial building.  And there has been a significant lift all along in the volume of 
nonbuilding construction--as represented by pipelines and power plants and refineries.  So the 
picture on the capital side is one of recovery, although a slower recovery than many of us, 
including myself, had anticipated.   



8/17/76 - 11 - 
 

As to the cause of this, Mr. Partee commented correctly on the element of caution in 
business thinking.  That should not surprise us.  You now have among the men who control our 
business enterprises today very few who have lived through an honest-to-goodness depression or 
recession.  Here we have the severest recession in the postwar period, by far.  It was unexpected 
by the business community.  The business community had come to think of the business cycle as 
being either dead or a very minor fluctuation, and here we have a very old-fashioned decline.  
They were caught by surprise.  Such a thing couldn’t happen in our economy.  After all, we had 
learned how to control the business cycle.  That was the popular thinking.  Once confidence is 
badly shaken, as it was, the self-assurance of the new business leaders was shaken.  Confidence 
revives gradually, I think that is human nature, and that is the history of mankind.   

Now one more observation.  Mr. Partee has warned us against this, and I simply want to 
elaborate on the comment that he made.  There is a tendency on the part of perhaps many 
business observers to think of a business cycle expansion as a continuous upward movement at 
more or less the same rate, or at a rate that gradually diminishes as the peak of capacity 
utilization is reached.  This is a picture that many of us carry in our minds, but it is not a picture 
that fits reality.   

At the National Bureau [of Economic Research], as I think you know, we made extensive 
detailed studies of business cycle developments in industrial countries.  We found a phenomenon 
that we described with the awkward phrase “mid-expansion retardation,”  which meant that after 
a year or two of a business cycle expansion, there is stagnation for awhile, a lower rate of 
growth, or even an actual dip.  And then a reacceleration follows.  That’s not the picture of the 
business cycle that we have in our minds.  But that is what we found some years ago.   

One of our investigators at the National Bureau wrote a sizable volume dealing with a 
phenomenon described as subcycles, and these subcycles were subdivisions of business cycles as 
historically identified by the National Bureau.  These subcycles were in large part minor 
inventory adjustments occurring in contrast to the larger inventory adjustments that have come to 
be known as part of business cycle history.  Mr. Partee mentioned some historical instances.  The 
most dramatic one that I recall at the moment was in 1951, when many business commentators 
spoke of a recession, and as we all know, this was a lull in activity.   

Now of course when you have a lull, it could be the beginning of an economic decline.  
That’s always true.  But if the kind of sequence that occurs in business cycle phenomena has any 
repetitive value, and I believe it has very considerable repetitive value, I don’t see how, on the 
basis of sequences in leading economic phenomena, one can argue persuasively that a recession 
is imminent.  There isn’t any evidence to support that.  One can argue, as Mr. Partee and Mr. 
Gramley did, that if this lull in economic activity continues for a few months, then the sequences 
in economic process that we associate with the early stage of recession could well come into 
being.  We are not at that stage now.  But I think it’s healthy to bear in mind the possibility.   

My own judgment is exactly the same as Mr. Gramley’s, that we’re experiencing a lull and 
that the underlying trend is still clearly upward.  That business confidence is not waning.  That 
it’s gradually reviving and that business capital investment is gradually reasserting itself as the 
driving force of the economy.  Well, I’ve talked too long, I think.  Let’s listen to Mr. Mayo now. 



8/17/76 - 12 - 
 

MR. MAYO.  Well, Mr. Chairman, you have articulated a couple of my points better than I 
could have, but I was about to say something along the same line.  I put a little different 
interpretation on Mr. Winn’s list, which is impressive, than I think either Mr. Partee or you do.  I 
think that it contains some of the elements, actually, of strength rather than weakness in terms of 
perpetuating the recovery.  I acknowledge here your point of the midrecovery pause, or whatever 
we call it.  But it seems to me that many of these factors are “normal” factors--that analysis 
would bring forward if we were to do it in depth--that characterized almost all of our recovery 
periods over the last generation.  It seems to me, therefore, that, while I recognize the somber 
nature of President Winn’s list, I find in that list a number of factors that, instead of giving me 
increased concern, give me a little more confidence in the lasting nature of the recovery and 
expansion that we are in.   

Having said that, I again will revert to the type that seems to characterize all of us.  I find 
the staff projections already encompass what I have just said.  It is a recognition of factors that 
keep this from being a worrisome, if you please, type of expansion that would lead to ultra-high 
interest rates, super inflation again, and a bust that would follow.  So I would like to put a 
positive tone on Willis’ list.   

I would also remind the Committee that this happens to be an odd coincidence of the 
August doldrums--not always statistically measurable--with perhaps a mid-expansion phase in 
our economy.  And I think that, psychologically, this has considerable importance.  My friends in 
New York as well as in Chicago find that there is less activity going on in August than is usual.  
And again, this is a year divisible by four, which has something to do with it, too.  People are 
sitting on their hands a little more.  I think the confluence of all three of those factors makes me 
feel even more that I’m not ready to make a judgment yet as to whether the economy is 
sputtering.   

One other facet of this.  No one has mentioned the interpretation of some of our leading 
indicators as optimistic.  I noted with some interest the article in, I think, the Wall Street Journal 
the other day--and I’d like to have Lyle comment on it, if he cares to--that [characterized] the 
ratio of the coincident to the lagging indicators as being a very bullish factor.  Again, I don’t 
want to get into gimmicks, and [in this case] maybe the ratio of one gimmick to another. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You’re close to it. 

MR. MAYO.  The ratio of one gimmick to another may be double gimmicking, but in a 
political year I think we can engage in some discussion of gimmicks that’s not on the record, 
especially when it becomes newsworthy enough for the Wall Street Journal to run a front page 
article on it.  Do you have any confidence in this particular ratio, Lyle?  Have you studied it all? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I have never been a fan of leading indicators generally.  I think one 
does much better to look over all the leading indicators individually to try to assess their meaning 
for what’s going on in the various sectors of the economy.  And if the leading indicators give 
confirming evidence of what you come up with, well, fine.  If they don’t, I would be more 
inclined to toss out the leading indicators than analysis in depth.  I do think the leading indicators 
are all still pointing upward, and that gives me reasonable confidence that the judgments we’ve 
arrived at with a more thorough study of the economy are right.   



8/17/76 - 13 - 
 

I would like to add one point, if I might, Mr. Chairman, in regard to Mr. Partee’s comment.  
And that is that though personal income growth did slow in June, it slowed because we had both 
a decline in employment and a slow rate of increase in average hourly earnings.  The average 
hourly earnings index went up quite slowly that month.  In July we’ve had both a large increase 
in employment and a larger rise in average hourly earnings.  In addition, we’re looking at a 
quarter in which we’re getting Social Security disbursements increased.  And those factors 
should act to increase spendable income in the third quarter and help to sustain consumer 
purchases in the short run.  

MR. PARTEE.  Social Security is an important point that I entirely forgot.  The other, I 
don’t know, it’s variable from month to month.  The increase in industrial production has 
continued to moderate; that is, July was less than June.  And you mentioned the August 
doldrums, Bob.  We don’t have any August measures yet.  Maybe we’re really going to have 
August doldrums.  But with Social Security we should get a big kick to this July.  That’s a cost 
of living increase? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’d like to comment on Mr. Mayo’s question about the gimmicks.  
Now, unlike Mr. Gramley, I have very considerable confidence in leading indicators, if only 
because I made the original [National] Bureau [of Economic Research] study back in 1937.  But 
I’ve always viewed economic indicators in a rational context, never in isolation of other 
evidence, and certainly not in isolation of economic interpretation.  That specific ratio belongs to 
the category of latter-day gimmickry that I want to have nothing to do with.  And you have to 
strain to rationalize that ratio.  But for heaven’s sake, you can rationalize it in terms of 
arithmetical patterns--ratio of the coincident indicator to the lagging indicator.  And that ratio 
will have, so it is claimed, a consistent long lead, you see.  And you can rationalize that in terms 
of rates of change of these two series, but you cannot give it, or at least I’ve been unable to give 
it--well, I must say that when I see a gimmick like that, which is pure arithmetic, I don’t even 
look for economic interpretations. 

MR. MAYO.  Well, one of the troubles with it, as we all know, is that it equates one stock 
market [index] with one labor index with one of all sorts of things, and--granted they’re trying to 
equate the trends in each one--the weighting is an impossibility.  I think that the only support I 
would give to such an indicator is as Lyle suggests.  If that indicator upon analysis--not just 
arithmetic but upon analysis--seems to give a little more cohesive support to conclusions already 
formed on the basis of substantive analysis, maybe this gives me a little more comfort.  We have 
a discomfiture index in the weather, and we can have one in economic projections as well.  And 
maybe that is false analysis. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I will never argue against anything that gives any man an 
added measure of comfort. 

MR. MAYO.  We just hope it isn’t false comfort. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that specific thing, if it serves that purpose, it serves a useful 
purpose.  But I don’t think it goes beyond that. 



8/17/76 - 14 - 
 

MR. MAYO.  One other observation, Mr. Chairman.  You, with all of your background, 
found it somewhat discomforting that 4 equals 8 when we were working with the seasonal 
adjustment problem on money supply.  Knowing how sensitive those seasonals are, some of us 
may tend to forget that they are equally poor, if I may use the term, on unemployment and more 
particularly on some of the price indexes.  

It was called to my attention yesterday morning that some of our people have a real 
suspicion, for example, of the agricultural price decline in the wholesale price index.  In July the 
change in the unadjusted figures was zero; this was publicized, though, as a decline of 
1.7 percent, or something like that, in food prices.  Some of my people who are very cognizant of 
the construction of these seasonals say, in effect, let’s not play games.  That’s the reason the 
wholesale index looks so good in this last month.  But ’taint really so; the seasonal isn’t that 
good.  So I think, again, we can draw from our own experience with our seasonal problems on 
money supply and recognize that [the data on] much of our economic world is suspect in one 
degree or another. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t know about vacation habits, but they may well be 
changing.  A good portion of mankind remembers that there is a month of August, and an 
increasing number of people I believe are taking advantage of it.  And whether seasonal factors 
catch that phenomenon is not a subject that I’ve studied.  I think it deserves study.  Mr. 
Baughman, please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, just a question.  Possibly an outlandish one.  That is, 
whether the rather slow growth in money stock through the last quarter of last year and first 
quarter of this year and the current slowing in some of the economic measures are considered to 
be rather completely unrelated developments, or whether there may be some relationship 
between them. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Good question.  We’ll hear first from Mr. Gramley and then from 
Mr. Axilrod. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I would say they’re entirely unrelated and coincidental and I 
would base that judgment on two sorts of evidence.  One is that, if you expect a slower rate of 
growth of M1 to feed through to the nonfinancial economy, you would anticipate that it would 
take place through such signs as rising interest rates.  That’s the way increasing tightness in 
financial markets initially evidences itself.  That has not happened.  Secondly, I would have a 
hard time understanding how slow growth of the money supply could have the sorts of 
distributional effects we see in the data.  The slowdown has been almost entirely in nondurable 
goods production.  The rate of durable goods production increased from last fall to this spring.  
That’s not the sort of thing you connect with an increase in monetary tightness. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Axilrod. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I’ve never been a believer that you can go 
from money supply growth to growth in GNP that mechanically.  I would tend to analyze things 
in terms of real effects that affect GNP, such as interest rates, markets, overall liquidity.  And I 
wouldn’t see anything in those developments that would be, per se, factors that would slow down 



8/17/76 - 15 - 
 
real GNP, and I don’t think we’re projecting this significant slowing.  If it does occur, I think 
that President Baughman is quite right.  Monetarists will indicate that the cause was the slower 
growth in money, that the lags have shortened considerably from the usual lags, and that this 
further proves that the Federal Reserve is wrong in the way it runs policy.  But I would not make 
that connection at this point. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But there is some question about the fact [of slowing growth in the 
aggregates] itself.  I would not interpret the figures on page 4 of the Bluebook as indicating a 
slowing in the rate of growth in the money supply. 

MR. AXILROD.  Mr. Chairman, if I may, in point of fact there was a very slow rate of 
growth in the money supply from midyear-- from June as a base through the first month of 1976.  
That rate of growth was on the order of 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate, and since then we’ve 
been growing at around a 6-1/2 percent annual rate.  So if you pick these particular months as 
kind of inflection points, you will notice a very definite change in trend. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You’re looking at M1. 

MR. AXILROD.  Yes, M1. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Appendix table 1-A in the Bluebook, Mr. Chairman, shows the 
numbers fairly-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Tables which? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Appendix table 1-A in the Bluebook.  I believe the page is not 
numbered. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Is that the one with the quarterly figures? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Yes, the M1 column in the center of the page. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh.  Well, I think you have a useful summary, the past three 
months, past six months, past twelve months, and on page 4.  Well, one can read these figures 
very differently.  I appreciate that.  Well, thank you Mr. Baughman.  Would anyone else like to 
speak on the economic outlook?  Yes, Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think one of the important determinants of investment is capacity 
utilization.  I wonder if we could hear a little about the various seemingly conflicting data on 
this.  The Federal Reserve capacity index for manufacturing is quite low but is generally 
regarded as being statistically too low.  The Commerce Department has a series, which I’m not 
well informed about, which seems to have reached 4 to 5 points below its previous peak.  The 
Wharton index is always high by nature of its construction.  There seems to be an index by 
[unintelligible] which shows capacity utilization well above our data.  So we’re left with our 
index low, and the materials index somewhat higher, but still not showing any pressure on 
capacity, and then these other indexes possibly pointing in another direction.  Any useful 
conclusion that can be drawn from all this? 



8/17/76 - 16 - 
 

MR. GRAMLEY.  The conclusion I would draw, Governor Wallich, is, first, our measures 
of capacity utilization are poor and need improvement, and we are working on that.  We hope to 
have some revised indexes out this fall on the capacity in all of manufacturing.   

More generally, I would say my conclusion would be that except for isolated cases, we’re 
not now in a situation in which bottlenecks or shortages are likely to impede the rate of 
expansion, nor are we likely to find ourselves in that situation over the next six months to a year, 
assuming the rate of economic expansion follows the path we’re projecting.  But it is, I think, 
evident that in a number of industries, particularly in the materials area, the rate of capacity 
utilization has increased sufficiently to make businesses think about their expansion plans. 

For example, in the nondurable goods materials industry, where we’ve been at an 
86 percent rate of capacity utilization throughout 1976, compared with a peak of 94--admittedly 
considerably higher, but that was a period of extreme shortages--and a trough of 70.  Now that’s 
a very significant increase in the rate of capacity utilization in those industries.  The bounceback 
in the durable goods industries has been smaller and slower, in line with the fact that durable 
goods production has not gone up as much.  But in the first six months of this year in the steel 
industry, to cite one example, we have had a very slow, significant rise in production and in the 
rate of capacity utilization.  And in that instance, I would think that the industry would be 
thinking about expansion of capacity as time goes on.  The utilization index for raw steel is now 
at 91-1/2 percent, compared with a cyclical trough of about 73.  So that’s a very substantial 
bounceback. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Lyle, what do you know about the Commerce Department 
measure of capacity utilization? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, we have a memo under way to evaluate that.  It’s a new index 
that’s been out for several years. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Really.  I just learned about it recently, and it shows a 
startling--well, Mr. Wallich described it, you know--[only a] 4 point difference, I think--an index 
of 86 at the peak of the latest boom and 82 now, not very far away, and it’s a startling measure.  
Whether there’s any degree of validity at all I don’t know.  It would be very useful to learn 
about. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We do have a study of that under way, and we’ll report to the 
Committee. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It’d be useful to send out a memo to all members of the 
Committee. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Be happy to. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you.  Anyone else like to speak on the economic outlook? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Yes.  Is there any steam left in the consumer?  The inflation rate’s gone 
down the last three quarters, particularly the unanticipated or surprise inflation rate, which 



8/17/76 - 17 - 
 
should contribute to a decline in the personal saving rate.  And also we know that consumer 
sentiment seems to be up.  Do you see further steam left in the consumer part of the recovery? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, my feeling is that the evidence we have on consumer confidence 
is a little bit out of date.  The latest statistics we have are based on surveys taken in May and 
June, and things may have happened since then.  They don’t show an appreciable change from 
early in the year.  One of the indexes shows a slight improvement in confidence; the other shows 
a slight deterioration but, at the same time, an improvement in buying intentions.   

As far as the rate of inflation is concerned, my feeling is that consumers are not likely to 
react to one or two months’ change in the CPI or to what they see in the grocery store but rather 
to longer-term trends.  And I think that what they have been seeing in terms of longer-term 
trends is a general improvement in the performance of consumer prices during most of ’75 and 
relative stability since then.  So I see nothing-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I wonder if consumers really feel that way.  I think consumers 
think of the level and not rates of change.  If consumer prices are going up at an annual rate of 
6 percent, by Job they’re going up period.  It’s economists who talk about stability of rates of 
change.  Consumers know nothing about that.  They know the grocery prices and other prices are 
going up. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I think our consumers have gotten sophisticated enough now so 
that, though they don’t sit down and make calculations on a calculator and compute annual rates 
of change compounded monthly, they are reacting at this point to rates of change rather than 
levels.  They expect general increases in prices to take place.  They see it all the time.  And I 
think that view is consistent with the way the consumer surveys have behaved.  As the rate of 
inflation slows, consumer surveys begin to report an increase in consumer confidence.  They 
began to report that consumers think it is a better time to buy, they are less worried about 
inflationary pressures. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question of comment?  Well, if not… 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We’ll resume our deliberations, and if we do so promptly, there is 
a chance that we will not go hungry today.  An opportunity that we ought not overlook.  We will 
hear now from Mr. Axilrod, who as usual, will be very brief. 

MR. AXILROD.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Axilrod.  Any questions? 

MR. WINN.  I just hate to speak again, but this is a technical question, Mr. Chairman.  To 
what extent are our M measures affected by the balances in branches of U.S. banks abroad?  
When we measure income velocity in other [unintelligible], we’re not measuring it only against 
domestic? 



8/17/76 - 18 - 
 

MR. AXILROD.  We don’t have deposits in U.S. branches abroad in our money supply 
numbers, and I do not believe that transaction balances are to any significant extent kept there.  
Corporations may have some CDs in such branches, but then we don’t have CDs kept here in our 
money supply numbers. 

MR. WINN.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  Yes, Mr. Guffey. 

MR. GUFFEY.  You spoke of the payment of the Treasury financing and how it fits 
into--is that affected only for August?  And then you would see growth again in September in 
M2? 

MR. AXILROD.  It affects the time deposits from going into M2, we believe only in 
August, and there will be something like a one-time diversion of funds.  Maybe funds would 
otherwise go into the [unintelligible] and maybe some little shifting out of actual deposits.  And 
then you’d expect to go back to a more normal rate of growth in other time deposits for 
September, and that’s in effect what was done. 

MR. GUFFEY.  The thing is that Treasury balances run down where you have a bulge in 
September in M2 [unintelligible]. 

MR. AXILROD.  We have a sharp rundown of about $3 billion projected in September.  
When a rundown of that magnitude last occurred, it was in April, and we had a very sharp bulge.  
We didn’t project it, and we’re not projecting such a sharp bulge this time.  We’re projecting 
growth only up to around 7 percent.  So there is some risk involved, and maybe we’re 
underestimating the impact.  As I’ve said, we’ve run through various econometric models and 
tests, and we’ve never been able to find a consistent significant relationship between the 
Treasury balance and the money supply over a period of a month or two. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any other questions?  Yes, Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  I saw some data indicating that the change in velocity in M1 during the 
second recovery year since the war has been remarkably constant, that is, within a lower limit of 
3.7 percent and a higher limit of 5.2--average of 4.2.  Does that sound still applicable to you in 
the light of the recent shifts in demand we’ve seen? 

MR. AXILROD.  In the first three recoveries of the postwar period--in the second [year], 
[the] velocity increase for M1 was 4.1, 4.3, and 5.2 percent respectively.  It was lower in 
subsequent periods, and that’s roughly in line with what we’re expecting now.  In the first two of 
the postwar periods, rates rose, and in the third one they rose also, but by the eighth quarter we 
were out of the recovery.  The rises were modest, but the levels were much lower, so it gets into 
the question of percentage versus absolute change. 

MR. WALLICH.  Yes. 

MR. JACKSON.  Did you have similar changes as a non-M1 transactional concept of 
money that we’ve had like in our [unintelligible] occurred in [unintelligible] those periods of-- 



8/17/76 - 19 - 
 

MR. AXILROD.  No, I think [unintelligible] so.  But what was occurring in the early 
periods, I believe, was an economization of surplus cash balances as you came out of the war.  
There was this trend economization of cash, raising the rates of growth of velocity in somewhat 
the same sense that movements to other types of instruments for holding money-type balances 
are affecting it now. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A certain quiescence has descended on this assembly, and 
therefore I think we’re ready to move to a discussion of monetary policy and the domestic policy 
directive.  I’m not adequately informed about the vacation plans or doings of members of this 
Committee.  But I do know that one of our distinguished members has recently been away and 
become reacquainted with the blue sky and calm waters and so therefore must have gained 
perspective on the world we are living in and maybe moving into.  So I’m going to call on Mr. 
Gardner to open this discussion. 

MR. GARDNER.  The Chairman is right.  I relaxed thoroughly for two weeks, and I have 
heard nothing this morning that disturbs my relaxation.  I think Willis performed a fine service 
with his point-counterpoint.  That sparked a very useful discussion.  Lyle, with his usual clarity, 
has persuaded me that we still do have a recovery, although it’s certainly not an economy 
plunging out of control in any sense--certainly not for the last month or so.  I agree with the 
Chairman’s comment that it is no surprise that businessmen are more cautious today, considering 
what they’ve been through.  I realize that the expert professional economists among you know a 
great deal more than I do about the history of business cycles and the relative activities that have 
occurred.  But I also give a good deal of weight to change in our economy, in our society, and in 
our environment.  And I think that’s why we’re useful.  If everything could be predicted entirely 
on the past, why it would be a rather mechanical function.   

In any event, it seems to me that this is indeed a time when we are having a pause, or at 
least no outward reason to change the performance or our goals or our ranges, which have served 
us pretty well since the last meeting.  Curiously, even the banking industry today is not expecting 
a revival of loan demand until early ’77.  I’ve never been through a fall when there wasn’t an 
increase in loan demand, but the bankers don’t seem to think they’re going to have it until early 
’77.  In any event, the Treasury has been successful, the situation is relatively stable, and it’s my 
strong conviction that we should not make a change in our ranges at this time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. Gardner has brought a relaxed mind to our 
deliberations.  I bring a very tired mind to our deliberations.  And I have a little more confidence 
in my own judgment now, despite my tired mind, than I might have had were it not for the fact 
that Mr. Gardner brings a clear, relaxed mind to our problems.   

As far as I can see there is no reason for changing our basic monetary stance at this time.  
Alternative B as specified on page 5 I think is reasonably satisfactory.  I would like a somewhat 
lower federal funds rate.  I would like a somewhat lower midpoint for M2, but these are subtle 
differences; I would not press them.  I’m not a believer in fine tuning, and if alternative B is 
satisfactory to my colleagues, it certainly would be satisfactory to me.  Who would like to speak 
next?  Mr. Coldwell, please. 



8/17/76 - 20 - 
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t find great difficulty with what you or Governor 
Gardner has said.  Perhaps a nuance.  I’m not ready to write off this recovery.  I think we are 
involved in the pause, at least with some dimension, probably for another month and perhaps 
longer.  [If] we recognize this pause in the policy prescription, I would think it would be a matter 
of minimal response.   

At least, however, [it] ought to call for some caution on our part.  Perhaps a shading of our 
judgments in Desk operations might be sufficient.  It doesn’t mean an overt move, but I suspect 
not perfectly steady in the boat either.  I’m a little bothered by the continued Desk mechanization 
with policy and response.  I’d prefer to shade just a little bit as the Desk sees opportunities, 
capitalizing on those opportunities as the market believes it ought to move.   

I would like to raise, though, with the Committee the possibility of again taking the 
opportunity of the fall and the seasonal demand period to look at--what is essentially a [Federal 
Reserve] Board action, of course--a change in reserve requirements.  I know that it is difficult to 
do this in a period of recovery, but we have a seasonal demand which, in the past, we have met 
with this device.  I continue to believe that our reserve requirements are larger than necessary for 
policy action, and it would be helpful to our [Federal Reserve System] membership problem if 
we could get them further reduced. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Partee now, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, a question I ask myself is whether we ought to do anything 
on our own initiative to help the trend in business activity, and if so what it ought to be.  And I 
guess I conclude that I don’t quite see what we could do that would be very helpful and would 
not seem a very activist policy from the standpoint of the market.  The flows are good, the 
aggregates are growing well--not spectacularly, but well.  If business truly does have a 
conservative attitude toward what it wishes to undertake, then the prescription I would say is just 
to lower interest rates in order to induce business to overcome this reluctance to invest.   

But I’m not quite convinced that they’re that conservative; I’m not quite at the point where 
I would be prepared to push actively toward lower interest rates.  In another month or two, if the 
pause continues, I might have a different view.  So I guess my leaning is toward ease in terms of 
money market conditions.  But I don’t feel strongly enough about it to want to vote for 
alternative A or to have a meaningfully lower funds rate, so I guess I would accept your 
specifications. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Eastburn, please. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Well, I would share the views expressed earlier that there is some 
concern about this so-called pause that we seem to be having, that it may well be that we’ll come 
out of it satisfactorily.  But it seems to me that the risks, as Chuck Partee has pointed out, have 
changed somewhat.  So my feeling would be that we should be moving a little toward A from B.  
I could accept B, but I think, given these increased risks, that we could afford to move a little 
toward A.  One way to do this would be to change the range under B to raise the lower end of 
that range somewhat, say, to 5 to 8, and perhaps drop the lower end of the range of the federal 
funds rate by a quarter of a percentage point.  I would like to see the range on the aggregates 



8/17/76 - 21 - 
 
narrower anyhow, and the range on the federal funds rate wider, so this would be a move in that 
direction.  I wouldn’t consider this a major move of any kind, but simply leaning, as Chuck has 
indicated, to a little bit more ease than we have under B. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Black now, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I think the recommendations emanating from the rested 
mind of Governor Gardner and from your allegedly tired mind are very good, and I come out 
exactly where you all do on that.  I would just like to throw out one word of caution.  I’m 
becoming increasingly concerned about this divergence in the rate of growth in M1 and M2.  M2 
is moving up pretty fast, and I think we ought to keep a close eye on that one because I think it’s 
becoming increasingly important.  We’ve said we would give equal weight to it [and to M1], but 
I think in practice that I, along with some of the rest of you, have weighed M1 more heavily than 
perhaps we should.  But this is a caution for the future, and not applicable for the moment. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Morris now. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I believe the staff’s economic projection is correct, and I 
think alternative B is the proper course for us at the present time.  Although, I would emphasize 
that, along the lines of Mr. Partee, I would expect the Manager to use the full range that is 
provided to him on the funds rate, particularly if the monetary aggregates come in on the low 
side, suggesting that the period of sluggishness is extending.   

And I would also like to support the proposition that Governor Coldwell made.  I think it is 
highly appropriate for the Board to be planning a fall reduction in reserve requirements, and I 
think such a change would be extremely helpful to us on the membership problem which is 
raising its head in New England very severely now.  And I think it can be explained to the public 
and the press that this does not reflect an easier monetary policy but simply one of the options we 
have to meet the seasonal needs for credit.  So I think that’s a very good suggestion, Phil, and I 
hope we get some support around this table.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Kimbrel now, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to pick up at the same spot and suggest that I 
very much hope that the seasonal opportunities will be utilized to accomplish some reduction of 
reserve requirements for the reasons that were already stated.  I’m hopeful that this would be a 
good opportunity to capitalize on that.   

For the other, [unintelligible] longer-run expectations remain good.  We have not seen a 
lack of funds [that would] threaten  the economic upswing.  The liquidity positions of both the 
lenders and the borrowers remain [unintelligible], certainly at this moment--an easier monetary 
policy would change the attitudes that are prevailing.  So we would certainly be inclined to 
associate ourselves with the suggestions of alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Jackson now, please. 

MR. JACKSON.  I would agree with the fundamental approach being taken.  However, I 
would not recommend any strong move that might be interpreted by the public as an overt 



8/17/76 - 22 - 
 
action, primarily because I think the public would misinterpret it.  One, there would be 
allegations that it was done for other than monetary reasons despite what the real reason may 
have been.  Two, if overt action toward ease [through a] change in reserve requirements were 
made, I would suggest that, if you have a business community that’s cautious, this might 
reinforce their caution because the monetary authority would be adding its doubts to those 
already in their own minds and so perhaps inject an additional element of caution.  So I’m not 
sure that psychologically the [unintelligible] expression of a level of interest rates would 
necessarily overcome the attitude of the monetary authorities.   

Getting back to the other issue, I’m not sure I’d agree with President Black about M2.  We 
had this balancing point creating arbitrary rates of growth around Regulation Q, and therefore I 
would think that M2 rates of growth to a significant extent are still artificial as we go to one side 
or the other of a Q rate.  And so while I’m not a worshiper of M1 for any reason, I wonder 
whether we really ought to be that persistent in our attention to M2 when we are at this peculiar 
balancing point where we can have all of the money flow in one direction due to just a slight 
change in the rate.   

In short, I would stick to alternative B, and certainly--unless we’re going to change the 
rules--I would say have the full range available based on the incoming evidence that is available 
to us. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 

MR. MAYO.  I have no problem with your recommendation or your points, Mr. Chairman 
and Vice Chairman.  I would buy alternative B.  I don’t want to suggest a change in the range for 
M1.  But I think it might be appropriate to raise a caution that if M1, in the preliminary judgment 
of the Desk and the people here, seems to be expanding because of the decline in the Treasury 
balance, I wouldn’t panic and go to the top of the federal funds range just because of that factor, 
because it itself is something of an aberration.  It’s not something to be ignored, but it’s 
something to be given a little lesser weight than other short-term movements in M1. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Williams, please. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Yes, we would support alternative B.  We’d like to see an expansion in 
the band of the federal funds rate, may be out to 1-1/2 percentage points.  And I would certainly 
support Governor Coldwell’s [recommendation of] taking a close look at the reduction in the 
reserve requirements with respect to the membership policy. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Williams.  Mr. Wallich now, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think there is a balance of considerations here, Mr. Chairman.  The 
economic situation might induce one to want to give a little push, but this pause probably will be 
over long before the major part of that [push] would be felt.  And as the [push might] indicate a 
high degree of concern, the announcement effect, as I would see it, would possibly be negative.   

There’s also the fact that we’ve had interest rates low [for] very long in this expansion, [so] 
a great deal of liquidity has accumulated in the economy, which at some future point might raise 
problems for us which we do not want to intensify.  Also, if we stick to our one-year target, then 



8/17/76 - 23 - 
 
anything we do now to ease means a faster rise in interest rates later.  This is perhaps more a 
defect of the way we handle our projections and calculations now.   

There’s really no reason why one needs to gear the expected rise in interest rates to the 
midpoint of the long-term range.  One could gear it to the edges and, say, associate a policy of 
money growth higher than in the long run, not with alternative B for the long-term of the 
midpoint, but with alternative A, and that would give one less of a rise in interest rates.  But in 
any event, it seems to me that [counter]balancing the desire to give some push for the negatives 
that we have here, I come out, as do our colleagues, with the conclusion that B is the right thing 
to do. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Who would like to speak next?  Yes, 
Mr. Volcker. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t take all of the discussion of the so-called pause in 
business as indicative of an emerging long pause or recession along the lines that everybody 
seems to agree upon this morning.  But I do take it as resolving some doubts in my mind [about] 
a real booming picture in the economy in the next year, either in actuality or in psychology.  I am 
less concerned than I was a few months ago about shortages and bottlenecks arising in the next 
12 months.  I’m less worried about it for various reasons, first in the general price level.  I can’t 
believe the unemployment figures month to month, but we know that after a year of recovery 
they’re pretty darn high.  And I’m still not entirely convinced by the investment outlook.  So I 
put this all together, and it’s clear you can make a case for a little bit of easing.  I don’t feel 
strongly about that case.   

My concern is that, when I look at alternative B, it still leaves me with the possibility that 
in the face of this situation, we could have a substantial rise in the federal funds rate in the next 
month.  I feel a bit at the mercy of what happens to the aggregates in that respect, and I don’t like 
it.  In fact, I think that would be a signal in the wrong direction.  I’m not bothered by the ranges 
in the aggregates in alternative B.  In fact the New York projections for this particular period are 
a bit below the Board’s projection, which gives maybe some feeling of comfort that the rise in 
the aggregates will not be so high as to trigger a sizable increase in the federal funds rate.  But 
still, taken literally, it leaves me quite uncomfortable to be at the whim of how these statistics 
come in and to [possibly] find myself with a 5-3/4 percent federal funds rate two or three weeks 
from now.   

To sum up my feelings, in the old days I would say we ought to conduct ourselves so that, 
if we err, it’s a bit on the side of ease.  I feel that way in spirit, but how you put [that spirit] in 
[terms of] these kinds of constraints, I’m not quite sure.  But I guess I’d rather see that federal 
funds rate at something like 4-3/4 percent to 5-1/2 percent without any implication that it be 
changed now.  We [admittedly] skew the thing a bit, but I don’t like the possibility that, in the 
face of all that is going on in the real economy, we end up with a 5-3/4 percent federal funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Yes, Mr. Guffey. 

MR. GUFFEY.  Just to kind of catch on to what Paul has just said, I think I’d like to do it 
another way.  I wouldn’t want to see the federal funds rate go down nor go up to 5-3/4, as you 



8/17/76 - 24 - 
 
suggest, Paul.  But isn’t there another way to do it, and that is to go with a money market 
condition directive, as opposed to an aggregate directive, with the anticipation that we’ll sit right 
where we are for the next 30 days.  And it’s what I would opt for. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. MacLaury, I’m looking at 
you. 

MR. MACLAURY.  I wish you could have given us your suggestion at 9:30, Mr. 
Chairman, because I really feel that today was a day when I didn’t have anything to add to the 
discussion.  I’m perfectly content with B.  I would like to ask, if I may, when we as a Committee 
are going to have that discussion of our operating methods. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I have that very much on my mind, and I’ve had several 
discussions with our staff about this, and staff work is going forward.  I hope we can have such a 
discussion at the next meeting.  But I see no point in putting that on the agenda until I see where 
the staff is in its preparation.   

As for your suggestions about 9:30, I must say to you in all honesty, that thought occurred 
to me, and I thought it would be poorly received by this Committee, and that’s why I didn’t make 
it.  Also, a more rebellious thought actually occurred to me, namely, to suggest to the members 
of the Committee that we not even hold a meeting, but then I thought it would be so rash, so 
outrageous, that the Chairman would be accused of approaching senility.  And I’ve reached an 
age where that is the last kind of interpretation that I could take.  We still haven’t heard from 
several members of our family.  Who would like to speak now. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I haven’t spoken, but I really have nothing 
worthwhile to say.  I’ve concluded that alternative B is an appropriate posture [in which] to 
continue in the present circumstance.   

I would register support as strongly as I could for Coldwell’s suggestion that we reduce 
reserve requirements at every opportunity.   

But the only other thing I would comment on is that I think we probably don’t qualify as 
psychologists.  I’m not sure that anyone really does, and in terms of [determining] our actions, 
we should go pretty much by the numbers in our judgments of the economic situation and not be 
influenced very much by our guesses as to how others will interpret our actions.  Because I’m 
not sure that we can make very useful guesses in that respect.   

With respect to giving signals, there’s at least one place in the country where the board of 
directors of a [Reserve] Bank would not be averse to considering a signal on the discount rate.  
But I think that would be a bit premature at the present time. 

SPEAKER(?).  You mean an increase? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Pardon? 

SPEAKER(?).  You mean an increase or a decrease? 



8/17/76 - 25 - 
 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Decrease. 

SPEAKER(?).  Decrease. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Would anyone else like to speak?  
Well, if not, I think we’re ready for a decision.  I would like to test the sentiment of the 
Committee on a money market directive.  In my judgment, that is an appropriate directive, in 
view of the [opinions] that have been expressed around this table at this meeting.  Now, with a 
show of hands, how many would find the money market directive acceptable at this time? 

MR. BROIDA.  Do you want members? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh yes, members. 

MR. BROIDA.  Eight, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  On M2, let me have a show of hands on a very subtle item, really, 
a preference of 7 to 11 as against 7-1/2 to 11-1/2.  Members of the Committee who prefer 7 to 11 
and who are against 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 would kindly raise your hands. 

MR. BROIDA.  Three. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, as to the federal funds rate, I’d be inclined to leave it as is, 
recollecting our discussion at the last meeting, but I can assure Mr. Volcker that this is a matter 
that not only the Desk but that I personally would watch very carefully.  And I think they ought 
to have a pretty convincing reason for going to 5-3/4, and I might want to communicate with the 
Committee on that if a purely mechanical interpretation of our rules would lead the Desk to that 
conclusion.   

In view of what may be happening at that time in the economy and the markets, I might 
want to communicate with the Committee, and all that I can promise is that I’m going to remain 
very alert to that because I’m sensitive to such a possible increase for what might be a purely 
mechanical reason, just as Mr. Volcker and, I believe, others around this table are.  Mr. Partee? 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I was just going to say that with eight indicated in favor of the 
money market directive, it would be quite appropriate, I think, to cut the range in the funds rate.  
And then if you’re outside the range on the aggregates, you have a wire communication, but I 
would myself give them a money market directive [unintelligible].  I’d prefer 5 to 5-1/2 as the 
funds rate range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is my preference.  I hesitated a little to indicate it in view of 
the somewhat painful discussion we had-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Because of the money market directive, you see. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --at the last meeting, when one or another of us sounded as if he 
might have a direct line to the Almighty himself, and the difference I thought was rather subtle.  
And we’re not asleep here, so I would go along entirely with Mr. Partee.  This is my own definite 



8/17/76 - 26 - 
 
preference, but it’s not anything that I would want to--in fact I’m not a belligerent on any subject 
today.  Well, let’s have a show of hands of those of us who would prefer the narrower range of 5 
to 5-1/2 with adequate alertness on the part of the staff and the Chairman.  Those who would 
prefer that would kindly raise their hands. 

SPEAKER(?).  That’s on the assumption you have a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s right. 

MR. BROIDA.  Eight. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think I’m breaking all records today.  Is there any other 
question or comment to take up before we have a formal vote?  If not, would you be good 
enough to let me specify what we’ll be voting on?  We’ll be voting on a money market directive; 
the range for M1, 4 to 8; the range for M2, 7-1/2 to 11-1/2; the range for the federal funds rate, 5 
to 5-1/2.  And I take it, although this has not been discussed with any thoroughness, that [the 
Desk will give] approximately equal weighting to M1 and M2--a procedure we have followed in 
recent meetings.  I hear no objection to my statement of what we’ll be voting on.  Therefore 
would you be good enough to call the role. 

MR. BROIDA.   
Chairman Burns  Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker   Yes 
Mr. Black Yes 
Mr. Coldwell Yes 
Mr. Gardner Yes 
Mr. Guffey  
 as alternate for  
 President Balles Yes 
Mr. Jackson  Yes 
Mr. Kimbrel Yes 
Mr. Lilly Yes 
Mr. Partee Yes 
Mr. Wallich Yes 
Mr. Winn  Yes 

Unanimous. 

END OF MEETING 

 




