









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

June 21, 1977 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

 
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 

the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 
or past members of the Committee. 

 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 

involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 

 
Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 

 
Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser 

Content last modified 01/11/2011.



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

June 21, 1977 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, June 21, 1977, 

beginning at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Guffey 
Jackson 
Lilly 
Mayo 
Morris 
Partee 
Roos 
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Black and Willes, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and 
Minneapolis, respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Guy, Deputy General Counsel 
Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis, 

Kichline, Scheld, Truman, and 
Zeisel, Associate Economists



6/21/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Hudson, Assistant to the Chairman, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Keir, Assistant to the Board of 
Governors 

Mr. O'Brien, Special Assistant to the 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Fossum and Smoot, First Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta and Philadelphia, respectively 

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Eisenmenger, 
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 
Cleveland, and Boston, respectively 

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Burns, Sims,and 
Willey, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, 

Dallas, San Francisco, and New York, 

respectively 
Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York 
Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, 

Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
June 21, 1977 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we are starting a bit earlier, and the reason is that I 
will have to leave this meeting at about 12:15.  I would hope that we could get through with the 
monetary policy directive by that time; and without interrupting members of the Committee or 
interfering with the flow of thought, I hope that we can accomplish that.  In the interest of trying 
to accomplish that, I am going to defer the discussion of foreign currency operations until later 
on in the meeting, and also the special problem that has arisen in connection with foreign 
accounts, repurchase agreements.  These two matters could be taken up readily in my absence.   

Also, I’m scheduling an informal meeting--meeting is hardly the word, really--Tom 
O’Connell will have the right word for it.  You know, [in] these days of the [Government in the] 
Sunshine Act, I’m at a loss for vocabulary--a new lexicon will have to be devised to fit Sunshine.  
In any case an informal discussion--or [an] informal something--is scheduled for 2:15 this 
afternoon, and I hope as many of you as can do so will be present.  Some recent correspondence 
with members of the Congress will be discussed at that time, and also some legislative matters 
on Capitol Hill that are of interest to the [Reserve] Bank Presidents will be discussed at that time.  
The meeting is of special significance for the Bank Presidents, but I hope that Board members 
will also attend, because we belong to one family, and these are matters of a mutual concern.  
One or two matters, actually, I have not yet had an opportunity to discuss with my colleagues on 
the [Federal Reserve] Board.  So I hope the members of the Board could be there as well.   

Now, when I leave, Mr. Volcker, the Vice Chairman of this Committee, will of course 
preside.   

We need to act first of all on the minutes of the May meeting.  Is there a motion to 
approve? 

SPEAKER(?).  Seconded. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The motion has been made and seconded, and I take it there is no 
objection.  And we will pass now to the report on the state of the economy.  Mr. Zeisel, would 
you be good enough to address the Committee? 

MR. ZEISEL.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Zeisel.  The increase in rentals.  I haven’t 
followed those figures recently.  What has the rise, and the average rise, in rentals been? 

MR. ZEISEL.  Those figures, I must say, are not the best base that we have, but they come 
from the CPI, and they show a fairly steady rate of increase in rentals over the last year.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Of how much? 

MR. ZEISEL.  I don’t have that figure with me, I am afraid. 



6/21/77 - 2 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I somehow have the impression that the rise in rentals has been 
below the rise in the consumer price index.  

MR. ZEISEL.  I think that’s right.  But, of course, the rise in the consumer price index, Mr. 
Chairman, has accelerated considerably recently because of the food and the-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Does anybody know?  We are all homeowners, and we don’t have 
rental-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  We can obtain that number and provide it in a few minutes for you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any question or comment?  Yes, Mr. Black? 

MR. BLACK.  Jerry, could you give us a little bit more on the revised first-quarter figures 
for GNP?  I’m interested more than anything else in why it was revised upward and what final 
demand did. 

MR. ZEISEL.  The revision occurred basically in corporate profits repatriated from 
overseas.  Its counterpart on the product side is net exports.  So two figures on the income side 
were corporate profits, which now show a slightly larger rise than they did in the earlier 
estimate; and net exports, which show a slightly stronger figure than before, and this resulted in 
an upward adjustment in the GNP projection for the first quarter.   

MR. BLACK.  Were inventories about the same? 

MR. ZEISEL.  Inventories were unchanged from the earlier figure. 

MR. BLACK.  But you did mention the figures on final demand in percentage terms, and I 
was trying-- 

MR. ZEISEL.  Final demand [was] revised up to a 4.2 percent real rate of growth for the 
first quarter.  

MR. BLACK.  That’s the one I missed; thanks a lot. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Mr. Eastburn, please. 

MR. EASTBURN.  A comment and a question.  I noticed in the New York Times that there 
was a listing of forecasts for 1978--some 35 forecasts.  Which, as I read what the Greenbook has, 
would put your forecast at the upper end of the list, probably at the top end of the list.  I have 
some reservations as to whether that will materialize, and I’m partly influenced by some 
meetings that we have been having in the last couple of weeks with several dozen businessmen, 
and I must say, sentiment is very pessimistic. Partly this is a function of the fact that it’s being 
held in Philadelphia, and the Philadelphia area is not very strong, and there is a special problem 
attached to that.  But I think that the degree of optimism is very low.   

We had one participant express this quite eloquently.  He said, “In the past, I have always 
had a kind of well of optimism that I could dip down into and draw when there was a shock,” 



6/21/77 - 3 - 

  
 

and he said, “My well has run dry.” And shocks do come along to the economy--so, I think that, 
first of all, the forecast-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Do you want to elaborate on that--the grounds for pessimism as 
voiced at the meeting? 

MR. EASTBURN.  Yes, I think it’s a function of several things.  One is the fact that 
businessmen feel lost, that they don’t know where things are going, that the old rules no longer 
apply, that they don’t know what government is going to do, particularly in the area of energy.  
And although they have become used to uncertainty, I think the degree of uncertainty is a great 
deal stronger than they have had in the past.   

This year has led, I think, to distrust of what the consumer is going to do.  For example, 
one retailer talked about his doubts and uncertainty.  I pressed him for his forecast for sales in 
the second half of the year as compared to the first, and he said the second half is going to be 
about as good as the first.  And I said, how can you be so pessimistic?  And he got off on costs 
and various other uncertainties.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, wait now.  When the retailer says that, I would interpret it to 
mean that the increase between the first half of 1976 and the first half of 1977 is of a certain 
magnitude and that he expects that the increase from the second half of 1976 to the second half 
of 1977 will be of the same magnitude, which is that’s the way retailers tend to talk or tend to 
think.  Well, that is not necessarily a pessimistic statement--it doesn’t necessarily mean at all that 
retail sales will be flat in the second half of this year. 

MR. EASTBURN.  That was the way I interpreted it--that, in fact, his forecast is not 
pessimistic, but his attitude is pessimistic.  And I suspect that the pessimism is overdone in many 
cases, but I think it is there and is reflecting itself in attitudes toward capital spending and 
willingness to take ventures and to move out in the near future.  My question has to do with the 
forecast projections--to what extent this is judgmental and to what extent it represents models.   

MR. ZEISEL.  It’s very heavily judgmental. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Is there a difference between what the model is saying and what the-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  The model is weaker, and particularly consumer spending is weaker.  
And the pattern on inventories is such that, at the end of the projection period, accumulation of 
inventories is about the same.  But in the earlier periods, the model is considerably weaker, 
which would give you a somewhat weaker second half, particularly, than the judgmental 
forecast.   

But I think the major difference is in this consumption area, which is clearly weaker.  And 
you end up with slower growth of real GNP over this projection [period] if you take the 
monetary assumptions [as being] the same and just run the model without any judgmental 
influence.  

MR. PARTEE.  Is the increase in the saving rate larger on the model than it is in the-- 



6/21/77 - 4 - 

  
 

MR. KICHLINE.  Yes, right.  That’s what happens.  The saving rate drifts up higher.  I 
might note that it looks like the model is indeed going to be off on the consumption sector in the 
first quarter and second quarter.  It clearly understated the degree of spending.  

MR. ZEISEL.  The model doesn’t sustain capital spending as strongly as we-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Can’t hear you. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, the model does not sustain capital spending as 
strongly as we do judgmentally into ’78. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Well, I think these differences may account for our tendency to be 
somewhat lower.   

MR. ZEISEL.  Of course, the relationship of consumption to capital spending and the 
generation of income is obvious. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Mr. Balles now, please. 

MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask a question about the Board staff 
forecast, mainly to clarify my own understanding of what’s been happening here.  As I look over 
the inflation forecast made monthly since the first of the year, we know it has been moving up 
steadily, starting off with a forecast of 5.5 percent for the year, May to January.  It’s now up to 
6.2 percent.  Over that same period, your forecast of real GNP has, on balance, remained 
virtually unchanged, your January forecast being a 5.7 percent increase for the year, and your 
latest June forecast being 5.8 percent.   

Given the fact that monetary policy has been roughly steady in this period, I guess one 
would normally expect, with roughly constant monetary policy, the same projection for real 
growth but increasing inflation.  Something has got to be a balancing factor there.  Are you 
expecting higher velocity now than you were, for example, at the first of the year, or just how do 
you get this result? 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, we have gone through a period in which the economic information 
that’s come in has grown progressively stronger.  The evidence, for example, of consumer 
markets has been for a considerable degree of consumer optimism, apparently.  Retail sales have 
been very strong, and we have been going through a process recently of revising upward our 
estimates of consumer outlays.  

The other area where we have shown additional strength to support continued [economic 
growth] [has been] residential construction, which has proved to be substantially stronger than 
we had thought it was [going] to be six months ago.  And this has proved the basis for a very 
strong growth as well.  So that, basically, while the information on prices has been on the 
negative side, the information on real demands has been on the positive side.  And I think this 
has been the key that has allowed us to get what otherwise might seem to be an inconsistent set 
of adjustments, to wit--rising prices without any negative effect on real output.   



6/21/77 - 5 - 

  
 

MR. KICHLINE.  I think also the interest rate side--I don’t recall precisely what we had 
for interest rates, but I do know by this time we had anticipated higher market rates, so that if 
velocity is pretty much on course, I think what is off is indeed that interest rate levels are less 
than we had anticipated given the kind of strength in economic activity that we now see 
developed. 

MR. BALLES.  Well, net-net, I was guessing that what was happening was that implicitly 
your velocity forecast has risen over this period, because normally you would expect a 
combination of steady monetary growth and inflation to produce some reduction in real growth, 
and yet you don’t have that.  Am I interpreting your figures correctly?  You are expecting higher 
velocity. 

MR. KICHLINE.  I think that’s right.  I don’t have the numbers back in the January-
February period.  It’s clear that over the balance of the projection period, we have M1 velocity 
rising at around a 7 percent annual rate, which is really very high, as you know. 

MR. BALLES.  I noticed that in the Bluebook.  I thought it was awfully high. 

MR. KICHLINE.  Let me just note that we do have some numbers on this residential rent 
index in the CPI, and in ’75 and ’76, that index had been rising at around a 5-1/4 percent annual 
rate.  And in the first quarter of this year, it’s 5.8 percent.  The monthly pattern is, February, a 
3.6 percent annual rate, 6 percent in March, 8.4 percent in April.  So we seem to be on a 
somewhat rising pattern for that particular measure of rents.  

MR. EASTBURN.  That’s gross rent, that’s not net rent, which is a little bit-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Net rent may well have gone down, based on those figures.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Partee now, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Jerry, I was surprised how pessimistic your comments were regarding 
prices.  I was surprised because I’m not that pessimistic, obviously.  But I wonder whether what 
you’re picking up in the GNP forecast, and second quarter forecast in particular, isn’t a reflection 
of past increases, principally in food prices.  If you look at wholesale prices of industrial 
commodities, the rise is slowing.  That’s particularly true at the raw stage of industrial 
commodities, but it’s also true of industrial commodities as a group.  Indeed the [total] wholesale 
price index was up quite a lot less in May than before.  And I know that the sensitive industrials 
in our weekly index have been declining in the last couple of months.  That’s just a few items,  
but perhaps indicative of reduced pressure in the market.   

And if you look at the hourly earnings index, why it seems to me the performance is really 
pretty good.  Year over year [in May], the increase was 6.9 percent; [for the] month, the increase 
was a 5.7 [percent annual rate].  But this far into a recovery, it seems to me that that’s a pretty 
good performance for wages, and it implies that unit labor costs are not, at least at this point, 
accelerating, looking through the bobbles you get up and down.   



6/21/77 - 6 - 

  
 

I assume that the forecast you have given us is largely based on higher food prices.  But 
even there, the impression I had is that the agricultural situation is better, rather than worse, than 
it was a couple of months ago in basic terms, because it’s rained, and the wheat’s coming in, and 
that kind of thing.  It might have some temporary effect in holding back meat animals and things 
like that in the market and give you a little increase in prices. But sort of fundamentally, as I look 
at the picture, it’s improved in the last two or three months with regard to the price outlook, 
rather than deteriorated.  Are you going to comment on that?   

MR. ZEISEL.  Yes, you are perfectly right.  My view of the price situation has deteriorated  
along with, I guess, my perception of what seems to be happening.  You are perfectly right, also, 
the adjustments at the moment are very largely in the food component.  Those prices came in 
much larger than we had anticipated for the last couple of months and have resulted in our 
raising our estimate of second-quarter food price increases--doubling them from about the 6 
percent range. 

MR. PARTEE.  6 to 12.  

MR. ZEISEL.  12 for the quarter.  And this is, in itself, a shock.  There are elements in 
wholesale food prices that are still to come through to retail--coffee is a particular case. 

MR. PARTEE.  But there we’ve been reading of reductions. 

MR. ZEISEL.  What we have been getting unfortunately--well fortunately-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Wholesale price of coffee has been coming down.  But the retail 
price has been below the wholesale. 

MR. ZEISEL.  That’s correct.  That’s exactly-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Therefore that can rise. 

MR. ZEISEL.  --so that, as the Chairman points out, the reductions we are seeing really are 
going to prevent future increases from being as large as they would otherwise be. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are going to limit or possibly prevent-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Isn’t that a favorable factor?  To limit or possibly prevent the increases 
that otherwise would have occurred--[that’s] an improvement, isn’t it? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, in that one factor. 

MR. ZEISEL.  That’s correct.  In that sense, Governor, I had commented that we may be 
getting some of the price increases clustered in the second quarter that we had anticipated might 
occur in the second half-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don’t know what this debate is about.  I’d like to have the 
question clarified.  Looking at the projections by our staff, the second quarter estimate on prices 
is a 7.1 percent annual rate, and then the figure falls in the next two quarters to 5.8 percent.  



6/21/77 - 7 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  I was referring, Mr. Chairman, more than anything else, to the pessimistic 
tone of Jerry’s comments about the worsening in inflation.  Simply all that the-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  He was simply anticipating Mr. Eastburn’s comment. 

MR. PARTEE.  If I may suggest a different explanation, it is that there has not been a 
deterioration in the inflation outlook that we did not previously foresee; the amount of increase, 
particularly in food prices, that [we] did not build in  [resulted from] the winter and the early 
spring drought and that kind of thing--and, indeed, that fundamentally there really has not been 
[an underlying] deterioration.  At least that would be what I would submit on the basis of my 
reading of the figures. 

MR. ZEISEL.  I think there’s a certain validity in that Governor-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would join Mr. Partee.  I’m impressed by the decline that has 
occurred in wholesale prices of food stuffs and industrial raw materials since mid-April--I wish I 
understood it better--and that is a favorable development on the price front. 

MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, I find it difficult to believe that this isn’t going to go into 
wages at some point.  These CPI increases--with a lag, I suspect--are going to influence hourly 
earnings. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, they could, but they haven’t yet. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, yes, but there’s a lag in these-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you say they haven’t yet.  The figures that I have in mind on 
wages that I try to follow relate not to average hourly earnings but to compensation per man-
hour in the private nonfarm sector.  The quarter-to-quarter fluctuations--these quarterly figures 
are unreliable.  I follow [the compensation data] on the basis of a moving 12-month period, and 
what that shows is a steady acceleration over the past five quarters.  Gradual, but without a 
break.  So the wage curve including fringe benefits, which the average hourly earnings figure 
omits, does show acceleration.   

MR. PARTEE.  As you know, the problem that I have with that is that the last quarter in 
the series includes the minimum wage increase and the increase in Social Security taxes.  I think 
it tends to give you an overly high reading for this most recent-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, that may well be.  The jump is largest in that quarter, Chuck, 
and therefore, allowing for that, perhaps you still have the acceleration, though I’m not sure.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My impression is the same as yours, Mr. Chairman.  
There has been a slight deterioration in the wage pattern.  We also, at this stage, expect to get 
slower growth in productivity, I think.  And the wage-cost element in the economy strikes me as 
being less favorable than I had hoped earlier in the year--not by a major amount but moving in 
that direction.  And I must say I am struck by the kind of deeply ingrained expectation of 
businessman and others in giving wage increases.  There seems to be very little resistance to a 



6/21/77 - 8 - 

  
 

kind of 8 percent or higher level.  No willingness to look forward to a decline in the rate of 
inflation.  And a kind of feeling that it’s only fair to give 8 or 10 percent.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t know whether it’s only fair or only necessary. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, they certainly argue it’s necessary.  They’re 
certainly not going to be willing to take a fight or strike or anything.  Well, I don’t think it’s 
terribly unusual for the big negotiated settlements.  It’s obviously not the average increase.  But 
the general feeling of no resistance because they think they can’t presumably--and they think that 
the prices are going to go up in the following year to justify--it seems to me to be very strong, 
and we have made very little impact on breaking it.   

While I have the floor, let me just say that I certainly have noted--pessimism may be too 
strong a word.  But the strongly increased caution of the business community that Dave Eastburn 
talked about has been reflected to me, too, and I haven’t been able to quite figure out why it 
takes place during a period when the economy has been expanding more rapidly.  Maybe the 
stock market had something to do with it.  I don’t quite know why it has happened, but I have 
detected this mood of great caution, apparent on the surface anyway, in the business community.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’d like to say a word about that.  There are businessmen 
complaining.  And businessmen are complaining about the atmosphere of uncertainty in which 
they live; and they don’t know what will happen to taxes, and don’t know what will happen to 
our antipollution legislation, and don’t know what kind of energy bill Congress is going to write 
eventually, and this undoubtedly is retarding business capital investment.   

At the same time, while businessmen are complaining all over the lot, their overt 
actions--as expressed in orders for capital equipment, as expressed in appropriations for capital 
expenditures, as expressed in plans for actual expenditures, as expressed in plans for actual 
expenditures, the successive survey reports--do indicate increasing spending.  And I would 
interpret that to mean that optimism fundamentally is gradually gaining ground.  There is a 
return of optimism, but it’s much slower than one had any right to expect at this stage of the 
business cycle, and particularly in view of the rate of utilization of capacity.  According to our 
index, we are up to 83.3 percent, and the peak was only 88 percent.   

Businessmen are complaining.  They are paid good salaries--one of their functions is to 
complain.  They’re justifying the salaries that they earn partly by complaining.  They have 
reason to complain--I don’t question that.  But I would not take that as an index of the 
underlying attitude.  Yes, I want to listen to them, and I do, plenty.  I have taught myself to do 
that.  But I also watch what they actually do.  And there I see, increasing slowly, a slow return of 
confidence.  That’s my reading. 

MR. EASTBURN.  As long as you are talking about this, there may be some function in 
age, because I happened to speak to a group of young businessmen who, by definition, had to 
have been president before they were 40, and they could not be over 50 and still attend this 
meeting over the weekend.  They were all very exuberant about everything, in fact so much so, 
that approximately 80 percent of them indicated with a show of hands that they thought 
monetary policy ought to be tightened--that things were running well. 



6/21/77 - 9 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s interesting. 

MR. PARTEE.  That is in the Southeast.  I think--you were talking about the New York 
attitudes, and Dave, Philadelphia.  It may be a reason how effective some [unintelligible]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What about New England? 

MR. MORRIS.  Well, I think in general we are more optimistic than Paul suggests [for] 
New York.  I think we have seen our capital goods industries continue to rise in orders--a feeling 
that capital spending is about to get going.  I think New England is pretty optimistic at the 
moment.  Not bullish.  No one has been looking for a boom, but no one really wants a boom, and 
I think there is a pretty general degree of satisfaction for the way things are going. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, these things need to be interpreted in the 
light of what we have heard about investment predictions.  If [the estimate is] correct, despite our 
belief that investment is peculiarly low, then we don’t need to attribute this to business 
pessimism if the objective facts as embodied in the model seem to say that investment should be 
even lower.  It must be the peculiar result that the objectives, factors--despite what I would have 
thought--point toward low investment.  Excess capacity, cost of capital, and whatever goes into 
that equation.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don’t know what goes into that equation, but I would have said, 
and I still say, that objective factors, putting aside uncertainty about legislation, point to 
increased capital investment.   

MR. WALLICH.  That’s been my intuitive interpretation, too, and I am surprised at what 
the equation says, but I think one has to pay attention to it to some degree.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, maybe you do.  Everyone has to speak for himself.  I have 
managed to get to my present age without paying much attention to what these equations have to 
say.  And I haven’t done too badly in judging the business situation.  I see no reason for learning 
these things at the present time.  However, if our staff can teach me what they know or think they 
know in an hour or so, I would be very glad to listen to them.   

MR. LILLY.  I think, when you listen to businessmen comment, you forget that they look 
at you as “Washington,” and it’s an opportunity for them to sound off on what they think is the 
matter with the government and their state of affairs.  I think lot of what you hear is being 
addressed to trying to correct the situation in Washington rather than reflecting their own state of 
affairs.  Because business is damn good--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you talk to-- 

MR. LILLY.  --let’s not kid ourselves. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --yes, you talk to a lot of businessmen.  You have been devoting a 
good part of your energy [to that].  What is your sense of the thinking of the business 
community? 



6/21/77 - 10 - 

  
 

MR. LILLY.  Well, they just hate Washington.  All of the regulations are driving them up 
the wall.  The biggest problem they have is that, instead of having no energy policy, we have a 
non-energy policy now.  No one has been able to make any plans in terms of where to put a plant 
because they just don’t know what’s going to happen in the energy field.  And until that energy 
policy question is cleared up, I think you are going to have a great deal of hesitancy on 
expansion of industrial capacity.  [Unintelligible] its business is damn good, and they all will 
admit it privately, but they won’t agree that the government is damn good.  And that I think is 
what you are hearing-- 

MR. MAYO.  Of course, Dave, they never have and they never will.  I think that’s part of 
the-- 

MR. LILLY.  I’m not speaking of any specific government, I’m just saying-- 

MR. MAYO.  No, the government.  But I think this is a characteristic of the business 
community. 

MR. LILLY.  I do, too. 

MR. MAYO.  We have to evaluate [it] in terms of degree of decibels--it’s a little different.  
And I guess I basically come out much as the Chairman does.  That businessmen are paid to 
complain, and you have to--this is very sensitive--we do not have any index of businessmen’s 
complaints.  We have to judge it by what they are doing in spite of the complaints, and business 
is good.  Even the one of the most profitable huge food companies in the 
Midwest--worldwide--the chairman told me the other day--“Well, it’s pretty good, Bob, but it 
could be better.”  But that was in view of an outstanding record for the first quarter and for 1976, 
and he is one of the highest paid executives in the United States.  That’s his way of expressing 
things.  And you get used to this.  And you evaluate differences in the way they say it. 

MR. LILLY.  Another thing you should also be concerned about--as a concern about the 
future--and that’s the farmer.  And I do not agree with Jerry in terms of the estimated price 
increases.  In farm products, I think you got a situation where you are going to have a bumper 
crop--that’s certainly the way it looks today--and it’s going to have a downward pressure on 
prices, both meat prices and grain prices.  

SPEAKER(?).  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me just interrupt for a second.  The consumer price index has 
just been released, and it shows an increase in the seasonally adjusted figure for May, of the 
overall index, of 6 tenths of 1 percent.  Yes. 

MR. ROOS.  We have continuing meetings with major heads and treasurers of our major 
corporations in the area.  They are optimistic, but I think we are overlooking, at least from my 
point of view, one issue there--they are certainly disturbed about regulation, they are certainly 
disturbed about uncertainties--but the one underlying concern that they have expressed to us is 
their concern about prices and about inflation.  We have not met one of these individuals--and 
this is not an exaggeration, we have been with scores of them--who has not said, “For heaven 



6/21/77 - 11 - 

  
 

sakes, do everything you can to protect us from further inflation.”  Now, I don’t think that factor 
has been given sufficient--maybe credence is the wrong word--but attention this morning.  I 
think that worries them as much as energy.  That worries them as much as regulation.  And they 
don’t see a real pattern, they don’t have real optimism over the long pull as to the probability that 
our inflation rate is really being reduced.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that’s a very important observation [unintelligible], that the 
high rate of inflation means a deterioration in business profits.  And partly because of the 
behavior of wages and raw materials prices, and partly because of our tax laws and our 
accounting practices, businessmen in periods of inflation have to pay income taxes on phantom 
profits.  And they have learned that.  And accounting is one of the most backward of our 
professions.  You know, there was a time when businessmen looked forward to a time of 
inflation because they saw wages lagging, prices soaring, profit margins rising, the stock market 
roaring, but things don’t work that way any longer.  Businessmen now know it.  And I think 
that’s why they speak and think as they do on the subject of inflation.  Mr. Wallich, we want to 
hear from you now.  

MR. WALLICH.  I have a couple of questions concerning rather minor aspects of the data 
you present.  One has to do with corporate profits.  I see that some of the inventory valuation 
adjustment and the capital consumption allowances in the first quarter was $40 billion, which is 
more than one-quarter of profits before tax; in other words, very large.  You then have it going 
down in your projection to a much smaller sum, $26 billion, which is one-seventh of the then-
expected profits.  My question really is, what makes it so large now, and what hope do we have 
that it will decline, given that the price trends aren’t all that favorable as projected. 

MR. ZEISEL.  I’m just searching for them.  I’m sorry.  

MR. WALLICH.  On page I-7 of the green pages in the Greenbook.  And a little below the 
middle of the page. 

MR. ZEISEL.  I’m a little surprised at the rate of growth of the IVA in the first quarter that 
you cite, Governor.  I thought it was somewhat below that in the--actually below $30 billion.  
We would anticipate a more moderate rate of increase in the IVA because we do have some 
moderation in the rate of price increase later in ’77, as the Chairman pointed out.  I’m sorry, 
we’ll have to look into this and I’ll have to get back.  We’ll give you an answer on this. 

MR. PARTEE.  The first quarter could have had a lot of oil in it. 

MR. WALLICH.  Do you think it’s oil?   

MR. ZEISEL.  It could have, I don’t  know.  I’ll have to look into it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, I have not studied these figures on profits, but I am 
surprised.  Figures that I’ve seen indicate that, during the first and second quarters, the 
improvement in profits has been negligible. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Very small increase in the first quarter.  



6/21/77 - 12 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And that surprises me, and I haven’t tried to analyze it.  You have 
these very sharp increases in physical volume of business activity, accompanied by virtually 
stable profits.   

MR. KICHLINE.  Well, the first quarter is partly influenced by the winter weather, which 
presumably affected costs more than it did sales and profits.  And on a quarterly average basis, 
the pickup that you are talking about really occurred later in the quarter.  So I think there’s a lag 
phenomenon at work there that would affect the first-quarter performance.   

In addition, we do have the minimum wage increase--and at an annual rate you get a shock 
effect in the first quarter, which presumably is also calculated in these figures.  So some of that 
ought to show up later on in the second quarter, but the second quarter does look very strong to 
us, either, I guess, in terms of profits performance.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the figures I’ve seen for the second quarter look remarkably 
low. 

MR. ZEISEL.  We have a very moderate rate of increase in profits projected for the second 
quarter. 

MR. WALLICH.  That’s [why it seems so odd].  Even those profits that we see are 
deceptive, that is, the result of inventory and underdepreciation. 

MR. ZEISEL.  We’ll have to look at this a little more carefully, Governor, and report to 
you.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that an interpretation of these profits figures is very 
important.  That may help to explain the phenomenon that Mr. Eastburn described in his area.  
The acceleration in inflation that you commented on may possibly be reflected in these profits 
figures.  And your estimates for profits later on in the year look remarkably high.   

MR. KICHLINE.  Well, it’s in part this lag effect, believing that the first half is an 
understatement of the underlying trend and that we have got special factors at work.  We are not 
as high on corporate profits as we were several months ago, [and the change] reflects, in part I 
guess, the somewhat less optimistic view on corporate costs and, secondly, a somewhat weaker 
picture for real GNP.   

MR. PARTEE.  Of course, the level of ’76 was much higher than the level of ’75. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh, yes. 

MR. PARTEE.  [Unintelligible] $40 billion in total profits [unintelligible]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You have a very sharp increase in ’76, you know. 

MR. WALLICH.  My second question, Mr. Chairman--in the federal budget, I see that 
from the first to the third quarter, we have a massive swing in the high-employment surplus or 



6/21/77 - 13 - 

  
 

deficit going from plus 10 in the first quarter to minus 10 in the third.  And I wonder whether 
this plays a significant role in your evaluation of the stimulating effect of the budget. 

MR. ZEISEL.  We have a rapid increase in federal grants to states, which are coming into 
play in this period, so in a real sense this will underlie the increase in state and local spending 
that we anticipate in this period.  You’ve got a number of pieces of legislation that relate to 
public service employment and other support programs, which move the federal grants to states 
and localities from about a $4 billion rate at the moment to about a $12 billion rate, I presume, in 
the first half of ’78.  And that’s a big element in the swing in the budget and should be evident in 
terms of stimulus to real activity. 

MR. KICHLINE.  I might also note, early in the year we had a high-employment surplus 
of about $10 billion.  And, in part, a transitory effect [is] reflected in that number, that is, gift 
taxes shot up to something like a $6 billion annual rate in the first quarter.  And that particular 
number, of course, works into higher receipts.  And so the first-quarter performance, I think, is 
the wrong base to measure from.   

MR. JACKSON.  Is that a consequence of returns filed in the first quarter for gifts made in 
the last quarter of the term?  

MR. KICHLINE.  It’s a consequence of the change in the tax law last September, which in 
effect changed the rules on gift taxes.  And apparently a lot of gifts were made in December to 
avoid the higher taxation implicit in January.  And those were paid largely in the month of 
February.  And [in] the first quarter, it’s about a $5-1/2 billion to $6 billion annual rate, which in 
effect also shows up in our numbers in the first quarter as a reduction in the saving rate by about 
four-tenths.  So that saving rate is a bit lower, as well, because of this effect.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Black now. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I have a question about the revision in your inventory 
projections for the balance of the year.  You reduced these for the second, third, and fourth 
quarters relative to what you thought a month ago.  Is this largely a result of the larger increase 
than anticipated in inventory building in the first quarter?  Or do you have in mind some more 
fundamental factors?  The reason I’m really intrigued by this more than anything else is that I’ve 
been playing around with some of the ratios put out by the Commerce Department in terms of 
’72 dollars, which should remove any downward bias from the switch to the LIFO method of 
accounting.  These show inventory-sales ratios greater than we actually had when the recession 
began, and I’ve been thinking all along that inventories were in pretty good alignment.  But they 
really don’t look that good when you look at them in constant dollar terms.  

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, we haven’t changed our view of the likely rates of inventory 
investment of this--what you note is a reflection of the fact that we got a larger inventory 
adjustment in the first quarter than we had been expecting.  And rather than a moderate rate of 
growth sustaining through the year, we now tend to have a slower rate of growth later in the 
year.  And basically the inventory-sales ratio at the end of the period remains about the same as 
we had had it earlier.  But we get there a little earlier, in a sense.   



6/21/77 - 14 - 

  
 

MR. BLACK.  I assumed [that’s] what it was, but I didn’t know.  These constant-dollar 
ratios are very interesting, I think.   

MR. ZEISEL.  Yes, that’s right.  They do show a very different picture. 

MR. BLACK.  They sure do. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Baughman now, please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I guess I feel obliged to report that in the Southwest 
we do continue to see a strong and growing demand for most everything, and the list of 
activities-- that is, types of labor that are in short supply--is growing.  And we’re seeing 
indications, of course, of a rather rapid rise in wage rates, in part related thereto, but it’s probably 
not a dominant factor in the rise in wage rates.  We’ve also had reports on two recent occasions 
of shortages of transportation, particularly trucks.  A couple of months back, there were reports 
of fairly serious shortages of capacity to move sizable equipment and also cement.  And recently 
there were reports of significant shortages of trucks to move produce.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  To move what? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Produce.  Specifically, a lot of melons apparently being permitted to 
spoil in the fields because transportation could not be acquired to move them out to market.  And 
it’s reported, largely as a suspicion or an assertion rather than a fact, that there’s been some lack 
of interest shown by the so-called independent trucker because of increased regulations, 
licensing, taxes, that sort of thing.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Lack of interest in expanding their operations?   

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Well, not so much expanding, but even coming in, in the usual 
volume, into this area to move these products at this point in time.  I don’t have more on that.  
I’ve undertaken to learn more about just what’s involved.  It appears to be a fact that the produce 
has been permitted to spoil in the field in substantial volume and apparently for this reason--at 
least they have not cited as an additional reason, thus far, an inability to acquire the labor to 
harvest the product.  Now, of course, in the labor force in that area there is a presumed 
substantial elasticity of supply of illegal labor.  And there have been indications of substantial 
mobility of labor, particularly skilled labor, into the area.   

With respect to energy, we hear all of the conversation about the uncertainty, and lack of 
program, and lack of specific goals and objectives which have been reported here.  But even in 
the face of that, all of the available rigs for drilling on land are in use, and the lease rates are 
rising.  The time lag to get a rig is lengthening--just to get on a list of a driller to drill.  And here 
again, you get into an area where it’s not reported as fact, not talked about openly, but there is a 
pretty generally accepted view that quite a bit of this drilling is being done for purposes of 
proving up supplies to be offered in the market at a later time, as compared with bringing [them] 
into the market immediately.  Here, of course, is reflected in a meaningful sense some of the 
uncertainty as to the price [or] prospects for those products.   



6/21/77 - 15 - 

  
 

We continue to see announcements of sizable commercial construction projects in the 
major cities in the area.  And it’s interesting that a fair number of these are being announced for 
downtown.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What kind of construction projects?  Commercial-- 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I’m speaking primarily of office building structures, but also multi-
unit residential and hotel. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What about large industrial construction?  Any of that? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  There is some of it.  Largely in the petrochemicals area.  And that 
tends to be concentrated in a fairly small geographic area down along the coast.  Aside from that, 
both indicated in the figures and just from observation as one travels around, it seems to be large 
numbers of fairly small developments, largely in suburban areas around the larger cities.   

With respect to the pessimism, and it would seem unusual I guess, to find any of it in that 
kind of a general environment, but there is a good deal of pessimistic talk, and it seems to me 
that it traces both to the uncertainty of the application of regulations flowing from legislation 
that’s already on the books as well as uncertainty as to prospective future legislation.  The 
regulations flowing from legislation already on the books has greatly lengthened the 
developmental time or gestation time for bringing projects into being, into completion.  And that, 
it seems to me, is a matter which is irritating businessmen as well as the bankers who finance 
businesses.   

With respect to the general economic outlook, I guess the sector of it that interests me 
most, and in which I maybe feel less certain than other aspects, is this prospect for capital 
investment.  And I don’t have anything to add to the conversation that’s taken place here.  But it 
would seem to me that there is a very heavy dependence upon what develops there, as to just 
what the pace of progress from here will be over the next year or two.  That’s all I have, Mr. 
Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Partee now, please.  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to set the record straight.  Although I 
was a little critical of the comments on inflation that Jerry had, I think that the staff projection is 
very defensible; and in general terms, the 5-1/2 percent increase in real GNP looks to me quite 
supportable on the basis of the sector.  The state and local spending outlook is vastly improved.  
Not only because of the federal transfers but also because of much better revenues as the 
recovery has proceeded.   

I agree with you on plant and equipment.  I think it looks pretty strong, and strengthening 
for the foreseeable future.  And with that it seems to me would go increased inventory 
accumulation.  So about the only black spot that the economy is likely to have, as I see in the 
forecast period, is in durable goods sales to consumers, in particular, automotive sales. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Also foreign trade.   



6/21/77 - 16 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think probably most of the deterioration is over in foreign trade.  It 
may not be that there [will] be much improvement, but probably there won’t be much [further] 
deterioration at this point.  But we should expect to see car sales level off or even decline after 
this period of extremely strong demand, and that will be associated with the rise in the saving 
rate.  But I think the other factors in the economy will overcome the phenomenon.   

The difference between 5-1/2 percent in the forecast for the year ahead and 5 is not very 
great.  I really don’t know that I could choose between them.  I guess I’m inclined to think that 5 
is a little weak, but in any event, if it’s 5 or 5-1/2, it’s still in the range of continued expansion at 
a reasonable rate.  And I think that’s what we ought to keep our eye on.   

Now, one other comment--although I’m not as critical of models as the Chairman--it is true 
that the models very often, for short periods, are quite wrong.  And the fact that our model 
delivers lower business fixed investment doesn’t surprise me.  It [has done so] repeatedly, and 
it’s delivered a high one repeatedly.  It’s just that it’s [based on] an average experience, and it 
just doesn’t seem to work too well in short-period forecasting.  And the fact that the model has 
lower consumption than [does the] judgmental [forecast]--[that phenomenon] has occurred, as I 
remember, repeatedly over the last several years.  So there’s nothing terribly unusual about that.  
So I would not use the fact that it’s a model to give it added importance or added weight; it needs 
to be taken into account, but I don’t think it deserves added emphasis for that reason. 

MR. WALLICH.  You know, I think one needs to look at what goes into it and what are 
the factors that produce this result.  That’s why I say--when I spoke of a particular equation--see 
if it’s the stock market, or excess capacity, or orders, or some other variable. 

MR. PARTEE.  The stock market, I think, is probably having quite an effect-- 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  The survey results are not particularly encouraging, either. 

MR. PARTEE.  Pardon? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I say, the survey results are somewhat in the same direction, are they 
not? 

MR. PARTEE.  Yes, except that that looks so unreasonable, doesn’t it, to see that the first 
half has been going on at a very substantial pace, and then all of a sudden you have this slump.  
It just doesn’t seem very likely, you know, that it would be the way things would work 
out--especially since, as the Chairman said, none of the other figures you would look at support 
the idea of a marked, almost immediate slowing in the rate of increase in capital spending.  
Which is what you’d have to have for that Commerce survey to come off.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Guffey now. 

MR. GUFFEY.  A couple of comments with respect to the level of optimism in the High 
Plains area.  It’s been sort of divided, up to this point, in the sense that in the metropolitan areas 
there have been, for the early part of this year, fairly high levels of optimism.  But there have 
been a couple of things that have occurred that are not readable yet but could very well dampen 



6/21/77 - 17 - 

  
 

that somewhat.  One is the fact that in the Colorado-Wyoming-New Mexico area, the drought 
has culminated in a limitation of any new [water] hookups, both commercial and residential.  It’s 
only a limitation--they still can hook up, but a very limited number over the rest of the year and 
projected into 1978, which is dampening considerably the construction of both residential and 
commercial.   

The other event that had just occurred is a Federal Power Commission order that limits, as 
of January 1978, any new hookups--as far as gas is concerned--throughout an area of Kansas, 
Missouri, part of Oklahoma, and part of Nebraska, which means that if that order is in effect, 
there will be no new gas hookups as of January 1.  Again, the comments coming from the 
business community, and particularly in the construction industry, are fairly [critical].   

Lastly, with respect to the agricultural sector--which has been sort of depressed in terms of 
level of optimism up to this time because of the drought--[it] has all turned around in the crop 
areas, for example.  What we are projecting now is a wheat crop that is larger by about 10 to 15 
percent than in 1976, which was a very good crop year.  The problem is now, not that they’re not 
going to grow anything, but rather that they’re adding to the carryover they already have, thus 
further depressing the price of grain, on top of which there is no clear capacity to store that grain.  
The price, as reflected by the futures, continues to deteriorate.  On top of that, in the agricultural 
sector, what has been anticipated for meat prices, for example, particularly cattle, has been an 
increase, particularly in the latter part of this year.  But the track record has been that cattle 
prices and red-meat prices [have] again turned down, so that there is a pessimism that’s 
arising--not only [regarding] the cattle but the wheat--in the agricultural sector.  So you put all 
those together, and what was kind of mixed before might turn out to be a fairly pessimistic 
outlook for that whole midsection of the country.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Morris now. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I have two comments.  I think there’s one measure of 
confidence that we shouldn’t overlook, and that is the remarkable performance of the bond 
market in the last few weeks despite the fact that we pushed up short-term rates--and in fact 
probably because of it, because we showed the determination to move promptly.  And despite the 
poor price index numbers coming out, we have seen a willingness in long-term investors to buy 
at declining yields, and the long-term market is significantly below where it was when the 
federal funds rate was at 4-3/4.  So I think that is one area of confidence.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  How do you interpret that, Frank? 

MR. MORRIS.  I think there is an expectation that we are not going to have a sharply 
rising trend in interest rates.  That also shows up in the Treasury bill futures markets.  The 
Treasury bill futures yields are going down, reflecting an anticipation of that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You think this behavior of long-term interest rates reflects, in part, 
confidence in the Federal Reserve’s policies? 

MR. MORRIS.  I think so, yes. 



6/21/77 - 18 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that’s been my own judgment, but it’s a hard thing to be sure 
of. 

MR. MORRIS.  I think if we had not moved in the face of that April bulge [in M1], we 
would not have had a decline in the long-term yield.  

MR. JACKSON.  How did you relate the stock market to that, considering that many of 
these long bonds are purchased by people that would normally have been in equities to a certain 
extent.  And they obviously are not going to. 

MR. MORRIS.  Well, I think if we get this continued confidence in the bond market, it’s 
going to spread to the stock market as well. 

MR. PARTEE.  But both could be consistent with not expecting a boom-- 

MR. MORRIS.  That’s right. 

MR. PARTEE.  --a willingness to invest in long-term instruments and holding away from 
the stock market. 

MR. MORRIS.  My other comment is less optimistic, Mr. Chairman.  Getting back to the 
wages issue, which I think is going to be very critical in the next 18 months or so.  I was talking 
recently with John Dunlop, and he is very pessimistic on wages.  And his argument is that we’ve 
had a number of settlements recently in automobiles and other areas that have produced a 
maladjustment in the normal wage structure.  And therefore, that is going to put pressure on 
union leaders in other areas this year and next to come up with settlements that will bring them 
back in line with the auto workers and steel workers and so on.  I was wondering if the staff had 
looked into this--what Dunlop considers to be a really difficult structural wage problem?   

MR. ZEISEL.  I trust Dunlop puts a good deal of emphasis on that kind of analysis of the 
wage market, that is, the differentials, and in fact that proved to be a very important factor in 
areas like construction and raising wages. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A little louder, please. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Excuse me, I think there’s no question that that’s going to have a 
significance.  That’s going to play some role in wage determination in the near future.  My own 
feeling about wages, I think, has deteriorated slightly because I’m afraid of the feedback from 
the rapid increase in prices that we’ve had recently.  And I think that’s been the most significant 
factor in my own adjustment upward of the outlook for wages later on this year. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, I think it would be a good idea for the staff to keep in 
touch with John Dunlop and one of our own [Reserve Bank] directors, Arnie Weber.  They are 
probably the most astute students of the labor market that we have.  And in judging wage trends, 
I think it would be a good idea for you to talk to each of these two men once every few weeks.  

MR. MORRIS.  He is pretty happy about the construction sector.  But it’s outside of 
construction that he thinks we’re-- 



6/21/77 - 19 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  He thinks steel and autos are well ahead of their [projected production] 
and so on. 

MR. MORRIS.  Yeah. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Fossum, please.   

MR. FOSSUM.  Mr. Chairman, I’d give the Committee a little sense of the sentiment from 
the Southeast based upon the expressions by our directors at their recent meeting.  I’d say, 
almost to a person, our directors expressed, not pessimism, but very cautious optimism about the 
near-term economic future.  And this is based in considerable part on the revived construction 
activity in our District, which is pretty general.   

Real estate is moving actively again in all of the regions.  We still have an overhang in 
central Florida.  In south Florida, activity has picked up considerably, based in part on purchases 
being made by foreigners--mostly Latin American, I would say, although some Swiss money is 
coming in.  One of our directors who is an industrial contractor reported that, despite the fact that 
it is not yet showing up in the figures, small, medium, and large companies are making 
commitments in a big way now for capital expenditures.  And that they will be coming online, 
they’ve got all the business that can handle in the near-term future.   

Supporting what Mr. Baughman reported, we are seeing shortages showing up now in oil 
drilling, rigs, and in labor.  There is a shortage of oil barges in the Gulf area.  Quite active 
activity on the Mississippi and Louisiana coast, but concern expressed for shortages that are 
impeding that.  But generally, the outlook is one of cautious optimism.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you.  Mr. Coldwell now, please. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, there are only three spots in the change, or in the 
projections, which raised some flags for me.  First, the inventory change, shifting--from the first 
quarter to the second quarter--from 12.1 to 3.0.  And secondly, the increase in final purchases 
jumped from 39 billion to a 57 billion rate.  And then, finally, the net export picture, from a 
negative 13 to a positive 1.  These are very large changes in these units as the forecast-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Those are for the second quarter? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Between the first and the second quarters.  I think, as I look over these 
figures and other matters, that the directions are right.  I wonder if the magnitudes are quite that 
much in the way of change.  I particularly question the degree of change in inventory because I 
think you’re going to get more rather than so much less.  The net export figure, I guess, was an 
oil figure more than anything else in the first quarter, and maybe that will swing that much.  But 
a shift [in] consumer purchases by that large a change is truly a major shift.  I guess all of this 
means to me that you’ve got negatives and positives on the side of the total change in the GNP.  
And I just wonder if maybe the second quarter isn’t going to be stronger than what you’re 
reflecting in this forecast. 



6/21/77 - 20 - 

  
 

MR. ZEISEL.  As far as inventories are concerned, Governor, the first quarter was 
extremely strong in part because it was a substantial shift--a swing in inventories from the fourth 
[quarter] to the first.  The actual rate of inventory accumulation in the second quarter is higher 
than the first at a reasonably--not a high rate, certainly relative to GNP, but certainly within a 
reasonable range relative to the growth in GNP.   

The net export situation in the second quarter is reflecting a continued high import of fuels, 
a much larger import of fuels in the second quarter than we had anticipated, and this involved an 
upward revision of the import figure and of further weakness in the net export figure for the 
second quarter.  Now, there is a bit of a long lag there, obviously, in getting figures on foreign 
trade, and those could be revised by the time the figures come out.  But they look like they’re 
moving in that direction.   

We’ve revised upward our personal consumption figures for the second quarter and now 
have a very strong increase in that sector, so I think we have a pretty strong rate of increase in 
that sector.  It’s certainly possible that the second quarter may turn out to be even stronger.   

The inventory figures we have are for April.  They don’t show any great acceleration from 
the earlier months, but they could move up rather swiftly.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Lilly now. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, I just wanted to point out that they would be unable to build 1978 
models until the legislation that was in front of the Congress to reduce the emission standards 
was passed.  I’m very much concerned about the 11-1/2 million annual rate of autos that you 
have projected, which includes the 25 percent decrease in imports, in view of the fact that 
legislation has not yet passed Congress, and the Ford Motor Company in the last couple of days 
announced they were going to put a ’77 label on ’78 models.  I’m sure that General Motors is 
going through the same kind of problem as to what they’re going to do, because the time for 
production is here.  Now they can, as most of you know--the ’78 models are mainly made in ’77.  
So they have the balance of ’77, they can build ’77 models and they can call ’78 models ’77, but 
once they get to the first of January, they’re in real trouble.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What is the status of that legislation? 

MR. LILLY.  It’s still in conference. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Expected soon?   

MR. LILLY.  Well, you know, last May 25 it was expected almost daily, and nothing has 
happened, and we’ve all-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Who’s holding it up?  Do you know?  I haven’t been told. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, I don’t know. 

MR. PARTEE.  [Unintelligible]. It seems to me there’s one last week-- 



6/21/77 - 21 - 

  
 

MR. ZEISEL.  We have kept in touch following your comments last month, Governor.  
We kept in touch with this legislation and, obviously, you are perfectly right.  The producers are 
disturbed, quite worried-- 

MR. LILLY.  Well, here’s Ford, you know--now putting a label of ’77 on a ’78 
model--incidentally that has an interesting effect because they’re going to have to sell it at ’77 
prices, they think.  So it’s actually coming on the market a little cheaper. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It might be a good idea to extend the thing. 

MR. ZEISEL.  They do anticipate-- 

MR. LILLY.  I was afraid they might see that. 

MR. ZEISEL.  They do anticipate action very soon on this legislation.  And on the basis of 
our discussions with Detroit, we have continued to assume that the legislation will get out very 
soon and that they will be able to move on to ’78 production on schedule.  And they are making 
that assumption.  

MR. PARTEE.  At higher prices. 

MR. ZEISEL.  At higher prices. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Lilly.  Mr. Winn now, please. 

MR. WINN.  Two brief comments, Mr. Chairman.  First, in terms of our capacity 
measures.  I’m quite impressed, on the one hand, with what industry has been able to do with 
some small retooling in terms of dramatically increasing the capacity of output for their plants.  
And so part of the new technology is just being factored [in] as the pickup occurs now in 
machinery orders and some of these things.  So this is one thing to sort of take a look at, that we 
are getting tremendous output potential from very small increases in investment, a result of new 
technology.   

On the other hand, the amount of real investment that has to come in our mining, coal, and 
other areas is just almost beyond imagination.  And some of this is starting.  The highly 
dramatized labor difficulties in coal haven’t really led to an awful lot of inventory building up.  
Normally, you would think that would occur rather rapidly.  Coal prices are firming, and their 
outlook is good.  But the transportation investment is very real, it’s resulting in changes in the 
location of coal.  Instead of Duluth being a mining center, it may be a coaling center.   

The third comment I’d like to make is, in Ohio the agricultural situation is not nearly as 
good as in other parts of the country.  The drought this year, and the freeze, which affect the fruit 
crops and other things, added a little bit of pessimism into the air. 

[Report on domestic open market operations] 

MR. MEEK.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 



6/21/77 - 22 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you for a very interesting report.  Any questions of Mr. 
Meek? 

MR. WALLICH.  I wonder to what extent open market operations in bills offset what the 
Treasury does by running off its bills?  You mentioned one week where the numbers seemed to 
be not too dissimilar.  But then you said that, over the quarter, the Treasury reduced bills, I 
believe, by $10 billion, which surely is much more than the Fed could have sold. 

MR. MEEK.  Well, our operations in the short run, of course, add to the available supply 
of market bills, and in this period they reduced the shortage in the market.  Nonetheless, the 
shortage of bills in the market has been one of the reasons that the bill rates have been out of line 
with other short-term rates during this period. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  Well, thank you.  And Mr. Kichline, could 
you introduce us to the Bluebook at present? 

MR. KICHLINE.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you.  I overlooked an action that is required on the 
operations at the Domestic Desk that we need to approve if we are so inclined--what the Desk 
has done during the past month.  

SPEAKER(?).  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Motion has been made and actually seconded. 

MR. PARTEE.  Do they have to buy them themselves if we don’t approve? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I hear no questions or objections.  All right, any question to Mr. 
Kichline? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Jim, on alternative B, you are looking at an M1 [growth rate] rising 
from 1.9 [percent] in June to 8.2 in July.  Would you tell me what the pattern of that was in 
1976?   

MR. KICHLINE.  For the June-July period?  We have it in one of these tables if I can 
locate it.  M1 in June of last year declined 1.2 percent and in July rose 7.1 percent.   

MR. COLDWELL.  So your pattern isn’t much different. 

MR. KICHLINE.  No. 

MR. COLDWELL.  One point higher. 

MR. KICHLINE.  No, that is right.  We are starting clearly at a June base that’s roughly a 
bit higher.  But essentially the same sort of thing in terms of, after two months or so, we assume 
that resumption of growth will occur.  That’s what we’ve built into our patterns this time.  This is 
two months after this massive bulge-- 



6/21/77 - 23 - 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Yet, your economic situation is sharply different. 

MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right, if our forecast is right, it will be stronger this time around 
than last.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Which ought to then build a higher rate for M1, shouldn’t it?  

MR. KICHLINE.  Well, since we have a little bit higher rate on average for that period, we 
have a higher rate.  

MR. COLDWELL.  I know, but starting at the lower base you still are moving roughly the 
same-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  We, by the way, are just about on track now in terms of [the second] 
quarter.  We had an 8.2 percent annual rate of growth, and we have about the same this time.  So, 
on average in the second quarter this year and last, there’s not much change.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Coldwell and Mr. Kichline.  Mr. Morris 
please. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I’m very much disturbed by this prospect of an early July 
artificial bulge in the money supply.  It seems to me that our response ought to be to adjust the 
seasonal adjustment factors to reflect the fact that our present seasonals are wrong.  To do 
otherwise is to give a market which is very sensitive to these numbers a misleading impression 
as to what is going on.  We now have in the marketplace a feeling of confidence that we have got 
the money supply under control.  I don’t think we ought to mislead the market, but on the other 
hand, for us to publish numbers where we know the seasonal adjustment factor is wrong, I think 
doesn’t make any sense.  I hope I can find some support around the table [for] that possibility. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You have me as a supporter, at least tentatively.  What is the 
answer to Mr. Morris? 

MR. KICHLINE.  Well, this is the first July that we had this.  [Previously there were two 
instances] of this sort of experience--the third time around [will be] this July.  In April, there 
were clearly a number of things going on.  We had three special factors, I remember, plus sort of 
underlying transactions demands.  So one of the issues is, how much do you allow for seasonal 
impact of this Social Security check?  And, quite frankly, the reason I brought it up is to call it to 
your attention, but also I’d like to put a little tone of uncertainty on it.  I know the New York 
Federal Reserve Bank has a somewhat smaller allowance--at least in our staff discussions early 
on they have allowed something smaller than we have.  So I think there is a good deal of 
uncertainty as to how much one ought to put into this special factor.   

MR. MORRIS.  Well, I think seasonally adjusting weekly data involves a lot of 
uncertainty anyway.  But it seems to me that we do have some historical basis for making an 
adjustment we ought to use. 



6/21/77 - 24 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, is this seasonal?  You’ve had two occasions--two different weeks 
and two different months, and the third one is coming up.  Now, the two seem to go the same 
direction, so do you already bet and change the seasonal?  What if the third one doesn’t happen?  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Suppose you didn’t call it a seasonal?  Suppose you called it an 
identifiable special factor that you are correcting for?   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It’s not very identifiable, is the trouble. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What’s that?  Well, not the amount, no.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  One way of handling it is, when you announce the 
figure, emphasize that this happened. 

MR. MAYO.  It seems to me that’s the better course to go, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t 
visualize this, just by reading the explanation correctly, as a seasonal at all.  It’s an increase in 
the money supply that is on the books of the private sector for a longer period of time during a 
month, during the year.   

MR. MORRIS.  If it happened every year, then the seasonal would take [it] into account, 
and we would not be showing a big bulge.  It’s [because of] the fact that it doesn’t happen every 
year that we’ve got a problem.  

MR. KICHLINE.  But that’s my point, I think, Frank, that this isn’t a seasonal.  If it 
happened every year, it would be up every year because you have a larger volume of money in 
the hands of the Social Security recipients for a longer period during that year.  But I don’t think 
it is a seasonal at all.  

MR. PARTEE.  It won’t happen, of course, in the same month.  It only happens when, as I 
understand it, the first of the month is a weekend.   

MR. KICHLINE.  Well, the third of the month is on Saturday or Sunday or holiday.  I 
might say there’s a chance-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Isn’t this analogous to the kinds of adjustments our statisticians 
have learned how to make in retail trade because of the shifting date of Easter?   

MR. PARTEE.  Exactly, or the number of trade days in a month.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I have sympathy for what Mr. Morris has suggested, having 
worked on problems of that sort, not recently, but over many years in the past.  What I could say 
in defense of the staff is that what they are allowing for, this exceptional factor, is not very large.  
And when you make your seasonal correction, the elements of uncertainty are parallel--[it] is 
much larger than the allowance which they make; therefore, practically, I don’t know that it 
makes too much difference.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  How much are we talking about? 



6/21/77 - 25 - 

  
 

MR. KICHLINE.  In dollar terms, a billion and a half.  But let me just say for that 
particular week, July 6, our weekly pattern consistent with alternative B has a not-seasonally 
adjusted increase of $10 billion and a seasonally adjusted increase of $3 billion.  So there’s a $7 
billion seasonal adjustment there in that week already, so out of the three we assume that 1-1/2 is 
associated with this Social Security affect. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Will you translate that into percentage change, too, Jim?  A third of 
your 8.2 would be-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  Yeah.  Without it we would be down to a 5.8 percent annual rate of 
growth in July.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  5.8 without this special Social Security factor.  What is it with that 
factor? 

MR. KICHLINE.  8.2. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, I think you’ve heard me say time and again at this 
table that 4 equals 8, and now we have 6 equaling 8.  And I still would go with Mr. Morris, I 
think, but it’s not a factor of much consequence, really, practically, because of uncertainty in 
measurements that surrounds our entire operation here.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Conceptually, I don’t see why this affects more than one 
week.  Why isn’t it all washed out the next week? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, but it’s spread out.  The average effect on the month. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I understand that, but you get a higher month because 
one week is higher.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And therefore the rate of change is-- 

MR. KICHLINE.  It’s that the change from [the week of] July 6 to [that of] July 13 is 
different with the higher level in the first week.  We have it all washing out in the first 15 days of 
July.  And that’s indeed what happened, if our interpretation is correct, in both October and 
April--that it’s a first-half phenomenon, and it occurs largely in the first week, and a little bit in 
the second week, and in the third week it’s all gone. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Mr. Mayo. 

MR. MAYO.  Well, I was on the same track as Frank--I think this is an absurdity in the 
[sense that] it causes people to suggest, when they hear the explanation, that we are all nuts 
down here.  It isn’t even clear--even if we say it’s washed out, well, we are saying it really isn’t 
washed out because it makes a difference in the way the rates go.  And if it is not washed out--if 
we are saying that, well, the Social Security recipient actually has on average more money in the 
month of July than he would before, [then] I think there is a real increase over the entire year.  
Maybe it’s tiny here; maybe it’s only 1/10 of 1 percent in the overall, but isn’t that what we are 
saying, that it isn’t strictly a seasonal? 



6/21/77 - 26 - 

  
 

MR. KICHLINE.  You’re quite correct.  I meant that the level of the money stock is not 
higher after mid-July, but on average you are talking about-- 

MR. MAYO.  But on average it is, and so that enters in--to put this absurdly, perhaps--this 
enters in to maybe 1/10 or 2/10 of 1 percent higher money supply growth for the entire year , or 
an annual rate of 2-1/2 for the month of July.  And so we should theoretically set our long-term 
target ranges one-tenth or two-tenths higher for what is an absurd factor.  And I think this does 
make us look rather foolish.  So I would vote very strongly for an adjustment to wash the thing 
up.  

MR. MORRIS.  I don’t think it makes the average figure for the year higher, because the 
rate of change in August would be lower because of this. 

MR. MAYO.  Not necessarily.  If you are a Social Security recipient and you have that 
money two days earlier, you have an average balance of cash for the month of July that’s higher 
than it would otherwise be, right?  It hasn’t anything to do with August, September, or any other 
month.  But it’s an absurd economic practice. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  A billion and a half dollars for two days can’t affect the 
annual average by even 1/10 of 1 percent. 

MR. MAYO.  It affects the monthly average by 2-1/2 percent, Paul.  Now, what I’m 
concerned about is the expectation in the marketplace that, by God, the money supply is 
exploding on us again. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let’s be careful; we are not talking about the explosion, we are 
talking about-- 

MR. MORRIS.  We are talking about very big increases in the first week of July, Mr. 
Chairman--about $3 billion.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We are talking about a difference between 5.8 and 8.2, and that is 
well within the normal margin of error of the seasonal calculation. 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s for the month.  I think Frank’s talking about the first week. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that’s true, for the first week it will be very much bigger. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think Paul’s got the right idea; you just emphasize it in the 
statement.  If you start to adjust your statistics ad hoc, there is a question of credibility:  “Why 
are you doing that?  Because you didn’t want to show a large increase?” 

MR. MORRIS.  We do this for the industrial production index when we have a special 
factor.   

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I know, but I have always been a little nervous about that.  



6/21/77 - 27 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The difference there is that it’s been done for years, and therefore 
it’s a respectable procedure by now.   

MR. WALLICH.  Well, the other special factors from time to time--when we have to do 
the same for each of them, in the end, then we find that the money supply throughout the year 
grows at 5.5 percent.   

MR. GARDNER.  Seems to me [that] protestations about people who have watched our 
money supply figures and immediately translate them into market actions are contradictory in the 
sense of the subject we are now discussing.  If we are really going to tell the world to stop 
worrying about weekly fluctuations, we ought to think a long time about making adjustments in 
those weekly fluctuations.  I wouldn’t mind commenting on them.  If we don’t want people to do 
what they are already doing, and I suppose that’s a vain hope-- 

MR. MORRIS.  All I’m suggesting, Steve, is that we have a good seasonal adjustment 
instead of a lousy one.  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I would suggest that we might discontinue the seasonally adjusted 
weekly figure as of the first week of July and give this as a reason.  There are so many odd 
things affecting that seasonal pattern, that we are going to stop seasonal adjustment.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think we have to be very careful about that.  A campaign is being 
waged against the Federal Reserve now by some economic and statistical quacks.  And for us to 
discontinue the seasonal calculations would, I think, be a concession on our part, which I am not 
ready to make at all--that the quacks who make a living out of quackery have suddenly become 
prophets and valid interpreters of statistical procedures.  I don’t think we ought to do that.  I 
think we ought to follow Mr. Morris’s suggestion, or do what the staff is now doing, or 
something in between.  After all, there is some leeway here.   

If we follow staff procedures, some explanation of the numbers ought to be indicated in the 
news release. I would not suspend the seasonal calculation.  What we ought to take up--and this 
is not the day to do it--is the question of publication of these weekly figures.  I will finally argue, 
I think, that we ought to discontinue.  These are sheer noise.  We would have to take some heat 
from the journalists and congressional people, but there has been enough discussion of that--the 
unreliability over those figures--to justify our doing that.  [But] let me not debate that issue 
today.   

MR. BALLES.  You have my vote, if you are going to vote today. 

MR. MAYO.  I’ll second it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is discontinuance permanently.  I thought you were 
suggesting for the one week. 

MR. PARTEE.  No, for permanently, of the seasonally adjusted weekly figures.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, no, I would-- 



6/21/77 - 28 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  You can’t discontinue the unadjusted figures.  Freedom of information 
requires-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don’t see why you can’t.  After all, we don’t publish daily 
figures, thank God.  We could do it, we’ve got them. 

MR. PARTEE.  You’d get a court case. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Look, whether we win or lose a court test, you do the right thing in 
this shop.  But let’s not debate that issue today.  Mr. Balles, you had a question on the Bluebook.  

MR. BALLES.  I wanted to ask Mr. Kichline a question, not on Bluebook per se, but on 
related matters in financial markets.  Just a comment.  In the first place, I find it rather strange, 
this dichotomy in the trend of business loans since the first of the year--New York versus the rest 
of the country, among the big banks.  Total business loans are up about 600 million in the 
aggregate among the big banks, but New York’s gone down 2-1/2 billion, and the other banks 
have gone up 3.1.  I wonder if that’s got something to do with the recent downward adjustment 
in the prime rate in New York.  I am particularly interested in [whether] the staff has a view on 
the dichotomy in the behavior of business loans--New York versus the other large banks.  And 
whether you had a view, secondly, on whether there might be a further narrowing in the present 
differential between the prime rate and the commercial paper rate.   

MR. KICHLINE.  With regard to New York, the only information that we have that seems 
quite consistent--we’ve checked reasonably thoroughly on this--deals with the performance of 
the commercial paper market.  Many of the prime customers apparently were in the paper 
market.  We tracked down the names of some of those issuers who were large borrowers earlier 
in April and May, particularly, and they seemed to have been candidates for New York City 
banks.  And perhaps the borrowing that would normally have gone to the New York banks 
showed up in the paper market.   

With regard to the prime rate spread, it clearly has narrowed.  I don’t know about further 
narrowing.  I think that the pressure would be there, given the New York banks’ performance on 
business loans, and the Redbook clearly reports qualitative comments that business loan demand 
at New York banks is relatively weak.  And so I think that there would be some continued 
pressure because of the preference of many of the borrowers to seek alternative sources of funds.  
And so I think that the pressures are in that direction for a narrowing of the spread. 

MR. JACKSON.  In that connection, John, I happen to have been at the New York board 
meeting, and I don’t think Paul was; Alan was, some others.  But there was some indication that 
this was not an unusual phenomenon, that typically loan demand growth in New York lagged the 
rest of the country in a business cycle, and that this was not abnormal in any sense of the word-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, it is true that New York normally lags, but this has 
been an exceptionally long and pronounced lag.  And I think the normal, usual explanation for it 
in the Treasury market is that the biggest companies in the country are relatively liquid, and most 
of the loan demands must be coming from smaller ones, which is reflected in the fact that outside 



6/21/77 - 29 - 

  
 

the weekly reporting banks, it’s stronger than in [larger] weekly reporting banks outside of New 
York.   

And this is an exceptionally wide discrepancy by historical standards, although, in [its] 
general direction it’s not unusual.  I think the banks are in a conflict about the pricing of their 
loans.  They don’t want to reduce the prime rate.  They feel it loses profit margin all around.  On 
the other hand, they have this problem--if they could reduce the prime rate without reducing it on 
so many secondary loans, I think they would do it.  They are unhappy with the pricing 
structure--there are too many people with the prime rate; they haven’t been able to correct it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Mr. Willes, please. 

MR. WILLES.  I have just one question, Mr. Chairman, following along essentially the 
same line that Governor Coldwell was on earlier.  I assume, given the robustness of the 
economy, that if your forecast for M1 turns out to be in error, and you are surprised by the 
number that you see, [would you] expect to be surprised with higher, stronger numbers? 

MR. KICHLINE.  I wouldn’t be surprised to see anything, frankly, on a monthly basis, but 
I think one of the factors tending to hold down July growth in our view is still some continuing 
lag impact of the higher interest rates--that we ought to be having some marginal trending down 
of what would otherwise be the underlying rate of growth of money demands holding interest 
rates constant.  So I think our guess at this juncture is quite good.  But if I put all the special 
factors together and what would likely come out, I think that we could very well be in for 
somewhat higher rather than somewhat lower numbers. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, we will hear from Mr. Jackson and then break for coffee. 

MR. JACKSON.  I have already said what I was going to say. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Very good.  We’ll take a break now, a brief break. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we have to resume our deliberations, and we want to 
turn now to the policy directive, and let me just say a word about that--give my own views.  We 
embarked on some tightening; what we sought to achieve, I think we have achieved.  There has 
been a marked slowing down in the monetary aggregates.  Also, while short-term interest rates 
have risen, the long-term interest rates not only have not increased, they have actually declined.    

To a degree, I think, we have been lucky.  To a degree, however, I think our action has 
been very reassuring to the business and financial community.  We have indicated that we do 
have a firm policy for dealing with inflation and that we at least are discharging that 
responsibility.  And we are not going to let the monetary aggregates explode, and we’ll do our 
job.  And I think this has been comforting to the market and is perhaps partly responsible, to say 
the least, for the behavior of long-term interest rates during the past three weeks.   



6/21/77 - 30 - 

  
 

I would recommend to the Committee that we stand still.  And alternative B looks good to 
me.  As far as the federal funds rate is concerned, I think I’d stay where we are, with a range of 
5-1/4 to 5-3/4, and with an asymmetrical midpoint at 5-3/8.  Now, I’ve had a discussion with the 
staff about the Social Security factor.  As I think you all know, the New York Bank holds a 
weekly [press] conference on the meaning of the figures they put out.  And this time, at the New 
York Bank’s press conference, the point will be made quite sharply and very clearly that the 
weekly figure is affected by the Social Security factor, and therefore we will not be misleading 
the market.   

As far as the figures are concerned, under alternative B, if, let us say, we did follow Mr. 
Morris’s suggestion, instead of having 3 to 7 for M1, the figures would be 2 to 6, you see.  And 
it’s a difference almost without much meaning.  While I lean in favor, logically, to Mr. Morris’s 
suggestion, I think that it would be a mistake to dictate to the staff on a matter of this sort, and 
Mr. Kichline has indicated to me that, in addition to the Social Security factor, there are other 
factors, technical factors, at play that have not been properly evaluated.  And, therefore, I would 
stay with the staff adjustment as it stands and not interfere with it but make a full explanation of 
the uncertainty and the special character of the figure at the New York Bank press meeting.   

Well, to repeat, my best suggestion to the Committee is to adopt alternative B as far as the 
monetary aggregates are concerned and to stay with the present federal funds rate range.  I see no 
good reason for changing.  

MR. BLACK.  Would you use the money market directive, Mr. Chairman, or the 
aggregates directive? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, logic is a stern master, and if one respected it, really, one 
would have to use a money market directive--but I have found it desirable at times to throw logic 
to the winds, and I see some advantage in the monetary aggregates directive because, basically, 
that is what we ought to be doing.  Who would like to speak first?  Mr. Volcker, please.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I have the same feeling about the federal funds rate 
range that you do.  I think, basically, we are talking about B.  I am, anyway, and you are.  I think 
I feel a little more cautious about the business outlook than the staff does at this point.  But also 
the aggregates are going up higher, and I think that this is a little above our target.  This is the 
right compromise, and I wouldn’t like to see the federal funds rate declining [to] 5 percent here, 
so I’d like that lower base, the one we have been working on.  And the aggregates are also all 
right with me.  I’d be perhaps a little happier by lowering the lower end of the range of M1, just 
in case it did come in low, because we could stand it coming in low again--make it 2 to 7--but 3 
to 7 is also acceptable to me.  I think the important thing is, if the aggregates come in a little low, 
we can take that and not go below the 5-1/4 on the funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Roos now, please. 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to speak in behalf of the alternative C pattern, for 
a couple of reasons.  It is obvious that our aggregates are at the upper portion, the upper limits, 
even beyond the upper limits, [of the] long-term ranges.  If we are going to get these down, we 
are going to have to, somewhere along the line, make a correction, unless we determine in July 



6/21/77 - 31 - 

  
 

to again raise the base from which we project these ranges.  And if we do that, if the ball game is 
similar to where it is today, I think we will find ourselves at a dangerously high range for the 
aggregates.   

If we are going to have to make a correction, it seems to me that, if we do it at a time when 
businesses are relatively strong, we create less of a reaction in the business community and less 
of a potential reaction psychologically.  If, for example, in the latter half of the year, due to 
capacity constraints, there is a turndown in the economy--if we move at that time to make such 
an adjustment downward in our aggregate targets, I think it will be a much more difficult time to 
bite the bullet than if we do it now.  And even though we see a great deal of confidence today, 
we do see the possibility of a significant turndown in the last half of the year.  We think it would 
be awfully difficult to make this adjustment later on, and I’d just like to, for whatever my 
opinion is worth, express a preference for C. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me make this observation.  It’s not that I want to be 
argumentative.  I’m trying to be factual.  If the economy should turn down, you can rest assured 
that the monetary aggregates will come in at a very subdued rate no matter what our target’s 
going to be.  And therefore, the monetary aggregates will slow down even if we left them 
unchanged, no matter what we do, pretty nearly.  That certainly has been the experience over 
many, many years.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 

MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman, I feel quite strongly that the federal funds rate range should 
remain exactly where it is.  I feel also, though, that I would rather adopt the monetary aggregates 
specs of C, because I am concerned--I don’t want to see us move as much as the fed funds range 
would indicate if, indeed, we only get a 2 percent or 1-1/2 percent increase in M1 and, 
correspondingly, with M2.  So, I would prefer to see the lower ranges adopted by this Committee 
for both M1 and M2 as being quite consistent with the 5 to 5-3/4 range.  I also prefer the money 
market directive, but I don’t feel strongly about it.  But I think it is the preferred course this time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Black now, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I feel that M1 in the second quarter is still going to be 
moving a little faster than we’d like to see it.  In view of the likelihood that the economy will 
continue on upward, the demand for transactions balances is likely to lead to some rise in the 
demand for money.  But fortunately, it looks like M2, which I consider a lot more important, is 
coming in better now, and the prospects for holding that within the target range seem pretty good 
to me, so I come out almost where you did in saying we ought to stay about where we are. 

I was leaning toward the money market directive, which I don’t like to do, either, and if 
you are prepared to throw logic to the winds, I’ll go along with you and go with the aggregates 
[directive], which I really prefer for philosophical reasons.  Like Mr. Mayo, I would prefer the 
ranges on M1 and M2 embodied in C because our projection suggests, quite surprisingly, that we 
may have a little less growth than staff suggests.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Okay, Mr. Black.  Mr. Coldwell, please. 



6/21/77 - 32 - 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’d be perfectly satisfied with the steady policy 
directive this time, but that, to me, implies use of the money market directive rather than the 
monetary aggregates directive.  I would prefer that we use the full specs of alternative B, 5 to 
5-3/4 on the funds rate range.  If things turned out to the point where you had a very large 
shortfall of the aggregates, I wouldn’t want to be limited to only 1/8 of 1 percent change in the 
funds rate.  It seems to me that, looking further on down the road, we’ve got ourselves built into 
a very high velocity estimate, and I’d like to maybe soften my bet a little bit on that, so I’m 
perfectly willing to stay in the 3 to 7 range for alternative B right now.  But I’d like a little 
flexibility in the funds rate and use the money market directive.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Balles, please. 

MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, in spite of some jawboning that we have gotten from 
certain quarters, I feel personally pretty good about what we did in calming down the monetary 
aggregates.  I think that has worked quite well.  We have reassured markets, as you’ve 
mentioned and as Frank Morris alluded to earlier.  In terms of the decline in long-term rates, and 
in terms of the decline in the T-bill futures market, I would stay just about where we are and see 
what happens for another month, when we get a peek at the August estimates.   

I’m basically fairly bullish on the economy.  I recall somewhere here [at] the table last 
month, maybe it was Mr. Guffey--I know now to call this Guffey’s law--saying that the better 
the economy, the more time we spend looking for problems.  Despite the fact that you can 
always find certain areas of risk, I think the economic outlook is quite bullish, and therefore I’d 
be prepared to stay with alternative B on the federal funds rate.  Like several others, including 
Mr. Mayo and Mr. Black, I would prefer the alternative C specifications on the monetary 
aggregates, and I would go for the aggregates directive.  I’d be prepared to rise above principle 
in this case. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Eastburn now. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, I like your suggestion of alternative B.  I think, also, 
that it is consistent with the uncertainty that I was talking about earlier.  And one of the things 
we also hear when we talk of businessmen is that they do look to the Fed for some source of 
stability.  And in that connection, I was interested to read in the Redbook a comment by 
Professor Samuelson--zigzagging around the desirable range as new information cumulates is the 
optimal policy posture in a changing world filled with uncertainty.  I am not about to take on 
Professor Samuelson, but I understand that that position, even in technical terms of optimal 
control theory and rational expectations, is questionable, and certainly [it is] in terms of the 
intuitive feeling that I have about uncertainty.  It seems to me that whatever we can convey to 
the business community that we’re going to move gradually, I think would be for the good.  In 
that context, it seems to me that it would be well for us to go with alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Willes, please. 

MR. WILLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We’ve talked a lot today about uncertainty, 
about businessmen’s feelings, and so on.  It seems to me that one element of consistency 
between what businessmen tell us and what we’ve heard around the table today is an increasing 



6/21/77 - 33 - 

  
 

concern for inflation.  And I guess, in the comments that you made earlier about the salutary 
effect that monetary policy has had on businessmen’s expectations--I find that very compelling, 
and I would take that same argument, that same logic, and apply that in a context today of 
suggesting that we ought to continue to give fairly overt signals that we are sensitive to that 
concern and we are going to continue to press gradually and modestly in that direction, even at 
the risk of some increase in short-term rates.  That has the added advantage--if the Bluebook is 
correct, and I find the argument fairly sound--that an increase in rates now would imply a 
smaller increase in short-term rates 9 to 12 months down the road, and that would have some 
obvious advantages as well.  So I would prefer to see the Committee move in the direction of 
alternative C. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Willes.  Mr. Partee now, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I am in agreement with your proposal, Mr. Chairman.  I think it 
would be a good time to stand still because it isn’t altogether clear to me which way we are 
going to be going from this point.  There are a few signals in the economy that are a bit 
bothersome.  On the other hand, it seems to me the bulk of the evidence is that we’ll have 
continued substantial expansion.  Also, I think if you look at alternative B’s ranges--M1, 3 to 
7--well, assuming June is right, at about 2 percent, that means M1 below 4 in July would get you 
below the lower limit.  Now 4 is not such a disturbingly low figure.  And so I think it’s set about 
right.  And on the other side, to get 7, you would need to have quite a large increase in the month 
of July.  Now it is possible, so I think that these are very good outer bounds of the tolerability we 
ought to have for what might seem to be developing as we go into the early summer.   

I’m inclined to think it ought to be a money market directive because of the very narrow 
band on funds, and also because of this uncertainty we have about the month of July with the 
technical factor that was discussed before, and with the question of how much rebound there will 
be.  And that would leave open the possibility of a special meeting or a special wire if, in fact, 
July developed very unusually in terms of the aggregates.  So I would take exactly the specs you 
suggested, but I would prefer a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Morris now, please. 

MR. MORRIS.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we are very fortunate that the staff 
projections for May and June turned out to be pretty close to reality and that we didn’t need the 
insurance on the funds rate that I feared we might need a month ago.  I like alternative B.  I 
would hope that we could stay, as Dave Eastburn suggested, at 5-3/8 for the month.  But on the 
other hand, I would expect the Manager to use a full range in the event that we get a radically 
different performance in the aggregates than we’re now expecting. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Who would like to speak next?  Yes, Mr. Jackson. 

MR. JACKSON.  I prefer alternative B, but I would prefer a money market directive.  If 
you look at the calendar and the distortion to take place July 1, and we meet on the 19th, and the 
projections are that it’ll take two weeks for this to be worked out, we will really hardly know 
what’s going on for July or most of the period ahead of us.  So I think a money market directive 
would be preferable.  



6/21/77 - 34 - 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Wallich, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, we’ve worked off most of the bulge of April and the two 
following months, but not all of it is for M1.  So to be going again at 8 percent in July is 
something of a concern.  However, this is a special situation, and so I would not take issue with 
the alternative B range of 3 to 7 [for M1].  As far as the funds rate is concerned, I hope we can 
stay at the present level and take our subsequent moves in discrete steps.  So again, I would go 
with 5 and 5-3/4, although ordinarily I would prefer a wider range.  As far as the directive is 
concerned, I have preferred on general principles an aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Who’d like to speak next?  Yes, Mr. 
Guffey. 

MR. GUFFEY.  I’d like to join those--I guess Paul Volcker, Bob Mayo, and others--that 
have suggested that we adopt the aggregate ranges of C but rather the federal funds that you have 
suggested, 5-1/4 to 5-3/4, and staying at the 5-3/8 as long as possible.  That seems to me and our 
staff a little more consistent with staying where we are and avoiding a drop in the federal funds 
rate that might possibly occur.  The other point that I’d like to make, whether it’s a money 
market directive or an aggregates directive, I guess it’s not of great importance to me.  So long as 
we have that lower range of the fed funds of 5-1/4, it will not go below 5-1/4 under any of those, 
and I could accept either a money market or an aggregates [directive]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Now, Mr. Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I get the feeling that we are once again gradually building a 
procyclical record of monetary policy.  Granting the great uncertainty of the numbers--as we 
attempt to peer a few weeks ahead, it seems this moves me into the direction of those who have 
suggested a little firming, or at least posturing for some possible firming.  And I find myself in a 
position of substantial indifference as to whether that be done by raising the bottom or the top of 
the funds range and riding with the aggregates shown in alternative B, or standing with the 
present fund range and adopting the aggregates in C.   

My preference would be to ride with the aggregates in B and raise the ceiling a little for 
the top end of the range on the federal funds rate.  With respect to the form of the directive, it 
seems to me the probability still is [that it is] desirable to ride with the aggregates rather than the 
money market conditions directive.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Winn, please. 

MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, these are mighty small difference we are talking about.  I 
think [if] our posture could be steady as you go, we probably are in the best position.  I think I 
would prefer the B, money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Who would like to speak now?  We have a 
few silent members of the Committee still.  Mr. Gardner, please.   



6/21/77 - 35 - 

  
 

MR. GARDNER.  My experience with this recovery--the only one I’ve had the 
opportunity to live with in the introspective halls of the Federal Reserve System--is that we are 
never quite sure of it.  It is certainly protracted, it certainly has not spawned an enormous 
number of pressures.  It has not been traditional.  I can understand all of those uncertainties 
because of the world’s present environment--the energy problem and the like.   

I think our posture, standing firm or standing where we are now, is entirely appropriate.  
We had a long discussion this morning about pessimism or unease in the business community.  
These are quite different, I would suspect, than any discussion which might have occurred prior 
to the oil embargo and other events that have taken place in our historical perspective.  
Therefore, I’m pretty sure that the recovery is still going to drag out.  I think that’s a logical 
presumption to make.   

And I’ve been told that the federal funds rate is going to be at 7 and 7-1/2 or 8 percent six 
or eight months from now ever since I arrived.  Therefore, I want to stay where we are, and I 
think it would be wise to adopt a caution in the sense of the sensitivity to the economy by 
keeping that 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 federal funds rate.  And I think there has been a lot of wisdom 
expressed for having either an aggregates or a money market directive.  I’m not going to invert 
logic further; I’ll accept whatever direction the Committee agrees on.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’d like to second that, that’s my view.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner. 
Mr. Lilly now, please.  

MR. LILLY.  Well, we are talking about such a small difference between B and C that I 
find it difficult to have an opinion.  But I must make a bow toward the longer range, and this is 
what we have to do over the coming years.  It would seem to me that any slight tightening 
possible should be undertaken, so I would be in favor of C on that basis and the funds rate--the 
range that you suggested--5-1/4 to 5-3/4, with a 5-3/8 midpoint. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Anyone else would like to speak? 

MR. FOSSUM.  Mr. Chairman, we would support the alternative B.  One possibility that 
occurs to us is that [for] the M1, which has been excessive in the second quarter, the alternative 
C ranges might be more appropriate.  M2 has been performing much better, and perhaps the 6 to 
10 range is more appropriate there. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Fossum.  Mr. Winn, are you in a mood to speak?   
Oh, yes, of course you did.  Are you in the mood to speak again? 

MR. WINN.  No. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think we have heard now from every member of the Committee.  
As far as the language of the directive goes--I haven’t kept a record--I am a little uncertain what 
the rest of the Committee’s thinking is.  I have the impression that as many are in favor of the 
monetary aggregates directive as the money market directive.  Let’s have a show of hands on the 
part of the Committee, those who favor a monetary aggregates directive. 



6/21/77 - 36 - 

  
 

MR. ALTMANN.  Four, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now we’ll just check that--those who favor a money market 
directive. 

SPEAKER(?).  I was going to vote for the majority. 

MR. ALTMANN.  Six, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, I will vote with the money market directive.  Let me just 
take a--well, my Secretary has given me somewhat incomplete information, I am sorry to say, 
and I don’t trust my memory.  There is, as I read the record, a majority in favor of 3 to 7 for M1; 
there is a majority in favor of a federal funds rate of 5-1/4 to 5-3/4.  

I’m uncertain about the attitude of the Committee toward the range for M2.  Let’s have a 
show of hands on the range indicated in alternative B, 6 to 10.  Those who find it more or less 
acceptable will kindly raise their hands.   

MR. ALTMANN.  Ten, Mr. Chairman 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, gentlemen, any further indication of the Committee’s 
thinking?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think there is some logic, as Mr. Fossum suggested, in 
just reducing the M1 a little bit.  It is M1 that’s above our ranges, not M2--one way to 
compromise it for me.  

MR. PARTEE.  Yes, I thought it was a reasonable suggestion. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I see no difficulty in having the range 2-1/2 to 6-1/2.  Let’s have a 
show of hands on preference.  We’re going to be comparing 3 to 7 for M1 over against 2-1/2 to 
6-1/2.  Those who prefer 3 to 7 will raise their hands. 

MR. ALTMANN.  Two, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, those who prefer 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 will raise their hands.  
Very well, that’s helpful.  Any other comment?  Well, I hear none; therefore, I think we ought to 
vote now on a money market directive and an M1 range of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, an M2 range 
of 6 to 10--I don’t want to push logic--and a federal funds rate range of 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 with an 
asymmetrical midpoint that is 5-3/8.  Are we ready for the vote? 

MR. COLDWELL.  I think I’d be constrained on that last one, Mr. Chairman.  I think we 
need more room on the bottom side.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I respect that.  There is a very clear majority favoring the 
lower limit of 5-1/4.  I don’t think the difference is really very large.  If and when we get to 
5-1/4, depending on how events in the economy, and the money market, and the financial 
markets more broadly are developing, we can take another look at it, if we are not rigidly bound 



6/21/77 - 37 - 

  
 

by the decision reached.  We can communicate with one another between meetings.  I think we 
ought to have the vote now. 

MR. ALTMANN.   
Chairman Burns Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 
Governor Coldwell No 
Governor Gardner Yes 
President Guffey Yes 
Governor Jackson Yes 
Governor Lilly Yes 
President Mayo Yes 
President Morris Yes 
Governor Partee Yes 
President Roos Yes 
Governor Wallich Yes 

Eleven to one, Mr. Chairman 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Now, we concluded what I wanted to 
conclude a little sooner than I thought, I am glad to say, but if the Committee consents to my 
doing so, I’d like to leave now and turn the meeting over to Mr. Volcker.   

The subjects to consider are, first, the foreign currency activities that we have been 
engaged in, and second, the special problem with regard to repurchase agreements on accounts 
of foreign institutions.  And, of course, we have to confirm the date for the next meeting.  And 
any other subjects the Committee considers appropriate, Mr. Volcker will deal with.   

We’ll reconvene, Mr. O’Connell, at 2:15, and we are not subject to any Sunshine 
limitations, considering what we intend to talk about.  And you know the subject. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I do, and in my judgment you are not [subject to Sunshine Act 
limitations at that session], Mr. Chairman.  And with your permission, if, in the course of that 
discussion, it appears to be otherwise, I will hasten to remind you.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you’ll be there as our moral as well as our legal conscience.  

MR. PARTEE.  Will we reconvene as the FOMC? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No.  We are reconvening as a-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that we need a report on foreign currency 
operations from Mr. Holmes. 

MR. HOLMES.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Mr. Morris, please. 



6/21/77 - 38 - 

  
 

MR. MORRIS.  Alan, what’s been the reaction to the comments in the BIS [Bank for 
International Settlements] report about the place of the American dollar? 

MR. HOLMES.  Hasn’t been much visible market reaction to that.  I know it has caused a 
great many people inside government to think about how long we can sustain this without some 
pressure developing on the dollar.  But I think more important is how well we do on the inflation 
front compared with Germany, Switzerland, and some of the others.  Right now we’re sort of 
average and not doing as well as they.  But with our interest rates a bit higher, the dollar has 
been extremely steady in the exchanges.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I have a feeling we have been pretty fortunate that the 
dollar has been as steady as it has been in view of the trade balance and our inflation 
performance.  And the key, I suspect, in the last month or so was this rise in interest rates that 
came along at a fortuitous time from that standpoint.  

MR. HOLMES.  We had no appreciation of the dollar, but it did offset these other 
movements attempting to weaken it. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, one wonders whether the dollar shouldn’t appreciate. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, we’ve had some discussions on that recently with 
foreigners, and what they point out is that there’s no indication that our trade with other 
industrialized countries is really suffering.  It’s oil, and LDCs [less-developed countries] for 
various reasons, and Japan--Japan [as an industrialized country] is the one exception to that. 

MR. PARTEE.  Yes, if you take out the OPEC countries, I think you still find the 
deterioration. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s right.  But it’s in the LDCs and in Japan.  It’s not 
vis à vis Europe--well it is Canada, too; [trade with] Canada has been [deteriorating]. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, if you break up the world into enough separate spots, you’re going 
to find some place you’re in balance with.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, this is the European argument you hear back, 
though.  There is no need for any depreciation of the dollar vis à vis Europe.  Which is basically 
what you are talking about here.   

MR. PARTEE.  Did you say, Alan, that money market conditions were easing in 
Germany? 

MR. HOLMES.  They had been except around the tax date. 

MR. PARTEE.  Do you think it was a special thing?   

MR. HOLMES.  No, I think they deliberately tended to keep interest rates on the low side.  



6/21/77 - 39 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The Italians are a bit worried about their economy 
turning down; mass production figures showed a decline.  Any other comment? 

MR. WALLICH.  When you observe that some pressures are being brought on the 
Japanese with respect to the upcreep in their reserves as a result of nonmarket acquisitions, [do] 
you see a tendency there to also try to accumulate, to some extent, high reserves at commercial 
banks?  

MR. HOLMES.  No, I think the Japanese have really abstained.  And I suspect, of all the 
central banks, we have a larger share of their total dollar holdings than any other.  In fact, they 
have used us to keep all those visitors from pounding on their doors.  They say, “No, the Fed 
wants us to stay with them,” which we have not said.  But it’s a good way to keep that steady 
stream of commercial and investment bankers away.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That doesn’t say whether they are hiding it? 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I meant by commercial banks, banks of the Japanese--  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Japanese commercial bank holdings.    

MR. HOLMES.  I have no evidence of this.   

MR. WALLICH.  The opposite of what the Italians are doing.   

MR. HOLMES.  I have no evidence. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Any other comment?  I take it that we have to approve, 
ratify, and confirm. 

MR. PARTEE.  One transaction. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Without objection, that is done.  The only other thing we 
have is this foreign RP [repurchase agreement] business.  I don’t know whether I can assume you 
have all read these memoranda--there is one from me and one from the Board’s staff analyzing 
some of the pros and cons.   

If I can, let me just put the issue as simply as I can.  If we continue providing this facility 
for foreign central banks, it appears, under our current understanding of IRS [Internal Revenue 
Service] regulations, we need to inject some arm of Federal Reserve System as principal.  Which 
means it would be an obligation or instrumentality of the U.S. government and therefore free us 
from withholding tax.  And the legal situation is such that, even if we just inject the New York 
[Federal Reserve] Bank as principal of the [Federal] Open Market Committee, it then becomes 
an open market operation, which the [Federal] Open Market Committee must approve.  So that’s 
why we have an issue for the Committee.   

I think there are a couple of underlying questions that have been raised:  whether in 
principle it’s a good idea for the Federal Reserve to have such a facility for foreign central banks 
or governments; and second, whether it helps, harms, or is neutral in terms of affecting the 



6/21/77 - 40 - 

  
 

conduct of our own domestic open market operations.  Mr. Holmes might offer a comment on 
that at the beginning.   

Just to review the general background, we fell into, if that’s the right word, this practice 
fairly heavily after the oil crisis, [when] a lot of short-term money was moving around.  There 
had been some isolated examples of doing RPs before.  But after the oil crisis, there was a lot of 
foreign central bank money that wanted a very short term investment vehicle.  When they came 
to us, it seemed logical to do RPs in a pattern of what had been done for the System account.  
And this has become a regular thing, averaging about a billion and a half dollars a day, these 
days.   

We were operating under the presumption that foreign central banks are subject to 
exemption from withholding tax so long as they are in government securities.  What has changed 
is [that] the IRS recently had a rather definitive-sounding ruling in a very different context.  It 
concerned a REIT [real estate investment trust] that wanted to count RPs that had been made [in] 
government securities [under] certain other IRS regulations.  And the IRS, for the first time [with 
regard to] government securities--they said it before in municipal securities to avoid the tax-
exempt pass-through--they said an RP was a loan for tax purposes and not a security.   

So the technical problem was, once they became a loan instead of the security--and the 
loan in this case presumably from the government securities dealer, and we were acting as an 
agent in between--there is a clear, definite threat that withholding is necessary, to the point 
where I thought we could no longer proceed in this knowledge, so we stopped it.  And since then 
all transactions have been done with the System account, which was the pattern of 70 percent of 
the transactions earlier.  The general practice has been, if the System account is operating 
anyway, they are done with the System account.  The System account, as Mr. Meek reviewed, 
has had a lot of ups and downs recently, so we have been able to do them all with the System 
account.   

But the question now is, how the Committee wants to regularize this, if at all.  I should say, 
if they are cut off, there is, I think, a justified feeling, although the magnitude of it can’t be 
identified, that the RP facility has become enough of a part of our investment services and other 
services to central banks generally that what would be affected is not just the RP facility but 
some of the other investment transactions in some unknown dimension.   

Technically there is another route that could be [taken].  Foreign governments are also 
exempt from withholding tax, and whatever they hold there, with some exceptions.  But in 
general they are exempt.  Foreign central banks, if they are wholly owned by governments, 
which is a big if, would presumably be exempt under that provision, but they can only get 
exempt by making individual application for a ruling to the IRS.  And it appears very doubtful 
that they would want to do that because it raises other complications.  There is one central 
bank--I guess I am a little doubtful whether it was a central bank, because of its name, the Saudi 
Arabia Monetary Authority--that has made such an application and is deemed exempt, but that is 
the only central bank that is in that category.  As a practical matter, I think if you relied upon that 
exemption, the foreign central banks would not apply, by and large, and it would certainly 
introduce a discontinuity.   



6/21/77 - 41 - 

  
 

There have been conversations between us and the Treasury and between the Treasury and 
the IRS, and where this stands at the moment is, the Treasury has gone to the IRS on our behalf, 
so to speak, and discussed the problem and asked essentially whether the IRS agreed with the 
theory that as a government instrumentality, if we’re injected as principal, there would be no 
withholding tax.  They got a favorable sound in response to that, but they also got the response 
that we should ask for a ruling precisely to confirm that.  The Treasury suggests that we apply 
for the ruling, and technically we would apply for it as [the] New York [Federal Reserve] Bank 
with the full support of the Treasury.  The Treasury would attach a memorandum, and so forth, 
saying they think it’s appropriate and proper.   

And in view of this apparent necessity to ask for a ruling, I personally think it is 
appropriate today for the Committee to decide basically what it wants to do, but not to take any 
formal action.  Authorize us in effect to apply [for] the ruling.  Assuming the ruling is favorable, 
then adopt a formal action that regularizes the whole procedure.  Otherwise, it is at least 
theoretically possible that we would formally approve an approach here and then find that the 
IRS didn’t act, and we might look a little silly--after we have to reverse the action.  So you can 
do what you want to do--I guess the basic question is whether you want to do anything.  I don’t 
think there’s any necessity for taking action today.  But before we [go] to the IRS for a ruling, I 
want to know whether you are prepared to take the action following presumably the favorable 
ruling.   

We’ve proposed three alternatives here.  I think the Board’s staff is in general agreement 
here that these are the appropriate alternatives.  If I understand it correctly--although you are the 
man, Tom; you can [speak] to it--they prefer what we cited as the third alternative, which is 
permitting the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to act as principal on these transactions.  And 
we would then act as principal when we were conducting it in the market.  If it was convenient 
for the [Federal] Open Market Committee, for the [System] Open Market Account, as in the past, 
if [the System account] wanted to take the transactions, [it] could be principal.   

A variant of that is to put the New York Bank as principal whether or not the System 
account is also principal.  That is the course of action that I favor myself because it seems to me 
closest to past practice and does not involve any question of whether the System account is being 
involved in anything that’s special for foreign accounts.  But I think the other alternatives are 
technically feasible.  The first alternative would not require any explicit action at all, just an 
understanding that the present directive covered it.  In effect that’s the way we are operating at 
the moment.  But in regularizing it, as I say, I have some preference for what’s presented as the 
third alternative.  I don’t know whether you want to say anything about the effect on the System 
account, Alan and Tom, and the different alternatives, or any other aspect of it.  

MR. PARTEE.  Would you start off by saying what we are doing at the moment, Alan? 

MR. HOLMES.  What we are doing at the moment.  At the moment, if the foreign account 
wants to make a repurchase agreement, we do a matched-sale agreement with them.  With the 
System account. 

MR. PARTEE.  Whether or not the account needs to have that reserve [drain]? 



6/21/77 - 42 - 

  
 

MR. HOLMES.  If we need to absorb reserves, that helps us to absorb.  And then go into 
the market and do it for the System, matched in the market.  So that in that case it helps.  If we 
are not supplying reserves at all, our practice up until now had been to do it in the market.  Now 
[if] we did [it] with the System account [when we do not need to absorb reserves], [we] offset 
that by a corresponding reversing--in other words, we [treat] it like a market factor that [is] 
absorbing reserves, and we offset it.   

Now, when we were supplying reserves, we would also go to the market.  We would do 
the matched-sale purchase with a foreign account but do correspondingly more in the market on 
the reserve supplying side.  Again, treating it like a market factor, which we have been doing.  If 
it helps us, fine; if it doesn’t, we offset it.   

MR. WALLICH.  Well now, what will happen when you get to [a] lower [volume of] 
operations if the legislation concerning Treasury interest on balances passes?  Wouldn’t you then 
find yourself sometimes in the position, and perhaps quite often, that you are acting in the 
markets simply in order to offset something that you’ve done with the foreign accounts?  You 
then tell the market, don’t you, that this is a foreign account, you don’t-- 

MR. HOLMES.  We would say it’s in connection with a customer transaction. 

MR. WALLICH.  So there’s no danger of misleading the market that you’re actually trying 
to achieve an objective that isn’t the case. 

MR. HOLMES.  No. 

MR. WALLICH.  But it could still appear after a while that a very substantial part of total 
transactions reflected these customer transactions in the foreign accounts.  

MR. HOLMES.  Yes, but this is very common in the bill market when we buy outright.  
As you know, we buy and sell for foreign accounts, over three or four times as much as we do 
for the System account outright.  And we identify those as customer transactions when we do 
them in the market.  And that’s caused us no trouble. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Under the alternative proposal, anyway, these 
transactions would be for the New York Bank as very brief principal to a foreign account, and 
not to the System account.  They’re all done as a trading [unintelligible]. 

MR. PARTEE.  But that would have a reserve impact, Paul.  It’s no different than dealing 
for the System Open Market Account. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, it depends upon where you begin this process.  A 
foreigner brings money in--of course, he wouldn’t bring money in if we didn’t have the 
facility--but if that was not offset, it would be a drain.  When the Bank acts for its own account, 
there is no reserve impact.  That’s one way of looking at it.  It’s just monies passed through to 
the market.  There’s only a reserve impact when the System account gets in on the other side.  
Depends upon how you look at it.  



6/21/77 - 43 - 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  [Unintelligible] right away, like you would if you bought bills for it. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s right.  It’s just like using bills for the foreign 
account.  Except the only difference is a technical one.  We buy bills as agent.  Here we would 
just inject our name as principal on both sides of the transaction.  That’s the only change that 
would take place.  Where we’re not acting as agent, we would act as principal, technically.   

MR. GARDNER.  Paul, you are suggesting, really, that we continue under the first 
approach and consider, after the IRS ruling, whether to adopt the second or the third approach. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Right. 

MR. GARDNER.  Now, you’ve already had a meeting of the FOMC to discuss this by 
telephone. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It was not a meeting.  It was an informal discussion. 

MR. GARDNER.  Informal discussion, all right.  I have a strong preference for the second 
approach, but I will deal with that as you find it in order to be dealt with.  Because we are not 
going to make, according to your specifications, a final decision. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that’s right, and I don’t think we need to know 
specifically which approach will be adopted in the end.  I think we need to know that one of the 
three will be adopted.  That decision, I think, should be made today. 

MR. MAYO.  So the decision is basically whether the facility is worthwhile or not? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Although, I guess in applying for the ruling, [we] will 
have to apply either in our [Federal Reserve Bank of New York] name or the System name, 
won’t we.  

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes, I think that, too, can be a matter to await a decision.  I agree 
with President Mayo that, at this time--or, may I suggest, Mr. Chairman, the [discussion], first, 
as to whether or not you will continue this operation, is appropriate; and then, whatever sense of 
the Committee [is] in terms of the alternative, to follow that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that is right.  The basic issue is whether we have 
this facility at all, at least on the present scale.  And you may still do it in a very limping way.  
You can certainly do it with the Saudis. 

MR. MAYO.  Do you want a motion to that effect or would you just rather have a-- 

MR. COLDWELL.  Before we start that, may I ask a couple of questions about the issues.  
First, Alan, to what extent are we dealing with others rather than central banks?  

MR. HOLMES.  It’s been entirely, well, if you include some of the monetary authorities as 
a central [bank], it’s strictly central banks. 



6/21/77 - 44 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Some central banks acting as agency for their 
government.  

MR. HOLMES.  But that’s because they do it anyway. 

MR. COLDWELL.  We are dealing only with central banks. 

MR. HOLMES.  Asian Development Bank is also a customer. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Asian Development Bank is a customer. 

MR. HOLMES.  Yes, some of the international-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Ficio, in Italy, has been one; that’s probably one we 
have to stop anyway.  It is not clear what its status is. 

SPEAKER(?).  That’s finished. 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s finished? 

MR. HOLMES.  But it’s only with people that are authorized to have an account with us.  
It’s mainly central banks; it would be one or two international institutions that from time to time 
might have just raised a bond issue, have plans to invest that money or use it within a week, and 
they might ask us to do an RP. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  In all respects, it’s the same people for which we have 
always had investment accounts, which is-- 

MR. PARTEE.  How do you distinguish doing it for the foreigner and not for a U.S. 
government agency?  Let’s say the Home Loan Bank Board would like you to start investing its 
money. 

MR. HOLMES.  I think they would much rather do it themselves.  As far as RPs are 
concerned, I know that for a fact.  That’s a big operation they have, and I wouldn’t want that 
operation; that’s a big operation.  I’d much rather see them be part of the market.   

MR. PARTEE.  Though, of course, you are talking about a billion and a half, if I 
understand, and that’s a very large operation. 

MR. HOLMES.  Yeah, but the Home Loan Banks are doing more than that themselves 
each day. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Has this question ever risen, of a U.S. governmental 
agency wanting us to--any kind of government agency. 

MR. HOLMES.  No. 

MR. PARTEE.  We haven’t sent them a circular offering-- 



6/21/77 - 45 - 

  
 

SPEAKER(?).  But I think we did make some for the postal-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, we do. 

SPEAKER(?).  At one point, I think before they took it over themselves.  I think the 
Treasury-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, regularly these transactions, they just go through 
the Treasury.  I am certain the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] was always 
investing through the New York Bank, but they did it through the Treasury.   

MR. WALLICH.  Well, government operations are one thing you do with a government 
institution, but here we are taking business away, it seems to me, from the market.  Now is this 
analogous to operating in bills on behalf of customers?  If commercial banks did this for a 
foreign central bank, would that commercial bank be making a profit or getting maybe some 
kind of a collateral advantage out of the operation?  

MR. HOLMES.  Oh, yes, I believe it would. 

MR. WALLICH.  So we are already, by virtue of having all of these securities, taking 
something away from the market. 

MR. HOLMES.  We have always had the attitude, Governor Wallich, that if central banks 
would prefer to deal directly in the market, go ahead and do it.  We have interposed no objection 
to that.  But we feel that ever since we started operations--we have done operations before in 
central banks--they like it, it’s part of our close working relationships with the foreign central 
banks.  And I think they are considerably useful to us, first, in watching these flows into and out 
of the dollar, and also in getting subsidiary information from the central banks because we have 
close daily contact with them on these operations.  

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I can see there are advantages, but I can also see that the general 
principle that one should let the private sector do what it can is in danger of being violated here.  
There may be many things that we could do better, or at least we could take away from the 
private sector, if we were so minded.  And I think, unless we can demonstrate that this is very 
important to us or that we do it substantially more to the liking of the foreign central bank, there 
is a presumption of letting the private sector do it. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Especially because we make no charge for doing it. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, the charge is a separable issue.  I think we ought to 
charge, myself.  And we are preparing some plans to that effect, and the charge would be-- 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, on that point, it is observed in the report that the 
operation in the aggregate is a bit on the profitable side.  What is the source of the earnings at 
present?   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, the whole foreign department in New York is a 
very profitable operation.  If you take all the balances which foreign central banks hold with us 



6/21/77 - 46 - 

  
 

and assume some earnings made on those balances, yes, just demand deposits.  It is now, 
however, very unevenly skewed.  Some accounts have a sizable balance that we don’t do much 
for, some we do quite a lot for and have very minimal kind of balances.  There is no explicit 
charge, although the total operation is quite a profitable one by commercial standards. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  What is the nature of the earnings on the foreign balances? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, it’s just that we assume the earnings rate on the 
portfolio-- 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  An assumed income?   

MR. HOLMES.  No, it’s an actual income because the fact that the central banks brought 
money in and left it has absorbed reserves.  In offsetting that, we’ve bought securities.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  For every dollar they have in an account balance, it’s a 
drain on reserves which we have offset through enlarging the System Open Market Account. 

MR. LILLY.  Are any of those balances in the funds markets? 

MR. HOLMES.  I think this would be one alternative, if we gave up the facility. 

MR. PARTEE.  The RP market’s not much different. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, the question-- 

MR. HOLMES.  The RP market is not quite as high a rate. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The RP market itself, I think, is going to be difficult--the 
federal funds market--for many of them to operate in.  But they will make other arrangements, 
and the question arises, what happens to the money?  My own sense of it is that probably most of 
it will go into the Eurodollar market.  That’s the big competitor.  They will have tax problems, 
among other things, if they put it in the federal funds market here.  But many American banks 
would try to take it and put it offshore, which is where the bulk of this money is now.  There’s a 
hell of a lot more there than there is in our billion and a half.   

Now some of them will reevaluate their position, and you can theoretically, or in practice, I 
suppose, have some of it moving in the foreign currency markets.  I don’t think that would be the 
largest part of it by a long shot.  I think that would be a small part.  But they’ve got to put the 
money someplace else, and those are their choices:  elsewhere in the U.S. market; the 
Eurocurrency markets one way or another, which I think is where most of it would go; [and] to 
some limited extent, perhaps, in foreign currencies. 

MR. WALLICH.  So there would be some slight pressure on the dollar from possible 
movements into other currencies. 

MR. HOLMES.  I think it would be slight, but there would be some. 



6/21/77 - 47 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  And you’re putting a little more in the Eurodollar 
market.  I think that’s quantitatively more important.  You are promoting the growth of the 
Eurodollar market as opposed to domestic markets.   

MR. MAYO.  Isn’t this function quite well justified, Paul, as part of, in effect, the 
execution of monetary policy, in that we know instantly what’s going on?  If it were through 
commercial bank channels, we would know, but it wouldn’t be that perfect information. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It’s been my strong impression that our record has not 
been good in getting information elsewhere.  We have always taken the position--and quite often 
they will ask, “Do you have any objection if we operate in the private market?”  And our answer 
is basically, “No, but we would like to keep informed about what you’re doing.”  Any reports 
about what they are doing are extremely scarce. 

MR. HOLMES.  I think that’s quite right; we are not well informed about what they’re 
doing in the market.  We can make a big issue of this, and maybe we should make an issue--I 
have in one or two cases, but-- 

MR. PARTEE.  And yet, you see, I’m concerned about the domestic operations effect.  
First of all, within the last five weeks, I testified on behalf of the Board’s support on this 
Treasury investment process, emphasizing the fact that it was very difficult for us to have to deal 
with all these Treasury balances moving in and out and the offsetting open market operations.  
Superficially, I fail to see the distinction between that and the difficulty that the foreigners could 
cause for us by our having to engage, in effect, [in] open market operations.   

Secondly, I recall, Alan, that you were having trouble with Venezuela some years back.  
That it was hard to lay out that money that they wanted to invest.  That was before the Treasury 
had decided to bring all its money into the Fed, and so you didn’t have that scale of operations.  
Now if the Treasury moves back to its previous situation--and apparently this Venezuelan thing 
has spread, so that it’s now quite general that people are doing the RPs--first of all, what’s the 
defense?  Isn’t that just the opposite of what you said you wanted to avoid in the case of the 
Treasury?  Secondly, couldn’t it cause us some days when [we would have] considerable 
difficulty laying all that out. 

MR. HOLMES.  To your first question, at least these operations are all in one direction.  
They don’t go up by 9 billion and down 9 billion; they’re fairly steady in size, and they are 
predictable. 

MR. PARTEE.  And they’re just repetitive. 

MR. HOLMES.  And they’re repetitive, right.  Secondly, we retain the right--if it interferes 
with open market operations, I’ll be the first one to come to this Committee and say that we’re 
going to stop all of this.  Because we can’t allow that to interfere with open market operations 
any more than we could let these big swings in the Treasury balance [interfere].  I think since it’s 
predictable and not too large, we can approach some people and say, “Look, you’re putting too 
much in the RP market, get some of it out.”  We can do that, and we have done that--on one of 



6/21/77 - 48 - 

  
 

those occasions where we did have a one-day difficulty doing what we wanted to do for the 
System because this was interfering. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  They’ll still go ahead and do it in some form or another, 
whether or not we’re the intermediaries.  

MR. HOLMES.  At least that will get the money out of our accounts. 

MR. PARTEE.  Yeah, get the money out of the account, that’s all. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Alan, operationally, do you have any advantages other than the 
knowledge of flows? 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, I can recall--remember, go back to the time when we had those 
huge currency inflows from Germany and the rest of the continent in 1971.  Instead of going into 
the market--well, you know what would have happened, the bill rate would have gone to zero.  
But the fact that it was coming to us and we could see the dimensions of it, we could go to the 
Treasury and work out a system by which it could be accommodated without any impact on our 
reserves, or much impact--certainly there was some on interest rates.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  In general terms, the background of this whole operation 
in dealing as agent for foreign central banks, whether it’s RPs or anything else, I think this grows 
out of a tradition--and stronger than the tradition in most central banks--the policy that they want 
this money funneled through central banks, and this is a service that’s expected to be provided, 
and I think virtually all central banks would provide this service.  The difference is that most of 
them would say, “You’ve got to go through us--we think it’s discourteous to put it in the 
market.”  We don’t say that. 

MR. WALLICH.  This kind of operation doesn’t happen in very many countries-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It’s [in] relatively few countries--sterling, the French 
franc to some extent.  It occasionally happens in other countries, but for isolated situations.  Of 
course, we don’t have much occasion because we don’t keep foreign balances.  But when we do, 
we do use the facilities through the foreign central banks. 

MR. WALLICH.  What sorts of comments do you get from the market?  Is there a sense 
that they’re being done out of a little business?  

MR. HOLMES.  Well, as you probably know, we have tremendous competition.  There are 
teams from all of the investment banks and all of the large commercial banks that spend all of 
their time in seminars and going around trying to sell central banks their services.  And in recent 
years there has been a drift away from us.  I think we have a smaller proportion now of the total 
dollar holding.  In fact, I know we have smaller proportions than we did, let’s say, three or four 
years [ago].  There is a big selling campaign going on.   

MR. WALLICH.  Is it important to the private sector? 



6/21/77 - 49 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, there is some sense of competition, I think that is 
fair to say.  It’s not hugely important.  Obviously these are not very profitable operations, and 
turning over short-term money of this sort, you make a little commission on it.  It’s not-- 

MR. MAYO.  If I were a central bank, Paul, and I went into the New York market, I 
wouldn’t be content, would I, to just deal with one bank.  I would split it up. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think most of them do. 

MR. MAYO.  And then these things get magnified out of all proportion in terms of what 
you might call market turmoil.  Now, theoretically, we are not concerned with market turmoil; it 
always settles through.  But as a practical matter, aren’t we?  Isn’t this what would happen? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I think it would depend upon the individual banks.  
Some of them would pick out an agent; some of the ones that aren’t too big, I suspect, do it--tend 
to concentrate in one agent.  Some others would scatter it around.  I think most of them, even the 
ones that don’t use us much, like to feel that they could use us in particular circumstances when 
they didn’t want to operate through the private market for some reason, or [as a] kind of 
backstop to their arrangements in the private market.  I think part of it is basically that some of 
them are uneasy about keeping so much in the Eurodollar market.  And for this very short-term 
money, there isn’t all that much alternative to an RP in the American market.  And anybody is 
going to run into this tax problem on RPs.   

MR. HOLMES.  One thing that has concerned me a bit, it hasn’t developed, but it is 
something that I think we ought to keep our eye out for.  And that is, some of these people who 
are selling these services sell them on the basis that they can arbitrage that account very heavily.  
And that could be bad for our market if it got too large.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We have told the market in writing a couple of times that 
we have no objection to them competing for this business, no objection to a central bank using 
them.  We didn’t like the idea of very heavy arbitrage operations, so they are in and out every 
day for billions of dollars in order to try to get next to three basis points. 

MR. MAYO.  And I think this is an appropriate central bank function and we ought to 
enthusiastically support it. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Could I ask you a question on that?  You mentioned consideration of 
charging.  I think we have a potentially explosive issue.  It involves a whole group of services to 
central banks.  It involves some benefits to both parties.  Is it possible to cost out-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes, I think we can.  We do have a charge for handling 
gold, for example, which we’ve just revised to reflect current costs.  We do charge for a few 
things, a very few things.   

MR. EASTBURN.  I am assuming that in addition to the courtesy that’s involved in this 
kind of service, that there must be some advantage to the foreign central bank in dealing with the 



6/21/77 - 50 - 

  
 

Fed rather than with the market.  And the market may stay quiet about this forever, but then may 
not. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I personally think it’s very legitimate to make a charge.  
I don’t know just what that charge should be, but I-- 

MR. WALLICH.  Balance or actual cash? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I was thinking earlier in terms of balance.  Before 
this issue ever arose,  I thought the most straightforward way to do it may be a minimum 
balance.  That may still be true, but now, it’s come up in terms of this particular issue, I think 
you could inject a little commission for RPs. 

MR. WALLICH.  I’d feel better about it if there were some specified charge so that we 
couldn’t be accused of competing on the basis of no charge, no profit.   

MR. COLDWELL.  Alan, to what extent have you been able to move some of the people 
out of RPs into regular transactions in bills? 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, we really haven’t made much of an effort except when it was 
building up to be a problem.  But that was quite successful. 

MR. COLDWELL.  It was successful. 

MR. HOLMES.  Some of the money disappeared, and I don’t know where it went, and 
some of it went into short Treasury bills--through us.  I suspect the other went into Europe. 

MR. WILLES.  Change of focus for just a moment.  As I understand, we’ve changed our 
practice so that we are accommodating these RPs currently.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, changed in the sense that we have stopped doing 
any of them in the market.  

MR. WILLES.  We are offset through the open market. 

SPEAKER(?).  If we were to continue to do that, is there a compelling need to go to the 
IRS for the ruling itself, or can we just let it ride and continue to accommodate these types of 
transactions? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, we could, but the issue having been raised, and 
raised in very plain form by this IRS ruling--and in the light of the consultations with the 
Treasury, and then in turn the Treasury with the IRS, and the IRS saying it looks okay but we 
really want you to have a ruling--I think we ought to have a ruling.  And that, you know, [it] 
would have been nicer not to, but given where we are, given the question that has arisen, I really 
think we have to clarify it.   

MR. HOLMES.  The Treasury has promised very strong support on this. 



6/21/77 - 51 - 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Would the ruling block out the idea of the central bank applying for 
exemption? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No.  Well, I don’t think any of them would without the 
ruling.  With the ruling they wouldn’t have any incentive.  But if they had another reason to 
apply, for other types of transactions, for instance--if they wanted to do an RP in the market, 
where you don’t have this governmental instrumentality interjected, they’d have to get a ruling.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, if they did, then we could still work through the market. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  If they got a ruling, we wouldn’t need the ruling for that 
particular central bank.  

MR. HOLMES.  One hundred and four central banks going to the IRS for a ruling. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  There are some central banks we know will fail in 
getting the ruling because they have some element of private ownership in them.   

MR. COLDWELL.  [Unintelligible] does, doesn’t it? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No.  Venezuela did--Venezuela is our big problem, 
historically.  Venezuela passed a law to eliminate their private holding, but during most of this 
period they had some private holding.  So they do not have available to them the defense that 
they are a government institution.  We don’t know about all the [central] banks--it’s hard to tell 
whether some of them are privately owned or not.  There are maybe a dozen that we suspect 
have some private ownership in them.  

MR. COLDWELL.  The major [central] banks would be government owned, I am sure. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, some major banks do have private ownership.  The 
Bank of Belgium just comes to mind.  But they are exempt by treaty.  And there are several 
things that cut across here.  The Swiss have private ownership and are exempt by treaty; fully 
exempt, too.  

MR. GARDNER.  The Federal Reserve could not get a ruling. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The Federal Reserve could not get a ruling, that is right.  
We are a governmental instrumentality under the IRS, but we are not a government. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I was thinking in terms of the volume you do.  Your volume would be 
largely with government-owned central banks. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Except Venezuela is big, and I’m not sure--we think 
they are government owned now, [or] they will shortly become, but they may still be in some 
transition state.  The deadline of the law saying that they are [completely] government owned is 
past, but we understand that not all the private owners have coughed up their stocks.  So their 
status is a little ambiguous at the moment.   



6/21/77 - 52 - 

  
 

MR. GUFFEY.  Paul, carry this one step further.  If we do, indeed, get a satisfactory 
ruling, that essentially forces all central banks to move through us. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, well, no more than they are now.  Well, I just don’t 
know the extent to which they are now doing RPs in the market, assuming they’re exempt.  
There is probably some of that.  But we don’t know how much.  Certainly when this [recent IRS] 
ruling comes to their attention and is fully analyzed, to the extent they are doing it they must be 
stopping. 

MR. GUFFEY.  That’s right, they will come to us, so we will essentially force them all 
into the Federal Reserve because the uncertainty-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Our impression is, and I think it is mostly an impression, 
that they do a lot of this with American banks, but the American banks book it in the Bahamas, 
basically.  I mean they move it offshore, for this reason.   

MR. PARTEE.  And that could still go ahead. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  And that still goes ahead.  And that’s what they have to 
do with all of it--they have to get out of the RP vehicle.  There may be other vehicles for doing it 
in the domestic market.  But that’s why I think the bulk of it will go into the Eurodollar market. 

MR. HOLMES.  Paul, I might add that a great deal of the countries, the smaller LDCs who 
have money, come in for a very short time, and they don’t add much to the size of the operation-- 
but [it’s] extremely useful for them in trying to manage a fairly small portfolio of dollar assets.  

MR. WALLICH.  If we are very useful to them, then wouldn’t they be willing to go and 
seek certification? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Some of them might.  I can’t predict that.  I would just 
suspect that it’s not going to be important to most of them to want to horse around with the IRS 
in the United States, which raises a question about their other income from the United States if 
they didn’t get the ruling.   

Somebody more legally informed than I can pick this up, but we can now certify under the 
present exemption for central banks that they are a central bank and therefore exempt on their 
government securities holdings.  We can’t certify that they are a government; we can certify that 
they are a central bank.  Now if, for instance, they applied for a ruling that they were part of the 
government and somehow failed, they might worry about jeopardizing the exemption they might 
already have as a central bank.  I would just guess that, you know, going to the IRS is a kind of a 
horrendous decision for a foreigner, and they are not going to be eager to do it.  But some of 
them, I’m sure, would. 

MR. WALLICH.  I’m looking at this as a measure, you know, of the eagerness of the 
central banks to have this facility and the importance of it to them.  And the result of the test is 
that it’s not all that important; they are not willing to run that risk.   



6/21/77 - 53 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t think that anybody could argue that this is 
absolutely crucial to a central bank’s operation--it’s a convenience for them. 

MR. COLDWELL.  [Unintelligible] cover RPs in governments. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Pardon me? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Your exemption covers RPs in government [securities]. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The exemption that we are looking for says it doesn’t 
make any difference what obligation we are giving them because all obligations of a 
governmental instrumentality are exempt.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Yes, but your present [unintelligible] this exemption covers 
government[s] only. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, anybody’s-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Any secured government loan.  That’s the issue isn’t it? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The way you say our present exemption--let me make 
sure.  

MR. COLDWELL.  You have the authority to provide certification. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes, that’s just for government securities, or deposits, I 
think. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, my question is, how much of these RPs are covered on the 
government-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  None, no.  Because that is what the ruling was.  They 
said these are not government securities, these are loans.  That’s the problem. 

MR. HOLMES.  The whole legal situation rather confuses me, I must confess.  Because 
for open market operations these are purchase and sales of securities, and that’s the legal 
interpretation.  It’s the IRS interpretation, I think, that could be challenged, but I am not a 
lawyer.  Because when we buy securities on RPs, we take delivery of them.  If there were a 
failure on the other end of the RP, we would have the right to sell those securities on behalf of 
the foreign central bank.  So you know, not being a lawyer, I stick with the idea that this is a 
purchase and sale.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Under the Federal Reserve Act these are still purchases 
and sales as far as we are concerned.  Under the Internal Revenue Code they say they are loans.  

MR. COLDWELL.  The exemption you seek, then, is just the RP exemption. 



6/21/77 - 54 - 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s all.  Well, the exemption we seek is just to say 
that we are a governmental instrumentality.  I think a ruling that we are a government 
instrumentality, which then permits us to make what we call RPs and what the IRS calls loans.  
We want a declaration that we are a governmental instrumentality.  Because then the law is quite 
clear.  It says obligations of governmental instrumentalities are exempt.   

MR. PARTEE.  And that would have to be the Fed of New York. 

SPEAKER(?).  No, the System Open Market [Account]. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No. That depends on which alternative you take.  
Whether it’s the Fed in New York or the System Open Market Account. 

MR. PARTEE.  It’s clearer, I think, for the System Open Market Account, but then I am 
bothered at doing things in the System Open Market Account that aren’t called for as a monetary 
policy action. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I defer to the lawyers.  My understanding is that it 
doesn’t make any difference to the lawyers whether it’s the Federal Reserve Bank in New York 
or the System Open Market Account.  So I don’t think legally it makes any difference whether 
it’s New York or the System account. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, I expressed earlier a preference for alternative 2 if you want to 
debate that, but I didn’t think you wanted to debate all these alternatives.  Incidentally, SAMA 
[Saudi Arabia Monetary Authority] didn’t apply for the exemption for any reason connected with 
this transaction at all.  It applied for an exemption some years ago for other investment purposes.  
They got a declaration that they were in effect an instrumentality of the Saudi Arabian 
government.  Which is all they got.  So whatever they do in our marketplace would be an 
investment in private or government securities, they‘re not subject to the withholding tax that’s 
applied to foreign investors. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  One of the reasons, I think, [other central banks] will be 
cautious about getting a ruling is there will still be some question about [whether] certain 
operations are a business in the United States, in which case they wouldn’t be exempt.  Or 
whether it’s a passive investment of some sort, so there are all these complications around the 
edge.  I think what we really need here, and all we need, is a clear expression of sentiment by the 
Committee--I don’t think we need a formal vote--that alternative 1, 2, or 3 is okay.  One of those 
three at least will be all right.  And in effect, authorizing either the Bank or the System Open 
Market Account--presumably do it in the form of both.  So that we could go either direction.  Go 
to the IRS for the ruling. 

MR. WALLICH.  It’s understood that if we do this, you’ll impose a charge of some for-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, that’s an additional question.  I’m happy to do it 
under that arrangement.  Because I think we should anyway.  If the Committee wants to issue 
that sentiment, I think that’s appropriate, too. 



6/21/77 - 55 - 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  I think we ought to have a report back to the Committee on the pros 
and cons and the way in which changes are going to be implemented.  We have had enough 
problems with this pricing business. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Let me propose specifically, and maybe we can have a 
showing of hands.  The Committee is in agreement that we go to the IRS for a ruling in 
contemplation that one of the three approaches will be adopted assuming a favorable ruling, and 
that we will come back to the Committee with a proposal on changes and an analysis thereof.   

MR. HOLMES.  And selection of which of the three. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  And selection of which of the three, right. 

MR. GARDNER.  In essence, this is the same subject that was discussed at the conference 
call, but that was not a meeting, and this is a meeting of the FOMC.   

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Are we ready for a showing of hands? 

MR. PARTEE.  This is not--we wouldn’t be indicating a preference for one of the three.  I 
have trouble with your dealing as principal with the Committee. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But you’re indicating that one of the three is going to be 
acceptable to the Committee. 

MR. COLDWELL.  That means in effect that New York will continue its provision of the 
service of RPs to all customers. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But through the System account. 

MR. COLDWELL.  But no matter how it’s done, you will continue to provide that service. 

MR. PARTEE.  May I also understand, Mr. Chairman, that the proviso that Alan added, 
which is that if there is ever any difficulty, interference with open market operations, he will 
immediately bring it to our attention? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Beyond that, if there is a real difficulty with System 
operations during this interim period , we won’t do it on that day. 

MR. WALLICH.  Because you have been able to do it only due to a large movement. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We would only be able to do it in conformance with past 
practices during these fortuitous large movements in the System. 

MR. ROOS.  You want a showing of hands, Mr. Chairman? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes, I would.  This is in favor of a suggestion that I had 
made. Do you have any expression of opposition?  Okay, well, we will proceed and ask for a 
ruling in conjunction with the Board legal staff and in conjunction with the Treasury. 



6/21/77 - 56 - 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Does that mean that you will ask the IRS for a ruling either way, for 
[the System] account or New York? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes.  I guess we are just left with the date of the next 
meeting, which is July 19.   

END OF MEETING 

 




