









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

January 17-18, 1977 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

 
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 

the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 
or past members of the Committee. 

 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 

involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 

 

Content last modified 01/11/2011.



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 

January 17-18, 1977 

 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Monday and Tuesday, 

January 17-18, 1977, beginning at 4:00 p.m. on Monday.  

PRESENT: Mr. Burns, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Gardner 
Mr. Jackson 
Mr. Kimbrel 
Mr. Lilly 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Wallich 
Mr. Winn 

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Roos, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Mr. Gramley,2/ Economist (Domestic Business) 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.



1/17-18/77

Messrs. Brandt,1/ Davis,1/ Keran,1/ 
Kichline,1/ Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,3/ 
and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists 

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee,3/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne, Guenther,4/ and Keir,1/ 
Assistants to the Board of Governors 

Mr. Gemmill,1/ Adviser, Division of 
International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Truman,4/ Associate Adviser, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice,First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Doll,1/ Eisenmenger,1/ 
and Scheld,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Kansas City, Boston, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Burns 1/ and Kaminow,1/ Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 
of Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Hall,1/ Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Mr. Duprey,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog,1/ Manager, Acceptances and 
Securities Department, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.  
2/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.  
3/ Attended part of Monday session and all of Tuesday session.  
4/ Attended part of Monday session only.



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
January 17-18, 1977 

 
 

[Executive session] 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, this meeting will now come to order, please.  There 
are several items that I thought would be best taken up in executive session.  And one of them is 
the agreement concluded by the central bankers in Basel concerning the establishment of a 
facility for handling official sterling balances.  The agreement has been distributed to the 
members of the Committee.  I hope you’ve all had an opportunity to review it.  I’ll call on 
Governor Wallich to summarize the essentials of this agreement in a few sentences.  And then 
we will discuss it, and at the end of our discussion, I hope that someone will be good enough to 
move ratification of the agreement.  Mr. Wallich, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  The purpose of the agreement--which exists in principle, and its main 
components remain to be finalized in a few details--is to reduce official sterling balances.  These 
have been a disturbing element due to their volatility.  The agreement provides that the BIS 
[Bank for International Settlements] will finance the Bank of England to the extent that these 
balances are reduced, except by bond funding and to the extent that the British reserves 
simultaneously go down.  The details are to be worked out.  If the BIS cannot fully carry through 
that financing, it has a fallback with respect to the participating central banks.   

Now, the Bank of England is committed to use its best efforts to reduce official sterling 
balances to working balances.  First, by a funding operation offering some of the major holders 
of official balances 5- to 10- year bonds, 75 percent of which, at a maximum, would be in 
dollars, the rest in nondollar and nonsterling currencies.  Second, whatever is left of the total 
balances after this operation, [the goal would be] to bring that down to the level of working 
balances.  The detail of that is not described, but it could consist of various administrative 
measures.  Broadly speaking, we’re talking about something like £2 billion sterling, or $3.4 
billion [equivalent]; maybe half a billion pounds of that could be funded.  Maybe something like 
£1 billion might remain as working balances, and the other half billion would have to worked off 
over time.   

This is to be done in cooperation with and under the supervision of the Managing Director 
of the IMF [International Monetary Fund].  The Managing Director of the IMF will confer with 
the U.K. jointly with the governors of the participating central banks to observe the progress 
made.  Should it turn out that progress is not satisfactory during the two years during which the 
stand-by agreement is in effect, or if the U.K. should become ineligible to draw under the IMF’s 
stand-by during these two years, then the facility can be suspended.  In that case, also, the 
amounts already drawn will be required to be repaid within 120 days unless the agreement is 
reconstituted.  These are the principle parts of the agreement.  Do you want me to go into the 
Treasury side of this? 



1/17-18/77 - 2 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, not at this point.  We want to deal solely with the agreement 
drawn up at Basel by the central banks.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Holmes, you worked hard 
on this--would you like to add any comment? 

MR. HOLMES.  I won’t go into any details, but at the Basel meeting preceding the most 
recent one, a group of experts was set up that met in Paris on December 20 and 22, then again in 
Basel last Sunday.  We started out with why there is disagreement, and ended up in the meeting 
last Saturday to agree on what we couldn’t agree on and to give that to the governors to decide 
on.  And we ended up with a very short document, rather than the usual lengthy report of 
experts, which I hope was useful to the governors.   

More importantly, though, with the bilateral discussions between the United States and the 
U.K., which were very intense--we met twice in London and once here and at great length to 
really work out to see if we couldn’t narrow our own range of disagreement.  And a lot of it 
was--it was a hard road, a tough road, but it was all done in a cordial sense.  And that’s all I need 
to say Mr. Chairman.  Except that I would like to point out, I’m not sure Governor Wallich 
emphasized that the [IMF] Managing Director will be acting in a personal role in this, with the 
approval of the Managing Board and informing them of what he does.  But with no role of the 
Managing Board of the IMF in making decisions. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Holmes.  The only additional comment that I 
would make is that the present expectation--and it’s an eminently reasonable expectation--is that 
the BIS will be able to meet any funds that the British may wish to acquire because of a rundown 
in the sterling balances.  All the BIS has to do is enter the market and bid for deposits and make 
those funds available to the Bank of England.  And therefore, the chances are that we at no point 
over the next two years will have to put up one penny.  But, of course, it’s a contingent liability, 
and we must be entirely clear on that.  But the present expectation is that the BIS will be able to 
meet whatever credit needs Britain may have under this agreement, and the BIS will not find it 
necessary to call on us or on the other central banks that are parties to this undertaking.  All 
right, are there any questions? 

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, a clarification--our loan would be to the BIS rather than to 
the Bank of England, in case we’re called upon? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  In case we’re called upon, well, Henry would you answer that? 

MR. WALLICH.  That is correct.  However, the BIS is obligated to repay only to the 
extent that it is being repaid by the Bank of England, except for its own small 4 percent share. 

MR. JACKSON.  It doesn’t [unintelligible]. 

MR. WALLICH.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Which means, in effect, we’d be lending to the Bank of England. 

MR. PARTEE.  We would lend at our discount rate?  Or our bill rate, or what?  What 
would be the interest rate? 



1/17-18/77 - 3 - 
 

  
 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, the first question is how the BIS establishes its rate with respect to 
the Bank of England.  Then we would normally lend at the Treasury bill rate for swaps.  If, for 
some reason, that’s inappropriate because it would give the BIS, for instance, too large a margin, 
I’m sure we could adjust that. 

MR. HOLMES.  It would come under our regular swap agreement with the BIS. 

MR. PARTEE.  Which is ordinarily at the bill rate? 

MR. HOLMES.  At the bill rate. 

MR. MAYO.  But there will be a uniform rate from the BIS to the British. 

MR. WALLICH.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The rate may vary over time, depending on three-month-- 

MR. MAYO.  I was thinking about the countries. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the other countries don’t enter into the picture until the BIS 
has to draw on other countries.  And as I said, that is really not at all likely to occur.  The BIS 
will enter the market and will borrow funds, or attract deposits at a certain rate of interest.  And 
the BIS will charge the Bank of England the rate of interest that it has to pay plus a certain 
commission, which may be 1/4 of 1 percent, maybe a little higher. 

MR. MAYO.  I see. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  Well, if there is no other question, would 
someone be good enough to move ratification of this agreement. 

SPEAKER(?).  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Motion has been made.  Any objection.  I hear none, and let us 
pass now to an internal agreement, that is, a separate agreement that we at the Federal Reserve 
have with the U.S. Treasury.  And that agreement is written out in a letter from Secretary Simon 
to me, dated January 14, 1977, along with my reply to the Secretary as of the same date.  And 
this agreement is very simple, really.  It’s unequivocal.  If the BIS draws on us, we could extend 
credit for up to a period of one year.  And if the loan has to be extended, then the Treasury will 
take us out and assume that loan at the end of one year.  Henry would you want to add to that 
description? 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I don’t think there’s much to add.  What we are doing is protecting 
ourselves as a central bank to make sure that this remains a short-term operation.  We have a 
clear take-out. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  In this regard, you may recall the provision that we had for a take-
out under an agreement with the Treasury--back in 1968, was it?  Well, there was an obligation 
assumed by the Treasury in that year.  And that undertaking by the Treasury has been subject to 



1/17-18/77 - 4 - 
 

  
 

interpretation and misinterpretation; there were elements of ambiguity.  [This] is an 
unconditional arrangement.  Mr. Volcker. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  There is one aspect of this that I just feel I ought to 
comment on because as a matter of form it concerns me.  In form, we have a take-out here after a 
year, but since the risk-sharing arrangement in the third indented paragraph here extends beyond 
a year, in substance we’re left with the risks of the credit and, therefore, in substance to credit 
beyond a year. 

MR. PARTEE.  For half of this. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  For half of it, that’s right.  For half of it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that’s true, but let’s be clear about the risk.  The risk 
is the Bank of England declares itself bankrupt, and I think that risk is a minimal risk. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, I think the risk is minimal--I would think the risk 
existed whether or not they were bankrupt.  The loan may not stand for more than a year at the 
exchange rate--no, there’s no exchange rate risk here. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No exchange rate risk whatever. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, that’s right.  That’s right.  No, I agree, the risk is 
very remote. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There would be a loss on this loan only if the Bank of England 
goes bankrupt. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That is correct. 

MR. PARTEE.  Or repudiates its debt. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Correct. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Or repudiates its debt without going bankrupt.  After all, that’s 
been done by Communist countries. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think this contingency is extremely remote.  I have no 
doubt at all in my mind about that.  But in form, the obligation really is for more than a year.  I 
don’t think we can kid it.  I mean, I would have wished that the Treasury would have just taken 
over the thing at the end of the year in view of this very minimal risk, and it would have been 
much cleaner and reserved our one year as being much more-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The Treasury wanted this paragraph since the agreement otherwise 
was entirely unconditional.  And since I regarded the risk as minimal--and if the Bank of 
England repudiates its debt, then I think we’ll be living in a very different world from any that 
you or I have known--I saw no reason to quarrel with the Treasury, since I had other quarrels on 
more important matters that were already resolved satisfactorily. 



1/17-18/77 - 5 - 
 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, the risk is certainly minimal, and I don’t want to 
suggest anything else, but as a precedent for the future and in form, I’m just a little unhappy 
about that particular aspect of it.  I will desist, but I just wanted to record some unhappiness over 
that aspect of it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I’m very glad that you’ve become--that you’ve thrown off 
your old Treasury garments completely, since you no longer even remember that no matter how 
this last paragraph is written, if there is a loss, well that’s going to come out of the U.S. Treasury. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That is correct, too.  Put on my old clothes, and I would 
have been in the Treasury arguing that we should have taken all this risk after a year.  I think it’s 
entirely appropriate that they would have done so. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are there any questions about this side agreement with the U.S. 
Treasury. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I move ratification, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A motion has been made to ratify the agreement with the Treasury.  
Are there any questions or expressions of dissent?  I hear none.   

And now I want to turn to the third item, which is a proposal for a warehousing agreement.  
And this is described in a letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, dated January 14, and a 
proposed reply under my signature dated January 17, which is today.  And what the Treasury is 
suggesting is a warehousing arrangement for the Exchange Stabilization Fund of $1-1/2 billion, 
half of which would be available for a period of up to six months and the other half for a period 
of up to one year.   

Now I don’t know if members of the Committee have received a document prepared by 
Mr. Morton of our staff, which gives the history of our warehousing of foreign currencies in the 
U.S. Treasury.  It was first authorized by this Committee in November 1963, and in September 
1968, the warehousing authorization was fixed at $1 billion for, I believe, a period of up to one 
year.  The present requested or recommended authorization is larger, up to $1-1/2 billion.  
However, the period on the average is shorter, half of it for a period of six months, and half for a 
period of 12 months.   

Now, in discussion of this suggestion with Governor Lilly at the luncheon table, Governor 
Lilly raised the question about the period of agreement.  And then, in the course of the 
discussion, it became clear that this Committee reviews its foreign currency directive, among 
others, annually in March, I believe.  Therefore, any year in March, if there is some question 
about this warehousing arrangement, its extension into the future, any modification of it--that 
would be the time [for this Committee] to take it up, and that could then be negotiated with the 
Treasury in accordance with the wishes of the Committee.  Would you like to add anything by 
way of explanation, Governor Wallich? 

MR. WALLICH.  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I’ve been focusing on a problem which just 
came up and I didn’t follow the discussion. 



1/17-18/77 - 6 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Holmes, I hope you have followed the discussion.  Would you 
like to add-- 

MR. LILLY.  Mr. Chairman, I hope the record will have your comments written in. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --would you wish to comment on it? 

MR. HOLMES.  No, it’s quite obvious, Mr. Chairman, if we warehouse foreign exchange 
for the Treasury, that has a reserve impact.  But we have no problems in offsetting that through 
domestic operations, and obviously this would be small compared to the normal swing in the 
Treasury balance.  I think from the domestic side there is no problem, and we had no problem in 
warehousing before, so I have no problem all the way through. 

MR. WALLICH.  May I add something, Mr. Chairman?  I think one has to be aware that 
this is not only an operation that has been performed before and, therefore, is not innovative.  
[But also,] it is not the kind of operation where the central bank makes a loan to the government, 
which typically gives concern.  It is an operation performed under the foreign currency 
authorization, a purchase of currency, and in that respect, I think, does not carry the kind of 
connotation that a loan to the Treasury would. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, as the first sentence in Mr. Morton’s memorandum 
indicates, System warehousing of foreign currency involves simultaneous spot purchases and 
forward sales of foreign currency by the System with the U.S. Treasury. 

MR. BLACK.  These at identical rates?  Spot purchases and forward sales at identical 
rates? 

MR. PARDEE.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Always at identical rates. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You involve the foreign currency in this case, though. 

SPEAKER(?).  What? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We [unintelligible] involve the foreign currency in this 
case. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Why not? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It belongs to the BIS. 

SPEAKER(?).  No, no it doesn’t. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Forget entirely the-- 

MR. JACKSON.  This is not linked to that [unintelligible]. 



1/17-18/77 - 7 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This is not linked as such with the Basel agreement.  The Treasury 
may find that the Exchange Stabilization Fund [ESF] is short of money for a great period. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  For other purposes, for any purpose? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It may arise out of the new Basel agreement or any other purpose.  
And then the Treasury will turn to the Federal Reserve as its banker for short-term financing.  I 
say “would”--may turn to us. 

MR. LILLY.  It’s almost a repurchase agreement. 

SPEAKER(?).  Yes, 

SPEAKER(?).  It’s what it is. 

MR. PARDEE.  It’s using a different instrument. 

MR. LILLY.  It has the same effect. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Enlarges the assets by 50%. 

MR. WALLICH.  It’s not even tied to the sterling as such, although that may be the main 
asset at a given time in the ESF, but if the ESF has other currencies--any currencies [on which] 
there is an authorization to purchase can be made the object of the transaction. 

MR. COLDWELL.  This would require, however, the Committee’s authorization for 
purchase of this specific currency?  In other words, it has to be a swap currency? 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, it has to be a swap currency for which a swap is authorized.  Now, 
within the limits of the swap authorization, that is a do-able operation. 

MR. COLDWELL.  It would not be possible for the Portuguese whatever, then? 

MR. WALLICH.  No, not without a new authorization. 

MR. PARTEE.  It has to be a swap currency? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Of course. 

MR. PARTEE.  The peso as such? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  To come under the law, it has to be a swap transaction, according 
to our lawyers.  And as Mr. Broida points out to me in the projected letter that I would send to 
the Treasury, that projected letter says, “the Federal Reserve will be prepared, if requested by the 
Treasury, to warehouse eligible foreign--” 

MR. PARTEE.  Eligible. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any questions about this warehousing arrangement? 



1/17-18/77 - 8 - 
 

  
 

MR. BALLES.  How is this made known to the public?  Is this released? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  This has been considered.  We reviewed the 1968 undertaking, 
and that was disclosed fully to the public.  That would be our intention now, subject only to 
some conversations with the Treasury.  If the Treasury has cogent reasons for not disclosing it, 
we would have to take them into account.  Now, I believe, Governor Wallich, you have 
discussed this question with Mr. Yeo of the Treasury. 

MR. WALLICH.  I had a preliminary conversation with Sam Cross.  Mr. Yeo is travelling.  
The view is that as a general principle, they would like to publish.  However, they would first 
like to see the final text, and second they’d like to touch base with the appropriate members of 
the Congress before that is done. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that’s clearly appropriate because the members of the 
Congress like to know about these things before they read about it in the newspapers.  And that 
presents no difficulty from our viewpoint because--Mr. Broida, am I right in thinking--it has 30 
days? 

MR. BROIDA.  We have 30 days to publish the explanation in the policy record.  We 
could at any time earlier put the text of the letters on file downstairs, but it need not be done 
before 30 days. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We could do that if the Treasury’s made its clearing with the 
congressional--? 

MR. BROIDA.  We could do that immediately. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question about this arrangements? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, my only question is something which we’ve talked before, and 
that’s the enlargement of the ESF divorced from the Basel agreement.  But given the restudy of 
this, or specific re-analysis in March, then I’ll subside. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think we ought to be careful about one thing.  I spoke 
about the March date, but if we enter into an agreement today, I think that this agreement ought 
to be good until March 1978.  I don’t think we could very well go back to the Treasury--not this 
March. 

MR. COLDWELL.  No, I meant March of next year. 

MR. LILLY.  That will be in a written record? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It should be written-in that, in the normal course of events, as we 
consider our various directives, we’ll take this up, among others.  That should be reported to 
files. 

MR. LILLY.  Would you like a motion? 



1/17-18/77 - 9 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes. 

MR. LILLY.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A motion has been made that this agreement be entered into.  Is 
there an objection?  I hear none, and therefore, I’m going to sign it now and dispatch it to the 
Treasury since they’re very nervous over there.  I hope they’ve got somebody in the mail room. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I wonder where it goes-- 

MR. GARDNER.  Opinion has been expressed by expert members of this Board that this 
isn’t a loan.  I just want to say that I’m going to withhold any such determination.  It is in effect a 
loan.  Until I talk to, if necessary, to experts whether this is a loan or a purchase of foreign 
currencies that the Treasury-- 

MR. LILLY.  I use “repurchase agreement,” you don’t criticize that. 

MR. PARTEE.  For 15 years we’ve been trying to-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The only way I’ve ever understood the whole swap network is in 
the language of loans. 

MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask, in wrapping up on this subject, any 
overall evaluation you might have of the combination of the IMF and BIS facility to the U.K. in 
terms of the prospects of getting them out of their trouble.  What the outlook is and how they got 
these two major new facilities? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  My apologies to you.  My attention was diverted; it seems Mr. 
Wallich set a precedent.  Would you be good enough to repeat your question?   

MR. BALLES.  I was simply asking if you would care to give us your evaluation of the 
prospects for the U.K. now that they have both the IMF and the BIS facility? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well now, look, they have the IMF loan [at] 3.9 [percent]; they 
have a commitment from us and the Treasury amounting in the aggregate to $500 [million], they 
can draw on that.  They have a supplementary commitment for $300 million by the Bundesbank.  
They now have this standby sterling balance facility of $3 billion.  What does all this mean?  
Well, it means that their ability to borrow is enormous.  How the markets will respond, I don’t 
know.  Now, there’s been no great upsurge in the value of the pound sterling in the foreign 
exchange market.  However, the sterling has strengthened, and the British have taken in recent 
weeks some $800 million.   

What are the prospects for Britain?  If the figures that I have seen concerning revenues to 
be derived as a result of North Sea oil, [then] the balance of payments position of Britain starting 
next year should improve dramatically.  Does that mean that the pound sterling will strengthen? 
It doesn’t mean that at all because if Britain continues to inflate at a rate which exceeds the 
inflation rate of the rest of the world, the pound sterling will continue to depreciate in the foreign 
exchange markets.   



1/17-18/77 - 10 - 
 

  
 

Now, the British along with most of the rest of mankind see borrowing more as a solution 
to their problem.  That is a solution that our politicians and our economists and even our 
businesspeople these days turn to when we consider our own domestic affairs, and the same is 
true around the world.  In my judgment, Britain will not be able to restore its economy until its 
budget is brought under control, until the present confiscatory taxation is drastically modified, 
and until all the nonsense about nationalizing industry comes to an end.  These changes, I don’t 
believe, will take place in Britain, and therefore, I can’t be very sanguine about the prospects of 
the British pound, which is very sad, and I hope I’m wrong. 

MR. BALLES.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, if there are no further questions about these foreign items, 
we have to return to consideration of the Government in the Sunshine [bill].  A question has 
arisen whether the FOMC is or is not covered by the Government in the Sunshine legislation.  As 
of today, I’m not prepared to make any recommendation to the Committee because certain 
conversations that are under way with members of the Congress interested in this legislation are 
as yet uncompleted.  And I will not be able to make a recommendation until I’ve gone further in 
consulting with members of the Congress who are following  the Government in the Sunshine 
Act closely.   

Now, Mr. O’Connell will set forth the pros and cons as he now sees them.  I hope the 
members of the Committee will listen very closely, and I shall want to get into the act at a certain 
stage, but I am not ready to make any recommendation because these conversations with 
congressmen, which bear critically on a decision, as I said, have not yet been conclusive.  Mr. 
O’Connell, would you be good enough to proceed? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The issues to which I think attention should 
initially be addressed, Mr. Chairman, relate to the definition of “agency” as it’s set forth in the 
statute [and] the question, Does the law apply to the Federal Open Market Committee?   

In essence, the requirement of the law is that every agency as defined in title 5 of the 
United States Code, the Administrative Procedure Act, must, after a stated date--March 12 of the 
next year--conduct, with certain stated exemptions, all of its meetings in open session.  The 
exemptions, I think, are to be considered only after a body has determined whether it meets the 
statutory definition of agency.  Now, as the Committee knows, Mr. Chairman, [the FOMC] has 
for purposes of other statutes assumed historically the status of an agency.  Thus, under the 
Administrative Procedure Act, the Federal Open Market Committee is an agency, and we have 
thus taken that position.  Under the Freedom of Information Act, the FOMC is an agency.  So the 
question would arise, Would it not thus be the same under the [Government in the] Sunshine 
Act?   

Well, if I may, the term “agency” means any agency, as defined in the statute that I’ve 
identified, headed by a collegial body composed of two or more individual members, a majority 
of whom are appointed to such position by the President with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, and any subdivision thereof authorized to act on behalf of the agency.  On the basis of a 
thorough study of this statute--of the legislative history, including the committee actions [and] 
committee reports from both the House and the Senate and [from] the conference committee that 



1/17-18/77 - 11 - 
 

  
 

reported out this bill before its enactment into law, we have given a definitional judgment that 
the statute does not apply to the FOMC for the very simple reason that the definition of agency 
requires that the collegial members to whom reference is made be appointed to such position [by 
the President].   

Now as the Committee is aware, this Committee is composed of the Board members and 
five Presidents of Reserve Banks.  The members of the Board are appointed to the Board by the 
President with confirmation of the Senate.  They are ex officio members of the FOMC.  By that I 
mean they are members by statutory grant, not by direct appointment of the President.  They are 
appointed to the Board and then statute makes members of the Board members of the FOMC.  
The issue of ex officio status was directly addressed by the sponsors of this bill, particularly Ms. 
Abzug, who was asked this question with respect to the National Security Council, the [Joint] 
Chiefs of Staff, and one or two other agencies.  And after going through the same definition I’ve 
now discussed, she reached the decision, and stated as reported in the legislative history, that 
such members were not the collegial--appointed to such position--members called for in the 
statute, and thus such a group would not be an agency within the meaning of the statute.   

The question arises, Well, what about the phrase “or subdivision of an agency, authorized 
to act on behalf of the agency?”  I think, immediately and clearly, the Federal Open Market 
Committee is not a subdivision or subsidiary of the Board.  Obviously, the Committee is 
composed of its membership with its statutory functions directly in the language of section 12(a) 
of the statute.  It is not a derivative of the [Board] by statute, although its membership is partly 
composed of members of the Board.  That issue was discussed in the legislative history, and Ms. 
Abzug, again, who was the sponsor of the bill, made clear that the fact she referred to what is a 
happenstance of law, that membership is identically composed, does not fit the meaning of this 
term.  And that therefore, such happenstance does not constitute a mandate of coverage by the 
statute.   

Mr. Chairman, the alternative, of course, is to assume this Committee had the question put 
to it [unintelligible] assume the status of a covered agency.  I would raise [unintelligible] 
question as, not only to the desirability of such assumption, but of the ability of an administrative 
agency, as this Committee is for other purposes, and of the statute to assume coverage of a 
statute.  One of the reasons I say this is that there are provisions in this bill that affect venue, 
jurisdiction, the right of courts of review, the methodology of review, the impact of timing on the 
agency to respond to suit, and even the right to bring suit on the part of a party.  I don’t know of 
the authority in a federal agency who has [unintelligible] question under an interpretation of the 
law to say as a matter of decisional act, let’s apply the law to us with all of its benefits and with 
all of its adverse consequence.   

For instance, normally, if this agency were sued without stint of [the] Sunshine [Act]--just 
a suit brought, for instance, for declaratory judgment--I think a court of law might properly ask, 
how much time would the agency have to respond?  The answer would be 60 days.  It’s an 
agency of the federal government, and under title 28 of the code, it has 60 days to respond.  How 
many days did you take here?  We took 28 because of this law.  Therefore, you, by pulling the 
law over your shoulders, you’ve deprived your agency of roughly 32 days’ time to answer.   



1/17-18/77 - 12 - 
 

  
 

Who is your counsel?  Well, the Department of Justice is our counsel.  Did the Department 
concur that they were deprived of 32 days’ time?  No, they objected and said that we had 60 
days.  But since we assumed the status of an agency covered by this act, we were deprived of 
those 30 days.  I raise this as an example of a jurisdictional “pullover.”  I question the right of an 
agency, be it this Committee or any other government agency, to deprive courts of other 
jurisdiction it might have, including appeal and other derivative procedural rights that are either 
granted or forbidden by the statute.   

I bring this to your attention only in the decisional basis.  It is my belief that there is good, 
strong, statutory language reference, as well as the legislative history, to support the position that 
this agency, as an agency, is not covered by Sunshine.  I’ve given you an example of the trouble 
I would have with a voluntary assumption of that status.  There are a number of practical 
reasons, that I won’t at this time take the Committee’s time to discuss, that I think argue strongly 
not to legally take the position that the statute covers this agency.  Now I say the latter for the 
simple reason that, I must advise, there is legislative history that, [it] can be argued, supports the 
legal position that this Committee is covered by [the] Sunshine [Act].   

When I say that, I mean there are exchanges on the floor of the House and on the floor of 
the Senate in the nature of colloquy.  They are not contained in committee reports officially 
reported on the statute.  They are colloquy exchanges in which one member of the House asks a 
series of questions, for instance of the sponsor of the bill, and in asking the question [will make] 
reference specifically [to] the FOMC.  And Ms. Abzug, in replying, used the term “the FOMC,” 
saying the FOMC would have no trouble, it could close all of those meetings.  I am sure that 
these exemptions would cover the FOMC.  So I bring to your attention my judgment that these 
discussions mark an assumed coverage of the FOMC status.  [The colloquy exchanges] then 
answered other questions that [were] relevant to the inquiry then being made.  In fairness, that’s 
the reference I have to the fact that the legislative history does bear some suggestion of coverage, 
if you start with the assumed position that I have identified.  On balance, I believe that the better 
position is that it is not covered and that there are good, salutary, functional reasons for 
following that position.  And Mr. Chairman, these roughly are my comments on the background, 
and I’ll go any length further that you wish. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you very much.  I have unavoidably become involved in the 
study of this problem in extensive conversations concerning it.  And I don’t have a single reason 
to question anything Mr. O’Connell has stated.  But I do think we have a congressional problem, 
one that I’m trying to test.  I’m not using the word resolve, because I don’t think the question is 
of a sort that can be resolved--but it can be tested, and it can serve as a guide to a rational 
decision by us.   

What is the congressional problem?  Well, it so happens that there are some members of 
the Congress, and particularly staff members, who are following the Sunshine legislation--what 
is being done under it--very closely, and who are concerned about any decision that we may 
make concerning the FOMC.  Now if the conclusion were reached, by this or that influential 
congressman concerned with this legislation, that we’re engaged in the circumvention of law, or 
that we’re following the law strictly but that the law contains a loophole, then this or that 
interested congressman might propose an amendment to the Sunshine Act.  And if that 



1/17-18/77 - 13 - 
 

  
 

amendment is on the floor, an amendment designed simply to encompass the FOMC in the 
course of debate--as things happen in the Congress, we stand a chance of losing the two 
exemptions that we won last year and which make it really possible, at least as I see it, for the 
Federal Reserve System to function.   

And therefore, I have begun a series of conversations with key members of the Congress.  I 
saw Congressman Fascell, who is the author of this legislation, or if not quite that, the chief 
intellectual exponent of it, in the House of Representatives.  He’s friendly, and he has no desire 
as such to present an amendment.  But I now have to see Senator Chiles, Senator Ribicoff, 
Congressman Brooks, and, on the Republican side of the House of Representatives, Mr. Horton.  
I don’t anticipate any difficulty, except perhaps with Senator Chiles.  Senator Chiles, I hope I’m 
being fair to him, was the author of this legislation on the Senate side.  He felt very unhappy 
about the amendments that we achieved in the Congress last year.  He felt very strongly about 
the legislation as it was passed by the Senate originally.  He might be described, perhaps 
unfairly, as being the theologian on this issue.   

If I succeed in persuading him that without coming formally under the Sunshine legislation 
we are not only adhering in full to the principles of the legislation, but going beyond it--I’ll 
explain that in a moment--if I succeed in that mission, which I’ve set for myself with Senator 
Chiles, then I think Tom’s recommendation is clearly the right one.  If I fail, I’m not sure of a 
conclusion, but that is where my problems begin in making a recommendation to this 
Committee, and I’m not at [that] point.   

Now, in this Committee we are living strictly, I think, within the spirit of the Sunshine 
legislation.  The exemption under the Sunshine law, I think, would make it possible for us to 
close every meeting.  The law as written requires that a verbatim transcript of every meeting be 
kept or that carefully prepared minutes be written out.  Well, certainly our secretarial staff is 
discharging the latter function--preparation of minutes--in exemplary fashion.  Not only that, but 
the law does not require publication of the minutes, and we do publish the minutes.  Not only do 
we publish them, but we publish them as promptly as is technically feasible.  That is, within a 
period of something like 30 days.  Therefore, we not only are living within the spirit of the 
Sunshine law but going beyond it.   

Now if a little speech like that will warm Senator Chiles’s heart, and it’s a factual 
statement, then I believe that we need not fear an amendment to the Sunshine law being 
proposed in the Congress.  And we can adopt Mr. O’Connell’s recommendation very 
comfortably.  But as I stated, if Senator Chiles feels that here is a loophole in the legislation that 
must be closed, that he is going to propose an amendment--that raises a difficult political 
problem for us, a problem I’ve already stated.  Namely, once an amendment comes to the floor, 
other amendments might be added; we might lose one or the other or both of the exemptions that 
we won last year after a most arduous battle in which all of you participated.  And who knows, 
other burdensome amendments might be added.  There is an element of hazard there.  That’s all I 
can say on the subject as of today. 

MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes. 



1/17-18/77 - 14 - 
 

  
 

MR. MAYO.  If the Congress were to support the position that you’ve just outlined, isn’t it 
still possible that suit can be filed by some people who aren’t happy with that and take it to the 
courts?  Or is that not a-- 

MR. O’CONNELL.  May I address that, Mr. Chairman?  It’s a very good and realistic 
possibility that, at the time the Board of Governors issues its proposed regulations under 
Sunshine, which will be forthcoming within a very short period now to meet the March 1 
deadline, that publication of those regulations and the absence of similar regulations on the part 
of this Committee could well draw an inquiry, then a demand, then a lawsuit, either to compel 
the issuance of regulations, as if this Committee were covered, or a suit to declare that the 
Committee is covered.  Yes.  And at a point in time the Chairman may perhaps wish to discuss a 
possible publication by this Committee of a document paralleling a regulation that would offset 
such a desire on the part of someone who would otherwise bring suit.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The suit might still be brought. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  It could.  Certainly, Mr. Chairman.  Yes? 

MR. GUFFEY.  When does the statute require that the regulation be published by an 
agency? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  There has to be a publication within a framework of 30 days for 
comment, then a review of the comments and a simultaneous oversight review by the 
Administrative Conference of the United States under the terms of the statute.  [Conforming], 
then, to a 30-day statutory comment period, a 10- to 15-day period for the staff to review those 
comments, review by the Administrative Conference--you’re into a two-month period.  That 
means, then, if the regulations must be in effect by March 12, [then] at or about mid-January to 
the 20th of January is about the terminal date for getting them into the public arena.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Which means that, if the decision of the Committee should be to 
come under the legislation, that we might be a little late in doing so, and this possibility was 
discussed with Congressman Fascell, who saw no difficulty. 

MR. GARDNER.  If we did publish a regulation and presumed that we were subject, the 
regulation would be of a very modest nature, is that correct Tom? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  At present, that is correct.  The draft that I’ve drawn to date is much 
more modest then you might otherwise assume. 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s because of the exemptions?  Is that what makes it modest?  The two 
exemptions? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no, the exemption is written into the Sunshine law.  The basic 
exemption, that is, exemptions under which you can close meetings. 

MR. PARTEE.  Perhaps I didn’t understand Governor Gardner’s question.  What do you 
mean “modest”? 



1/17-18/77 - 15 - 
 

  
 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, if we were by some mischance to be subject to the Sunshine, our 
regulation concerning open and closed meetings would almost be entirely closed meeting. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would like to think that it would be entirely, rather than almost 
entirely, even if we decide that we come under this act. 

MR. LILLY.  But what would be the difference between being under Sunshine?  You 
make the assumption you’re under it vis à vis the way we’re operating now.  Forgetting all of 
those [unintelligible], what would be the basic difference? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  They are the legal questions, or possibly legal difficulties, that 
Tom will refer to, but I think we better go with that [assumption]. 

MR. LILLY.  But those I don’t--the ones that he listed in his opening remarks-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let Tom address them now, and then we’ll return to your question. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Addressing the question as I understand it, Governor, What would be 
the difference between being covered totally and technically under the law, and not being 
covered but adopting a position as though we were covered?  Is that correct?  The difference 
between these two positions? 

MR. LILLY.  That isn’t my question. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  All right, sir. 

MR. LILLY.  My question is, is there some fundamental operating difference--like the 
release of the minutes.  Assuming that we could close the meetings, either being under the law or 
not under it, which I gather, is the fundamental difference, then in the one case we can wait 30 
days and in the other case we couldn’t? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Addressing specifically the issue of the minutes, if we are covered by 
the statute, the makeup of the minutes in some respects wouldn’t be as full as they presently are 
in our Record of Policy Actions.  In other [respects], the law requires, for instance, that you 
identify every document that is before the Committee by name and title.  Not so with respect to 
the minutes we now use.  Once identified and in the record of the minutes, they are subject, of 
course, to FOI [Freedom of Information Act] demand for production of those documents.  That’s 
one distinction, or difficulty.   

Secondly, we believe that more-timely issuance of our Record of Policy Actions--30 
days--might be accomplished than [for] the minutes under the statute.  Under the statute, we 
probably could withhold publication of those minutes for much longer than 30 days--four 
months, five months--because of their still-sensitive nature.  So, as it is presently, the minutes are 
so written as to not make specific disclosure of the name of the document, and we have no 
problem issuing in 30 days.   

There are other procedural impositions of the statute, Governor, that would facilitate 
lawsuits demanding certain documentation and opening of previously closed minutes that we 



1/17-18/77 - 16 - 
 

  
 

would not [be] subject to were we not covered by the statute.  There is item after item that I 
could take you through, were we covered, that make more difficult, more burdensome, [our] 
operation under the statute than if we were not under the statute but, in our own way, almost 
fully comply with the spirit of that statute.  Does that respond to your question? 

MR. JACKSON.  If we decide that we are not an agency covered by the statute, but do 
decide to publish as a public gesture the Committee rules of procedure, we are then not 
constrained as to time by the Administrative Procedures Act or the Sunshine Act, and therefore, 
we could publish our own voluntary and gratuitous disclosure any time prior to the effective date 
without having any time constraints otherwise.  Is that correct? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  As I understand your inquiry, we can have up until the eve of March 
12 to issue whatever form of statement we intended to issue with respect to our proposed 
practices, that’s correct.  Thus, we could await the Board [of Governors] action in publishing a 
finally adopted set of regulations in final form, which might, say, come out the week before 
March 12, to issue our FOMC statement at the same time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, let me just interrupt.  I don’t know why I was favored 
with this cup of coffee, but I was so favored, and therefore, if any of the rest of you would like 
coffee, you will not be so favored, but the coffee is right there.  And let’s take perhaps a short 
break, coffee break, if you so wish.   

[Coffee break] 

Gentlemen, the coffee break is at an end.  We’ll defer the question of the appeal until 
we’ve taken up on the Sunshine legislation, and then return to that.  Well, I’m sorry, first, [about 
having] to bring Sunshine legislation back to the Committee; and second, [about] not being 
prepared to make a recommendation.  I think we need to know more before we act.  But any 
advice that you may have, any thoughts that you may have, would be very helpful at this time. 

MR. BALLES.  Could I ask a question, Mr. Chairman?  Would you feel you are able to 
describe what the [Federal Reserve] Board is going to do with respect to the regulation on its 
own?  The Sunshine Act--you’re not prepared to do that yet? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, that’s a very good question, and I’ve issued instructions to the 
staff, and the instruction has been--draw up a set of rules and procedures.  And work with it 
hard--the procedures should be such that Sunshine will be neither audible nor visible at the 
Board table.  Or it’ll be audible and visible only to the absolute minimum.  Now and then, 
members of the staff have reported their progress, and I’ve expressed dissatisfaction in 
[unintelligible] way because they were drawing up rules of a kind that I thought would involve 
the Board in too much discussion, too many rules.  And the rule of being inaudible and invisible 
was not being [observed] scrupulously or meticulously enough.   

Apart from these warnings that I’ve made repeatedly when I’ve heard about these rules, I 
don’t know where they are now.  Whether I, for one, am satisfied with them or not, I don’t know.  
However, Tom O’Connell has worked on these rules, and perhaps you can indicate where they 
stand.  This may or may not give me an opportunity to say that they are insufficiently inaudible. 



1/17-18/77 - 17 - 
 

  
 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Under the circumstances, I should say we started with this and we’re 
now about this [business].  That’s about all I can say, Mr. Chairman.  More directly, the Board 
has legal-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But we have to live within the law.  But, you know, there are ways 
of turning this into a grand ceremony or [instead] dealing with it in a way that satisfies the law 
[while] not obstructing Board business, in taking Board time, on minutiae of procedures. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I trust that the document that is finally before the Board, subject to 
some continuing amendments to make more simple and less obtrusive the provisions of that 
regulation, will soon be considered by the Board.  The regulations, I think I can say, President 
Eastburn, pretty well follow the exact mandated statute.  What we’ve done is to put into 
regulatory form the substantive and procedural requirements of the statute as they apply 
particularly to the Board and its mode of meeting operation, providing for open meetings, closed 
meetings, and the parallel requirements of the preparation of transcripts of minutes, depending 
on the type of meeting that’s closed; and otherwise providing for the procedural identified step 
of the advance requirement for notice of the meeting, the votes, and so forth.  I hope that they 
closely adhere to the statute and that they don’t go beyond that, thus following the mandate the 
Chairman has given in the adoption of them. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You might indicate what kinds of meetings will be open to the 
public. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  At this time the regulations clearly contemplate that matters dealing 
with consumer affairs, by their nature, will be open to the public.  Otherwise, the Board’s 
regulations announce its intent to close such meetings as are allowed in the other 9, really 10, 
total 10 exemptions of the statute.  It is contemplated that, on the whole, more meetings of the 
Board will be closed than will be open, although there are specific matters that, subject to 
approval or adoption by the Board, will be open to the public, the OSCA [Federal Reserve 
Board’s Office of Saver and Community Affairs]-type meetings, being an example of them. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the Bank Presidents would be especially interested in the 
question of whether matters that come before Mr. Coldwell’s committee [the Federal Reserve 
Board’s Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Activities, or BAC] involving Federal Reserve 
Banks in general [and] Reserve Bank budgets in particular would be handled in open or in closed 
session--could you address this range of thinking? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I could, Mr. Chairman--taking the specifics, for instance, of a 
personnel action, within a Reserve Bank, that is normally presented to [the] Board [of 
Governors] for confirmation or approval.  It is hoped that, by definition of the exemption for 
personnel matters, which is found in the statute, such discussions by the Board could be closed.   

The issue of a Reserve Bank budget:  There is no straight exemption for an agency’s 
budget, or for a Reserve Bank budget, as would be the case here--[no provision] for closing such 
a meeting.  However, depending on the nature of the item in the budget being discussed, for 
instance, if it involved or contemplated the acquisition of a building site, and so forth--items 
such as that, we believe, could [be covered] under one of the exemptions, such as section 9(b), 



1/17-18/77 - 18 - 
 

  
 

[because] premature disclosure could place the agency at an operating disadvantage.  We will 
look for such closure possibilities. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me indicate this, too.  If Federal Reserve Bank budgets were to 
be handled in an open meeting, then our public image, if nothing else, would require that we 
devote a good full day to consideration of those budgets.  Otherwise, we’re simply rubber 
stamping what a committee had done, and we’re not doing our job. 

MR. JACKSON.  It is mostly likely that the [Bank Activities] Committee meeting would 
be open, too, under those circumstances. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, I hope you would do more research on that question, 
because the Board does not have that much time.  It’s largely the [Bank Activities] Committee’s 
job.  The Board traditionally has not spent a day on the budget.  Now maybe we should, but we 
don’t have too much time.  You know that this is a very hard-working Board. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that Governor Jackson’s point was that 
if that particular budget examination were done by a committee of the Board, that if the Board 
were required to have an open session, so would the committee.  I believe that was the point he 
was making. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, then, maybe the [Bank Activities] Committee ought to be a 
smaller committee? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  It’s possible.  If it were, for instance, a one-man committee associated 
with staff of the agency, rather than three members of the Board, I believe that it escapes the 
definitional impact of the statute and would not be subject to the Sunshine Act. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Suppose that we have a recommendation such as we had from the 
New York Bank, the Kansas City Bank, concerning new computers--now, would that have to 
come before the Board in open session? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, the matter presently to the best of my understanding is 
delegated to the Bank Activities Committee for initial determination and a recommendation to 
this Board. 

MR. COLDWELL.  The final determination if it’s within our limits? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Final determination by the subcommittee within a certain dollar limit.  
If it came within that dollar limit, the decision could be made on delegated authority by the 
committee, [and] the committee would first have to ask, “Must this be open to the public?”  It’s 
the matter of the purchase of equipment.  If there were nothing in that consideration, Mr. 
Chairman, the disclosure of which at that time would jeopardize the ability of the committee to 
direct and achieve a purchase within a given dollar amount, and it wouldn’t adversely affect the 
competitive thrust of such proposal, it would have to be open to the public. 



1/17-18/77 - 19 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What about the question of the general level of salary increases or 
a guideline for salary increases within our Federal Reserve Banks? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Two possible exemptions from open meeting, Mr. Chairman.  Very 
briefly, one under exemption 2, relating solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an 
agency.  We would have to urge that a discussion of that matter, insofar as it relates to the Banks, 
would come within this exemption because we’re a unified system, and that, this being a Bank 
personnel matter, [it] is also an agency personnel matter, namely of the [Federal Reserve] Board.   

If that were to fail, I would next turn to section 9(b) that says, you may keep a meeting 
closed if, in the case of an agency, disclosure would be likely to significantly frustrate 
implementation of a proposed agency action.  If, by open discussion of this issue of salaries, 
namely, the level at which we are going to establish them, we [brought] into play competitive 
forces [acting on] what we perceive to be the market level, [and] that made it necessary for us to 
raise those salaries or otherwise adversely affected our action, [then] it’s possible we could close 
the meeting; otherwise, it would have to be open. 

MR. JACKSON.  The best answer to this, Mr. Chairman, is to have one open [meeting], 
and then nobody would show up after that. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, we haven’t discussed regulatory matters, and a good deal of [the 
Federal Reserve] Board’s time is spent on regulatory decisions.  Tom, I believe that, because of 
the nature of such decisions, we could close those meetings. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Except in consumer areas. 

MR. GARDNER.  I’m talking about a bank holding company application, some matter 
involving individual institutions. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I have no reason to believe, Governor Gardner, that in almost every 
case, such items could be [unintelligible] closed meetings.  There is a requirement in the statute 
that goes beyond the conduct of the meeting itself, namely, either [a] transcript is prepared or, 
[if] the meeting is closed pursuant to one of four specific exemptions, you have minutes instead 
of a transcript.  Any meeting that is closed pursuant to sections 7, 8, 9(a), or 10, you may have 
minutes.  If those minutes or the transcript are later found to contain nonsensitive items, that is, 
conversations, references, or inclusions that were not subject to closure, that portion of the 
transcript or the minutes must be made promptly available to the public.  Now that contains 
caution for the [Federal Reserve] Board and for the FOMC, should they come under the statute.  
The result would be, you could close the meeting, but immediately you must review the 
transcript to determine whether portions must be made available to the public. 

MR. PARTEE.  Tom, you didn’t mention transcript when you were talking in terms of the 
possible implications [for] the Committee--is that because the exemptions make the minutes 
possible? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  That’s correct. 



1/17-18/77 - 20 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  In both cases? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  The nature of our closing exemptions would make minutes the name 
of the game. 

MR. PARTEE.  But again you’d have the question of sensitive and nonsensitive parts in 
the minutes. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes, you would. 

MR. COLDWELL.  You have another question, which I probably can answer myself, but 
maybe I’d better get some guidance.  If you have a consent calendar item, that is just as much a 
decision as a regular calendar item? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Under the present format of the Board’s operation, Governor, that is 
correct.  It’s possible, and this would be up to the Board and the Chairman, it’s possible that 
consent calendar items can be [exempt] because [of] their nature, largely a circularization 
function as much as what was formerly known as a consent calendar.  That [function] could thus 
remove those from any form of Board agenda. 

MR. COLDWELL.  So you don’t have a Board meeting? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  That’s correct.  If they were the only items, and the Board adopted 
that method of circulating to the Board members for reading and for initial approval, the 
discussions in Congress indicated that this is perfectly appropriate. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Also dangerous. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Coldwell, have you given any attention to these rules that the 
staff is working on? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Have you been involved? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Yes.  Governor Gardner, Mr. Allison, and I spent a couple of hours on 
this subject just prior to this meeting. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I hope you will find ways of dealing with Federal Reserve Bank 
problems so that as few of them as possible need to be handled in open session. 

MR. COLDWELL.  I think we have. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You think you’ve already done that. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, we’re headed in that direction.  I’ll let the Vice Chairman [of 
the Federal Reserve Board] speak on that subject. 



1/17-18/77 - 21 - 
 

  
 

MR. GARDNER.  We have a plan.  The problem, Mr. Chairman, as you know, is that if a 
committee, regardless of its size, is delegated to act for the Board, then it becomes subject to 
Sunshine by that delegation.  So we are working on alternative ways.  Now, a number of the 
Board committees--in fact, the majority--do not have delegated authority, and they can meet 
without violating any law in closed session because they’re only advisers or what have you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You see, this question about Federal Reserve budgets disturbed 
me because these budgets are worked out very extensively by our staff.  They’re worked on very 
extensively by Mr. Coldwell’s committee.  I work on it to some degree with Mr. Coldwell 
outside the Board Room.  The amount of time that has been spent by the Board as a whole on 
Federal Reserve Bank budgets hasn’t been large because of all of these preparatory steps.  All 
right, now you have an open meeting, and there may be some newspaper fellows there, and Mr. 
Gardner’s Common Cause, and--what’s this?--Ralph Nader’s crowd, and what not.   

Here, let us say, we take up a budget coming to $600 million plus, and we do that within 
an hour, and, well, we’d look very bad.  Therefore, if that were the case I would consider it my 
duty to just stretch it out over a day.  Well, that’s terrible.  Then we’d look good or reasonably 
good in Mr. Nader’s eyes, but we’d destroy or reduce our effectiveness.  Now, there must be an 
answer to that.  Well, we have enough ingenuity in this room, I think, to find the answer, but I 
don’t think we have found it yet.   

SPEAKER(?).  In the process, too, Mr. Chairman, you end up publishing the budgets of 
the individual Federal Reserve Banks, which has never been done. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well-- 

MR. O’CONNELL.  To the extent that those budgets can constitute documents before this 
Board. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, if it’s an open session? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Then they are exposed. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We consider the budgets--well, of course, they’re before us.  Well, 
gentlemen, Sunshine brings us blessings, it also brings us problems, and the problems do not all 
lie with the legislation.  We’ve got several weeks, but this may still prove to be a very heavy 
burden on us.  I hope that the staff will continue to be resourceful and that Messrs. Gardner and 
Coldwell and the rest of us will continue working on the problem, and I will try to dig in myself.   

Well, let’s come back to the FOMC problem as far as Sunshine is concerned.  Any 
thoughts the members may have that we ought to bear in mind?  Now, we may have a telephone 
conference on this issue because of the calendrical constraint--that is March 12, is it? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes sir. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we may be unable to reach that deadline, but we don’t want 
to be too late-- 



1/17-18/77 - 22 - 
 

  
 

[Secretary’s Note: The raw transcript for the January 17 session ends at this point.  It 
seems that the meeting recessed here, but there may have been additional discussion.] 

January 18, 1977 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, our meeting will get under way now, please.  We need 
to act on the minutes of the December meeting.  Is there a motion to approve?  Motion has been 
made and seconded.  Any questions?  Let’s move on, then, to the report by Mr. Holmes on 
market operations. 

MR. HOLMES.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Holmes.  Any questions? 

MR. WALLICH.  The Germans are still in surplus.  [Otmar] Emminger [of the 
Bundesbank] said that they are willing to accept a deficit, as was stated in the press.  And my 
question is, does the German intervention suggest that they are merely trying to iron out minor 
market fluctuations, or are they positively resisting a upward trend in the D-mark? 

MR. HOLMES.  I can’t answer that question with great certainty.  I think two things were 
involved.  They were disturbed when they were seeing the mark appreciate by nearly 1 percent a 
day.  This, I think, was an effort to calm down the markets, and they recognize, too, that there 
have been several large orders coming out of individual banks, probably representing 
diversification--$100 million orders--and they took parts or all of those orders out of this market.  
In addition, I do think they felt that the dollar market rate was becoming inappropriate in some 
sense.  I think there is an element of that in their thinking.  How far that is an element, I’m really 
not prepared to say.  They were concerned, of course, when they were having such huge inflows 
into Germany of the liquidity consequences of that, and so they were delighted to be eventually 
able to get the mark turned around and not face further inflows. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Anything else? 

MR. JACKSON.  We’re increasing how often we intervene in marks.  Do you think we 
need larger working balances, or is the swap an adequate substitute-- 

MR. HOLMES.  I would be delighted to build up our working balances.  You know, many 
months ago the Committee suggested that $150 million might be a proper level.  We built up 
close to $100 million in all foreign currency balances at one time, and then the market turned 
against us and we had to spend them to keep our market in New York orderly.  I would hope, if 
market conditions permit, that we can build up more-respectable balances.  If we ever get 
anywhere near $150 [million], I certainly will come back to the Committee for further guidance 
on where we should go from there. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any more?  If not, a motion to confirm the transactions carried out 
by the Desk--the motion has been made and seconded.  Any objections?  There are none.  Mr. 
Holmes, do you have any recommendation with respect to the operations of the Desk? 



1/17-18/77 - 23 - 
 

  
 

MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, there is just one recommendation.  Two drawings made 
last November by the Bank of Mexico, in the amount of $75 million each, come up for renewal 
on February 10 and February 17.  The new Administration [in Mexico] has provided a boost to 
confidence.  The peso has firmed a bit in the market, and the Bank of Mexico has been able to 
recoup reserves.  We expect the drawings to be paid in February unless something goes wrong. 
On the chance that that can always happen, I would like to recommend to the Committee that the 
Committee agree to a first renewal if that is requested, although the likelihood is that the swap 
will be paid off. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Do we have any advice from the Bank of Mexico on the subject? 

MR. HOLMES.  Yes, I believe we have, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. PARDEE.  I talked to the Deputy Governor last Friday. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, a recommendation by Mr. Holmes is before the 
Committee. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Is this to be in any way tied to the Treasury action on our part? 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, they have a similar swap with the Treasury that they will be paying 
down pari passu, I assume, [with] the two. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any objection to the recommendation?  I hear none.  Thank you 
very much, Mr. Holmes.   

We will turn now to Mr. Gramley for his report on the economic outlook. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you very much, Mr. Gramley.  Your reports are always 
good technically, professionally, but today’s report was not only excellent professionally but it 
also brought a little cheer to some of our hearts.  We are ready now for Committee discussion.  
Who would like to be first?  Mr. Lilly, please. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, as you know, since last summer I have been the bear of the outfit.  I 
have been quite concerned [about] the course the economy was taking, partly as a result of the 
actions of the Committee this last fall and other factors.  I’ve now become very bullish, and I feel 
that we are about to see a marked improvement in the capital expenditure area.  I suspect that 
those requests for investment approval are just now moving through the industrial hierarchy, and 
in about 60 days you’ll see a substantial improvement.  I’m now concerned that the economy 
may heat up a little faster than we would like it to. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Lilly.  Mr. Black, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Lyle, do you have any inkling as to what other parts of GNP may show?  
How about real final purchases--do you have a feeling on that? 



1/17-18/77 - 24 - 
 

  
 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes, I have the figures.  I just got them a few minutes after I came 
down this morning.  Real final sales are precisely the figures that we had projected--76.8, up 4.8 
percent. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  4.8 percent.  Is that the highest for any quarter of this past year? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes, it is, to the best of my recollection. 

MR. BLACK.  That is a pretty significant margin, really--4.3 was the highest in the third 
quarter. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Baughman, please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I would ask Lyle, would he care to express a view as to whether a 
larger increase in wage rates would likely be restrictive or expansionary as far as economic 
activity is concerned--regarding total employment and production?  As to larger than what, well, 
larger than otherwise.  Or if there was some way of reducing the increase in hourly wage rates 
that apparently will be coming along--as to whether that will be an expansionary or 
contractionary economic input? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I believe that in the short run, a larger increase in wage rates would 
tend to have a larger stimulative effect on consumption than an adverse effect on business fixed 
investment.  But I think the longer-run implications would more likely be adverse.  If you have 
in mind a time period of two years--a horizon that long--then I am inclined to think a larger 
increase in wage rates would [have] an adverse implication for economic activity. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I assume that you have noted that the oil companies have apparently 
negotiated contracts with a 9 percent increase for the first year and apparently-- 

MR. GRAMLEY.  For the second year also; this is a two-year package.  As I understand, it 
is roughly 9 percent in each of the two years and no cost of living adjustment. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  --and apparently this will be kind of a pattern for that industry.  
Whether it will extend into other industries, I wouldn’t know. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Winn, please. 

MR. WINN.  I’m sympathetic to Governor Lilly’s view in terms of the turnaround, but just 
one word of caution on that score.  To what extent are future capital expenditures related, as they 
have been in the past, to local and state government activities?  We’ve put the financial position 
of these firms in better shape so that they can move ahead.  But to what extent is heavy 
equipment and construction and all of this related to the big role that local and state government 
has played--roads, sewers, hospitals, schools, and the rest of it?  I don’t see that coming back. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We have a projection of a fairly moderate increase in real state and 
local expenditures for 1977.  I think most forecasters anticipate that the state and local sector will 
not be showing much strength.  Well, I think Governor Lilly is talking about business fixed 
capital, and that is independent in the way we look at the statistics.  But that is segregated in the 



1/17-18/77 - 25 - 
 

  
 

national income.  There is an offsetting consideration to be taken into account.  I think Governor 
Lilly’s point is one that needs to be kept in mind--that is the implication of the remarks that I 
made at the end of my prepared statement.   

But again, I would remind you, Governor Lilly, that that’s the sort of thing that we 
anticipated last year, and it did not happen.  I would remind you also that the [Department of] 
Commerce December survey of plant and equipment outlays for the year, which doesn’t have a 
long history--we’ve had the record now for about six years--generally speaking does not tend to 
underestimate capital outlays.  Now it could happen this year.  That is the sort of thing we need 
to keep in mind and keep watching for over the next few months. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, I don’t want to get into a long argument about the future, because it is 
too unpredictable, but I do think, when you have a very strong retail sales stream here that we 
didn’t have before--it goes back to Thanksgiving--that’s my basis for my feeling on capital 
expenditures. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, on that point, I wish I had the document before me, but 
perhaps Mr. Mayo can help me.  I was reading last night a report of the Chicago 
businessmen--that is an excellent group, Bob.  One of the men commented that the rather flat 
trend in retail sales that we had between March or April and September was due in part to faulty 
seasonal adjustment.  Remember that, Bob? 

MR. MAYO.  Yes, I can find that.  Well, “this firm” refers to one of the economists for 
one of the retail firms--“this firm” is in an excellent position to know.  “This firms believes that 
the Department of Commerce sales data that show a flat trend in summer and early fall reflect an 
erratic seasonal adjustment and that sales did not really level off.  Also, it is believed that 
government data understates sales of specialty stores, in apparel, appliance, furniture fields.”  
Lyle, do you have any view on that? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I don’t have any feeling for that.  Generally, though, my feeling would 
be that retailers were disappointed in the pace of sales during the late spring and the summer 
months. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, some retailers [are] like the rest of us--we have our 
own feelings and attitudes, we look at some statistics, which may be faulty, and the statistics 
have an effect on our views and our judgments. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  That could be. 

MR. PARTEE.  They weren’t looking at seasonally adjusted figures, they were looking at 
the year-over-year, as I recall, which narrowed very appreciably, and made them gloomy. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, this is true of the retailer.  I would like to think that their 
economists do both.  I know, in one of the very large retail sales chains-- 

MR. PARTEE.  I know of one retail economist who looks at seasonally adjusted-- 



1/17-18/77 - 26 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Federated. 

SPEAKER(?).  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s the one I was thinking of.  This may merely mean that we 
know so little about what economists in other retailing firms do.  Lyle, would you be good 
enough to get ahold of this economist--he’ll be easy to locate--and find out what he thinks he 
knows?  He may have some valuable insights in statistical practices. 

MR. JACKSON.  How did that information compare with inventory accumulation in 
nondurables at retail? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, I think it is a question of whether or not the rate of accumulation 
was too high in the minds of retailers.  And since their sales were not performing as they had 
thought--since they were gloomy about them--they took actions to try to get rid of those excess 
inventories.  And the pattern fits in that respect, but it still could be true that retailers had 
unrealistic expectations. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the pattern fits qualitatively, not necessarily quantitatively. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes, by all means. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you very much.  Mr. Eastburn, please. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, my forecast agreed, for the most part, with the 
projection of the Board staff.  One possible difference has to do with inventory.  Once a month 
we survey manufacturers in our area, asking them their intentions [unintelligible].  And although 
they’re not doing much right now with respect to either reducing or adding to inventories, our 
survey indicates a considerable accumulation for the months ahead, and I just wondered whether 
your increase in inventory is enough.  In your projections, do you think the risk on inventories is 
on the downside? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I think there’s some possibility of a downside risk in the first quarter.  
We had a little better inventory clean-up than we had anticipated, and as I look at both our 
figures and those of the Commerce Department today, their figures are not a lot different than 
ours.  I really think that the revised GNP figures for the fourth quarter are likely to show a yet 
lower rate of inventory accumulation.  And so I think that would imply some pickup in the rate 
of inventory accumulation, perhaps early in the year.  But we have the rate going up to $19 
billion--1 percent of GNP--by the fourth quarter, and that seems to me to be in the right ball park 
if our estimates of final sales are right. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Yes, but my figures would be for the shorter run.   

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes, I think that’s a point well taken. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Partee, please. 



1/17-18/77 - 27 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with the first part of Governor Lilly’s 
statement, but I don’t think I really agree with the second part. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What is the second part? 

MR. PARTEE.  The second part is that he is concerned with the possibility of overheating 
in the course of this year.  And I would certainly agree that the best-guess projections appear to 
have changed markedly for the better in the last several months, not only the retail sales.  Now, 
Dave, those retail sales could be a little bit chunky; that is, we might find ourselves kind of 
down, now, for a period of time, but it did have the very desirable effect of reducing observed 
inventory levels and changing attitudes, and I think it is a real shot in the arm.  And I think 
housing looks to me as if it has sustained strength--you mentioned that too.  And I agree that this 
all ought to have an effect on capital spending as the year goes on, and it ought to be stronger 
than we were previously worrying it might be.  However, the staff projection for the four 
quarters of 1977 averages a little less than 6 percent--I guess 5.9, 5.8, something like that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  For what period, again? 

MR. PARTEE.  For the next four quarters.  And so, even if that were, say, a point higher 
than what’s projected, it would not be an extraordinary number.  It could be a point higher if we 
get a little more capital spending, a little more inventory than suggested.  But even with that, it 
seems to me that, as you reach the end of 1977, you wouldn’t be talking about really high 
utilization rates, you wouldn’t be talking about, well, an unemployment rate that would be down 
even to anyone’s objectives.  So I don’t think there is that much difficulty if there should be 
some moderate overrun from staff projections in the actual results of the economy in the course 
of the year.   

There is another point, though, that I would like to bring to the Committee’s attention.  
Some few of us have continued to watch the full employment surplus and deficit numbers, and I 
want to point out that the concept of potential GNP has been revised to reduce, I think, to a more 
realistic objective the rates of growth that can be expected in the real economy based on 
productivity and labor force growth.  And also [it has been revised] to adjust for structural 
changes in the labor force so that the unemployment rate associated with full employment is no 
longer 4 [percent] on the nose but, as a matter of fact, for the year 1976, is 4.96 because of 
structural changes--almost 5 percent.  And that, also, is a desirable change.   

But the result is that, even with the proposed fiscal program--which I would think is more 
apt to be altered in the direction of being more liberal than less liberal as it goes through 
Congress and as the new Administration considers it--with that program, there is, on these new 
figures, a rather high full employment deficit for 1977, calendar ’77.  Our staff estimate is [for a] 
$26.3 billion full employment deficit in that year.  And related to potential GNP, on the new 
measure of GNP growth, this is the highest proportion of potential GNP in more than a decade 
with the exception of only one year, 1967.  In 1967, the full employment deficit, on these new 
figures relative to potential GNP, was a bit higher than is now projected for ’77.   

Well, it’s a very considerable increase from calendar ’76 to calendar ’77, from a 
$12 billion full employment deficit to a $26 billion full employment deficit.  That gives me 



1/17-18/77 - 28 - 
 

  
 

pause and concern about financial market conditions as the year goes on because, although I 
never believed much in the idea of crowding-out on the basis of just the actual deficit figures, I 
noted long ago that if you look at the full employment deficit figures and you see a sharp shift 
toward deficit which is associated with tighter conditions and higher interest rates, it is going to 
be a problem as the year goes on.   

It also does contain the possibility, this kind of a full employment deficit--which I’m pretty 
sure will be the highest in the postwar period, although the figures were taken back only to 
1964-- may have psychological effects on inflationary expectations in the economy. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Full employment deficit will not have any psychological impact. 

MR. PARTEE.  But it has a real effect, Mr. Chairman, that’s what I guess I want to imply 
to you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A psychological effect will come from the actual or prospective 
deficit, over time. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, that would be $70 billion or so, and that’s a very large number, too.  
But it also could have some effects that we can’t fully anticipate.  So I think, although I am not 
concerned about overheating things for the year immediately ahead, that the trend in these fiscal 
numbers does give me real pause.  And I think it also may cause very considerable pressures for 
the central bank if in fact it brings some crowding-out, if it brings some tightening in the 
market--which is likely, I think--and higher interest rates.  The usual kinds of difficulties we 
have when interest rates are rising and housing people can speak out about that kind of effect.  
Since it hadn’t been mentioned by Lyle, I just wanted to bring it to the attention of the 
Committee. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  May I make one comment, Mr. Chairman.  A fact which I think the 
Committee should keep in mind in thinking about Governor Partee’s comments--and that is, this 
$26 billion includes a $10 billion rebate-type payment.  If it would be your judgment that rebate-
type payments don’t have much effect on economic activity, then you ought to mentally subtract 
that as you think about the size of the full employment deficit.  That part would be gone the next 
year.  On those grounds alone, the full employment deficit would revert to $16 billion in ’78. 

MR. PARTEE.  I wouldn’t subtract $10 billion.  I’ve never felt that a refund didn’t have 
any effect on the economy. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  No, I don’t either. 

MR. PARTEE.  It does have a rather high spillover into the saving flows, but I wouldn’t 
say it’s a zero effect on the economy.  And the other thing, the point that I would make, Lyle, is 
that this is just the opening gambit by the Administration.  The Congress has not yet dealt with 
this, and the spending programs that are people’s pets have not yet been brought to the floor.  
The chances are that this number will be exceeded--not falling short--in actual practice as the 
year goes on. 



1/17-18/77 - 29 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would agree with Mr. Partee.  I would also point out that what 
happened in the market for long-term interest rates last week, partly as a response to the new 
fiscal package announced by the incoming Administration, is a warning of what may be ahead.   

While I’m speaking, let me add one fact.  At 2:00 or 2:30 there will be an announcement 
on housing starts, and I don’t feel free to disclose the figure, but I can say it’s quite an optimistic 
report.   

Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Wallich now, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I share what Mr. Partee says about the full employment deficit.  In 
addition to the financial consequences, it also shows the greater limitations in the way of capital 
expenditures that we face once the economy is operating at a high level again and the problem, 
therefore, of getting an adequate amount of capital spending.   

Well, the other point I wanted to make is the stimulus that is being proposed to be put into 
the economy, not in fiscal ’78 but in the following year.  The program is divided in those two 
parts.  The second part is more iffy than the first, but they seem to be of about equal 
size--$15 billion apiece.  And I’m asking whether we’re not repeating the mistakes that have 
been made in the past--of overstimulating late in an expansion.  In putting in a two-year 
program, are we in danger of getting into the fourth year of expansion and overheating, and if so, 
what is the proper stance for monetary policy?  So, my question really goes to what is the likely 
effect of this second part, the second year of the fiscal program, to the extent that one can now 
assess it? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Governor Wallich, I think that’s a genuine concern.  I think, in 
answering that question, one should start by noting that, while we’re in a fairly advanced stage of 
the recovery, we still have an ample amount of underemployed resources, both on the labor side 
and on the industrial capacity side.  I would note also that in terms of the-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Is that true of skilled labor-- 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, it’s less true of skilled labor, Mr. Chairman, but if you look at the 
unemployment rates for adult men, I’ve always tended to use the rule of thumb that, when the 
adult male unemployment rate gets down to about 3 percent or somewhere around there, we’ve 
got tight labor markets.  It’s now above 5, 5 to 5-1/2.  I think there are particular skills which are 
in short supply--there always are except in massive depressions--but, generally speaking, we 
have an adequate supply of labor and of capacity to move up significantly further.  Governor 
Partee has noted that the real potential GNP level has been moved down by almost 4 percentage 
points.  Well, what that does is to move down the gap between actual GNP and potential GNP 
from 11 percentage points to 7.3 percentage points.  There’s still an awfully long ways to go yet, 
an awfully long ways to go.   

We have run some simulations, and I put them out without assigning a great deal of 
credibility to what the model can produce in this respect.  What we did was to take the 
judgmental staff projection and then extend it through 1978 by keeping the same monetary 
policy and then making the fiscal package for 1978 as close as we could to the spirit of the new 



1/17-18/77 - 30 - 
 

  
 

Administration’s recommendation, in the sense that we add some more for expenditures and we 
don’t repeat the rebate.  And what happens when you do this is that you get a growth rate of real 
GNP which stays fairly high--it stays in the 5 to 5-1/2 to 6 percent range, somewhere around 
there, but it does not lead to any buildup of inflationary pressures.  Actually, the rate of increases 
in the fixed-weight index goes up somewhat less for 1978 than it does for 1977.  It does give-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  How good has the model been in predicting inflation? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Recently it’s done quite well.  But not over the longer term. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  How good was it in 1972, 1973, the first half of 1974? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  During those periods we had most unusual influences affecting the 
price-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, that wasn’t my question. 

MR. PARTEE.  It missed by an order of 2, I think. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Pardon me? 

MR. PARTEE.  It missed by an order of 2, I think. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Well, it’s a very large factor, but I don’t think one can evaluate a 
comment of that kind without recognizing that we went into 1972 with price controls.  And the 
model was not running on its own.  We were making adjustments to the model to try to take that 
into account. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  How good was it in 1970? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I’d have to go back and look.  The model’s price performance has been 
one of its weaker elements.  As I said in the beginning, I don’t know how much credibility to 
assign to these comments that I’m making about the model’s results.   

MR. PARTEE.  Of course, if you continue to make adjustments because the model has 
been weakened at the moment, it will finally get to the point where it overestimates the rate of 
the price inflation because of adjustments that are made [judgmentally].  But I don’t know that 
we’ve reached that point. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are you satisfied, Mr. Wallich?  Okay, Mr. Kimbrel now, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know about the numbers, but I think the 
discussion with our own directors and the consensus [among] businessmen comes out pretty 
close to that expressed by Governor Lilly, and it’s not optimistic.  I think also that they have a 
concern that the cost may be indirectly associated with unusual weather conditions [and will] 
provide an opportunity to pass through energy costs and labor costs.  They’re enormously 
concerned about the prices and the potential for inflation.  I think, though, that the expectation of 



1/17-18/77 - 31 - 
 

  
 

our people is that prices are sure to escalate, but that the mood is going to continue [being] very 
good.   

Now, I wonder if the staff has given some thought to the possibility that some capital 
spending has been delayed, waiting for the determination of possible tax advantages this year, 
and it may be we have some [spending] coming on stream that was waiting for the possibility of 
taking tax advantages. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  We have thought about that question, President Kimbrel, and our view 
would be that, based on what businesses have seen in the past when tax incentives have been put 
in place--and I mean by that the tendency for new bills to be retroactive to the first time big 
business was beginning to think about this, perhaps the first time they were suggested seriously.  
So this would not likely be a significant factor in holding up capital spending.  We think that the 
hold-up in capital spending has been more an aggravation of the uncertainties with which 
businesses were looking at the economic and financial climate during 1976--an additional 
uncertainty generated by the pause [and] generated also perhaps to some degree by concerns 
about where the new Administration might be going. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  When was the Department of Commerce survey taken, the results 
of which were recently announced? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  November and early December.  And that could be still, you see, quite 
a bit out of date in terms of where thinking has gone since then. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Mr. Coldwell now, please. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve been listening.  I think I agree with much of what 
I hear.  To me, the tone of things has improved considerably; perhaps we’ve lost some of the 
threat of inventory change.  I have a feeling that this year ahead isn’t going to be quite as smooth 
as this staff forecast shows.  I guess you could say that about any year, but I have a feeling that 
this one’s going to be a highly erratic year.  We may get some heavy fiscal stimulus that runs up 
one quarter or a couple of months and then runs back down the stream.  I can see possibilities of 
the same sort of arguments and data that we faced in early ’75 on the money supply and 
aggregates data and maybe on some interest rates, too.  I can see some very sharp run-ups in 
consumer spending right after a rebate, if that’s the way the Congress goes.  I can see as a 
possibility that there may be another--if there is such a thing--midcourse pause somewhere down 
the line, too.  So I guess I’m a little more cautious about taking all this and converting it into a 
very bullish year ahead--but on the other hand, not much in the way of a bearish year, either.  I 
think it’s going to be a highly erratic one. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Morris now, please. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to follow up on Governor Partee’s comment on the 
crowding out issue in ’77.  The staff has an estimate of corporate external financing in ’77.  How 
does that compare to ’76?  



1/17-18/77 - 32 - 
 

  
 

MR. AXILROD.  President Morris, we have not projected any greater net external need for 
funds on the part of corporations in ’77 than in ’76; they’re virtually the same. And thus we have 
room for corporations to increase their [holdings of] government securities in somewhat the 
same fashion as they purchased them in ’76.  In fact, we’ve actually projected somewhat higher 
acquisition of government securities by corporations in ’77 than ’76.   

We don’t have a lot of the traditional features that you see in the government securities 
market from crowding out.  That is, we don’t project at this moment any increase in consumer 
purchases of government securities.  We have the government securities that are added being 
purchased by foreign and official institutions and by businesses and pension funds.  We don’t see 
any particular need for sizable consumer purchases over the year, which are the traditional 
source of interest rate pressures when looked at from the flow of funds, but we do see that 
picking up in the second half of the year.  So if you were going to locate a problem area from 
these figures--and it’s hard to locate--it would come about in the second half of the year through 
the beginning of pressure of selling securities outside the banking system. 

MR. MORRIS.  But to have a major problem you would have to have a substantial 
upgrading in the corporate investment numbers. 

MR. AXILROD.  Or diminishment in their profits.  A reduced profit flow. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, Mr. Partee commented on psychological reaction to 
one or another kind of deficit.  I think that once the business community becomes aware of what 
is an emerging fact, namely, that the deficit this fiscal year will be substantially larger than 
during the preceding record-breaking year--once the business community becomes aware of the 
emerging fact that large fiscal deficits are ahead for several years, this may well have a profound 
effect on inflationary expectations.  Mr. Mayo, please. 

MR. MAYO.  Just a question to Lyle.  Several months ago we heard quite a bit of 
discussion on the corporate side that tax liabilities were being piled up in ’76, payments were 
low in ’76 based on ’75 profits, and the place where this would begin to pinch was in the spring 
of 1977.  I haven’t heard a word about that for a month or so now, and I noted nothing in the 
discussion today, either written or oral, on the subject.  Does that mean, Lyle, that this was 
blown out of all proportion and really isn’t significant? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I think maybe Mr. Axilrod is better prepared to answer that.  We’ve 
been thinking about that in terms of financial market projections. 

MR. AXILROD.  President Mayo, I think it has been blown out of proportion.  Whether it 
isn’t at all significant--I think it has some minor significance.  We did put our estimate of the 
magnitude into the first part of the Greenbook, in the outlook, buried in the footnote--it’s put in a 
complicated way there, but what it amounts to is you might get about $3 billion or $4 billion 
more in payments coming in because of this development than you would otherwise have had.  
So these business corporations are going to have to find $3 billion or $4 billion more to pay over 
to the Treasury.  That could [generate] some very temporary money market pressures in the 
short-term market.  But I don’t think it would have any lasting significance at all, and to the 
extent that Treasury receipts turned out to be a little higher than were expected in the longer-run, 



1/17-18/77 - 33 - 
 

  
 

it washes out.  So I don’t see it as anything except a possible spot pressure around mid-March or 
mid-April. 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s when it is, mid-March to mid-April? 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, in March and June they make up their payments for 1976, so that 
make-up of the payments in ’76 occurs in mid-March and mid-June; and in April, it’s the first of 
their 1977 liability [payments].  So, if the experience of ’76 causes them to increase their ’77 
estimates, you get an effect in the beginning of that statement period. 

MR. PARTEE.  But it comes at approximately the same time that the Treasury would have 
to finance the refund, also. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, the refunds of the ’76 taxes to individuals-- 

MR. PARTEE.  No, I mean the rebate. 

MR. AXILROD.  Oh, we expect the rebates will be in May.  So, in coming through this 
whole period-- 

MR. MAYO.  Thank you, Steve, I heard a figure in excess of $10 billion, which seemed 
awful high at the time.  This reassures me. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, we expect total payments will exceed their accruals by about $8 
billion.  That may be in that order of magnitude, but that figure is itself about $3 billion more 
than in ’76. 

MR. GARDNER.  This is really not a synthesis [unintelligible].  I thought the pause was a 
pause; many of us did.  I was very interested in the external factors--OPEC.  December came and 
went, and we didn’t get a 15 percent rise or a 10 percent rise; we got something else.  I think I 
understand the reluctance of businesses to spend for long-term capital improvement and 
expansion.  I think as long as that fund of private stimulus remains a possibility, it’s a point of 
strength in the fact you [unintelligible].   

I’m just thinking out loud.  We’ve had a pretty good year in many ways.  Inflation has 
come down.  But there is one thing that deeply concerns me.  That is 7.9 percent unemployment.  
I worry about [unintelligible] getting a little more comfortable with some of the statements 
coming from the Administration, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that the Congress will not 
take off on many spending measures.  Unemployment is a very difficult thing because we have 
had  a pause and evidence that the pause is past.  We are looking forward to improvements, but 
still, it’s 7.9 percent unemployment, which has become such a campaign issue, such a 
psychological effect, that whatever conservatism may be inherent in the Administration’s plans, I 
don’t think it can weather for long a grudging slow reduction in this number.  It’s too visible a 
number.   

I was disappointed with the amount, Lyle, [by which] it came down in the last report.  And 
I am curious about the more rapid decline in unemployment that occurred early last year.  That 



1/17-18/77 - 34 - 
 

  
 

occurred in the first quarter or the second quarter, and unless that happens, those of you who 
have expressed concern about the size of the deficits and the like are going to be wise men--if 
unemployment were now 5 percent or 5-1/2 percent, we would all be smiling to see a good year 
ahead and perhaps one [in which] we could continue to make progress against inflation.  Do you 
have any comments about what you expect unemployment to do in the next-- 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I would want to talk mainly about what I think might be in store for the 
unemployment rate in the immediate future.  Last year, during the spring season, the 
unemployment rate was going down rapidly, in part because GNP was going rapidly in the first 
quarter, but also in part because the seasonals were probably out of whack.  The reported 
unemployment rate was really going down faster than the actual unemployment rate--if we knew 
what that really was.  I think some of that seasonal maladjustment is showing up in the fourth 
quarter of 1976 figures.  I think the actual, true seasonally unadjusted unemployment rate is 
probably a tenth or two lower than what we have recorded in November. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  When are we getting new seasonals? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  They normally come in February. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’ve already heard about a slight adjustment--that is, the 7.9 will 
be 7.8 for December on the basis of new seasonals.  Do you know about that? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I have not heard that yet.  But that would not surprise me.  That’s the 
direction we would have expected.  Now I think also that when you see a pickup in activity as 
we have seen in the last couple of months, you have to anticipate that it’s not going to affect the 
unemployment rate in a substantial way for a few months.  Initially what tends to happen is that 
businesses work their existing employees a little harder to get more productivity, then hours 
begin to lengthen a little bit, and then the new hirings begin.  So I would anticipate that if this 
pickup has some durability, as I think it will have, we will see some better unemployment 
statistics in the fourth quarter. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Lyle, yours is good classical analysis.  But it leaves out of account 
a new factor that has been disturbing our judgments and our forecast, and that is what may 
happen with the labor force. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  The labor force is a very erratically moving series, and it could be 
growing substantially next year.  We have allowed in our projections for a sizable increase, an 
increase of around 2 million, in the labor force.  That’s less than what we have had over this past 
year.  But it’s far above what we used to think of as the longer-term trend.  But you’re quite right 
that an erratic movement in the labor force during the first quarter, a large increase, could hold 
the unemployment rate up. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would only question the word “erratic.”  It might be a systematic 
factor in changing habits and new pressures arising from inflation, as the factors impinge on 
families, women joining the labor force--well, because people like to live better, and they 
certainly don’t want to see their standard of living coming down.  And one of the illusions 
generated by statistical reporting is that wages go up for everyone.  They go [up] on the average, 



1/17-18/77 - 35 - 
 

  
 

[but] tens of millions do not experience a wage increase in any six-month period, a year.  
Farmers’ incomes may decline--they have declined during the past year; incomes of proprietors 
and so on.  This may well be a systematic factor--partly [one of] changing cultural trends and 
partly the pressures on families arising from inflation, all of which causes an increase in labor 
force participation by women and, to some degree, by teenagers.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Gardner, Mr. Gramley.  Mr. Balles now, please. 

MR. BALLES.  I’d like to ask Lyle a question about the velocity estimates that seem to be 
implicit in the Greenbook forecast this time.  With the 5-1/2 percent M1 growth assumption, it 
appears that the velocity of M1 will be at the highest rate of growth in the third year of recovery 
of any of the post-Korean [War] cycles--namely 5.8 percent versus the previous average in the 
post-Korean [War] cycles of 3.4 percent--and about the same thing could be said for the velocity 
of M2.  What I am interested in is, on what basis did your staff, Lyle, say this velocity growth is 
going to be this substantial at this [stage] of the recovery, when the normal pattern has been a 
decline in the rate of growth in velocity of both M1 and M2 during the third year of recovery. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Mr. Axilrod, I think, is the person that would have the answers for that. 

MR. BALLES.  That’s a good move, Lyle. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I thought so too. 

MR. AXILROD.  One thing I would do, President Balles--we were well aware of the high 
velocity, of course--is reduce, to take a percentage point [off velocity] as reflecting the ongoing 
shift from M1 to other deposits or other money market instruments as people seek to 
economize--[a] trend that has been occurring over the past few years.  We would have estimated 
last year somewhere over 1-1/2 percentage points as a rough rule of thumb.  I would take at the 
beginning of this year something like 1 percent--it may prove to be more or may prove to be less.  
So that reduces the problem you’re discussing to some extent.   

Secondly, as you do point out, you had 3.4 percent in those particular periods.  Trend since 
’61 has been on the order of 3 percentage points.  The standard deviation around that trend has 
been about 1-3/4 percentage points; the absolute deviation around 2 percentage points.  So 
you’ve got a certain random factor that’s at work.  And, finally, we do realize that it’s a fairly 
large increase in velocity that’s called for, and we would expect for that reason--as time goes on 
in the next year--for interest rates to rise as people try to get cash by selling assets and 
borrowing.  So we wouldn’t really expect at this point a sort of free increase in velocity of that 
magnitude but would expect the economization to reflect in part the interest rate pressures that 
might occur as the year goes on. 

MR. PARTEE.  Is it also a rather high real GNP increase for the third year of recovery? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes it is, but it is certainly not unprecedented. 

MR. PARTEE.  That tends to add to this pressure on velocity?   



1/17-18/77 - 36 - 
 

  
 

MR. GRAMLEY.  It’s not unlike, as I remember the numbers, what happened in 1963, 
although I believe the pickup there, after the pause of ’61, was even a little more rapid than what 
we have had. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Black, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask you a question?  A while ago you 
indicated that you did not think businessmen yet realized the extent of the federal deficit or the 
inflationary implication of that.  Do you anticipate that this will have a significant impact on 
either the timing or the amount of business capital spending? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would not anticipate much response in that direction.  I would 
anticipate protective measures by businessman:  raising prices to the extent that they can--more 
than they would want to-- 

MR. BLACK.  Any inventory buildup? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Not really, because businessmen very rarely speculate on 
inventories, and the mood has not been in that direction.  The only recent year when we’ve had 
significant inventory speculations was, I think, 1974 [and] to some degree 1973.  Normally, 
speculation on inventory--I don’t think [it] is a part of business practice. 

MR. LILLY.  In the longer run or shorter run? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Shorter run.  I’m thinking of 1977. 

MR. LILLY.  Most businessmen, if they think there’s going to be a substantial increase in 
the next two quarters, will cover themselves.  But you might call that a speculation or you might 
also call that hedging. 

MR. JACKSON.  That’s true in materials and intermediate goods, not in finished goods.  
So you get a substantial disparity based on the stage in process. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And I would expect that the inflationary expectations I spoke of 
are being reflected in prices, making their own forecast, to some degree, come true.  And I would 
expect it in interest rates.  The effects on capital spending, if any would come later, might come 
toward the end of ’77, and my feeling is that it will come in ’78.  Mr. Jackson, please. 

MR. JACKSON.  I have a slightly different judgment on this question, Mr. Chairman.  I 
would think that once the perception of these [large-]size deficits takes place, we are likely to see 
a continuation of what we have already seen--a desire on the part of businesses to get their long-
term financing accomplished rather promptly, particularly refinancing, like the utilities are 
doing. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That would depend on rate movements. 

MR. JACKSON.  Right.  Second, I would guess that you see maybe a very, very short-
term acceleration in capital spending as people try to get projects completed that are in process 



1/17-18/77 - 37 - 
 

  
 

of construction, and an attempt to get under firm contract things that are committed but are not 
nailed down as to price.  But over the long-term, I would think that into ’78 it would indicate a 
reduction in capital spending because of--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You and I are on the same track. 

MR. JACKSON.  Yes, I would have a slightly different judgment about the consequences 
for the economy for ’77 to those expressed.  I think my own judgment about the actually 
measured economic progress wouldn’t be too different.  My own judgment would be that the 
public perception of that progress would not be as strong as the actual measurement of it.  I think 
[that members of] the public are poor economists is what I am trying to say, and therefore I think 
the consequences for unemployment, things of this sort, would produce a public attitude that 
would not reflect the progress that would actually be measured and be made.   

However, I don’t know whether to be awed or amused by the accuracy of the measurement 
you have been able to make on full employment, when you are able to measure unemployment 
levels at full employment down to the fourth decimal place.  I wish we shared your capacities in 
much more important fields, because I think that’s an amazing performance. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, basically, this is based on a measure of capacity of the economy.  
The unemployment rate just happens to fall out.  But it doesn’t depend on a direct measure of 
unemployment. 

MR. JACKSON.  4.96 percent is an amazing figure. 

MR. WALLICH.  And I think many people would say that 4.9 is lower than can be 
reached, actually for labor force reasons rather than for capital capacity reasons. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t think Mr. Partee intended to suggest that the second 
decimal had any significance; he might even question the first. 

MR. PARTEE.  I certainly wanted only to report to the Committee the figures.  I think it is 
a good thing to allow for structural change in talking about what the economy would hope to 
accomplish, and in that sense I think this is a real move forward compared with the way we used 
to measure potential GNP and [with] a 4 percent unemployment rate as an invariant target. 

MR. JACKSON.  When we talk about structural change, I think that’s true of the labor 
force, too, as we talk about the public perception of economic progress.  When you see about 40 
percent of the women as participants in the work force, I think our perception of an acceptable 
unemployment level for those participants in the work force is going to change. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  As a matter of potential output, I wrote a paper in 1935 in which I 
attempted to demonstrate by impeccable logic that potential output cannot be measured.  I have 
lived during periods when this has become a habit.  Well, I don’t think I’ve changed my mind.  
Mr. Partee you were going to make a point? 



1/17-18/77 - 38 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I was just going to ask, following up on Governor Gardner’s 
comments and also Governor Lilly.  One of the problems is in this question of the political 
perception--and also your comment--[regarding] the rate of improvement in the economy.  A 
little technical difficulty in the staff’s projection, Lyle, is that the lowest quarterly increase is 
[for] the first quarter in the projections for the year--5 percent.  And I was wondering if you had 
a view as to what the possibilities might be that in fact we could exceed that growth rate in the 
first quarter--that is, start out in the year pretty well?  I note that you don’t have much inventory 
accumulation in the first quarter, and I note also that you hold housing starts the same in the first 
quarter as in the fourth.  Could those two areas perhaps turn out to be stronger? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  Yes, they both could.  We have expected some decline in housing 
starts, largely on technical grounds, in December.  I haven’t seen the figures yet, but judging by 
the Chairman’s earlier comment, it doesn’t sound as though we made a very accurate decision in 
that regard.  But I commented earlier, in response to President Eastburn’s question, that I do 
think our inventory number for the first quarter may be too low.  We put this together and froze 
it before we got the November figures on inventories, and they were really quite a surprising 
development.  If it turns out that December inventories are also negative in real terms, as I think 
the November figures indicate was the case for that month, well, then, the prospects for a real 
pickup in industrial production and employment and inventory accumulation in the first quarter 
are quite substantial. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, at this point I would join, to an attenuated degree, Mr. 
Coldwell’s comment on erratic movement.  We may well get an erratic movement of inventory 
change in the next year.  Sharp buildup, slowdown. 

MR. PARTEE.  The point that I was trying to make with Lyle is that output could go up 
faster here.  It would show up in a little more inventory accumulation. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That would be my guess. 

MR. GRAMLEY.  I think it’s a very real possibility, yes. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  For the year as whole, that’s another matter. 

MR. JACKSON.  Would the weather, natural gas situation impact on this prospect? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  It might, yes.  We are going to be contacting the Reserve Banks right 
after this meeting this weekend to ask them to help us ascertain what the weather may mean for 
production.  But I heard on the radio this morning that there are at least four states that are quite 
worried:  Ohio, Minnesota, Michigan, and Pennsylvania.  And we have no experience in terms of 
trying to estimate how we are to adjust estimates for industrial production, and I don’t think it 
would be wise for us to try.  But that’s certainly going to be a negative factor. 

MR. JACKSON.  It strikes me as a possibility--the inventory accumulation could be 
delayed even though it might be not be canceled at this time. 



1/17-18/77 - 39 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, if you apply standard seasonals, you may find that activity 
shows a decline when the seasonals which you ought to be applying are of a different character, 
because we are having an unusual winter--an unusual January.  And that will certainly have to be 
watched very carefully.  I would use a standard seasonal, and then I would try to use a seasonal 
adjustment for weather factors.  Now a good deal of research was done on that years ago, and I 
haven’t kept up with it.  Whether we know how to do it now or not, I don’t know, but I’m sure 
we can do it roughly, you know, as a guide to the interpretation of the statistics.  Well, we’ve had 
a good discussion of the economy.  Yes, Mr. Mayo. 

MR. MAYO.  Just one other observation on the employment side, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t 
want this to be interpreted as expressing any lack of concern for the point that Steve mentioned, 
which I share, but I made the point before that I wondered what would happen if we just took 
civilian employment and related it to population in the United States--preferring on some 
occasions to take a gross measure because of all the difficulty we have in fine tuning all of these 
adjusted measures.  I found it rather significant.   

We didn’t do [the exercise for] every year, but we took years that we thought would be 
significant back to 1929, and I am glad to report that civilian employment in this country as a 
percentage of population is at its highest point in history.  Now that means conversely that that 
proportion of the population that is not employed is at its lowest point.  Don’t pursue this too far, 
but I think it is a rather interesting observation.  We measure all sorts of things in international 
statistics on a per capita basis.  This is a per capita basis in terms of civilian employment.  Not a 
new record by a large [amount], but it’s 40.7 percent as against 39 percent in ’29--slightly over 
40 percent but not as high as ’74.  Civilian employment divided by total population--it’s a very 
simple statistic on an annual basis. 

MR. JACKSON.  Does your figure adjust for military and government workers? 

MR. MAYO.  This is just civilian, but it includes government civilians. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What is the percentage ratio, Lyle, of total employment to the total 
population of age 16 and over? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  It’s been going up.  I don’t have a figure in my head as to the precise 
ratio. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I mean, is it at a record level? 

MR. GRAMLEY.  It is, it is. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I thought so--at a record level.  That, perhaps, is a more significant 
figure, Bob. 

MR. MAYO.  Yes, it’s less gross. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Less gross, less subject to some questioning or criticism one might 
make because the base there is the potential working population. 



1/17-18/77 - 40 - 
 

  
 

MR. MAYO.  Of course, there are differences again, over time, as to what proportion of 
those slightly under 16 or slightly over 16 are working or aren’t.  This is merely a terribly 
simple-minded approach that anybody can look at.  And, by the way, the Wall Street Journal 
yesterday had a column that approached this same point.  It’s not something to use in devastating 
the worriers about unemployment, but in terms of mouths to feed, in terms of standard of living, 
total population I think is quite--after all, we are all supposed to be equal in this regard, one way 
or another.  It has some merit. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Very good.  Any other questions?  Yes, Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN.  Just to comment on the situation in Ohio and western Pennsylvania and the 
problem with information, we have checked-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Would you also comment on natural gas? 

MR. WINN.  --yes, we had contacted the utility companies to get some feel [for] this, and 
we knew that one company had real problems with gas supply.  The others assured us that it 
didn’t make any difference what the weather was, they were going to be able to handle any kind 
of need, and at the moment they are all shut down.  And a month ago, they told us--and this was 
good information, you know, the top of the companies--that they had no problem, and at the 
moment, plants across the state are closed.  It’s a real serious problem there. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s been predicted for Ohio for a long time. 

MR. WINN.  Well, that’s because of one company that sold gas they didn’t have, but many 
of the companies have got out and drilled their own wells, and we have had all kinds of 
scurrying for just this sort of emergency.  But we’re shut, there’s no question.  Perhaps this is 
good in the long run--that we will now, as a nation, face up realistically to some of our energy 
problems, because [we] are [in a] very weak [position].  We had brown-outs across the state on 
the electric side, and the gas companies are just providing a holding operation.  Not operating. 

MR. MAYO.  We have had natural gas shut off to a number of large users, but they have 
been able to convert to other fuels, and there has been no big unemployment as a result of this, or 
plant closings. 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, may I just follow up on John Balles’s complications.  Our 
people feel very strongly that the projections of growth in the Greenbook are impossible to 
achieve at the rate of money growth which is assumed in those projections.  We feel that our 
model, although it probably has been frozen in recent weeks--I’m glad that John comes from a 
warmer climate than we--projects about 1 percentage point less in the rate of real growth in the 
year ahead than the staff here projects, and I think maybe it’s just important to reiterate the 
possibility of differences of opinion on this subject. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that’s entirely valid, but I would have liked your comments 
better if you had not based it on the model.  The St. Louis model does not get high marks for its 
predictive power.  In fact, it gets very low marks in the economics profession.  Am I right on 
that? 



1/17-18/77 - 41 - 
 

  
 

MR. GRAMLEY.  You are correct, yes. 

MR. ROOS.  Fuel injection has been changed recently. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, gentlemen, any other comments on the economy?  Well, 
let’s take a brief coffee break now. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we want to turn now to the discussion of our longer-
term targets, and we will first turn to the monetary aggregates.  I think members of the 
Committee know that the House Banking Committee will be holding a hearing on February 3 
under the House Concurrent Resolution.  I will be testifying on that subject on that day.  And 
therefore, this Committee must today decide once again on our monetary objectives for the year 
ahead, that is, for the interval running from the fourth quarter of 1976 to the fourth quarter of 
1977.   

Now, in setting these monetary targets for the year ahead, we need to consider apparent 
conditions of the economy.  We’ve done that.  We need to consider economic prospects for the 
year ahead and their dependence on the monetary policy that we lay down, and we’ve done that.  
We know less about monetary policy, on our overall judgment, than about economic prospects.  
And finally, we need to consider the degree to which, if any, our monetary policy should 
contribute to unwinding the inflation from which our economy has been suffering since the mid-
1960s.   

Of these several considerations, the last, I believe, is peculiarly important for us at the 
Federal Reserve.  I say this because no other branch of government, certainly not the executive, 
certainly not the Congress, has anything approaching an articulate policy for bringing down the 
rate of inflation.  Now, if we at the Federal Reserve should fail to persevere in bringing down our 
monetary growth rates, which are far too high from the viewpoint of ever returning to price 
stability, there would be no chance whatever for reestablishing a foundation for economic 
stability in the future.  Recognizing this basic principle, this Committee during the past 21 
months has moved very gradually, but rather consistently, toward lower monetary growth rates.  
Our moves may have been much too gradual, but they at least have been in a salutary direction.   

In approaching the problem of setting monetary growth rates for the year ahead, I start 
with the basic thought that, if at all feasible, we should once again make a small move in the 
direction of monetary growth rates that are tolerably consistent with eventual restoration of a 
stable price level.  Now, in my own mind, this basic thought is clouded by other considerations, 
namely, unemployment is still unduly high.  We have a new Administration; the new 
Administration has proposed a fiscal plan for reducing unemployment, and any lowering of 
monetary growth rates at this time would, I’m quite sure, be very widely interpreted--and not 
only in the political arena--as an attempt on the part of the Federal Reserve to frustrate the efforts 
of a newly elected President and newly elected Congress to get our economy, to use a popular 
phrase, “moving once again.”  I’ve tried--it obviously isn’t easy--to bring these two sets of 
thoughts into some sort of harmony.   



1/17-18/77 - 42 - 
 

  
 

And accordingly, my recommendations to the Committee are as follows.  First, that we 
leave the projected growth range for M1 as is--4-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent--for the coming year.  
Second, that we modify the growth ranges for M2 and M3--specifically, that the growth range of 
M2 be set at 7 to 10 percent instead of 7-1/2 to 10 percent, and the growth range of M3 be set at 
8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent instead of 9 to 11-1/2.   

The proposal to leave M1 unchanged has at least this advantage:  You would avoid any 
charge that the Federal Reserve is indifferent to unemployment or, and this is more serious, it 
would avoid the charge that we are seeking to frustrate the efforts of the new Administration.  
The proposal to lower the lower limits of M2 and M3 by 1/2 percentage point has, I think, the 
following advantages.  First, it recognizes the recent tendency of various banks and thrift 
institutions around the country to reduce the interest rates paid to savers, and this tendency may 
well result in a lower growth rate of M2 and M3 in the immediately succeeding months.  Later 
on in the year, higher market rates of interest may well slow down the inflow of funds to thrift 
institutions.  And finally, the slight lowering of the lower limit of M2 and M3 would once again 
provide some evidence that the Federal Reserve is sticking to its repeatedly stated objective of 
gradually bringing down the monetary growth rates in the interest of restoring--not immediately, 
but over a period years--general price stability.   

Now, I realize that the lowering of the lower limit of M2 and M3 might evoke some 
criticism.  But on this point I would say the following.  First, no matter what we do, there will be 
some criticism, and this is an inevitable accompaniment of central bank action.  Secondly, I 
would say that, as we all know, far less attention is paid by the general public, by the Congress, 
even by economists, to M2 or M3 than to M1.  M1 is still the magnitude that is widely followed 
and respected.  And I would say, finally, that even after lowering the lower limit of M2 and M3, 
the midpoint of the range for M2 and the midpoint of the range for M3 would still be precisely 
what it was six months ago.  Therefore, no lowering from where it was six months ago, and this 
would be duly noted in our statement to the Congress.   

These are my best thoughts on a very difficult subject.  Let us now have a general 
discussion and try to determine where we should come out.  Who would like to speak first?  Mr. 
Eastburn and then Mr. Black. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to spend a little bit more time on the question 
of the degree to which monetary policy should work with fiscal policy in this coming quarter.  I 
think this is a very difficult task. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Coming quarter or coming year? 

MR. EASTBURN.  Well, in setting a long-term target, of course, we’re setting a year’s 
target, but since we do this quarterly, I think we do have another shot at it in a few months, and I 
think it would be in the near-term when the fiscal package would be going into effect.  I find it 
helpful to go back and look at what happened in 1975, when we had a similar situation--had the 
tax rebate in the spring and, as you say, the Fed has been criticized since then for frustrating the 
fiscal action. 



1/17-18/77 - 43 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It has been both criticized and applauded, with more of the latter 
than the former. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Well, it has given rise to some speculation that the Fed will try to 
avoid that kind of criticism by doing something different.  Anyhow, I found it helpful to go back 
and look at ’75, and I’d like to review that briefly.  What happened was that the funds rate 
moved up somewhat to help keep the aggregates under control in the spring of that year.  The 
aggregates, as you may remember, considerably exceeded the targets for a time:  M1, for 
example, grew at an annual rate of 11 percent in one month, and 18 percent in another 
month--two successive months.  The Committee did not change the long-term targets to 
accommodate those overshoots.  And so, in effect, the Committee permitted some increase in 
rates, it permitted some overshoots in the aggregates temporarily, and it held the long-term 
target.  

I think this is a good model to follow because it does have the advantage of supporting the 
fiscal action, of being careful to hold any increase in interest rates to moderate amounts--to only 
those amounts it would be necessary to prevent the aggregates from getting completely out of 
hand.  It would permit the Committee to explain that its main concern is with the longer-term 
growth of the aggregates, and I would prefer, I think, to see us hold to the long-term target in that 
kind of a model. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Black, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve struggled with this dilemma that you described so well, 
and I reached pretty much the same sort of conclusion that you have, that despite the political 
problems that do arise from adjusting these rates down, that we ought to make a small move.  I 
was a little surprised, really, that you knocked down the lower limits of M2 and M3.  My feeling 
would be that those are probably all right.  We need that much expansion, probably, and my 
preference would be to knock 1/2 [percentage point] off the upper ends of those two.  But 
otherwise, I come out about where you do. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, there’s a lot to be said for that.  I struggled with that issue, 
and I’m not at all sure that I came out correctly.  The effect on the midpoint is the same. 

MR. BLACK.  I think that’s important. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And in that sense, the two are interchangeable.  By leaving the 
upper value where it is, we would be less likely--that was my reason--to attract, or to encourage, 
or to excite criticism. Now, the troublesome figure is the high point, you see, the high value.  
And it’s that high value that is outside the range of historical experience, and that would be a 
more direct way of approaching the point.  I didn’t, for the reasons that I’ve stated.  The 
midpoint, which is the effective value, is identical; and by lowering the lower limit, we’re less 
likely to incite criticism.  I don’t consider that a decisive argument, and I’ve great respect for 
your suggestion. 

MR. BLACK.  My feeling was sort of that they’re saying, “My gosh, they’re willing to 
tolerate only 7 percent growth in M2 with an inflation rate such as we’ve got, that’s just not 



1/17-18/77 - 44 - 
 

  
 

adequate.”  But your reasoning may be better on that.  I don’t have a great deal of trouble with 
one or the other.  Some move, I think, should be made. 

MR. LILLY.  May I ask a question?  In the past construction of the long-term rates, did 
you assign a weighting to the three Ms for the longer-terms? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, but in our shorter-term targets we’ve been operating under the 
general rule for some months now of giving approximately equal weight to M1 and M2.  And 
since there is some relationship between the short-term and the long-term, even though it’s a 
somewhat tenuous relationship, there is some carry-over--but only to a very mild degree, you 
see--of this Committee’s short-term weighting.  Mr. Kimbrel, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I particularly appreciate your willingness early to give 
some evaluation of your reading of the possibility of thwarting fiscal policy by any action of 
ours.  Candidly, I would feel somewhat reluctant to raise the M1 ranges, but I continue to be, as 
expressed earlier, very much attentive to inflationary possibilities--they continue to be 
unsatisfactory--and expectations, from my vantage point, are even more disturbing.  
Nevertheless, I think we need to demonstrate our concern for that expectation, and I am 
impressed with the prospect for maintaining a gradual lowering of the long-term target.  So with 
that I think I would be very happy with exactly the prescription you have suggested. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Jackson, please. 

MR. JACKSON.  Mr. Chairman, I think the one thing we need to recognize in the 
discussion we’re having, particularly in the M2 and M3 measures, is that the retention of 
approximately the same targets [assumes] a substantial reduction in the rate of growth in time 
and savings deposits, both in commercial banks and in thrift institutions, because the actual rate 
of growth in M2 for ’76 was 11.3 [percent], which is out of our present range, and M3 was 13.1 
[percent], which is even more substantially beyond.  And I think we need to recognize that even 
retention of our present targets over time will constitute a substantial change from the present 
environment in which those types of saving activities are taking place.   

Now, of course, the next question is, to what extent is a substantial change appropriate for 
the economic and inflationary prospects that we have before us?  I personally feel that these 
aberrations, as I’ve said before, are to a large measure the product of this silly price-fixing 
mechanism called Regulation Q, and that the underlying fundamentals of the monetary policy 
that attaches to these are clouded by the shifts from one type of liquidity to another type.  And 
we’ve seen some indications of that. I feel that, given the perspective of ’75 that we had, and 
given the impact on economic activity that will take place--and there will be some real impact 
taking place as liquidity shifts from these types of savings forms to other types of savings forms 
if our long-term objectives are reached--that this will produce a salutary effect on inflationary 
prospects, but it will also produce some effect on real economic activity.   

So therefore, I share the fundamental objectives that you outlined.  And I think this 
perhaps will be much more real in [the effort to control] inflation and inflationary expectations 
than perhaps we recognize from the action taken today.  And so I would support the proposals 
that you’re making, but I think the impact will be much more dramatic if they are carried out.  



1/17-18/77 - 45 - 
 

  
 

After all, these are current objectives [unintelligible].  But I think the result, perhaps, is more 
dramatic than has been outlined in your statement because I think they would be very real, and 
probably even dramatic, in some of their economic ramifications. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Balles now, please. 

MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, in some of your earlier testimony, it seems to me, you’ve 
done an outstanding job educating Congress as to the change in financial technology that’s going 
on, and why M1, therefore, doesn’t mean as much as it used to.  And in fact, if adjusted for 
earlier conditions, [it is] perhaps as much as a couple of percentage points below where it 
otherwise would have been if these changes in financial technology had not come about.  That’s 
one point I’d like to get laid on the table as a background for my own personal views as to what 
ranges we ought to adopt.   

And the second key consideration in my thinking was one that Governor Jackson has just 
alluded to, and that is, for some time now, we have had inconsistent ranges, I’m afraid, for M1 
versus M2 and M3.  The big overshoot we’ve seen in M2 and M3, we all know about, and I’m 
concerned that that will continue to go on; and that really, to be consistent with our M1 growth 
range, we have needed--for some time now--a higher range of growth for both M2 and M3.   

The third consideration in my thinking is that, for some time, my staff has been calling my 
attention, and increasingly so in the very recent past, to the fact that, as they looked at the 
historical record, M2 has now emerged as a superior measure of monetary influence on the 
economy since about mid-’74, if you go back and make all the tests--from, say, 1960 to ’74.  The 
forecast of GNP through the third quarter of last year, using both M1 and M2--the M2 forecast is 
now showing a lower error than M1.  In short, I hope that, if you feel you can help educate both 
the Congress and the public about that fact, [then] we perhaps ourselves [will pay] even more 
attention to M2 than we have.  Perhaps weighing it even more heavily than the 50 percent that 
we’ve been giving it.   

Before I came in and heard your persuasive remarks--and I’m impressed by all of the 
caveats that you’ve mentioned, about reaction to the Administration’s new fiscal package to 
stimulate employment and a fear that we may be frustrating their objectives--I prepared a 
different set of numbers that I think might get around the problems which you mentioned.  And 
that would be first of all to reduce the M1 growth range to 4 to 6 percent, based on another of 
your good statements about how financial technology is changing.  And if you agree with the 
analysis that I’ve just gone through, to stress even more the importance that we now attach to 
M2--to make those growth ranges consistent--to up the growth range of M2 to 8 to 10 percent, 
and the M3, 9 to 12.   

So if we did all those things, we would be, on the one hand, seeming to reduce the M1 
range--not seeming to, we would be--by half a point in both the upper and lower boundaries.  
But assuming a satisfactory explanation, at which you are very adept, of why we’re doing 
this--in view of the change in financial technology and the growing importance of time and 
savings deposits--we would be on the record as increasing by half a point the lower range of 
M2--that is going from the present [range of] 7-1/2 to 10, [up] to 8 to 10.  And with regard to 



1/17-18/77 - 46 - 
 

  
 

M3, increasing by half a point the upper range, going from the present [range of] 9 to 11-1/2, up 
to 9 to 12.   

I’m equally concerned about the danger of inflation that’s been discussed at length around 
here this morning.  And I’m quite concerned that if we in this year ahead were to experience the 
same sort of large overshoot on M2 and M3 that we had in 1976, we might well be setting the 
stage for significant inflationary pressures by 1978.  Well, for that rather complex set of reasons, 
I would therefore suggest a possible alternative for the three ranges that I just mentioned. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Partee, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe I would support the ranges you proposed, 
recognizing in each case that they’re pretty tight.  With regard to M1, I’m a little surprised to 
hear President Balles suggest a reduction in the range, when earlier he commented that the 
implied velocity increase was extraordinarily large [on the order] of the 5-1/2 percent--that is 
where we were--in the projection.  And I want to comment on that because I think that’s true.   

I believe that a 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 M1 range [is appropriate], given what I think are fairly 
optimistic views on inflation by the staff and a real growth rate which--it’s all right, but just--is 
at the lower end of a range that people would seek, I think, in the abstract, for 1977.   

It’s a tight objective, 4-1/2 to 6-1/2.  I’m not at all sure that there won’t be people who will 
say that, “Well, in view of the fiscal program and the needs of the economy, the Committee 
should have increased its M1 ranges.”  But I think I wouldn’t want to increase them, certainly 
not at this point, anyhow.  I just would be afraid to make a further reduction, John, because of 
the implied velocity rise, even allowing for Steve’s 1 percentage point for shifting definition.  
You still have a large velocity rise--if I understood you right, you said 5.8 percent for the year, 
and if you take that point off, that would make it 4.8, and that’s still above the usual experience.   

Also, although I agree with what the Chairman said about the poor predictive results of the 
St. Louis model, I think the St. Louis model must have said about the same thing, given 
President Roos’s statement that we can’t make that real growth [projection] with the money 
supply range we have.  Therefore, I am a little uncomfortable with 4-1/2 to 6-1/2--I think that the 
needs of the economy might be for more rather than less--but I would support the 4-1/2 to 6-1/2.   

Now M2 and M3--I think we need to recognize that what we’re doing essentially is 
projecting interest rates.  Given the M1 growth rate and the performance of the economy, M2 
and M3 will be largely a function of interest rates.  Governor Jackson is quite right that the upper 
ends of the present ranges for M2 and M3 imply a considerable increase in interest rates.  
Because throughout 1976, we produced numbers a good deal higher for M2 and M3; and in the 
fourth quarter of 1976, we’ve produced much higher figures for M2 and M3 given the interest 
rates we had at that time.  I’m inclined to think there will be some increase in interest rates, but I 
can’t support President Black’s suggestion that we reduce the upper end of that range, since I 
think it’s already a tight squeeze.  It implies that we anticipate a considerable increase in interest 
rates as the year goes on to get down within the present ceiling on M2 and M3.   



1/17-18/77 - 47 - 
 

  
 

I would, however, be prepared to support a lower limit of the range, and the reason I would 
is that we’ve been so miserable in our interest rate projections that, in fact, there could be a lot 
more interest rate rise than we expect as the year goes on, which would tend to produce low-end 
numbers for M2 and M3.  And I doubt that, on those grounds alone, the Committee would want 
to loosen up on policy.  That is, [if we get], let’s say, a very high federal deficit or a shift--as I 
said before--in the full employment deficit number to a much higher number, you [will get] 
considerable upward pressure on rates, and those savings inflows [will start] to recede 
significantly.  I doubt that we would want, on those grounds alone, to pump a lot more money 
into the economy.  In fact, I think we’d probably be inclined to go the other way.  And therefore, 
I think it’s consistent to have a lower low end, Bob, on M2 and M3, rather than to reduce the 
high end, even though historically you’re quite right that those numbers are a little bit on the 
high side. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  They’re very much high. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, but with a 5 percent inflation rate, and the desire for real growth [to 
move] from 6 to 7, it requires quite a sizable number I believe. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The average rate of growth of M3 for the period 1966 to 1975 was 
8.8 [percent].  The average for the period 1971 to 1975 was 10.8.  The average for 1976 was 
12.4.  The corresponding figures for M2 are 8.3, 9.5, and 10.9. 

MR. PARTEE.  And you’re suggesting an upper limit of 11-1/2 on the range for M3, and 
of 10 for M2, which is less than last year’s result in both cases. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s correct.  Last year’s result was very much out of the ball 
park. 

MR. PARTEE.  My point, simply, Mr. Chairman, is that I think the Committee must be 
aware of the fact that--because we’re talking about relationships among the family of 
aggregates--it’s basically projecting interest rates.  It may be that, sometime in the year, 
Regulation Q could give, which would hold the number up.  But I hate to predict that, because of 
the difficulty in negotiating those changes.  So, altogether, I find myself prepared to accept the 
numbers you have suggested.  But I do want to note that I think that in each case, the range is 
tight relative to what we expect the economy to do. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Baughman now, please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve wondered how we’re going to handle this 
situation in the environment that we apparently will be in, and I hadn’t been as resourceful as 
you have been in terms of how it might be handled, because I had tended to think in terms of 
some change in the top instead of the bottom of the ranges.  I’m prepared to support your 
proposal.  It seems to me it’s probably about as optimal a suggestion as could be, of the 
proposals that could be put together, given the prospective environment that we’re going to be 
in.  I would go with you. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Morris, please. 



1/17-18/77 - 48 - 
 

  
 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I guess I’m in a minority position in this, but it seems to 
me that there are advantages in the present situation of staying with the present ranges.  I think 
you’re quite right that we must have a policy of gradually moving down the ranges.  But I don’t 
think we ought to get an [unintelligible] policy--to have a feeling that we’ve got to make a 
change every three months.  It seems to me, given the state of the economy, that on pure 
economic grounds, a case could be made for staying with the present ranges until the leading 
indicators of capital spending start showing some strength, which they don’t at the moment.  And 
my second reason is that, it seems to me, this is not a change.  The change you’re proposing is 
not a change in substance.  This seems to me to be a questionable judgment.   

I would prefer [waiting] until the next meeting of the Committee, [which] would be in 
May.  It seems to me that would be a better time to make changes.  I think we would be better off 
to stay with the present set in this particular context. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would only make one comment.  There’s never a good time.  I’ve 
learned that from very long and hard experience.  Secondly, the next time we turn to this subject 
will be in April, and the Congress may just have passed the fiscal bills recommended by the 
President, or be on the point of passing.  That isn’t going to be an easy time for us, either, in 
terms of what Mr. Baughman euphemistically described as the environment. 

MR. MORRIS.  Well, I think you’re quite right, Mr. Chairman, but I think that if we were 
making a change in substance here, and [if] I thought we had the economic case to make it, I 
think it would be quite different.  But to make a change that I don’t think is substantive in this 
climate--I don’t think that it makes a lot of sense. 

MR. WALLICH.  On the fact that there was an overshoot in M2 and M3, I would like to 
explore this a little.  If we were to continue with the same ranges for M2 and M3, we would be 
doing nothing to correct for that overshoot.  In other words, we would be allowing base drift to 
proceed.  Now this is a convenient way of dealing with a past event, but it does not reflect the 
intentions that we had three months ago when we set this target.  If, on the other hand, we bring 
down the range for M2 and M3, we would be making a correction of this overshoot, and I think 
that should carry some weight.   

Now, as to whether to reduce the upper or the lower end and whether these reductions 
should involve a change in the midpoint with respect to six months ago, is a more complex 
matter.  There is some logic in bringing down the upper end, precisely because  of the overshoot 
element.  On the other hand, we’ve learned, I think, from the experience of past hearings, that 
Congress is more sensitive to the upper than the lower ends.   

Now let me comment for a moment on M2 and M3.  I don’t feel like giving much weight 
to M2 and M3 in the short run.  In the long run, M2 has turned out to have been remarkably 
stable--over the last 15 years.  I can only think at the present time that this is the result of two 
conflicting trends.  The M1 component has all the instability that M1 has, and the time and 
savings deposit component has instabilities which we are familiar with, namely the 
intermediation process that occurs because market interest rates are low.  So, stability here is, I 
think, [a] balance [of] conflicting forces, either of which could change, and for that reason M2 in 
the short-run does not impress me as a very valuable guide.   



1/17-18/77 - 49 - 
 

  
 

I think the logic of the situation is that M2 will tend to move more slowly as interest rates 
go up, and in that sense, my concerns about base drift will be allayed.  Also, the inconsistency 
that has been observed on the M1, M2, [and] M3 targets--the trends are just not in line with the 
way our ranges are set up.  That, too, I think is likely to come more into line [if], over the years, 
interest rates go up.   

One last concern--the targets ought to be flexible.  We want to be able to change our 
minds.  The only consistent action we have taken is to lower them over time.  This, too, is an 
element where flexibility or inflexibility can play a role.  I agree with you, Mr. Chairman--there 
is never a good time.  I suspect that now is perhaps a better time than three months from now to 
do it.  I would like to caution us that we may run out of half percents, which [unintelligible] to 
reduce over time as we go, if we operate on the fringes as we have to, if we do that on a quarterly 
basis.  So-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Proceeding as we have, Henry, I’ve made some calculations--it 
will take us ten years.  Ten years if we’re lucky, if we don’t have any recession, and if we just 
persist in doing pretty much what we’ve been doing. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I feel apprehensive about quarterly changes.  This one, it seems to 
me, has a good deal of logic, and I support the reductions in the lower ends of the M2 and M3.  
So I do not arrive at a different conclusion.  But there are some considerations here, I think, that 
at some time might need to be examined more in depth. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Winn, please. 

MR. WINN.  I’m a little bit of the devil’s advocate today.  I’d like to refresh our memory 
as to where we set our target three months ago, when we were faced with a pause.  We were 
concerned about the outlook, and we were not nearly as positive as we are at the moment; yet we 
took a stand for cutting back at that time in view of our concern about inflation and so forth.  It 
seems to me that we’ve got a much more positive economic environment at the moment but 
more legitimate concerns about the inflation problem, and therefore I think we have to make 
some sort of a gesture, although I get uneasy as to just exactly where that should be.  But I think 
we have to persist at this time.  And I would follow Dave’s advice to be a little more tolerant of 
an overshoot or a miss here in this first period as a way of both maintaining a posture of concern 
and target and at the same time adjusting to the realities of the situation. 

MR. PARTEE.  That’s a question of short-term targets. 

MR. WINN.  That’s correct. 

MR. EASTBURN.  It is a question as to what we mean by targets. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Mr. Coldwell now, please. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’ve been debating this matter in my mind for several 
days, weeks, months as to where to opt for standstill or some modest lowering of targets, and I 
agree with you that, if we are going to lower targets, M2, M3 [offer] the better logic than M1.  



1/17-18/77 - 50 - 
 

  
 

The arguments that I devised in my mind went something like this for a standstill:  We do have 
adequate range [from] where we stand today to probably come within that.  We certainly 
exceeded the M2, M3 this past year; I believe we came within the targets for M1.   

I don’t believe it is absolutely necessary for us to move every time, and perhaps when we 
see something very strong in the way of a move, it might be worthwhile to knock a full 
percentage point off instead of a half percentage point, and maybe cut your years to 5 instead of 
10.  But the lower growth rates, I think, can be reached within our current stance.  Certainly if 
we’re looking at a 5 percent inflation, we’re going to have to accommodate some of that in our 
aggregates.   

But I look at the primary function of these annual rates, [and] as I see them, [there are] 
basically two.  First, the public perception of what we’re doing and the congressional oversight 
position.  And second, some very broad Committee guidance--I would emphasize very 
broad--because I don’t hear many Committee members, perhaps excluding President Balles, who 
keep reminding us that our short-run [targets] ought to be somewhat consistent with our long-run 
targets.  And consequently, while we get some very broad guidance out of [the annual rates], our 
performance really hasn’t been tied very well to the long-range targets.   

I think the possibilities over the coming year are interesting--almost a possibility of a 
reversal of 1976--in that we might get greater M1 growth and lower M2, M3 growth, especially 
if we really believe that this economy is going to move up strongly and interest rates advance 
with it.  To lower the targets comes down to a point, really, of the degree of harassment you want 
to take at your hearing, because I think you will get harassed by a Congress that says, “Well, you 
are trying to frustrate us, and you’re not going to provide the funds necessary to make our fiscal 
policy work.”  Now that doesn’t bother me, because I’m not on the stand now.  It may bother 
you considerably before your hearing’s over.   

But assuming you can get away with this without too much harassment, and I believe you 
can because of the particular points you picked, I’m perfectly willing to [reduce] the [lower end 
of the] range [for M2] to 7 and [for M3 to] 8-1/2.  I would like to point out to the Committee that 
we do have a different spread in these three aggregates.  M1 at 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 is a 2-point spread, 
and I have heard some around this table [who say] that it ought to be a single-point number and 
others who want a 3- or 4-point spread, including those who said it doesn’t matter a bit whether 
you’re talking 4 or 8, it means the same figure. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That comment touches one of my nerves.  I have made that 
comment repeatedly with regard to our two-month targets.  I’ve never made it with regard to the 
long run. 

MR. COLDWELL.  No, I recognize you have not made it for the long run.  Nevertheless, 
M2 and M3 are presently on a 3-point spread.  Now, I haven’t got any strong feelings about this 
because I am not much of a short-run believer in these things.  But [for] the long run, I have 
some belief in these figures, and I would like to see if maybe we could talk some day about a 
little narrower spread on the long range in the upper end instead of the maintenance of the 3[-
point spread].  And, unfortunately, what you’re suggesting enlarges the spread instead of 
narrowing it.  We did narrow it before; we enlarged it last time by raising the upper end, and 



1/17-18/77 - 51 - 
 

  
 

now we’re going to lower the lower end, which enlarges the spread again.  Well, this long 
diatribe will come to a halt.  I am willing to accept the M2, M3 change.  I would have been 
willing to accept a standstill because I don’t think it is absolutely necessary for us to move every 
time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 

MR. MAYO.  I am quite willing to accept your prescription, Mr. Chairman.  I started out 
going Frank Morris’s way--no change.  Then I began to worry that, just about the time that we 
come up for this three months from now--and I feel much surer [now] in my own mind--I 
wouldn’t want to see us make a change [then].  And if we’re going to pursue our longer 
objectives, I would rather see us do it now.  Congress is either going to be in the process of 
passing a tax cut or will have just passed one when you go up three months from now.  And I 
think the eagle eye will be placed on us 10 times--well, it will be 10 times as difficult to explain 
a change in our targets at that point than now, everything else being equal, which of course it 
never is.   

But on the basis of what limited foresight we have at the moment, I would prefer to see us 
make some recognition of our desire to reduce the ranges over a period of time.  I subscribe to 
cutting the lower [end of the] range on M2 and M3 because I think that, if you look at the 
maximums and minimums of all three of these ranges, these are the least sensitive ones in terms 
of what you might call our justification for going above or below, in a minor way, from the 
minimum of the M2 and M3 ranges.  M2 and M3 ranges are in part a product of Regulation Q 
and the disintermediation process, and, unlike Phil Coldwell, I see no objection to eventually 
widening the spread a little bit on both M2 and M3 rather than narrowing [it]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Gardner now. 

MR. GARDNER.  I think we’ve had a kind of good discussion about the prospects of the 
economy and we have at least a seeming consensus of what is ahead.  I once spoke about the fact 
that it is not necessary to change at every meeting of this Committee.  But when I see a road 
ahead that I generally perceive [as desirable], then I want to get about our business.   

Now, we’ve had an overshoot in M2, M3.  Henry, I take exception to your view that 
they’ve been remarkably stable over the years.  Actually, I think you could build into the 
numbers evidence of a continuous expansion of growth and size. 

MR. WALLICH.  There is a lot of work done on this which shows that, over 15 years, M2 
has been very stable. 

MR. PARTEE.  Relative to GNP. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Starting around 1961.  If you carry it back just a few years, it all 
collapses. 

MR. GARDNER.  Well, I have another view of M2, and M3 particularly, and that is that it 
isn’t only [Regulation] Q; it’s the technological change in the way transactions are handled, 



1/17-18/77 - 52 - 
 

  
 

which you are all familiar with--telephone transfer, NOW accounts, and what have you.  And I 
want to get about the business of this overshoot.  We have had half again as much overshoot as 
we have range in M1, and almost in M2, and almost in M3.  So I think it’s wise for us to lower 
the bottom, reducing the midpoint by 25 basis points.  Because, really, as Governor Jackson 
says, what we’ve got to do is to forget about putting these two aggregates somewhat closer to our 
targets.  Quite a bit over on both of them.  They aren’t going to change and become less of a key 
in the economy.   

The two--the velocity of money and the liquidity quotient of the economy--they are going 
to become more liquid, they are going to become more volatile.  At least they’re going to move 
more rapidly.  M1 loses status in my mind.  M2 and M3 are inevitably going to be more 
interconnected with the current state of transactions balances in the economy.  So I’m perfectly 
happy widening the range a little bit, lowering the lower limit.  I think that what we will be 
concerned with in the short range is our interest in the overshoots that we have had in the last 
year.  And I even think this is consistent, or at least it takes cognizance of Dave Eastburn’s 
admonition.  If there is a rebate or what have you, I wouldn’t lower the top of the range.  I’d 
lower the bottom of the range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner.  Mr. Guffey now, please. 

MR. GUFFEY.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, in preparing for this meeting and sharing the desire to 
continue to move downward, I think we came to the judgment that whatever we might do should 
be principally cosmetic.  And we came out, much as you did, to lowering the lower [end of the] 
range of M2 a half percentage point.   

We had thought some [about] the M3 as well.  Listening to this conversation, I wonder as 
to the wisdom of lowering M3, and particularly drawing the fire that may come from it [because] 
M3 figures [are] made up of savings and loan and other types of deposits, which may imply that 
we are indeed going to do something to housing very early in 1977 or through 1977.  We need 
not draw that fire.  So I’d stick with just going down on the M2 side. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, just one point:  Leaving the upper limit of M3 
unchanged should, I think, protect us against that criticism, assuming that criticism is going to be 
rational, which it sometimes is, and often is not. 

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, I wonder, did the staff do any estimates to see what that 
M3 would do to housing?  Did you project it? 

MR. AXILROD.  I don’t believe [so], Governor Partee.  We didn’t project for the lower 
limit. 

MR. PARTEE.  No, but for the upper limit--M3, well anything. 

MR. AXILROD.  No, we did not project.  Because [M3] includes time and savings 
deposits at banks, which are going down, I don’t believe lowering it a quarter of a point would 
be offset by additional lending by the Home Loan Banks.  So I don’t think you’re going to get 
any significant impacts on housing from that minor change. 



1/17-18/77 - 53 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, they’ve been flooded with money.  If they have a 
problem, they can easily solve it through 1978. 

MR. PARTEE.  The question that I had in my mind and, I think, that Governor Jackson 
had in his mind is whether coming down from where we’ve been recently--not with the upper 
end of the ranges but where we have been--won’t create quite a wrench in housing.  And that is a 
matter of flow of funds projections. 

MR. AXILROD.  Of course, that’s basic to the projection of GNP that we’ve already 
presented to you.  And that working-down is built into that projection. 

MR. PARTEE.  So, do you have a rising level of starts with an M3 within the ranges that 
we’re talking about? 

MR. AXILROD.  Yes, that’s right. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Volcker, may we hear from you now. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Just on this latter point, I would think part of the 
rationale--although I haven’t worked the figures through very carefully--is that an awful lot of 
M3, in effect--certainly in the savings banks--is now going into the corporate bond market rather 
than in the mortgages.  There’s quite a lot of slack to be taken up if there was a real mortgage 
demand.   

But more generally, you can’t help but sit here and be struck by the degree of consensus 
around the table, which means that there is very little to add.  The differences are very narrow.  
Certainly, in approaching this problem, I’ve been impressed by some points that have been made 
repeatedly, that these targets are so high relative to our ultimate objectives, and we’ve got to 
work them down.  They’re also high relative to historical experience, including ’72 and ’73, 
when the Federal Reserve had a lot of criticism for stimulating inflation.  And both those factors 
are fundamental to my approach.   

It’s a little tricky to work it in with the present economic outlook and the question of 
whether we’re consistent with the fiscal strategy of the Administration.  As I view the outlook, I 
feel relatively comfortable, but I still do think there is a major problem in the investment area, 
which probably won’t materialize in 1977 in terms of capacity restraints, but well could in 1978.  
And I don’t see us making very much progress in that direction.  And the possibility of greater 
congestion in financial markets, which was referred to this morning, on the surface at least, 
doesn’t help.   

Take that all together and, in a kind of theoretical way, you could say what the doctor 
orders here is a tight-fiscal-policy, easy-monetary-policy kind of approach.  But there is an 
overwhelming argument against that.  We ain’t got the tight-fiscal-policy approach.  That’s quite 
evident.  So you have to work within that framework.  And I think expectational factors here are 
very important in terms of that potential congestion in the market as related to the prospects for 
inflation.   



1/17-18/77 - 54 - 
 

  
 

So I think it’s very important that we do maintain a posture of not releasing the bands on 
inflation, and that may--through the expectational route--help avoid late, excessive congestion in 
financial markets and avoid inflational tendencies that we’re all worried about. So I can 
rationalize, for my satisfaction at least, reversing the presumption of tight fiscal policy and easy 
monetary policy through that expectational route.   

My feeling coming here was that I’d be perfectly happy to see some gesture, not very 
substantive, toward reducing the targets.  But I was certainly prepared to support no change, in 
recognition of the enormously difficult problem of explanation at this particular juncture.  If we 
were going to make a change for more or less technical reasons, I was a little more on the Balles 
side in thinking that maybe at least the lower limit of M1 ought to be reduced--this consistency 
point that other people have referred to.   

But I think you can also argue that M2 and M3 have been moving at an exceptionally high 
rate with a change in the environment of the financial markets.  And particularly without raising 
the upper limit, as you have suggested.  This can be rationalized over a period of time.  So I’m 
quite happy to go along with your suggestion, recognizing that you volunteered to take on the 
burden of explaining, which I think is crucial here, and I think you have the equipment, as you 
demonstrated here this morning and in the past, to do that.  So on that basis, I’d rather follow the 
instinct to get at some small gesture, at least, toward reducing the aggregates in the manner you 
suggested. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Would anyone else like to be heard?  
Yes, Mr. Van Nice, please, and welcome to our meeting, Mr. Van Nice. 

MR. VAN NICE.  Thank you very much.  Since I haven’t been here for 2-1/2 years, I 
would like to give you a fresh viewpoint, but I am rather disappointed to say that I find, as Mr. 
Volcker does, that there seems to be a reasonable consensus here this morning, and I share that 
consensus.  I think the Minneapolis view of the economic outlook is remarkably similar to that 
projected by the Board’s staff--that alternative B, which essentially is what you’re 
recommending with the two modifications you mentioned, is consistent with the projected 
economic outlook. And that the short-term money market objective, or federal funds objective, is 
consistent also with no change, which I think is, for the reasons you have stated, the sort of 
prescription to me that we need at this time.  So I would certainly support your 
recommendations. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Van Nice.  Would anyone else like to speak?  If 
not, I do think that we have a rough consensus as to numbers.  There is a consensus in another 
respect, and this goes--I have only one quarrel with your comment, Paul--at one point, you refer 
to being quite happy.  I don’t think anybody is quite happy with this exercise; there is a 
consensus also of not being enthusiastic.  It’s very hard to be enthusiastic, and I share that light 
enthusiasm.   

But in view of the rough consensus that has emerged, I would like to put to a vote now the 
following targets for the 12-month period from the fourth quarter of ’76 to the fourth quarter of 
’77:  4-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for M1, 7 to 10 percent for M2, 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 [percent] for M3.  As 
for the credit proxy, I suggest that we follow the practice that we have in recent meetings and 



1/17-18/77 - 55 - 
 

  
 

leave that to our staff.  Any number determined by our staff as being rational will be accepted by 
the Committee.   

Now, so we’d be voting on M1, M2, and M3 as I stated.  Are there any questions before 
we begin the voting?  Would you be good enough to call the roll? 

MR. BROIDA.   
Chairman Burns  Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker  Yes 
President Balles  Yes 
President Black  Yes 
Governor Coldwell  Yes 
Governor Gardner  Yes 
Governor Jackson  Yes 
President Kimbrel  Yes 
Governor Lilly  Yes 
Governor Partee  Yes 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN.  Could I raise a question?  Steve, I got troubled on your Appendix 3 in the 
Bluebook in terms of your federal funds rate projection.  Now, is the failure of that behavior 
[mean] that higher rates at the moment would indicate a less rapid rise in the future due to the 
fact that that should be projected out over a couple more years? 

MR. AXILROD.  Higher rates? 

MR. WINN.  Well, of the federal funds rate? 

MR. AXILROD.  It would indicate lesser growth in what over the future? 

MR. WINN.  The federal funds rate in the future.  See, you’ve got the high rates 
currently--raise the rates currently--to get even higher rates at the end of the year. 

MR. AXILROD.  Oh, well, alternative A pertains to a longer-run growth path for M1 that 
is higher than the one adopted by the Committee.  Alternative C pertains to a longer-run growth 
path that’s lower than the one adopted by the Committee.  So alternative A simply permits a 
more rapid money growth and thus a lower funds rate; and alternative C has a more restraining 
money growth rate and thus a higher funds rate.  I’m not sure I’m answering your question. 

MR. WINN.  Okay. 

MR. PARTEE.  We should look at B as being the projection. 

MR. AXILROD.  B is the projection that would be consistent with what the Committee has 
adopted today for the long run. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions? 



1/17-18/77 - 56 - 
 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Just one brief question of what impressions or facts the 
staff may have about the prevalence of a reduction in the passbook rate, or savings certificates 
rates, around the country. 

MR. AXILROD.  I don’t believe we have anything more specific than we presented last 
time, and it’s just scattered reports.  You don’t have anything beyond that, President Volcker. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Black, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Steve, you may have answered this--I know you have skirted it very 
closely--but I was a little surprised when I remembered that, back in 1975, when we had that 
sharp jump in M1 and M2 in May and June, when we had the tax rebate--since we have larger 
refunds coming this year, we are going to have a rebate too.  I would have thought your second 
quarter estimates of M1 and M2 would have been higher than they really were.  Is there 
something that I’m missing there? 

MR. AXILROD.  In 1975, the first quarter rate of growth was very small, of course, 0.6 
percent, and the second quarter, on average, was 7.4.  And we have assumed this year, in our 
tentative working out of a pattern in the second quarter, that the rebates will move out of demand 
deposits perhaps faster than they did last time.   

As you recall, last time, May was very high, and June was even higher.  We are assuming a 
faster movement of the rebates out of demand deposits into other investment instruments or 
spending this time than [we did] last time, on the assumption that people learn.  Now whether 
that will in fact develop, I can’t be sure.  Also, we are not really certain as to the size of the 
rebate--it could vary between $7 billion and $11 billion; we assumed 10, not too far different 
from last time. 

MR. BLACK.   You do have pretty large refunds, don’t you? 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, again, the refunds come, and it depends on the pattern, because 
what goes in in March goes out in April, and it has a negative effect on the April growth rate.  So 
you might get a high March growth rate and a low April growth rate, [and] a high May growth 
rate as the rebates come in; if they go out, move into deposits, you get a low June growth rate.  
And that’s roughly the kind of pattern we have assumed.  God knows whether it’ll be fact or not. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Steve there has been some talk in the market about the uncertainties of 
seasonals, particularly at this time of the year.  Do you have any feelings to whether they are 
more uncertain now than-- 

MR. AXILROD.  We hope to have new seasonals by the next Committee meeting.  We 
have held them up, waiting for the June benchmark; we do them both simultaneously.  I am 
absolutely certain, from following past experience, that the weekly seasonals are going to be 
revised substantially.  The large weekly variations that we have seen will be much dampened.  I 



1/17-18/77 - 57 - 
 

  
 

have no feeling at this moment about the monthly seasonals.  I have no reason [to think] that they 
will be changed in any significant way at this point. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Wallich, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  Steve, we’ve chosen for the long-term ranges something close to 
alternative B.  If we were now to choose something like alternative C for the two-month ranges, 
then, of course, the interest rates path of Appendix 3 will not apply.  But there will be something 
like the usual pattern, which shows that C means a higher funds rate earlier on but a lower funds 
rate relative to the other alternative later on. 

MR. AXILROD.  Yes.  If you choose the interest rate pattern implicit in alternative C, that 
is, a higher federal funds rate over the next few weeks, which is about 1/2 point, then our ending 
point on the funds rate would not be 6-1/2 percent, as it is under alternative B; it would be 
somewhat lower, on the thought that the Committee has put the restraint in earlier, and thus you 
wouldn’t need it as much as time goes on. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Partee, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, going back to President Black’s question, what we can look forward 
to with some confidence is a bulge, maybe as early as March, with the refunds of 1976 tax 
payments, certainly in May and June depending on the timing of the rebate.  And so it puts us in 
sort of an odd situation; the January and February numbers are not extraordinary in any way, but 
we all look forward with anticipation to these bulges, and we can’t do much about it.   

MR. AXILROD.  Yes, but I might add that it seems as certain as death and taxes in May 
and June.  The refunds that we are projecting--and we could be off again on that projection of the 
amount of refund--but if it does turn out to be $3 billion higher, it’s likely it will bulge in March. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Axilrod.  We have to make a decision as to the 
procedure.  It’s 5 minutes to 1:00.  And we could continue this meeting and perhaps reach a 
resolution as to our short-range targets quickly, or we could break for lunch and come back at 
2:00.  What is the pleasure of the Committee? 

MR. PARTEE.  I think we ought to break. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The suggestion has been made that we break for lunch; I hear no 
protest. 

[Lunch break] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now we are ready for item 4.  Let me give you the housing figure.  
Here is the way they have been running, to give you a frame of reference:  
August--1,537,000; 
September--1,840,000; 
October--1,814,000; 
November--1,716,000; 



1/17-18/77 - 58 - 
 

  
 

December--1,940,000. 

MR. PARTEE.  Single or multifamily? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Increase in both.  Let me give you the multifamily:   
August--366; 
September--560;  remember there was a sudden increase associated with special activity by 
HUD; 
October--477; 
November--479; 
December--617.   

On the other hand, building permits figures show somewhat different results:   
July 1,215; 
August 1,296; 
September 1,504; 
November 1,590; 
December 1,513.   

So there is a small decline in permits, a large increase in housing starts with a trend in 
both-- a favorable one, a rather strong one.   

Gentlemen, we now have to turn to the decision on the domestic policy directive for the 
coming months.  What I find particularly difficult is the specification for the federal funds rate 
this coming month.  Now, in alternative B, I find myself really wrestling [with a choice between] 
the federal funds rate specified under alternative B, and a still-smaller range that is 4-1/2 to 5 
percent.   

Now, you know, these ranges have to be realistic.  I thought for a time of a range of 4-1/4 
to 5-1/4, and I asked myself a question:  What would happen to the world we live in if the federal 
funds rate were to rise from 4-5/8 to 5-1/4?  I would say that, for the coming month, it would be 
an unacceptable increase.  So I brought it down to 5, and then I asked myself a question:  What 
about the rate going down to 4-1/4?  Well that’s possible; 4-1/2 is perhaps better.  I could live 
with one or the other.  I think I would like 4-1/2 to 5 a little better.  As for the growth rates, those 
under alternative B look all right to me; perhaps it might be shaded by a 1/2 point. 

MR. PARTEE.  That would put them at about alternative C, if you shade them. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s right.  Well, that’s the way I see matters for the month 
ahead.  Who’d like to speak on the subject.  Let’s see if we can’t go round the table and do it 
with reasonable speed.  It’s now 2:30, and there is a lot that all of us still have to accomplish 
before this day is over.  Mr. Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I found myself in the same box you did because the 
only thing I really have much problem with is the federal funds rate range.  I don’t have any 
problem with the alternative B objectives.  The federal funds rate range, though, I came out 
differently than you did.  Although not differently in the center point.  I just think if we are going 



1/17-18/77 - 59 - 
 

  
 

to have an opportunity to make this work, we have got to have that range wider, and I picked the 
4-1/4 to 5-1/4 range, which puts me exactly at the same center point of 4-3/4 that you have [put] 
down.  Directive-wise, I take a status quo position. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Volcker, please. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My feeling about the interest rate range is exactly as you 
expressed it.  I’d be hesitant to see it move from 4-5/8, but [a] 4-3/4 percent midpoint is okay.  
And I think in practice it should be narrower; however, as far as how we put the thing formally, I 
can’t see what would happen to this market if it went above 5, or I think it would be very 
misleading if it went below 4-1/2.   

Let me just make one point on ranges for the aggregates.  Governor Coldwell raised the 
point this morning that we didn’t relate them enough to the long-term targets--or, [remove] the 
word “enough”; we don’t relate them [at all], usually.  I think we should; that should be our 
usual point of departure, and I just want to make that point and associate myself with Mr. 
Balles--he’s another one who’s made it.  Typically, these short ranges ought to straddle the long-
range targets.  There may be particular instances when we want to deviate, but we ought to be 
clear why we are [doing so].  And we shouldn’t take as our point of departure these short-term 
projections, which are very erratic, anyway.  Our basic point of departure ought to be the long-
term range and then deviate if we have a good reason.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  Mr. Partee, please. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Oh, excuse me, let me just add [where] this leads me, I 
guess. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, I was going to ask that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I was going to live with alternative B--I suppose I would 
be a little happier, particularly if M2, in the light of our decision this morning, was reduced by 
1/2.  I think there are some reasons to make it a little higher at the moment, in the long term. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I don’t exactly agree with President Volcker’s “straddling” the long-
term range.  I think a lot of times you got a month, and the two-month average that we know is 
coming in pretty high or pretty low.  And so it becomes just impossible, unless you just disregard 
it, to have something in that midpoint.  This doesn’t happen to be one of those times, although I 
guess generally [unintelligible], and tremendously so.  I would rather have the lower ranges, too, 
for these two months, because I am concerned about the bulge.  And if we could, I would like to 
save up a little room to accommodate the bulge when it occurs.  Now I don’t mean by that to 
make it a very low number, but 3 to 7 on M1, and 7 to 11 on M2 seem to me to be reasonably 
high numbers.  And if could save a half point there, why, we are going to need it, I’m quite sure, 
if there is a [tax] rebate and if it’s of the size people have been talking about.   



1/17-18/77 - 60 - 
 

  
 

And we should, I think, start now to plan our strategies so that we don’t seem to [take an 
action] that people would imagine as a contradiction to the fiscal policy action--the kind of 
response we got in the spring of ’75.  So I would go for the short-range specs of alternative C.   

As far as the funds rate is concerned, I can’t really disagree with the Chairman--4-1/4 
seems low and 5-1/4 seems high.  But we are getting awfully myopic on this question of interest 
rates, and if the aggregates were quite strong, I could imagine us wanting to do this, perhaps as 
high as 5-1/4; if they were quite weak, I could then imagine us deciding maybe we ought to pull 
back a little bit--perhaps as low as 4-1/4.   

So, although I don’t have a great deal of happiness about the bottom quarter or the top 
quarter of that range, I would prefer the 1 point range--4-1/4 to 5-1/4.  And I don’t really think 
we have any good basis for continuing on a money market directive type of approach, as we had 
in the past month, since we are through that period of extreme uncertainty.  So I think if you’re 
going to have an aggregates directive, you need a point range.  So I would vote 4-1/4 to 5-1/4, 
but use the 4-1/4 and 5-1/4 points sparingly. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No-- 

MR. PARTEE.  That is, well, you’d have to have a high number on both or a low-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no, wait, wait--we have been through all of that.  For a time, 
we would fix on a range and then we would say, oh no, let the effective range be smaller.  That 
got us into difficulties.  The range that we decide on, we’ve found through experience, is the 
range that ought to be available to the Desk to use in full.  Now, circumstances may arise 
between meetings when the Chairman may seek the advice of the Committee on going beyond 
the range or not going up to the limits of the specified range.  But if we decide on 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 
today, that should be our decision and that should mean that the Desk is free, assuming there are 
no further instructions to the Desk, to use that full range, depending on the behavior of the 
monetary aggregates. 

MR. PARTEE.  If we got to the extremities on the aggregates.  But we would have zones 
of indifference-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh yes, oh yes. 

MR. PARTEE.  All right, then I’ll retract:  4-1/4 to 5-1/4 straight--that will be my vote. 

MR. COLDWELL.  It’ll take three weeks for the Manager to understand where he is 
anyway. 

MR. JACKSON.  Did you say “to the extremities” or “through the extremities”? 

MR. PARTEE.  I said “to the extremities.” 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, “to” or “through”-- 



1/17-18/77 - 61 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  If you were at the extremes on M1 and M2.  One other point, Mr. 
Chairman.  I sort of feel, as I think President Volcker inferred, that we’re probably at the bottom, 
and rates are going to be moving up.  We’ve been wrong about that before, and we could be 
wrong about it again, and I don’t think we ought to make the judgment final.  And therefore, if 
we did get extreme weakness, maybe we ought to let them drift down a bit. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We’ll move on now.  Mr. Kimbrel now, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I believe Governor Partee has phrased my honest feeling 
about this.  If had my druthers, I [would] really prefer to see the funds rate with a somewhat 
larger spread.  I recognize the problem that we face and am prepared to accept this narrower 
4-1/2 to 5, but that doesn’t mean I am overwhelmingly happy about it.   

In M2, I would like to hope that we could not exceed the long-run targets, or maybe that’s 
too much to expect at this moment, but I would like to see us shave at least a half point, to 7-1/2 
to 11 if we could; but within that, the alternative B seems to be the most acceptable. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Who’d like to speak now.  Mr. Mayo, 
then Mr. Black. 

MR. MAYO.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I [do not have] a very decided preference, but I do 
have a preference for Chuck’s prescription on a 4-1/4 to 5-1/4.  I think a 1 point spread--I find it 
a little more comfortable than a 1/2 point.  I think we are zeroing in a little too closely on the 
federal funds constraints if we make it only a 1/2 point spread.   

On the M1 and M2, the differences between alternatives A, B, and C are minuscule, and I 
find that we’ve sort of become dedicated to a 4 point spread here.  I see nothing wrong in this 
instance to have a 3 to 8 on M1 and a 7 to 12 on M2.  Not with the purpose of embracing all 
three assumptions, which sounds sort of Machiavellian, but rather just to indicate that, again, we 
are not going to have trigger points that are really unreal here.  And I think the spread both ways 
would give us a better feeling with regard to the way we are using the federal funds.   

As far as the money market versus the aggregates directive, I have a slight preference for 
money market, but it’s very slight. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Black, please. 

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, our projections for January, like those of the Board staff, 
suggest that M1, anyway, will come in a good deal stronger than we thought a month ago.  But I 
think we’ve got particularly difficult problems this time of year, and we have been studying this 
pattern that develops around the Christmas season--beginning in November and ending in 
February.  And it makes a whale of a lot of difference where the weeks fall; you have what 
appear to be pretty random factors that make a great deal of difference as to whether the rate of 
growth shows up in February or January.  And we don’t believe that either the monthly or 
weekly seasonal factors take very good account of this, and so in essence we really feel that you 
have got to take a look at the two months in tandem before you draw any very valid conclusions 
at this time of the year.   



1/17-18/77 - 62 - 
 

  
 

In essence, anywhere between 4 and 7 percent to us would not necessarily mean that you 
are getting off your long-run trend--that [it] was accelerating, in other words.  So, what I am 
saying is, not that “4 is 8,” exactly, but “4 is 7” anyway you look at it now.  So I think that I 
would value your suggestion on this.  I never thought that I would want to go for a money 
market directive two months in a row, but because of the particular uncertainty about the 
aggregates this time of the year, I believe that’s the wisest course for the time being. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Balles, please. 

MR. BALLES.  Well, a number of those who have already spoken have, in effect, given 
my speech.  In view of the sustained overshoots we had in M2--given my own strange sort of 
view that M2 is probably a better predictor of what’s going to happen now than M1--I think it’s 
time to lean against that overshoot a bit, and hence I would like to see the federal funds rate edge 
up a little.  And also because I am convinced that we should have a full-point spread in the 
federal funds range, I would join those who are commending a 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 federal funds 
range.  But for the reasons that Governor Partee has already alluded to and my own concern 
about not getting clear outside of our long-term ranges in the short run, I would favor the 
alternative C specifications on M1 and M2. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Who would like to speak now, please.  
Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think the matter that should dominate our thinking is the prospective 
bulge, and that’s been very troublesome in the past.  I therefore feel that Governor Partee has a 
very good point in suggesting we accumulate a little reserve.  That leads me to alternative B, 
shaded downward by 1/2 point on each end.  Once the bulge is within immediate distance, I 
would also go to a money market directive.  This time, I would stay with an aggregates directive.  
And with that in mind, I do lean toward a wider funds rate specification and would like to go 
with 4-1/4 to 5-1/4, bearing in mind that we should begin to guard against the bulge at this time. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Lilly, please. 

MR. LILLY.  I have no problem with alternative B as far as M1 and M2 are concerned.  If 
I’m right about the economy having bottomed out, starting out it may well be that we will need a 
5-1/4 rate.  If I’m wrong, it may well be that we need a 4-1/4 rate.  So I would vote 4-1/4 to 
5-1/4. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Lilly.  Who would like to speak next, please.  
Governor Jackson now. 

MR. JACKSON.  I would be inclined to support the 3 to 7 M1 and 7 to 11 M2 ranges.  It 
strikes me that, within the current environment of the money market, I would be more inclined to 
the 4-1/4 to 5 federal funds rate [range].  While I share the concern about the prospective bulge, I 
don’t share the opinion that near-term prospects of changes in the federal funds rate of the 
magnitude we are likely to undertake are going to produce a darn bit of difference. 



1/17-18/77 - 63 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Who’s ready to speak now.  Mr. 
Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN.  If I understand what is referred to by “the bulge,” then I guess I have 
some difficulties with it because it seems to me that, if it comes from a rebate, it’s just a 
temporary cessation in the flow of funds [to which] we shouldn’t pay all that much attention.  So 
far as rates are concerned, it seems to me that rates are going to be moving up, and we should 
permit them to do so moderately.  So I would have no objection to 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 percent.  But I 
would stick with alternative B [for the] aggregates. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Gardner, please. 

MR. GARDNER.  I think we should shave the 1/2 point off of the aggregates.  I think the 
range in the federal funds rate is important in view of the sensitivity in this current situation.  I 
don’t want to see the zone of indifference widened without some recognition.  The size of the 
range is the inverse ratio of the amount of time Steve Axilrod [is] out of his office, and he is 
down at the same end of the corridor that I’m in.  And I would just as soon have a narrow range, 
which means consultation.  I wouldn’t like to see a 4-1/4 federal funds rate or 5-1/4 federal funds 
rate without some reflection.  I would accept your recommendation of 4-1/2 to 5, expecting that, 
should the situation require it, we’ll have some consultation. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner.  Who would like to speak now. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I would find your recommendation acceptable, but with a preference 
for the 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 federal funds rate.  And I guess I didn’t hear you mention a preference on 
the directive, but my preference would be for the aggregates directive.  I was a little confused 
with Governor Partee’s saving up theory, but the ensuing discussion I guess has kind of clarified 
that really what this means is that you’d be a little more inclined to let rates go up now than if 
you didn’t see that coming.  Is that the context that you-- 

MR. PARTEE.  And not have to adjust it so much when we have it at hand. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  That’s about the only context in which I could hang it together. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Winn, may we hear from 
you. 

MR. WINN.  Yes.  I think the alternative C ranges for the Ms, and probably 4-1/4 to 5 on 
the rate spread.  I’m not sure that’s logically consistent. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You say you’re not sure. 

MR. WINN.  That it’s logically consistent.  I’m not sure of that. 



1/17-18/77 - 64 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It’s as logical as anything around this table. 

SPEAKER(?).  That’s a new consideration!   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Guffey. 

MR. GUFFEY.  If I understand Mr. Winn correctly, I think I would adopt the same thing, 
that is, alternative C ranges on the aggregates with the fed funds 4-1/2 or 4-1/4 to 5--what is 
expressed as the range for B.  It isn’t clear to me, however, what would happen if we adopt a 
4-1/2 to 5 range for the federal funds.  Does that mean that we move fairly quickly to the 4-3/4 
midpoint?  That’s an important question. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That would be the judgment the Committee would have to reach.  
Normally, we move gradually; there have been times when the Committee wanted to move 
rather rapidly.  Anyone else want to speak?  Mr. Morris, yes, please. 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I think that the differences we’re talking about are quite 
narrow, but I think I would prefer to keep the present midpoint and use a 4-1/4 to 5 range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Morris.  Anyone else?  If not, there is a 
narrow preference for the ranges of 3 to 7 and 7 to 11 for M1 and M2 respectively.  There’s more 
diversity with regard to the federal funds rate, but the divergences are quite small.  I think a 
reasonable balancing of the opinions expressed would be a range of 4-1/4 to 5.  I would suggest 
that to the Committee.   

Or, I think if the Committee finds that suggestion agreeable, then I would suggest that we 
still consider the question of whether the midpoint be treated in symmetrical fashion or not.  
Symmetrically the midpoint would be 4-5/8, although the Committee might prefer a midpoint of 
4-3/4, and that would accommodate the thinking of the plurality who wanted a range of 4-1/4 to 
5-1/4.   

Let me make this suggestion to the Committee, and then we will discuss this:  that we vote 
on a range of 3 to 7 for M1, 7 to 11 for M2, and 4-1/4 to 5 for the federal funds rate but that the 
midpoint be treated asymmetrically--that is at 4-3/4 rather than 4-5/8.  Does that shock anyone? 

MR. JACKSON.  Could I have Mr. Axilrod’s judgment on the reaction in the marketplace 
toward a perceived slight firming in the federal funds rate given the recent emotional reaction to 
prospects of interest rates. 

MR. AXILROD.  I think you may also want to get Mr. Sternlight’s judgment, but mine 
250 miles further south would be that-- 

MR. JACKSON.  That might be the reason I asked you--he’s too close to it. 

MR. AXILROD.  --would be that there would be a further reaction.  I would be hard-
pressed to quantify it, but if I had to guess, I would put 10 to 15 basis points on the bill rate, 
maybe 10 to 20 basis points more on intermediate Treasury issues, and further rises from the 
corporate bond rate.  I might add that I think the intensity of the reaction will partly depend on 



1/17-18/77 - 65 - 
 

  
 

whether such a rise or such an indication of a rise occurs well before the Treasury financing is 
announced--which will be January 26--or occurs in the midst of the Treasury refunding without 
any, in a sense, prior indication or prior suspicion on the part of the market that it is likely to 
occur. 

MR. PARTEE.  Which would be the bigger reaction? 

MR. AXILROD.  The latter. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, let’s turn to Mr. Sternlight, and then we have Mr. 
Holmes. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, I think I agree that there would be a reaction, proceeding to a 
4-3/4 [rate]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Aren’t you just about there now? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  It’s very close, Mr. Chairman.  We are only talking about 1/8, but 
it’s something that-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, wait a minute now.  Haven’t you been closer than that 
recently?  Weren’t you closer than that yesterday? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, we’re still aiming at 4-5/8. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I didn’t ask you what you were aiming at, I asked you where you 
were. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, yesterday’s effective rate was 4.80, but I think the market still 
perceives us as aiming for 4-5/8.  I think there’s a difference--they’ve seen us resisting-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yesterday you were [at] 4.80, and if you move within a range of 
4-5/8 to 4-3/4, the market might be relieved, instead of exploding with 10 to 12 basis points.  
You know, I’m not a market man, but I do follow figures.  I don’t know-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Would you agree on the size of the adjustment, Peter--10 to 20 basis 
points? 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  It depends on how the market saw us implementing it; I think that 
might be reasonable.  I think, if we moved aggressively to achieve 4-3/4, that it could be more of 
a reaction than that.  Or if we were just sort of able to slide into it because, as the Chairman said, 
we were already there yesterday and funds just kind of stayed there and we didn’t do anything 
about it, then it could be less of a reaction.   

But I’m concerned about trying to implement something quite gradually because of this 
upcoming refunding.  If there is to be a change, it might be well to have that atmosphere cleared 
just a little bit before the Treasury has to come in, or at least before its issues are bid on. 



1/17-18/77 - 66 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Mr. Holmes. 

MR. HOLMES.  I think I would stress Mr. Sternlight’s last point, that it’s how you get 
there that’s really important.  If we had to push aggressively in the market to push the funds rate 
up, I think the market would react one way.  If it rather drifted into it and then we tended to keep 
it there, I think the market would have less [of a ] problem.  This is a very subtle difference, Mr. 
Chairman, but I think it is an important one. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don’t think there is any sentiment within the Committee 
that you do anything aggressive.  You know what we have been talking about are such minute 
differences, and therefore, aggressive behavior is hardly being contemplated by the Committee. 

MR. HOLMES.  I don’t mean aggressive in a real term but I mean in a market-perceived 
term, and in that case you don’t have to be very aggressive to seem aggressive.  This is a very 
subtle difference. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, I can’t speak for the Committee, but let me still try, and the 
Committee will tell me if I’m off track.  Suppose that the instruction to you were not to be 
aggressive in any of the senses of the word that you have distinguished in our behalf. 

MR. HOLMES.  We would understand that, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, would you, in that case, cause trouble? 

MR. HOLMES.  No, I think we would have to watch what happened.  If we got to 4-3/4 
and found it was causing trouble, my inclination would be to back away, to come 
below--quickly. 

MR. JACKSON.  You would plan on moving to 4-3/4 with deliberate speed is the course 
you-- 

MR. HOLMES.  Deliberate speed, but recognizing there is a Treasury financing coming 
up.  If we are already closely there, we don’t have all that much time. 

MR. PARTEE.  And they were at 4.80 yesterday. 

MR. HOLMES.  I don’t know where we are.  We were at 4-3/4 earlier today. 

MR. EASTBURN.  That effectively would be sort of stopping the downward drift and 
imperceptibly tightening up. 

MR. HOLMES.  One would hope that we would be that skillful. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, let me try--I have to try something else.  I have heard 
no dissent from my suggestion on the M1 and M2.  Suppose we have a 4-1/4 to 5 percent federal 
funds rate and that the midpoint not be regarded as 4-5/8 and it not be regarded as 4-3/4 but that 
it be regarded as the range between 4-5/8 and 4-3/4. 



1/17-18/77 - 67 - 
 

  
 

MR. HOLMES.  That’s a good 16th, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. PARTEE.  I suggested that last time, and you said I was being too tough on the Desk.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, but I’m having more trouble today. 

MR. WALLICH.  I think that’s highly desirable, also, in the interest of softening up the 
precision of these things a little. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes, I think that’s a good technique. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to put too much sand into this cogwheel, 
[but] I must admit you’re narrowing the degree of available range within which the Desk moves 
from a-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no, this is a definition of the midpoint. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, I understand that-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Not a definition of the federal funds rate range. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, but you’ve got some range now. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’ve broadened the definition of the midpoint. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, against the 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 you have narrowed it. 

MR. PARTEE.  Then it’s the whole range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The midpoint is no longer a point; the midpoint has itself become 
a subrange.  If my motion is unsatisfactory, we will entertain any other and put it to a vote. 

MR. BLACK.  Try 4-5/8? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That is to say, conventional procedure--4-1/4 to 5 conventional 
procedures.  All right is there a-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Are we giving preferences? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What’s that? 

MR. PARTEE.  Preferences?  4-5/8 as the midpoint, or 4-5/8 to 4-3/4 as the midpoint. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  4-1/4 to 5 is the range.  All right, but the midpoint could be 4-5/8, 
or an asymmetrically determined midpoint of 4-3/4.  Those members of the Committee who 
prefer 4-5/8, would they kindly raise their hands. 

MR. BROIDA.  Four, Mr. Chairman. 



1/17-18/77 - 68 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Those who prefer 4-3/4. 

MR. BROIDA.  Five. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we can’t--we weren’t voting.  The wise men haven’t voted, I 
think.  Gentlemen, I will put this to a vote now, quite arbitrarily:  3 to 7 for M1, 7 to 11 for M2, 
4-1/4 to 5 percent for the federal funds rate range, and the midpoint to be interpreted by the Desk 
in the light of our very illuminating discussion and the monetary aggregates directive. 

MR. BALLES.  May I ask you a question, Mr. Chairman, about that midpoint--how the 
Desk is to determine that.  I’m not sure what that means. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. Holmes, you’re on the spot. 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, I’ll [try to] interpret it, Mr. Chairman:  If we could go a bit above 
4-5/8 without causing any damage to the interest rates, or only a very little, that would be the 
preference of the Committee.  Now, is that right?  That would be my interpretation--I’m not sure 
it’s right. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any quarrels with Mr. Holmes? 

MR. PARTEE.  When you say a very little damage, you mean some small rise? 

MR. HOLMES.  5 to 8 basis points on the bill rate--we’re getting awfully precise on that. 

MR. PARTEE.  I just wanted you to define damage. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that the [proposal would be for a] range of 4-1/4 to 5, with 
the Desk to interpret the discussion that has taken place in this room, the Desk being managed by 
men of high intelligence and great integrity.  I don’t think we ought to go beyond that--give them 
just the illusion of a little flexibility and a little authority.  We are ready for the vote.  Would you 
be good enough to call the roll. 

MR. BROIDA.   
Chairman Burns  Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker  Yes 
President Balles  No 
President Black  Yes 
Governor Coldwell  Yes 
Governor Gardner  Yes 
Governor Jackson  Yes 
President Kimbrel Yes 
Governor Lilly  Yes 
Governor Partee  Yes 
Governor Wallich  Yes 
President Winn  Yes 

Eleven to one. 



1/17-18/77 - 69 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think we’ve done all that we can. 

END OF MEETING 

 




