









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

February 15, 1977 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding. Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, words have been added in brackets 
to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

 
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy at 

the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the 
record of the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been reviewed by present 
or past members of the Committee. 

 
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 

involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are indicated by gaps 
in the text. All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 

 
Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 

 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

Content last modified 01/11/2011.



2/15/77

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 15, 1977 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was 

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal 

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 15, 

1977, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.  
Mr.

Burns, Chairman 
Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Balles 
Black 
Coldwell 
Gardner 
Jackson 
Kimbrel 
Lilly 
Partee 
Wallich 
Winn

Messrs. Baughman, Guffey, Mayo, and Morris, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Eastburn and Roos, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and 
St. Louis, respectively 

Mr. Broida, Secretary 
Mr. Altmann,1/ Deputy Secretary 
Mr. Bernard,1/ Assistant Secretary 
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist (Domestic Finance) 
Messrs. Brandt,1/ Davis,1/ Keran,1/ 

Kichline,1, Parthemos,1/ Reynolds,1/ 
and Zeisel,1/ Associate Economists

1/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.



2/15/77

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Pardee,1/ Deputy Manager for Foreign 
Operations 

Mr. Sternlight,1/ Deputy Manager for 
Domestic Operations 

Messrs. Coyne and Keir,1/ Assistants to 
the Board of Governors 

Mr. Ettin,1/ Associate Director, Division 
of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Mr. Truman,1/ Associate Director, Division 
of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Mrs. Farar,1/ Economist, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mrs. Deck,1/ Staff Assistant, Open Market 
Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Mr. Van Nice, First Vice President, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Boehne,1/ Davis,1/ and 
Scheld,1/ Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, 
Philadelphia, Cleveland,and Chicago, 
respectively 

Messrs. Davis,1/ and Green,1/ Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City 
and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. McNees,1/ Assistant Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Mr. Kareken,1/ Economic Adviser, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Hill,1/ Senior Economist, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 

      

     

1/ Attended part of Tuesday session only.

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
February 15, 1977 

 
 

[Executive session] 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Good morning gentlemen.  I was just about to apologize for being 
late, and I am sorry, but I had a breakfast meeting and I couldn’t get away on time.  But a 
colleague of ours suggested that this might be a 10-minute meeting, and in view of his wise 
pronouncement, I am not going to apologize.  But I am sorry to be late.   

As you all know, we have planned a luncheon to honor one of our colleagues, Lyle 
Gramley, who has left the Federal Reserve but has not left this city.   

We will begin this meeting in executive session with a report by Mr. O’Connell, who will 
recommend to the Committee that the FOMC agree that the meetings of the FOMC are not 
covered by the [Government in the] Sunshine Act.   

Now, just a word of introduction.  This is the finding by Mr. O’Connell, and he has done 
very extensive research on the subject.  His conclusion is firm.  I have been keenly aware of the 
fact that this conclusion, if adopted by the Committee, could cause us some difficulty on Capitol 
Hill because some members of the Congress interested in the Sunshine law apparently have been 
under the impression that the FOMC is covered.  And I’ve been a little concerned about the 
finding by our counsel on the ground that some members of the Congress interested in this 
subject might propose an amendment to the Sunshine law under which we might lose the two 
amendments we want.  We fought hard to win and we finally did win at the last session of the 
Congress.   

And therefore I have discussed this subject with considerable care with Senator Ribicoff, 
Senator Percy, Senator Chiles, Congressman Brooks, and Congressman Fascell, and I have also 
talked this over at length with John Gardner of Common Cause.  And as you may know, John 
Gardner and his group played a very important role in getting this legislation enacted.  I wanted 
to make sure that this finding by our counsel is not interpreted, first, as a circumvention of law, 
and second, that there will be or may not be a move in the Congress to amend the Sunshine Act.  
These conversations with the members of the Congress have gone well, and they understand the 
position that Mr. O’Connell has reached, which I am recommending that the Committee adopt.  
We don’t have any actual assurance that there will not be congressional action, but as of today I 
have no reason to expect it.  That’s all by way of introduction, and the floor is yours, Tom. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, the members of the Committee have, I believe, 
received [in] advance [of] the meeting [the] memorandum of law setting forth, as the Chairman 
has indicated, the conclusion that I have reached on researching this issue.  And accompanying 
that memorandum was a proposed statement of policy that I have recommended, and with the 
concurrence of the Chairman, the language has been adopted for the Committee’s study 
[unintelligible] the position that I recommend.  May I take just a few brief moments and restate, 
in summary form, what I believe is a sustainable position with reference to the outcome of the 
study?   



2/15/77 - 2 - 
 

  
 

The issue, of course, is whether the legislative history of the statute can reasonably be read 
to exclude the FOMC from its coverage.  As you have read in the memorandum page position 
guide, certainly by definition of the term “agency,” which is contained in the statute, there are 
three basic tests that an agency must meet as to whether it’s covered.  One is whether it’s an 
agency as [defined] in that statute.  The Committee is such an agency.  Second, whether that 
agency membership is composed of [unintelligible] Committee meets that requirement test.  And 
the third is whether two or more of the members of such collegial bodies have been appointed to 
such position by the President of the United States with the advice and consent of the Senate.  If 
that final test is met, the agency is covered.  And of course it is on that last, third criterion that I 
have taken the position that the FOMC is not covered.   

[Unintelligible] the [Federal Reserve] Board members, of course, are appointed to the 
Board by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate, but they are ex officio 
members of the Committee--by statute, members of the Board are designated as members of the 
FOMC.  And, of course, at any given time, the five [Reserve Bank] Presidents serving [as voting 
members of the FOMC] are not appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the 
Senate.  So the [FOMC] does not meet the so-called agency test within the meaning of the 
statute.  Nor, in my judgment, is the FOMC in any sense to be considered to be the subdivision 
of the agency [that is, the Federal Reserve Board], which is also a component part of that 
definition.   

On examination, there is no function performed by this Committee that can be said to be 
the result of, or the direct follow-up of, the delegation of authority under the Board committee.  
Its principle functions are defined by statute and by some regulations issued pursuant to that 
statute.  The Committee is a functioning agency for other purposes and within the meaning [of] 
the law.  The Committee knows it is an agency within the meaning of the Administrative 
Procedure Act--which is [unintelligible] USC.  The Committee is an agency and has taken that 
position with respect to the Freedom of Information Act.  But for purposes of the Sunshine Act, I 
am perfectly well satisfied that the start [unintelligible] the composition of the Committee as 
explained by statute, viewed in the light of the definition of agency within the Sunshine Act, 
reasonably postures the Committee [as] not being covered by that act.   

I cite in my memorandum, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, statutory 
reference to the historical points, as this bill was going through the Congress, that support this 
position, one such being the extract, contained in the memorandum, of an exchange by Ms. 
Abzug, sponsor [of the] bill in the House.  When asked by a member of the Congress as to the 
actability of the term “agency,” she very clearly stated that the test of agency status is the 
definition itself.  And she gave an example of an ex officio status of an agency that would not be 
covered by the act for the simple reason that the members were not appointed to such position by 
the President.  Although she admitted that they were appointed to another position by the 
President, it was the body of which the question raised the statute’s actability that was the test 
that’s forming that same rationale that we shall have.   

I must admit, there is contrary legislative history in the form of the debates on the floor of 
the House.  But I point out that, on careful study, I adjudge those quoted portions of the debates 
to have assumed the status of coverage for the FOMC and then to have discussed other collateral 



2/15/77 - 3 - 
 

  
 

issues such as who is a member--assuming that the agency is covered--such as the right to close 
a meeting and withhold a transcript.  In that exchange it was assumed that the FOMC was 
mentioned in these two or three phases.  The sentence carried was something like:  the FOMC, it 
can close its meetings.  So it was a stated assumption without itemized evaluation of the 
language and statutes.   

Overall, I adjudge the legislative history to [be] balanced in favor of the position that is 
contained in the memorandum and as reflected in the statement policy--the recommendation for 
adoption of that statement.  I submit that it has been very carefully prepared to adhere as closely 
as possible to the language of the statute without exaggerated statement of the Committee’s 
position.  That, upon examination of its own operating procedures, the Committee has 
determined that its present procedures, if continued to be followed--even though it demurs from 
the position of legal technical coverage by statutes--in fact [demonstrates] compliance [with] the 
spirit of the Sunshine Act.   

And more particularly, the Committee under its present practice releases its Record of 
Policy Actions roughly a month following each of the respective meetings, and as now written 
[because of] the Committee’s action of several months ago, [the Record] is a very full text when 
compared with coverage [required] by the Sunshine Act.  Under the technical terms of that act, 
the Committee could hold major portions, if not all, of certain transcripts for months, even a 
year, or whatever period that the Committee determined [was required] under the particular 
exemption.  As now written, there is basically nothing that is withheld per se [from] the Record 
of Policy Actions, which is released about a month after the meeting.   

So in that sense, and as the Chairman has advised each of the members of Congress with 
whom [he spoke], we feel that there is full deliverance in the spirit of the Sunshine Act, and that 
we can go forward in that spirit, and that we are not in any sense cutting short the rights of the 
public with respect to the Sunshine Act.  Mr. Chairman, I think those are the points I wanted to 
cover. 

MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, does the emphasis that we’re placing on this argument on 
whether or not members of the FOMC are appointed by the President, confirmed by the Senate, 
does that strengthen Mr. Reuss’s position on the appointment of Reserve Bank Presidents, and 
will that stimulate further efforts on his part, based on this Government in the Sunshine issue, to 
try to force through Congress the bill that he was unable to get out of the Committee last year?  
Is that-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me make an introductory comment and then turn the legal 
question over to Mr. O’Connell.  All that we intend to release to the public is the statement of 
policy described as attachment B rather than the lengthy legal opinion that has been developed 
by Tom O’Connell.  I think the legal opinion is a document to this Committee, and there is no 
intention to release that.  Tom would you be good enough to-- 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Roos, as you well know, it’s difficult to respond to what will 
trigger Mr. Reuss into further action.  The Reuss suit is now on appeal, and I should advise the 
Committee that, at this time, the burden is on Mr. Reuss’s counsel to file his brief in support of 
his appeal.  As of last night he had not filed the brief, so I don’t know particularly the points he 



2/15/77 - 4 - 
 

  
 

would make.  It is possible, if he knew of this content, he could [use] the thesis of this position  
against us.  I have thought this out.  I have discussed it with my colleagues.  None of us, 
including myself, is [of] the view that it [unintelligible] would weaken [our position in] the 
Reuss suit.  I am not aware, really, of any rationale.  It is possible he could attempt to interpret 
the Sunshine Act-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Black. 

MR. BLACK.  Tom, is it possible we might do that all the time, not issuing our statement 
of position but the other actions which we worked on under the Government in the Sunshine 
Act? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I am sorry, Bob, I didn’t hear the last part--excuse me. 

MR. BLACK.  I was just saying is it possible that it would be better if we did not adopt the 
first part of the recommendation, issuing a statement that we don’t think we [are] covered, 
[unintelligible] merely acting as if we were. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  I have an opinion on that President Black.  To the contrary, I believe 
that our position is far better secured by the issuance of a statement of policy of the nature I have 
recommended--similar to the action by the [Federal Reserve] Board several years ago, when we 
issued a statement of policy with respect to the System’s position on labor management.   

In this case I have had calls from a number of public interest groups, I have had calls from 
the Hill, from the editors of the two newspapers, stating an assumption that the recently 
published Board regulations under Sunshine as they were released here some two weeks ago 
were seeming to cover the FOMC.  “Do they cover it?”  And my response has been that the 
matter of coverage of the Sunshine Act has yet to be determined by the Committee, and shortly 
we would announce the position.    

I am concerned that if we don’t publish a statement of policy in which we forthrightly set 
out the Committee’s position and explain at the same time equal exposure as if covered, we will 
either have law suits compelling the publication of regulations or constant demand when they hit 
at us--“where are [the] regulations?”  This will at least serve that purpose, so the public will 
know there will not be regulations covering the FOMC. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There is an additional comment.  We’ve been advised by two of 
the men whom I mentioned--very influential, greatly involved in this legislation--to put out such 
a statement of policy. 

MR. GARDNER.  Tom, isn’t it true that we cannot pretend that we are covered by the 
Sunshine Act because a part of what you have to do is public [announcement of] regulations 
[regarding our operations under the Sunshine Act], if in fact you are covered by the Sunshine 
Act?  We have already gone past the [deadline] date on that. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Well, Governor, your point is well taken.  Sitting now at the [15th] of 
the month, if we were to issue today a proposed regulation covering the Committee [under the 



2/15/77 - 5 - 
 

  
 

Sunshine Act] and allowed 30 days [for comment], as required by law, we are then at March 14, 
two days subsequent to the release date.  Better late than never would be the attitude we [would] 
have to exhibit.  If the Committee adopts the statement of policy, [and] we are sued, and a court 
were to require us then to [be covered] under Sunshine, and then we issued [our] regulations 
[regarding our operations under the Sunshine Act], we’d be even that much more late, so the 
matter of a few days I think probably wouldn’t be at all decisive.   

I should say, Mr. Chairman, and Governor Gardner’s question [unintelligible], I believe I 
mentioned in a previous Committee meeting that I have great difficulty in lightly recommending 
that this Committee adopt the position of coverage when there is a clear appearance of 
noncoverage.  [My difficulty is] that I don’t know the administrative capability, under law, of an 
agency taking [upon] itself the [decision regarding its] coverage [under] a statute where it 
implies--and as a matter of fact, expressly involves--cutting the time in which the agency has to 
answer a suit under the law.  [The Act] gives jurisdiction [to] many courts of law that otherwise 
would not have jurisdiction over this Committee [regarding] an ordinary lawsuit.  It renders 
certain of the rights of this Committee negative by law, and I don’t believe that the Committee 
has the right as a matter of law to adopt these positions, thus covering up [unintelligible].  So it 
would take an act of Congress or a declaration by a court of law, in my judgment, to cover us 
under this law. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There are two supplementary observations that I would make.  
One is that the point that Tom has just made was made--Tom accompanied me to the 
meetings--with the legislators, and Tom developed this legal point in great detail, and the 
members of the Congress with whom we met were very much impressed by it.  That is point 
number one.   

Point number two, if the mood should develop within the Congress to amend the Sunshine 
law on the grounds that here is a loophole, and the loophole ought to be closed--if a serious 
move along these lines developed, then I might very well come before the Committee and 
suggest that we take the step of declaring ourselves as coming under the law in spite of the legal 
difficulties that Tom has mentioned.  And that is simply something that may develop.  As of 
today, I don’t think that will develop in the Congress, but it may. 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, may I add to a point that I wanted to make?  As a 
result of one of the visits the Chairman made to the Hill, a member of the Senator’s staff, at the 
Senator’s suggestion, referred the sole issue of law to the congressional library’s law division, 
and without reference from us but from the Senator’s office.  And a memorandum of law was 
delivered from the congressional law library stating that its study of the statutes as applied to the 
FOMC led to the very firmly stated conclusion that the FOMC was not covered by the Sunshine 
Act for the very reason that we had argued.  And we had not contacted [them], and [it was] an 
independent legal memorandum, stated in one paragraph. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, you mentioned today in a memo about the National 
Security Council, are there other agencies which come under this-- 

MR. O’CONNELL.  May I respond to that?  President Eastburn, [subject to] judicial 
[determination] or a declaration one way or the other, the Joint Chiefs of Staff [have a statutory] 



2/15/77 - 6 - 
 

  
 

position on the National Security Council, the Loan Guarantee Board probably would be an 
example, the [unintelligible] President’s advisors, apparently do not come under [the Sunshine 
law] for the same reason that they are ex officio members of the bodies that I mentioned.  It is 
estimated that there may be as many as 10 agencies that are similarly situated. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  Well, if not, the recommendation by our 
counsel is before the Committee, and I think we need to vote on it formally.  Is there a motion to 
approve?  The motion has been made and seconded.  Is there any objection? 

SPEAKER(?).  I would like to comment.  I think it has been very thoughtfully researched, 
and I think all of us recognize that.  And I guess, even with that, in reading [the memorandum], I 
was not overly impressed with taking that move.  But I think your visits with the other people 
have convinced me that maybe this is well and wise. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I have not been either, and I kept on pressing Tom 
O’Connell on the point:  Well, why not say that we are covered, since actually we are observing, 
we can live under, the Sunshine [law]?  We’ve gone beyond the Sunshine law because the 
Sunshine law would be satisfied if we merely kept detailed minutes.  We not only keep detailed 
minutes, we make them public.  We make them public fairly promptly.   

I kept pushing Tom on that, and I reviewed this question in some detail, that is, through 
Tom largely and with members of the Congress.  And Tom’s legal reasons, I must say, carry 
more weight with members of the Congress than they did with me, probably because they are 
lawyers and I am not.  I think the position recommended is probably the best position we can 
take at this time.   

Any dissent from Mr. O’Connell’s recommendation?  All right, the Committee will be 
recorded as being unanimous on the point.   

While we are on these legal questions, let’s get through with item 3 on the agenda, the 
Committee’s information rules--some technical points you want to call the Committee’s attention 
to? 

MR. O’CONNELL.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do.  And very briefly, Mr. Chairman, the 
memorandum deals with the provision in the Committee’s regulations with respect to the 
availability of information which at present [is] exempt from release under the Freedom of 
Information Act--memoranda and materials to the Committee that are authorized by statutes to 
be withheld from the public.  At the present time, we have no specific statutory exemption that is 
apt, nor have we had challenge nor direct [unintelligible] applicability of the provision.   

But in 1975 the Supreme Court of the United States had reason to address the issue of the 
applicability and coverage of the so-called third statute exemption in the suit involving the FAA 
administrator against Robertson.  In that case, a challenge was made to the breadth of 
discretionary coverage of the statutory provisions.  The Supreme Court determined that any time 
a statute gives an agency discretion to withhold certain information, even though the standards 
for withholding are extremely broad and discretion in the administrator is broad, that exemption 
applies.   



2/15/77 - 7 - 
 

  
 

This concerned a number of public action groups that addressed the issues to Congress.  
And [at] the time the Sunshine Act [was] before the Congress for consideration, these groups got 
language before the Congress that would closely limit and narrow the interpretation of 
exemption 3 of Sunshine as pronounced by the Supreme Court.  As a result, and as contained in 
the memorandum that is before the Committee, by law, as in the law of the Sunshine Act, that 
exemption is now far more closely and tightly limited in its use.  With the three circumstances 
set forth in the memorandum, namely, that you have to have a specific statute authorizing 
specifically withholding in a nondiscretionary manner--or if discretion is granted by the 
Congress, with the standards, the benchmarks, the factors that [show] the agency follows that 
exemption and the guidelines [unintelligible] so that a member of the public can look at that 
exemption and the guidelines and know precisely what the agency may withhold.   

It locks our discretion, that’s the name of the game.  This statute, the Sunshine Act, has 
amended the [Freedom of Information Act], making mandatory the adoption of those standards 
by each agency.  For that reason I presented it in an amended form to the Committee for 
adoption.  I don’t know and can’t anticipate when the Committee will have to apply it.  
Hopefully it won’t be soon.  But on adoption, Mr. Chairman, the Committee will now act and 
report [unintelligible]. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are there any questions?  Does this require us to [unintelligible] 
the Committee’s actions? 

SPEAKER(?).  I move that we adopt the proposal. 

SPEAKER(?).  Seconded. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any questions?  All right, we will consider Mr. O’Connell’s 
interpretation and recommendation [to be] adopted.   

[End of executive session] 

We now need to act on the minutes of the January meeting.  Is there a motion to approve? 
A motion has been made and probably very most inaudibly seconded.  I hear no objections, and 
therefore we move on to the report by Mr. Holmes on foreign currency operations during the past 
month. 

MR. HOLMES.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Holmes.  Are there any questions? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Are you able to buy your Swiss franc repayment in francs out of the 
market primarily, or are you drawing it from the Swiss? 

MR. HOLMES.  We are buying directly from the Swiss primarily.  We have had occasion 
to buy Swiss francs from some of our correspondents who have been sellers.  So we buy them 
directly at market rate.  We have never really gone into the market.  Really, it hasn’t quite been 
that good.  We hope to, over time.   



2/15/77 - 8 - 
 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Does the market know this? 

MR. HOLMES.  We see no impact of any of this on the market.  I think the market has 
assumed, and rightly so, that we are buying mainly directly from the Swiss National Bank. 

MR. PARDEE.  All press releases we have had have indicated that it would be done 
directly [with the Swiss authorities] to avoid any market impact. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we haven’t made a commitment to that effect, have we? 

MR. PARDEE.  No.  It is one of three options.  And to some degree we are buying German 
marks and French francs in the market, which we then supply to the Swiss when they need them.  
And the other options. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions?  All right, a motion to confirm the 
transactions of the foreign desk is now in order.  Motion is made and seconded.  Any dissents?  
Very well, do you have any recommendations, Mr. Holmes? 

MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, for once we have no swaps maturing in the period ahead, 
and so I have no recommendations to make to the Committee. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, no one will object to that.  We will now ask for 
consideration of the economic outlook.  Mr. Zeisel, will you be good enough to report to the 
Committee. 

MR. ZEISEL.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Zeisel, for your report, and we’d now like to hear 
from members of the Committee. I think it would be particularly helpful to have any views on 
the economic outlook that diverge from the staff opinion expressed by Mr. Zeisel 

MR. BLACK.  In trying to prognosticate what lies ahead, I guess I generally tend to think 
in terms of probabilities, Jerry, and I come out thinking that what the staff has done this time has 
a pretty high probability of happening.  I am right with you this time, more closely than I have 
ever been.   

What I am wondering about is another scenario, as to how likely you think [it is that] this 
might happen.  In a period now when inflation expectations seem to be strengthening and you 
have had some shortages and fuel problems and so on, what probability would you attach to the 
possibility that we might have an inventory cycle built up here, unreasonable levels that might 
cause trouble later on. 

MR. ZEISEL.  We’ve taken the optimistic tack, assuming that the caution that 
businessmen have evinced in their treatment of inventories over the last several quarters will 
continue, and they will not be panicked into a rapid increase in inventory investment during the 
second and third quarters when we get these temporary surges.  After all, they were burned in 
1975, but I must say that they could well be burned again, in the sense that we might very well 
have a rapid increase in inventory investment and then face the situation in which final sales do 



2/15/77 - 9 - 
 

  
 

not support that rate of inventory accumulation, and we move into an inventory adjustment 
toward the end of the year.  In terms of the probabilities, I hate putting numbers on things, but 
maybe I’ll say one in three. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What was that? 

MR. ZEISEL.  One in three, possibly. 

MR. BLACK.  I guess that’s even higher than I would have put it.  That is real interesting. 

MR. PARTEE.  What is a normative figure on inventory accumulation now?  Do you sort 
of assume close to 1 percent of GNP would be a normal figure? 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, the postwar average, as you know, was about 0.9 [percent], and our 
assumption more recently has been somewhat under that.  And we have averaged somewhat 
under that for this period.  We rise to above that rate toward the end of the projection period. 

MR. PARTEE.  For next year.  The whole of this year is well below that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would add only this comment.  I would expect that, before this 
year is over, we’ll run through an inventory cycle, induced in part by weather developments, 
induced in part by the Administration’s fiscal package with its emphasis on the so-called rebate.  
And therefore I believe that all of us should pay far closer attention to final sales as the year 
unfolds rather than to a couple of GNP figures.  Mr. Baughman, please. 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, a number of somewhat disconnected comments.  First 
off, it seems to me that a reading of the Redbook this time [was] rather interesting.  
Notwithstanding the great number of very unusual and generally adverse developments around 
the country, [in] almost every district there is a very strong flavor of optimism in the report and 
also a very strong flavor of adaptability and adjustability of the local economy to unusual 
developments.  It seems to me that [is] there to an unusual degree this time.   

With respect to the inventory question which Mr. Black has raised:  At our recent directors 
meeting,--where we had two retailers represented, one nationwide and one regional--this 
question was discussed, and they were of the view that retailers will not make the mistake this 
time that they feel they made a year ago, in which they had to, as they feel, sell excessive 
inventories at substantial price reductions.  The question was raised as to whether they might 
make the opposite mistake this time, and they seem not to be concerned about that. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s what I always hear from bankers--they won’t make 
mistakes in the future. 

MR. JACKSON.  Are you speaking of commercial bankers or central bankers? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I was thinking of commercial bankers.  I have no difficulty 
with your generalization. 



2/15/77 - 10 - 
 

  
 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  We’re in a very strong economic environment in the Southwest, 
which of course traces largely to the oil and gas business and, I suppose, in part to weather.  
There were reports from all members of our board of directors, who have had a wide range of 
contacts during the past month, that they can recall no time when they have had so many 
inquiries about industrial sites in that part of the country.  And they are anticipating that the trend 
to move to that part of the country is going to substantially accelerate.  And it’s a rather 
substantial trend at the present time.  You know, it’s possible that this is simply weather talk, in 
view of the fact of the recency of the weather phenomenon.  But there is a feeling that there is a 
good deal of substance to it.   

Notwithstanding the fact that it’s a prosperous area, it is a capital deficit area, and we had 
reports that there is a continuing improvement in the availability, and continuing improvement in 
the sense of more favorable terms, on funds to flow into the area.  This is more obvious, of 
course, in the construction and real estate development area.  It is reported from some 
individuals in the area who deal largely with small companies that the same thing is reflected in 
that they can now place stock privately in small companies in a much more effective way than 
they have been able to do in the past year or two.   

With respect to the outlook for the prime rate on business loans, we had a variety of views 
expressed, but the one banker who has been closest to the mark during the past two years very 
interestingly expressed the view that the next move is more likely to be down than up.  That is all 
I have. 

MR. MAYO.  Did he say why? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Because the loan demand is not that strong, and the availability of 
funds is continuing to improve. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Kimbrel now, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Zeisel, you refer to minimum likelihood of the labor force 
negotiations this year, I wonder if your projections have accorded any dimensions to the 
possibility [of an] increase [in] the minimum wage.  

MR. ZEISEL.  Yes, we have incorporated the minimum wage increase that occurred 
January 1st into our projection of the-- 

MR. KIMBREL.  I really had in mind any further increase though. 

MR. ZEISEL.  No, that is all we have incorporated.  Anything else that may occur, of 
course, would add to the pressure.  This increase in the minimum wage, to $2.30, affected--our 
guess is--about 2 million people, to some extent in residential construction and to some extent in 
trade and services.  It is hard to know how much of an effect it has.  It certainly has a tendency to 
push everybody up slightly.  That is, we have an estimate in the first quarter of the impact of that 
on our wage costs. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I am surprised by your reference to construction. 



2/15/77 - 11 - 
 

  
 

MR. ZEISEL.  Apparently there are, in some parts of the country, relatively low wage 
construction people.  I don’t think that’s the major group. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Where wages of some construction workers are or have been 
below the present minimum of $2.30? 

MR. ZEISEL.  So I have been told. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That is interesting.  I didn’t realize that. 

MR. COLDWELL.  A lot of non-unions. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Even so, it isn’t--any facts that you may be able to present on that, 
I for one would like very much to see [them].  That surprises me.   

Any other questions, Mr. Kimbrel?  Thank you.  Mr. Winn now, please. 

MR. WINN.  Mr. Zeisel, in trying to assess the impact of the proposed universal welfare 
payments, to what extent have you adjusted the prospects in terms of the ’75 experience, where 
the ’75 payments came in a period following some declines in consumer credit outstanding?  
This will come [when] consumer credit outstanding has been increasing and perhaps 
deteriorating in quality.  In other words we may not get the same impact this time as we did in 
’75 because of the difference in credit circumstances. 

MR. ZEISEL.  You are perfectly right.  There were a number of factors operating in ’75 
that are not exactly similar to that here, and we may very well get a somewhat larger total effect 
from the rebate.  However, I must say, we’ve used ’75 as a base for making our estimates of the 
impact of 1977 rebates, with a few judgmental adjustments for those special factors.   

MR. PARTEE.  You thought, Willis, that more will be used to begin to repay debts? 

MR. WINN.  Yes, and utility bills.  You don’t have any penalty now, interest rate or 
anything else, on utility bills, so they can accumulate without being cut off.  No interest 
payments, and some of those are climbing.  The credit situation is not so good, so you may not 
get the multiplier effect that you got before. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We didn’t get much of a multiplier effect last time. 

MR. WINN.  No, but look at what happened to consumer credit as a result of ’75; it really 
spurted, and then combined with these payments-- 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, car sales went up.  That’s why you’ve got consumer credit. 

MR. WINN.  That’s right.  And that may not happen. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Mr. Morris, please. 



2/15/77 - 12 - 
 

  
 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I think there is a need for the Committee to make policy in 
a longer-term time frame than we’ve been accustomed to.  I thought I would ask if the staff has a 
concept of what the optimum growth path ought to be for the economy over the next few years, 
and if so, how does the projection for ’77 relate to that time path. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well the projection for ’77 that we have is approximately a 6 percent rate 
of real GNP growth; that is the average of the four quarters, which would accomplish a moderate 
reduction in the unemployment rate--we anticipate getting down to 7 percent, or that general 
magnitude, by the fourth quarter.  I think one has to make judgments about the implications of 
the rapidity of making that kind of progress for considerations like inflation.  I think the 
approach that would involve a moderate rate of improvement over a period of several years is the 
more sensible one, and I think this rate of growth of approximately 6 percent, possibly a little bit 
larger than that, is consistent with something close to an optimum, given the continued 
sensitivity in the economy to inflationary anticipations.  I think that’s a critical dimension here.  
One can set various goals, after all, and can push the economy to reach those goals at greater or 
lesser speed.  But to the extent that our judgment is that the rate of increase that we have 
projected appears consistent with no increased inflationary pressures, this suggests that we may 
be on the right track. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Zeisel, am I right in thinking that the staff, in considering the 
longer-run trend of the economy, is now thinking of a rate of growth, over the long term, of 3-1/2 
percent for real GNP for a year, in contrast to the figure that has become standard in the 
literature--4 percent? 

MR. ZEISEL.  That’s correct. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Recognizing the flattening out of the trend of productivity-- 

MR. ZEISEL.  Productivity has weakened. and that has reduced the trend, correct. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --so, without being able to specify the details, a 6 percent rate of 
growth this year, let us say, merging into a 3-1/2 percent figure over the longer run, assuming a 
reasonable development of the economy.  Is that the correct statement? 

MR. ZEISEL.  That is right. 

MR. PARTEE.  It would take a number of years at 6 percent-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --to accomplish that--well, that is to say, 6 percent growth or 
something higher than 3-1/2 percent. 

MR. PARTEE.  Literally looked at, the unemployment rate drops to 7.1 in its projection 
over the year; with 6 percent growth, [unemployment drops] from 7.9 to 7.1.  That is an 8/10 
[percentage point] reduction.  So it would take another couple of years to get down. 

MR. MORRIS.  I think a kind of interesting development in the New England academic 
scene--we have Otto Eckstein, for example, coming out now with the concept that we really had 



2/15/77 - 13 - 
 

  
 

not better plan for a rate of growth on the average over the next four or five years in excess of 5 
percent--5 percent is really the outside limit, and the Phillips curve will rise very sharply with a 
growth rate in excess of that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It’s an undesirable growth rate? 

MR. MORRIS.  It’s undesirable, right. 

MR. WALLICH.  Even temporarily?  On the way to recovery or to some full employment 
goal? 

MR. MORRIS.  I think that’s the implication.  I think so.  But he also argues that this path, 
which would get us to about 5-1/2 percent unemployment in 1980--that, at that time, we are 
likely to [have] approximately the same degree of strain on capacity [for] basic materials that we 
encountered in 1973.  Now, I don’t know how, I’m curious to know if you would share this 
particular view? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Let me just sharpen this question a bit, if I may.  I have 
seen calculations which suggest, I think on an economic outlook very similar to the one you have 
projected--about the same rate of growth--but by the second half of 1978, also given projections 
of this sort for plant and equipment, we will be back at the 1973 operating rates on the average, 
maybe as early as the midpoint of next year.  Is that what your calculations-- 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, as I recall it, our calculations for capacity use in manufacturing bring 
us to about 85 or 86 [percent] by the middle of next year.  And that is beginning to move--  

MR. PARTEE.  It was about 87-1/2. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It was about 88, I think, so that would probably bring it 
to 88 or beyond by the end of next year. 

MR. ZEISEL.  About, by the end of next year.  I think one can view this in several ways.  
One, of course, is to argue that one ought to have some sort of steady-state pattern throughout 
the period toward an objective.  One can operate reasonably with a slightly more rapid rate of 
increase in the early period, moderating down as you approach fuller use of capacity and begin 
to get close to the danger zone.  The argument in favor of this would be, of course, to reduce 
social costs in the early stages, where you still have extremely high rates of unemployment. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any further questions along these lines? 

MR. JACKSON.  Mr. Chairman, I will just say that all of this assumes that we will have 
had a relatively strong sustained rate of growth for three full years after the trough.  And that 
may or may not occur.  Well, I begin to question the validity of that strong a rate of growth for 
that long a period. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The dichotomy we have here is that maybe we have not 
much excess capacity on the physical side and we’ve got lots on the employment side.  In a way, 



2/15/77 - 14 - 
 

  
 

it’s getting worse, but that depends on what the labor force is going to be doing, too.  I don’t 
know what kind of projection you have on the labor force. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Our projections on the labor force are [for a] less rapid pace than we had 
last year.  We’re figuring on about a 2 million rate of growth in numbers for 1977 versus about 3 
million in 1976.  That is larger than the average and larger than the growth in population [and it] 
assumed continued increase in participation of women largely-- 

MR. PARTEE.  It would depend on how it is distributed, too.  If you remember ’73, it was 
rather a surprise that we had that much inflationary pressure with that level of capacity 
utilization.  It was, of course, reported lower than it is now.  It’s been revised.  But nevertheless, 
it seemed as if there were lots of pressure points.  And if you had a more general distribution of 
demand so that we might not have a repetition of that--it would depend on the precise character 
of the forecast. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I agree it depends on the precise character of the 
forecasting of the distribution, but do you have any reason to think ex ante that it’s going to be 
better distributed this time? 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I wouldn’t expect any 20 percent devaluation.  And I think that had 
a major effect on that rate of inflation in 1973. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I see things somewhat as Mr. Volcker does.  I note all sorts of 
arguments as to why capacity pressures are not likely and why the experience in ’73 and ’66, 
when it went to 89, is not relevant.  But nevertheless, I think we have the fact that we’ve greatly 
changed our data and that these do show that we have a good deal less capacity.  We know now 
it takes a lot more time to bring capacity on stream.  Somebody here the other day said that, on 
some project, it took five years before you could put a spade in the ground.  And under those 
conditions, I’m not very hopeful that these capacity margins that we still have are adequate. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would agree with that.  The overall figure, I think, has always 
been historically deceptive because of variations among industries in rate of utilization and 
variations among firms within individual industries.  And an overall figure of even 85 percent is 
consistent with developments as they have been historically, and I see no reason a priori to 
assume anything very different this time.  An overall figure of 85 percent has been consistent 
with bottlenecks scattered through the system--individual firms and industries.  Mr. Eastburn 
now, please. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, on prices, a comment and a question.  Our projections, 
Jerry, would have a little bit more price effect as a result of the cold weather that we have been 
having.  You might want to comment on that.  And second, I have seen some scenarios--we have 
a chart here, for example, from DRI, which projects the deflator through this year by quarter, 
which has a rising trend in the price component.  I happen to be more in agreement with what 
you have here.  But what kind of odds do you attach to a rise in the deflator in the latest 
increase? 



2/15/77 - 15 - 
 

  
 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, let me break it down into three broad components--food, energy, and 
other.  As far as food is concerned, we have situations for the immediate future deteriorating to 
the extent that the cold weather has had some effect on prices of fruits and vegetables.  But, as I 
indicated, we expect that to be a fairly short-term phenomenon.  Other than that, the last month 
or two has suggested that meat prices were going to be lower--weaker than we had earlier 
thought--so that without the freeze we probably would have edged off [our] estimate of food 
price increases in the first quarter.   

As far as the remainder of the year is concerned, it is really very difficult to say.  The 
drought in the West--I’m no agricultural expert, but [our expert] tells me that, at the moment, his 
evaluation is that the people are being a little pessimistic about the implications of the drought in 
the West for supplies.  Grains are apparently in considerable supply.  And later there may be 
some effect on California-produced fruits and vegetables.  But they would not be a very 
important factor overall.  So that basically, our feeling is that, unless we have continued bad luck 
in terms of weather, food prices would not be a factor pushing prices up markedly in the period 
of 1977.   

As far as energy prices are concerned, we have made assumptions in regard to OPEC 
prices which involve a 5 percent increase, edging up to 7-1/2 percent.  If that got worse, we 
would obviously have some problems.  There are some additional costs associated with increases 
in gas which we have incorporated in our projections.  We’ve made some assumptions in regard 
to the implications of the use of intrastate natural gas in the interstate system.  It’s a very small 
factor overall.  That’s obviously a factor pushing prices up, but not extremely rapidly, given our 
assumptions.   

So we come back to the element of unit labor costs from other sectors as being a major 
determinant of prices.  And there, productivity plays a large part, as do wage increases.  The 
outlook for wage increases this year, it seems to us, is no worse than last year.  Possibly slightly 
higher increases, but very little.  We don’t have any really large negotiations which involve a big 
catch-up to compensate for increases in the cost of living.  Probably the most dramatic 
negotiations that we will have [involve] steelworkers, and that is going on right now.  They are 
covered by a cost-of-living clause, which has kept their real wages above what [they were] when 
they negotiated the contract, so the pressures are not too intense.   

It’s a big settlement, it’s a big year--there are some 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 million people being 
covered by contracts, but they’re very widely dispersed, and virtually all of the big ones do have 
cost-of-living protection.  So we are not going to get that kind of surge.  And we are anticipating 
that wage compensation increases will remain under 8 percent--in the 7-1/2 percent to 7-3/4 
percent range.   

As far as productivity is concerned--based upon past experience, a rate of growth in real 
output in the 6 percent range is consistent with above-average increases in productivity.  And we 
would think this probably will be the case now, since business generally suffered probably its 
worst productivity performance--certainly in the post-World War II years--during the recession, 
and I would think there would still be continued pressure to try to recover some of that.  And, 
while [our forecast is] not terribly expansive on productivity-- our average is a little above 3 
percent for the year as a whole--[but] if we’re right on that, this gives us a unit labor cost 



2/15/77 - 16 - 
 

  
 

increase of about 4-1/2 percent.  That roughly would be consistent, we feel, with price increases 
slightly above that.  And this gives us a pattern of price increases for the year which are 
somewhere in the 5 to 5-1/4 percent range. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I hope you’re right, Mr. Zeisel.  Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I listened to a discussion of business economists the other day in 
which even more micro and nonmonetary approaches to prices all led to an impression of 
downward price pressures, which seemed very gratifying.  But my own look at these numbers 
always is a little bit above what yours is:  Wage increases--I think we would have to be a little 
optimistic to get 7-1/2 to 8.  Productivity, 3 percent--well we might be able to do that.  So that 
allowing for some losses from things like drought, oil, other adverse factors, we might be 
underestimating our rate of price increase.  That is what I fear.   

And the question I want to attach to this is, we have now mapped out what is a relatively 
slow rate of recovery-- growth about 50 percent above long-term trends.  As I remember, in the 
past people would talk about 100 percent above the trend quarterly growth rate sometimes--8 
percent with a trend assumed to be 4 [percent].  We ought to be getting downward pressures on 
prices simply from excess capacity and unemployment.  And countries like Germany and 
Switzerland are getting this and have been quite successful.  Why is it that this doesn’t seem to 
be clearly happening in the U.S.? 

MR. ZEISEL.  I wish I could answer that question.  I really don’t know.  I think one has to 
speculate about it.  Certainly the past half year has been instructive in a sense.  In a period when 
we had not only excess capacity but also a rather sluggish economy, [and] one looks at industrial 
prices abstractly from special consideration such as energy, one sees that the rate of increase, if 
anything, accelerates.  This is not what one would have anticipated based on the kind of model 
that we are used to analyzing.  So I think [we] have to start thinking about business attitudes and 
business perceptions of what their costs may be, what inflationary implications may be, what 
government programs may involve in terms of price regulation of one sort or another.  I think 
these are in a sense new dimensions that have to be taken into consideration. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, they’re also old dimensions.  One is, raw materials 
prices have been advancing; they started rising at the very beginning of 1975 once again.  And 
historically, wholesale prices have moved upward starting at the very beginning of an economic 
recovery--a few months before, at the time, [and] one or two or three months later.  And this 
historical pattern by now is being superimposed by a long-run inflationary trend of our economy.  
And therefore I hope our staff is right in this projection as to prices, but my own [projection] is 
less optimistic.  Mr. Balles now, please. 

MR. BALLES.  Since Mr. Zeisel mentioned the drought in the West, I thought I might 
pass on a few calculations that I had my own staff make in terms of what impact they see this 
year.  There will no doubt be disaster for a number of California farmers, but we have tried to 
figure out what this will result in, in terms of costs.  In view of the almost record low levels 
we’re seeing as we move into a second year of drought, in [moisture content] in the ground, of 
levels of water in the reservoirs, and snow pack in the mountains, they are guesstimating a 
possible 25 percent reduction in the output of fruits and vegetables in California farms this year.   



2/15/77 - 17 - 
 

  
 

The staff figures that fruits and vegetables make up about 3.1 percent of the cost of living 
index; and that 25 percent reduction, unless offset by increased production somewhere else in the 
country--the net bottom line result is about a 0.3 percent boost in the cost of living index for the 
year as a whole.  Does that jive with the agricultural expert that you talked to, Jerry? 

MR. ZEISEL.  That’s very much in line with our assumption.  We figured a rise in fruit 
and vegetable [prices] of about 25 to 27 percent.  We built that into a higher level for prices for 
the year. 

MR. JACKSON.  John, what [effect does] the development of much more modern farm 
techniques in all of Mexico begin to have on that projection and on our relationship with that 
country? 

MR. BALLES.  I don’t know the answer to that question, Phil. 

MR. JACKSON.  Recent newspaper reports would indicate that the substantial 
improvement in modern farming techniques [in Mexico] could have some moderating effect on 
that influence of California. 

MR. BALLES.  I hope that’s right. 

MR. JACKSON.  Maybe they just recently had a drought, too; I don’t know.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Partee, please. 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I just thought that I might say, since I think we need 
so many views on this, the economic outlook seems to me to be quite good and strengthened 
over the last month or two.  We did have Henry refer, I think, to this group of business 
economists we had in last week, and they were also, it seemed to me, quite optimistic, talking 
really about a very good outlook for their products and their industries in the period to come.  So 
I agree with the staff forecast that there is developing strength in the economy.   

But I do think that we have to recognize that, at this instant, we haven’t been able to assess 
yet the full effects of the weather.  I understand this.  Now there is, as I think Jerry said, 
somewhat of a strike effect there, that you cut output, cut inventory, cut income for a very 
temporary period--but, in this case, over a very wide number of employees.  And you would 
expect that, when the weather changes, output will come back and the inventories will be 
reaccumulated and the incomes will be restored, and so there wouldn’t be much overall effect.   

There also is an income transfer point here, which has been mentioned, that may not be 
overcome; that is to say, that you shift income from consumers to sellers of fuel.  And you could 
presume, I suppose, that the sellers of fuel have a lower propensity to spend than the ordinary 
consumers have, and we might get some depressing effect.   

So I guess I wanted to indicate that, although the prospect is that we would get a very good 
snapback and maybe a very strong second quarter, it is not yet quite in the bag because we have 
not quite yet assimilated the total effect that this weather development [will have].  And I think 



2/15/77 - 18 - 
 

  
 

we need to be a little cautious until we can see what the shape of our coming out of this weather 
will be. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I agree in substance with what our staff has indicated and [with] 
Mr. Partee’s pronouncement on the general outlook of the economy.  I think the outlook is good, 
but I think I should report to the Committee that my own conversations with businessmen and 
business economists recently [have] suggested to me that there is a somewhat uneasy mood 
within the business community, as I sense it.  There is an uneasiness about the possibility of 
price controls.  There is uneasiness about the Administration’s fiscal policy and where it may be 
going.  There is uneasiness about the energy outlook.  There is uneasiness about inflation, and 
that is interfering with judgments about capital expansion.  And there is uneasiness also about 
foreign developments.  And this mood of uneasiness, if I read it correctly, is a little stronger than 
it was a month or two ago.  Mr. Coldwell, please. 

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, you and Governor Partee in effect have stolen exactly 
what I’d planned to say, except that I’ve got a little bit different scenario to it, and I think Chuck 
is right that we’re headed upward.  I have a sneaking suspicion that we may find ourselves in a 
kind of a peaking situation in the latter part of the year--maybe a downturn of no major 
proportion, but a kind of interruption in this nice smooth path the staff has laid out for us here.  
And I suspect that we can have exactly what you are talking about, in terms of the uneasiness in 
businessmen accumulating into a less-than-forward look [to] their operations, and certainly 
capital spending, and perhaps some other areas, too--an uneasiness translated into perhaps 
excessive caution.  So while I think we may average out to where the staff is looking for it, I 
wonder if this pattern isn’t going to be perhaps markedly different than that shown. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Winn now, please. 

MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, in their uneasiness, did they express any concern over the 
stock market behavior? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes.  And partly as an expression of their uneasiness, and partly as 
a cause of it.   

Any other question or comment? 

MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, could I ask Governor Coldwell if he could elaborate 
just a little on what he thinks it is?  I think margin, in terms of the usual cyclical aspects, in 
which there is a little pressure on capacity, a little pressure on inventory. 

MR. COLDWELL.  No, I’m thinking in terms of a fairly low first quarter, with a growing 
boom in the second and third tapering off largely because of the impacts of business caution, 
reflected by the comments of the Chairman.  We might have a consumer boom from the first to 
the third quarter quarters, [but] not supported by a capital spending boom. 

MR. BLACK.  You think that inventory explains what’s causing it? 

MR. COLDWELL.  Yes, the inventories are playing a considerable part. 



2/15/77 - 19 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Balles, please. 

MR. BALLES.  I’d like to ask Mr. Zeisel one more question in connection with the $50 
dollar rebate program or, as the Chairman has more appropriately called it, a gift, by the 
government to its citizens.  Do you have any estimates as to how much you expect that sum to be 
spent as opposed to saved? 

MR. ZEISEL.  Roughly-- 

MR. LILLY.  What are you going to do with yours? 

MR. BALLES.  I’m going to spend it.  Seriously, I’m not sure yet.  I’ll wait until I see it.  
We may not get it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think it’s a little hard--as far as I’m concerned, I don’t know 
what I will do, period. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Historically, this kind of--quote--windfall, which is what I think it’s 
generally called, has involved something in the neighborhood of 25 percent spent in the current 
period, and then drifting up to 40 or 50 percent total of it spent, possibly, and the remainder 
saved.  And we built in about this kind of pattern; however., I think you’ve got an additional 
element that’s come into play here, and that is the extra gas bills which are going to be coming in 
now.  It’s conceivable that people, to the extent that they are aware of these rebates, will be 
figuring they are going to use that rebate to pay their gas bills.  So that adds another dimension 
of the word “uncertainty” on how’s it going to operate. 

MR. PARTEE.  Yes, but assume they would pay their gas bill anyway. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, they have to pay their gas bill anyway. 

MR. PARTEE.  You’ve got about a $40 billion increase in savings in the second quarter. 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, the payments out of these rebates, which are at $46 billion annual 
rate, come very late in the second quarter--May and into June--so that most of the-- 

MR. PARTEE.  You add it. 

MR. ZEISEL.  There’s a lagged spending response to them. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions or comments on the economic outlook? 

MR. GARDNER.  May I make an observation, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Please do, Mr. Gardner. 

MR. GARDNER.  Listening to this concern about uncertainty, I have to reflect back to the 
beginning of last year.  The midpoint of last year.  What were the points of uncertainty?  What 
prevented business from moving forward with capital goods planning or expansion?  Well, the 



2/15/77 - 20 - 
 

  
 

pause was on our minds almost all of the year.  The pause as to whether unemployment began to 
rise after dropping.  The election was certainly on our minds.  OPEC’s protestation that they 
would increase prices were with us for many months last year.  In fact, there were a great many 
reasons or significant reasons for business uncertainty in 1976.   

None of these are quite the same concerns today that they were last year.  The election is 
behind us.  We have seen the first stimulative program proposals.  There’s no question about the 
pause being a downturn any longer, and that’s proven to be an unnecessary worry in some 
respects.  Unemployment, even in a crazy mechanical way, dropped by a macro number for [a] 
month; but nevertheless, the Saudis seem to be holding out with a two-price system to [the] 
advantage [of] our economy.  I remember a lot of concern about the fact that if we didn’t have a 
big December, we would have great difficulty in retail sales, but we did have a big December.   

I [am] persuaded, gentlemen, that businessmen are very inventive in thinking about things 
to worry about.  Now they are worried about the weather and the energy shortage or what have 
you.  But when I try to balance these against last year, I don’t think they are terribly impressive.   

All I’m trying to suggest is that I look someday to the time when the perception generally 
in business will be that they ought to go ahead with some of their capital expansion. 

MR. WALLICH.  God help us then. 

MR. GARDNER.  Pardon? 

MR. WALLICH.  God help us then. 

MR. GARDNER.  Now wait a minute.  We haven’t had any significant capital 
investments.  We’ve had a recovery without that leading the way.  And this has always appealed 
to me as a fact of future strength.  At some point, we may indeed get some additional thrust from 
the longer-delayed capital expansion developments.  I’m a little bit from Missouri when it comes 
to businessmen and their worries. 

MR. WALLICH.  If I may interject, I do see things somewhat that way, but late in the 
cycle, everybody will realize that [they don’t] have enough capacity, that they should have 
invested earlier, there [will] come a great rush in this--bottlenecks in capital goods industries.  
And that’s exactly how I negatively interpret the belief that, at some time, we all should go 
ahead. 

MR. GARDNER.  I want to ask one question, Mr. Chairman.  Jerry, steel capacity 
worldwide, aluminum capacity worldwide--I don’t know anything about pulp and paper 
capacity--do we have the same set of conditions today that we had in ’73 on capacity?  We are 
worried about our 85 percent rate or our movement toward an 85 percent rate [of capacity 
utilization].  I seem to remember an enormous burst in construction of steel plants throughout the 
world very readily available.  Some very basic industrial commodities readily available from 
input.  Can you comment on that? 



2/15/77 - 21 - 
 

  
 

MR. ZEISEL.  Well, I can comment a bit.  I would ask Mr. Reynolds to supplement my 
comment, since I am not as familiar with the worldwide situation, obviously, as he is.  My 
impression is that we are not in a situation where the pressures in capacity worldwide [are] what 
they were then.  And, in fact, the other day there was a comment from the conference of business 
economists group that there seemed to be a considerable amount of available capacity in these 
basic metal producing sectors worldwide.  And so I think, to that extent, that we are not facing 
the same kind of pressure points that we did face back in ’73.  John, do you? 

MR. REYNOLDS.  Yes, I think there is very little pressure on capacity abroad.  That’s 
been the reason that investment spending there has lagged, too.  Steel is certainly in ample 
supply.  Most chemicals, I think, are in ample supply.  Figures that Wharton School gathers on 
industrial capacity, while perhaps not very good, show capacity pressures much less than they 
were in ’73. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Mayo, please. 

MR. MAYO.  Just one observation following up on what Steve was saying.  I think there is 
another phenomenon that’s added to uncertainty that we tend to forget in-between time.  We 
have almost a semiannual regularity of the August doldrums and February depression, in terms 
of attitudes, and I think this has been accentuated this year, and as they say, this too shall pass.  
The stock market decline has not helped it, either. 

MR. LILLY.  Well, I have to hasten to get in on the statement about businessmen’s 
worries.  I think that what you describe has become a kind of a way of life.  And they’re used to 
this; at this point, I think they’re just going ahead.  My own view is the economy is going at a 
very fine rate, as Chuck says.  I am concerned that perhaps too much liquidity [is] in the 
economy.  And this bothers me more than anything else at this point.   

I’m not too worried about the capacity problem.  I think there is an international 
[unintelligible] that we [unintelligible]--furthermore, I think that all of you are paying too much 
attention to manufacturing, which is only 19 million employed even though there is a multiplier.  
[Unintelligible] the great job [unintelligible] has got to come in other areas. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question or comment?  Well, if not, let us move quickly 
to Mr. Sternlight’s report on operations at the domestic Desk. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  [Statement--see Appendix.]  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Sternlight.  Any questions or comments?  Yes, 
Mr. Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH.  There seem to have been significant shifts in interest rate relationships, 
with the principal rise in rates [being] in the medium-term Treasuries.  What does that imply for 
the market’s expectations of future rate movements?  [Is it] an indication of sharper rate 
increases in the area immediately below that in maturity? 



2/15/77 - 22 - 
 

  
 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think there has been some expectation of rising rates as this year 
goes along.  Just taking the period of the past month, this trend that you point out is not so very 
pronounced, but I think it would be pronounced if we go back to the beginning of the year.  
There has been a steepening of the upward sloping yield curves.  And I think it was essentially a 
fading of the expectation of any further easing and some expectation developing that, as this year 
goes along, there would tend to be some higher rates developing. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think Mr. Wallich’s question does raise a question for the 
Treasury as to debt management policy in the months ahead, and this is something that our 
financial staff should pay very careful attention to. 

MR. AXILROD.  Mr. Chairman, I was going to add, if I might, supplementing Mr. 
Sternlight’s comment--I think that if it also had to do, not simply with expectations--expectations 
change--but that was the area where there was a very large supply of securities.  The Treasury 
had been hitting that area rather consistently, and you saw a sharp reaction in that rate area in 
part because people who were just trading in the securities tended to unload them--and so it was 
something [more] than just a change in attitude in that area more particularly than in other areas 
because of the very large supply that was floating. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, may I comment.  Once a month, in the preparation for 
these meetings, one of the things that we do is to take the yield curve and try to make projections 
of the rates on the basis of what the market seems to be expecting and reflected in the yield 
period.  In recent months the market projections have not been as high an increase for the funds 
rate as the Bluebook would [make it] seem.  But the latest one that we have done indicates that 
the market was expecting increases in short-term rates which were quite similar to those that the 
Bluebook projects.  Which indicates to me that, if and when it’s necessary for rates to go up, that 
the market apparently is expecting that.  It would not be surprised. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Any other questions or comments?  
Yes, Mr. Black. 

MR. BLACK.  Steve’s observation occasioned me to wonder about something.  Steve, 
what maturities do you feel really compete most effectively with thrift institution obligations?  
I’m wondering about disintermediation here. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, with thrift institutions, I would say that you really have to go 
through the whole maturity spectrum up to around four years.  That is, the savings accounts are 
sensitive to the bills, and that may be more particularly true for commercial banks now with 
business and state and local governments. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think Mr. Black was directing his question to the assets, is that 
correct? 

MR. BLACK.  Yes sir. 

MR. AXILROD.  Oh, I’m sorry, I thought you were asking about the liability side. 



2/15/77 - 23 - 
 

  
 

MR. BLACK.  Maybe I misunderstand the Chairman on it.  I was really wondering-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  About mortgage interest rates, is that what you had in mind? 

MR. BLACK.  No sir.  I was thinking about disintermediation on the liability side of the 
thrift institutions and what this might mean, you know, for debt management with this bulge-- 

MR. AXILROD.  I would say on that, that it’s up to the four-year Treasuries and maybe a 
little bit longer, that is when those issues have very attractive coupons.  And, of course, those 
yields are low now, or relatively low.  Then you tend to get funds that would otherwise be going 
perhaps into four-year certificates going into Treasury issues.  And also, [with] very high bill 
rates, funds that would otherwise go into savings shares [going] into the bills, and sometimes 
from very short-term certificates into bills. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other question or comments?  Very well, we’ll break for 
coffee now and we will be back in about 15 minutes. 

[Coffee break] 

MR. AXILROD.  [Secretary's note: This statement was not found in Committee records.] 

MR. JACKSON.  Have you noticed any change in the source of CDs for banks in domestic 
versus foreign? 

MR. AXILROD.  No, I have not.  But I have not investigated that. 

MR. JACKSON.  --material shift in the sources of them? 

MR. AXILROD.  I’d have to investigate that more carefully to give you an answer, but I 
have not--none has come to my attention. 

MR. JACKSON.  Would you think it material if there was? 

MR. AXILROD.  Not from the point of view of our domestic finance.  It might be material 
from the point of view of the balance of payments and pressures on exchange rates. 

MR. STERNLIGHT.  I’ve had some impression of banks drawing more from foreign 
sources. 

MR. JACKSON.  That’s the impression I’m getting.  That’s the reason I was asking the 
question.  But I frankly don’t know whether it’s material or immaterial. 

MR. PARTEE.  You mean the CDs--not Eurodollars?  Issuing domestic CDs to foreigners? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It’s not apt to be in the form of CDs; it would be in the 
form of Eurodollars. 



2/15/77 - 24 - 
 

  
 

MR. JACKSON.  Excuse me.  I used the wrong expression.  I’m talking about purchased 
funds as a whole. 

MR. KIMBREL.  I’m not so sure.  At least in the south Florida area, the CD related to 
foreign is significant.  And so much so that some of the larger banks have put a $150,000 limit 
on what they will accept from foreign sources. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Wallich, please. 

MR. WALLICH.  I wanted to ask a question about appendix table 3, which shows implied 
velocity growth rates.  Now the growth rates that would eventuate under the various alternatives 
are pretty high--particularly when you look toward the third and fourth quarter, they are 
remarkably high for V2, because typically that doesn’t fluctuate that much.  Now, I think Steve 
has given a partial answer to the implied concern here, by pointing to the high degree of liquidity 
and the ability of the economy to take care of a growing demand for credit out of its existing 
resources.  But I’m still puzzled by something like on alternative A and B, almost an 8 percent 
rise in velocity requirements.  How does that come about?  Do you expect a very low rate of 
money growth at that time after the initial blip in the earlier part of the year? 

MR. AXILROD.  That’s right.  We are expecting a very rapid growth rate in money in the 
second quarter.  And I think the--actually that 5.3 percent velocity for that quarter is in some 
sense artificially low--it’s around 6--you have to average through the second and third quarter, 
which still leaves you a high M1 around 6.  And we’re expecting a drop-off in the third quarter, 
so that, [unintelligible] because of the rebate money in effect being used over a longer period.  
But in addition, Governor Wallich, we are expecting interest rates to rise, and that accounts for a 
good part of the rise in velocity in addition-- 

MR. WALLICH.  In the absence of rising interest rates, allowing for the special factors 
that are operative now on the demand for M1, did you say how large that trend growth rate 
would be? 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, Governor Wallich, in the course of working out the material for 
this Bluebook, we did not work out an alternative which had no interest rate increase involved.  
So I really cannot give you an answer which would be anything other than my hunch.  And I 
don’t know whether you want that at this point. 

MR. WALLICH.  Yes, I do. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I can tell you the New York hunch.  That’s a little over 7 
percent. 

MR. AXILROD.  I was going to put my hunch at around 7, and that would be a lower 
number, I believe, than would be literally read out of some of the models. 

MR. PARTEE.  What’s the number you’re referring to? 

MR. WALLICH.  7. 



2/15/77 - 25 - 
 

  
 

MR. AXILROD.  The increase in money supply without an increase in interest rates over 
this Committee’s one-year horizon. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  What M1 would be without an increase in interest rates. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, that would be a growth velocity of about 4 percent, if M1 grew at 
7 percent. 

MR. AXILROD.  That’s correct, and that would mean that we’re allowing for some further 
shift from demand deposits to other transaction balances and for the fact that some of this 
liquidity might be given up willingly rather than require high interest rates in the atmosphere 
ahead. 

MR. EASTBURN.  Mr. Chairman, may I follow up?  I was also struck by this table, Steve.  
What kind of historical precedent is there for this kind of a velocity rate at this stage of the 
cycle? 

MR. AXILROD.  I believe this is a high velocity rate, but again, as I point out, we’re 
expecting higher interest rates.  I don’t believe there would be a precedent at this stage of the 
cycle without rising interest rates.  I don’t know whether you would even have found that.  I 
don’t have those figures at hand. 

MR. MORRIS.  There is a precedent.  In the third year of the expansion beginning in ‘69, 
M1 velocity was 6.2.  But, of course, that was accompanied by a sharp rise in interest rates.  So 
there is a precedent, but not without major changes in short-term money rates accompanying it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, I think we have to be very cautious in approaching this 
question on the basis of historical perspective.  I think it’s fair to ask how did velocity behave in 
the past in the third year of a business cycle expansion.  And that is the question that is being 
discussed and answered around the table.  But I think that one ought to take into account the fact 
that we had a lull in the economy, a pause, a reacceleration--and from a certain point of view, a 
new expansion, you see, is getting under way, and one can therefore, from that point of view, 
regard it as being more nearly comparable to the first year of expansion.  I think the truth is 
somewhere in between.  And one has to look at it from both points of view in order to get a fair 
reading of what history can tell us. 

MR. EASTBURN.  This would be higher, though, even for the first year. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, this would be an average of 6 percent for the year, which is 
not high for the first year of business cycle expansion on the average.  Now, next, one has to take 
into account the changes in financial technology.  I’ll tell you how I read this table.  I didn’t go 
back to any historical records at all, I didn’t have the time, and I start with a 3 percent secular 
rate of growth.  I make an allowance for a high rate of growth during a normal business cycle 
expansion.  That gives me, say, another 1 percent, so I’m up to 4.  I make some allowance for 
this being a reacceleration, that gets me up to 4-1/2 or 5.  I make some allowance for changes in 
financial technology and I get to 6, and therefore, I’m not too unhappy with this figure. 



2/15/77 - 26 - 
 

  
 

MR. AXILROD.  President Eastburn, it was in an effort to help explain this new table that 
I did want to point out that the movement in liquidity has been very unusual in this cycle as 
compared with previous cycles.  And that is, people have improved their positions during a 
period when they ordinarily deteriorate.  That doesn’t mean that you are surely going to get more 
velocity without much interest rate pressure, but it is at least an indicator in that direction. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Is it not true, as Governor Wallich, I think, already 
suggested, that V2 may be a little more unusual than the V1 here in terms of a historical 
perspective?  V2 hasn’t got the 3 percent secular-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  More unusual if you go back to 1960 and stop there.  If you go 
further back, it’s a different picture. 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I think one can sort of decompose what’s happening to V2 to the 
extent that it contains M1 or if there is an increase in velocity.  Now, if there’s disintermediation, 
one would of course expect an increase in velocity during that period because M2 would be 
rising at a less than trend rate. 

MR. AXILROD.  If we’re wrong, President Volcker, about the extent of interest rate 
pressures, then V2 would look more reasonable.  If interest rate pressures are less, the V2 
number is going to be considerably less, while the M1 velocity would be about the same. 

MR. MORRIS.  But even then, at this stage of the cycle, that is not an unusual level of 
velocity for M2.  Because in the third year of the cycle beginning in 1960, M2 velocity was 6.2. 

MR. AXILROD.  That was the beginning [of] disintermediation. 

MR. PARTEE.  It’s higher than what you’ve projected. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, that’s very sensitive to disintermediation. 

MR. JACKSON.  Have we done any studies on V3 which would tend to eliminate the 
changes in financial technology?  It wouldn’t totally do so, but it would reduce it. 

MR. AXILROD.  V2 does to a great extent. 

MR. JACKSON.  Until you get to V3 you don’t have the total effect as well covered as 
you would. 

MR. AXILROD.  I don’t have that data here. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I have not done any. 

MR. JACKSON.  It just strikes me that it might tend to give you some indication [of what] 
effect changes in technology would have on this. 

MR. PARTEE.  [Unintelligible] a lot of technology in V2, that is, to the extent some of the 
shifts from demand deposits to savings accounts in banks [unintelligible]. 



2/15/77 - 27 - 
 

  
 

MR. JACKSON.  But it’s not all going to banks [unintelligible]. 

MR. PARTEE.  Some of it’s going to thrifts. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Kimbrel, please. 

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, [unintelligible].  Do you have any information that 
refunds are likely to be, in timing or amounts, significantly different from the usual this year? 

MR. AXILROD.  We think that the refunds will be a little bit higher than they were last 
year ,when they came in strong toward the end of February and March and had a definite effect 
on M1.  But the stronger [rebates] were evident also in ’74; we think our seasonals are beginning 
to pick it up.  But we don’t expect the refunds to be enough stronger in this year to have any 
significant effect on M1.  It could provide some uptick in March, but we haven’t built in 
anything very special for it. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Volcker, please. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I just want to follow up on this question.  
Apparently our analyst thought that the refunds would have a significant impact in March, 
anyway.  But beyond that, the rebates, which won’t come for a couple of months subsequent to 
that, you obviously must have made some calculations here that affect these numbers.  I suppose 
I would be interested in knowing not only what impact that has but what degree of confidence 
you attach to estimates you can make about the rebate phenomenon at this point. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, we did put the March growth rate somewhat higher than the 
February growth rate partly on this thought of the refunds, but it’s not a significant enough 
difference for me to put any real weight on it.  On the rebates, we have in process, and we’ll have 
completed within two or three weeks, a very detailed study of the experience in 1975.  Pending 
that, we have made some tentative estimates, which in my view are somewhat arbitrary at this 
moment, of the effects on demand deposits and time and savings deposits.  And we have added 
some 9 percentage points or so to May growth rates and something like 5 percentage points or so 
to June growth rates and then taken these out later in the summer, in July. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  9 percentage points? 

MR. AXILROD.  I believe that it’s 8 to 9.  It’s in that order of magnitude.  Again I would 
like to stress that these may not be the numbers that we will be using when the rebates come 
upon us or when we get a better fix on them, because we have not completed this very detailed 
study we have under way of the 1975 experience.   

These numbers are very sensitive to assumptions you make about whether people have 
learned from the 1975 experience; whether they’re going to spend [the rebate funds] faster than 
they did at that time; whether they are going to move them out of demand deposits faster or 
slower.  And you can get radically different numbers for various months depending on whether 
you assume they come out two weeks, three weeks, four weeks, or five weeks [later].  The 
monthly numbers are enormously sensitive.  And our pattern at the moment has something like a 



2/15/77 - 28 - 
 

  
 

14-1/2 percent rate of growth in M1 in May, a 10 percent in June, a minus 5 in July, and if you 
just change an assumption about a week or two, we can get a much lower number for June and a 
higher number for May.  But at the moment these are the numbers we’re working with for M1. 

MR. PARTEE.  I’m surprised that your average increase in the second quarter was only 8 
percent under alternative B. 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, that’s how it works out with this 5 percent for April, 14-1/2 for 
May, and a 10 percent for June.  The average rate of increase for the first quarter is somewhere 
around 5-1/2 percent. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I have no idea what confidence to attach to any of these 
things, but apparently the New York people have a much lower estimate of this rebate impact 
that you’re just citing now.  I thought they had a little confidence in what they were doing, but if 
I can do it over again and see whether we-- 

MR. AXILROD.  Well, I had hoped, President Volcker, that the subject would not come 
up because I did not feel that the work that we had done was adequate for a very confident 
estimate.  And that’s why I’m stressing that these are very first approximations and that we are 
working on a very detailed paper to try to get whatever you can out of the ’75 experience.  But as 
I say, these estimates will be very sensitive whether you decide that a person is going to hold 
[the rebate] for a week and then spend it or hold it for two weeks and spend half.  It’s just highly 
sensitive. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There’s only one way to do this.  Since you don’t know what 
people will do, and since ’75 experience may or may not be repeated--history has a way of 
springing surprises on all of us--I would submit to this Committee a series of estimates based on 
varying assumptions.  And my advice to the Committee at that time will be to allow for a very 
significant margin of error in any of these estimates as [we give] our directions to the Desk at 
that time. 

MR. AXILROD.  We also don’t know, Mr. Chairman--and this may cause differences in 
the assumptions--the exact timing of the payout.  We have, I think, here assumed that it begins in 
late April or early May.  Again, you get a different [result depending on whether] payouts [are] 
being [held or] drawn down in May.  It’s a highly difficult area.  And we will Mr. Chairman, 
when we get into the months-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We don’t want that.  The point I’m trying to stress is, don’t give us 
a single estimate. 

MR. AXILROD.  No, that’s what I was going to say. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --give us a series of estimates. 

MR. AXILROD.  When we’re presenting the months where they will be highly relevant to 
policy, we will provide a range of estimates for the Committee. 



2/15/77 - 29 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right any other questions? 

Let’s turn to our discussion of monetary policy, and at the end of that discussion we will 
consider Governor Partee’s memorandum.   

I find myself in a tranquil mood today.  Alternative B--considering the state of the 
economy, the state of markets--that seems entirely satisfactory to me.  I commented earlier on 
elements of uneasiness within the business community that I believe I have detected during the 
past month or two.  The sources of the uneasiness, one can guess about; there’s very little we can 
do about that, I believe, but there’s one contribution we can make and that is to recognize the 
nervousness that has existed in financial markets.  And I see no reason for departing from the 
federal funds rate objective that we’ve pursued with very little change here in the past few 
months.  And that is my suggestion to the Committee.  And now let’s hear from members of the 
Committee.  Who would like to speak first?  Mr. Volcker, please.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My initial approach to this would be, I think, similar to 
what you just stated.  That, on the basis of what I see now, by which I mean I would include the 
projections we have of the aggregates during this period, I don’t see any basis for making any 
change in our stance.   

Let me consider what would happen, or what should happen, if things in the next month 
turn out, particularly in the aggregates, not to follow the pattern that is now projected.  And I 
speak in this connection against the feeling of some confidence in the outlook that has been 
expressed earlier by a number of people.  And that the fiscal program may be a little larger rather 
than a little smaller if the Congress does change it, although I don’t think that’s terribly 
significant.   

I am concerned in the longer range about the possible capacity problems that were 
discussed earlier.  I tend to share the staff’s optimism about prices, but I think it’s a very shaky 
projection, and I think it’s very important that prices--we don’t have a feeling in terms of 
confidence in the business community that prices are moving up again at a stronger rate of speed.  
So all this makes me a little sensitive to the aggregates speeding up well beyond the projection, 
should that happen.  And I’m particularly sensitive against the difficult background--as we get 
into the rebate period, not wanting, rightly, I think, to act strongly then--in view of the 
uncertainties of those estimates inevitably.   

So while I see no reason for a change right now on the basis of any information we have, I 
could see the case more easily for shading upwards just a bit on the federal funds rate than 
shading down should the estimates come in higher than we now expect on the aggregates.  Now 
how you transfer that into the precise specifications, I’m not sure.  I have no trouble with the B 
specifications on the aggregates, although maybe I prefer that A specification on M1.  But the 
difference is only 1/2 percent, it’s not enough to argue about.   

I wonder on the federal funds rate.  I suppose I can express my view in terms of substance 
more accurately if the federal funds rate was 4-1/2 to 5-1/4, let’s say, or even 4-1/2 to 5, with a 
midpoint asymmetrical toward the lower end of that range.  Something like 4-3/4, or even 4-5/8 
to 4-3/4, so we have less room on the downside than on the upside.  



2/15/77 - 30 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s where we are now; 4-5/8 to [4-3/4].  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s where we are now.  I don’t really want to change 
now, but I’d like to give myself a little leeway for changing a bit if in fact the aggregates came in 
high, and I mean quite high--a couple of percent, anyway.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, under our rules, if that should happen, then the Desk 
would communicate with the Chairman promptly, and he in turn would get in touch with the 
Committee and take actions that are appropriate.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that would be acceptable.  All I want to express 
is, I feel a little asymmetrical about the situation.  I’d be a little readier to move up just a bit if 
things came out that way.  I hope they’re not going to come out that way.  They’re moving in the 
other direction.  

MR. PARTEE.  Paul, you could move to 5 within this specification.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s right. 

MR. PARTEE.  Because if you were toward the top on the aggregates, why, you could 
move up.  If the aggregates were very strong, you could go beyond 5 through the device of [a 
Committee consultation].  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t really want to move above 5, don’t 
misunderstand me.  I’m not sure I want to move to 5.  I just feel a bit asymmetrical about the 
desirability of moving if the estimates came in on the high side, and that’s the only thought I 
wanted to express here really.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Black now, please.  

MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I’m a tad more hawkish today than you are, but not a great 
deal.  I’m not particularly concerned about M1, and I recognize these uncertainties involving the 
rebates and refunds and the likelihood that whatever does take place may be reversed.  I think we 
have to be very cautious in reacting to the behavior of M1, and to compound my confusion, the 
projections we’ve been doing in Richmond suggest that in February, M1 may actually decline a 
little bit, but [may have] a pretty good spurt in March.  But that’s, of course, a guess.  But 
anyway, regardless of what happens, three sets of projections for the first quarter would be in the 
neighborhood of 5 to 5-1/2 percent, or something like that.  And I think that’s perfectly 
appropriate.   

The thing that really concerns me is something that’s bothered me for some time, and 
that’s this rapid rise in M2, and I would hate to see this continue for very many more months.  I 
think that’s something we definitely have to be concerned about.  So I’m inclined to make a little 
move toward less ease right now, although I recognize the uncertainties of the weather.  I think 
that’s going to be temporary, as I indicated a little earlier.  But I certainly don’t think we should 
do any more than a very gradual move at this time, keeping in mind that the financial markets are 
very uncertain and that they could react very sharply to even a slight tightening move.   



2/15/77 - 31 - 
 

  
 

And when we get to the numerical specifications, I would take the language of B and the 
Ml specifications of B, which would be 3 to 7 per cent.  But on M2, I would like to see that 
range reduced to 6 to 10 per cent so that we could trigger some reaction on the funds rate if we 
move up to 10 per cent.  And I would favor going back to our 1 percentage point spread by 
adopting 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 on the federal funds rate.  But I wouldn’t make any move toward a 4-3/4 
midpoint unless in fact we do see the aggregates accelerating from the sluggish pace that we’ve 
been experiencing recently.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Coldwell now, please.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I’m in a basically hold position, which I guess is what 
you’re saying.  I think the interest rate structure is generally satisfactory for growth over this 
near-term period, and monetary aggregates seem to be growing at a reasonably satisfactory pace, 
given the liquidity in the economy.  I wouldn’t resist much of an increase if we came down to the 
rebate, but that’s a down-the-road decision.  I might want to change my mind later on.   

Right now, I would resist too much of an increase in the fundamental growth here.  I do 
have a feeling that we may end up with some international pressures which might impact upon 
our decisions in the near-term future, in the next few months.  I think the Committee’s posture 
right now ought to be one of a rather cautious stability.  And, it seems, that is an appropriate 
position for the uncertainties of the economy ahead, until we see exactly what kind of a fiscal 
policy and impact these various things have had over the past few months.  So I would stay with 
B with a federal funds rate of 4-1/4 to 5.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Kimbrel now, please.  

MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, I think we share the same concern for the delicate 
uneasiness and all of the reasons you suggest, but I did detect that you referred to the weather-
induced distortions that we are experiencing.  And I think they, too, are contributing to that 
uneasiness.  I think this caution that’s been generated has probably pushed [backward] some of 
the capital investment commitments for two or three months.  I don’t think we need to anticipate 
any of this in our action.  I personally would like to see more definitive developments both in the 
fiscal area and in the business community before we move.   

I guess I have a natural inclination to rather anticipate some movement in the federal funds 
rate, and would be naturally inclined to spread that from a 4-1/4 to 5-1/4, but I guess my restraint 
is more in the area of trying to maintain some stability at this particular moment.  I think that 
would serve us better for this immediate period.  So I would opt for alternative B exactly as is 
written, and the specification.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Partee now, please.  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I find myself I guess mostly in agreement with 
President Volcker.  I think the danger right now is that we could have higher-than-expected 
growth rates in the aggregates, and I think if we do, we ought to move against them fairly 
promptly because of our feeling that the second quarter is going to have a bulge.   



2/15/77 - 32 - 
 

  
 

I might point out to the Committee that it may appear that it’s made headway in gaining a 
little room for the bulge because, as reported by Peter, the M1 was at or below the midpoint of 
the range all through the intermeeting period.  But if you look real hard at this Bluebook, you 
will find that January is going to be revised up in the 4.6--or something like that--growth rate, to 
5.8 because of the change in seasonal factors.  And mainly what we’ve done is we’ve added to 
the January growth rate and taken away from the March growth rate in that seasonal factor 
adjustment, so that, in fact, we haven’t made any progress in providing room for the second 
quarter bulge.   

Therefore, I guess, Paul, I would be opposed to raising that M1 range to 3-1/2 to 7-1/2.  I 
wouldn’t want to give any ground, and I think 3 to 7 as in alternative B is the best way to go.  
And I suppose I might have a small preference for a 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 range [for the federal funds 
rate], but I don’t feel strongly about it if it’s understood that if [we] move up toward the high end 
on these growth rates, we will be moving toward 5, and if we move significantly over those 
growth rates, why, we’ll reconsider the instruction to the Manager.  So I would go along with B 
as written.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Mayo now, please.  

MR. MAYO.  I really have no trouble with alternative B, Mr. Chairman.  I think you could 
make a case for keeping the federal funds range just where it is now--4-1/4 to 5--on the grounds 
that we don’t know about the weather and so forth and so on.  But I think I would be rather 
shocked if we took advantage of going even to 4-1/2, much less to 4-1/4.  So there seems to be 
no great [problem] here other than the usual one of not being able to see clearly.   

I have no problem with the M1 and the M2 growth rates as they’re spelled out here.  I 
think that wrestling with that problem is at least one more month down the line.  And I don’t feel 
that we ought to consciously try to curb the M1 expansion too much in anticipation of the 
rebates.  I think we’re in a more appropriate posture to play that as we see it when they come 
about.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Jackson now, please.  

MR. JACKSON.  I don’t see the need to make a big, long speech, Mr. Chairman.  I think 
you ought to just stay at alternative B.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Lilly.  

MR. LILLY.  Well, I’m not going to make a big, long speech, either.  I’m only going to 
echo what Chuck said, except that I want to make one point.  I think it’s going to be easier now 
to move to 5-1/4 than it will be a month from now, two months from now.  It might be prudent 
now to go to 4-1/4 to 5-1/4, [with] the midpoint of 5/8 going to 3/4.  Otherwise, I’m in perfect 
agreement with B.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Lilly.  Mr. Wallich.  



2/15/77 - 33 - 
 

  
 

MR. WALLICH.  Well, I think our concerns once more are more with inflation than with 
growth now that the pause seems clearly over the dam.  We also see some substantive blips 
ahead in the aggregates due to rebates, refunds, rebounds.  As I look at those velocity estimates 
and the associated interest rate increases, I’m [sufficiently] troubled by the pressures that may be 
ahead that I’d like to lay in a little reserve against all of these things.   

So I would lean toward alternative B, with a slight shading toward C to widen the funds 
rate 1/4 point on the upside, 4-1/4 to 5-1/4, and leave M1 as is.  In M2, I’d go with Mr. Black, 6 
to 10.; I think that’s an interesting innovation.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Eastburn now, please.  

MR. EASTBURN.  I would align myself with those who would stay with alternative B and 
the specifications noted under that.  I would like to have a wider federal funds range, but given 
the way the Committee’s operating, I’m satisfied with what we have, and I do think that there’s 
ample room to move if the aggregates were to come in large.  And I feel better about that based 
on the comments I made earlier, that the market, I think, would not be surprised if this were to 
happen.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Who would like to speak next please?  
Yes, Mr. Van Nice.  

MR. VAN NICE.  I think I’d align myself with Governor Wallich.  I would adopt 
alternative B--which would happen to give us an average growth rate in M1 for this quarter 
exactly along the lines of our long range targets--with a slight leaning toward alternative C for 
the same reasons that he’s mentioned.  And perhaps a raising of the federal funds rate by 1/4 on 
the top end of the range.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Van Nice.  Mr. Guffey now.  

MR. GUFFEY.  I think I would also prefer B [and] adopting the suggestion to widen the 
fed funds rate range to 4-1/4 to 5-1/4.  I think I would also like to see us, by the Committee 
meeting next month, to be at a midpoint of that range, 4-3/4.  It’s a very slight change, to be sure; 
we’re averaging 4.66 now.  I’d like to see us end up at 4-3/4 next meeting.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Balles now.  

MR. BALLES.  I think I would agree with what Governor Wallich has expressed.  I am 
concerned with the constant outlook for the economy that I have, and keeping in mind the sharp 
upward base drift we had in M2 last year, which was over $11 billion and especially strong in 
the fourth quarter.  [And] a concern Governor Lilly has earlier expressed, which I share, which is 
the amount of liquidity in the economy.  And in view of all of these things, I would come out 
about half way between B and C, I guess, and I think Governor Wallich has expressed the 
specifications pretty well.   

I would favor a federal funds rate of about 4-1/2 to 5-1/4 and would like, as Mr. Black has 
indicated, to pull the M2 range down a little bit to, say, 6 to 10.  But my fear is that if we don’t 



2/15/77 - 34 - 
 

  
 

begin to lean against the bulge that’s in prospect, and in view of the very large overshoot in M2, 
I’m quite concerned about the implications for inflation as we move into next year.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  And who would want to speak now?  Mr. 
Gardner, please.  

MR. GARDNER.  I have the conviction that we should stay with B as stated here.  In 
addition to all else that’s been said, I want to make this comment.  I don’t think that we can 
pragmatically lay in some supplies for the future in this instance.  The reason I say that is the 
stimulus program is not yet passed into law.  If market rates begin to do things that those who 
[seek] stronger stimuli take exception to, we could be possibly a partial instigator.  I’m entirely 
clear that we should stay where we are at the moment, although I recognize that the job before us 
in the coming months is terribly important.  I suggest if we start that job prematurely, we may 
compound [the difficulty of] our own mission.  So I would stay right where we are at the 
moment.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner.  Mr. Winn now, please.  

MR. WINN.  I’d identify myself with those in support of B.  I think I would take the 
insurance step of widening the range, not that I advocate using it, but it’s being on record that 
it’s there.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Yes, Mr. Morris.  

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I support your position with alternative B.  I think that the 
time to lean against the bulge will be in the third quarter, when we find out how much the bulge 
was.  I think in terms of timing, [it is] more appropriate to do it then than to start to do it now.  I 
agree with Governor Gardner that to take even the minor step toward that now is premature.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Baughman.  

MR. BAUGHMAN.  I would think that alternative B would probably serve our needs for 
the next month, with a monetary directive as the aggregates directive and understanding that, if 
we go to the top of the aggregates, we would go to the top of the funds range as well.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Roos, you have the opportunity to pronounce the benediction.  

MR. ROOS.  Well, I become a voting member possibly next month, so I’ll keep my 
powder dry, Mr. Chairman.  B is fine, though.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you.  You know, without going through the expressed 
opinion meticulously, but having listened very carefully to the views expressed around this table, 
I would like to make the following proposal:  that we vote on a monetary aggregates directive; 
that we specify a range of 3 to 7 for Ml; a range of 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 for M2; and a range of 4-1/4 
to 5 per cent for the federal funds rate.  Is there any unhappiness around the table if I put this set 
of suggestions to a vote?   

MR. PARTEE.  The center point in the funds rate 4-5/8--  



2/15/77 - 35 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Where it is now, yes.  It’s off-centered toward the higher end.  
Well, I don’t hear any shriek of horror, and therefore would you be good enough to call the roll.  

MR. BROIDA.  
Chairman Burns  Yes  
Vice Chairman Volcker  Yes  
President Balles  Yes  
President Black  Yes  
Governor Coldwell  Yes  
Governor Gardner  Yes  
Governor Jackson  Yes  
President Kimbrel  Yes  
Governor Lilly  Yes  
Governor Partee  Yes  
Governor Wallich  Yes  
President Winn  Yes  

It is unanimous.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, let’s turn to item 7 on the agenda, the memorandum from 
Governor Partee reporting on the thinking of [his sub]committee as to the precise form of our 
domestic policy directive.   

This was put before the Committee, oh, two months ago, and a question was raised at that 
time by Governor Jackson, and I thought that that question ought to be explored by our general 
counsel before we proceeded to vote on it.  Our general counsel has not found any difficulty.  
Since that time, there have been some very minor changes made by Governor Partee and 
members of this Committee.  And as far as I could see, the recommendation is one that I, for one, 
can support.  Mr. Partee, would you like to comment on this?  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, the subcommittee has not made an effort in this 
proposal to do anything substantive.  All we wanted to accomplish in the way, you might say, of 
a clean-up of the records of the Committee was to put directly into the directive the directive 
[specifications].  And to discontinue the specification sheet, which is sort of a side agreement 
that we’ve had for some years, and its position was never absolutely clear in anyone’s mind 
whether it be a legal document or an instruction to the Manager.   

So that the purpose here--and I want to emphasize that [it] is not to make any changes in 
the previous procedures or in the Committee’s way of speaking.  The longer range, which 
represents the thrust of the Committee’s thinking over the longer run and [is] voted upon with 
the qualification that those long-term ranges could be respecified at any time.  And [in] the short-
term range we try to capture precisely what we’d recommend the Manager to do, that is, a 
monetary aggregates or money market directive, [giving] attention to the aggregates or to the 
money market.  In either case, the directive is affected by where we’re falling in the projections 
relative to the range of expectation.  And again, we qualify the short-term specification, as in 
practice that has been done, by pointing out that if the specifications are inconsistent [with the 



2/15/77 - 36 - 
 

  
 

money market range], the Manager informs the Chairman, and the Chairman may call for a 
change in the specifications.   

So I don’t think there’s anything here that represents any kind of departure.  The sample 
directive from Mr. Broida that we have attached to this memo, February 7, could be used today, 
for example, by putting into the blanks in the monetary aggregates formulation the numbers that 
we’ve just agreed to.  And I think it would be an exact representation of what the instructions to 
the Manager have been.  And of course, it goes without saying that if the Committee were 
prepared to adopt these numerical specifications, the so-called specification sheet would then be 
discontinued, and this would be the record.   

I might note that there were differences, sometimes, about individual words that appear in 
this directive language, and you may have noted that Governor Wallich would like, in the case of 
the long-term range, to insert the word “target.”  The subcommittee decided against that because 
that would be a change in practice from what had previously occurred, but Governor Wallich 
may wish to speak to that issue.  I can’t recall that we had at the end any other differences, 
among our subcommittee of four, that call for a [comment] by the members of the 
[sub]committee, but if they would like to say something, I certainly don’t mind.   

Governor Wallich, did you want to say something about the use of the word “target”?  

MR. WALLICH.  There is no basic disagreement at all on my part with the subcommittee.  
I do feel that stressing aggregates is a defense for us, even though the Chairman has pointed out 
many times that Congress really thinks in terms of interest rates and that hiding behind good-
looking aggregates will not help us if interest rates go up.  I think there is some defense.  
Moreover, there is substance here.  In an inflation, interest rates, both are less meaningful--we 
don’t know what the real rate really is--and they are less controllable.  Our span of control over, 
certainly, long-term rates may be minimal, maybe zero.   

So I would like to do what one can to stress that we are focusing on the aggregates, and 
hence I’d like to add the word “target” to ranges, so that it’s clear it’s a target.   

And I’d like to substitute for the rather timid “appear to be consistent with,” which is good 
for the Federal Reserve prose but really doesn’t, I think, influence anybody else.  Say “reflect,” 
which is still very much Federal Reserve--a very modest, cautious term--and yet I think a little 
stronger in focusing on what I think we mean--namely, that we try to set an aggregate and try to 
exert our influence on the economy through it.  

MR. PARTEE.  Would the other members of the Committee wish to say anything?  Frank?  

MR. MORRIS.  No, I have nothing to add.  

MR. PARTEE.  John?  

MR. BALLES.  I must say that I’m sort of attracted by Henry’s reasons for using the word 
“target,” and I would be prepared to go with that.  I caught up with this fairly recently.  It’s an 
interesting alternative to consider.   



2/15/77 - 37 - 
 

  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, as I say, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that that recommendation, 
which may have merit on its own, violates the spirit of the exercise here, which was to simply 
transfer what we now have into a different and more useful form.  So I think it could be 
considered by you and by the Committee if it wishes, but it is not a necessary part of the 
transference [of] procedures that we have in mind.   

MR. LILLY.  How would you feel if it didn’t violate the spirit?  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, you know, I must admit that I’m inclined to back away a little from 
the use of the word “target” in the case of the monetary aggregates because I’ve always felt that, 
as I think the Chairman has stated to the Committee, our target is the performance of the 
economy.  That is, our objective and the target we have in mind is a meaningfully good 
improvement in the performance of the economy.  And therefore, the monetary aggregates are 
only an instrument toward achieving that.   

Now, it’s a little difficult, frankly, not to use the word “target” as shorthand when you refer 
to these long-term ranges--because they are targets on the assumption that those will produce 
economic results that we want.  They’re very shiftable targets, and I think this might be 
misunderstood when [one calls] them targets.  So I don’t think I can go along--at least I feel 
uncomfortable about accepting Governor Wallich’s suggestion at this point.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  May I make this suggestion:  that we consider first of all the main 
thrust of the memorandum by Mr. Partee and then discuss further to the extent that we may wish 
to do so the verbal changes that Governor Wallich has suggested?   

Is there any difficulty with the main recommendation , that is, spelling out these ranges of 
ours in the policy record?  Any difficulty with the main recommendation?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You say any difficulty.  I have a slight difficulty in that I 
think it has a kind of spurious precision to it.  And maybe it neglects some of the nuances in our 
conversation.  But I don’t have any strong feeling if this is the way the Committee wants to go.   

I think even in this case it’s pretty hard just to drop in these figures we’ve just talked about 
and reflect all the conversation adequately around the table.  By not putting them actually in the 
directive, you leave that a little fuzzy.  I think that’s a merit, but I don’t feel so strongly about it.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But actually, all of these numbers now--  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  --now appear anyway.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --now appear in the monthly policy record.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  They’re just a little more formalized this way, and I 
don’t see that advantage, but I have no--  

MR. PARTEE.  Paul, you just voted on it.  

[VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.]  That’s correct.  



2/15/77 - 38 - 
 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  But I would echo Paul’s reservation. This does provide a bit more 
emphasis, placing them within the directive.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, what is the thinking of other members of the Committee?  

MR. GARDNER.  Mr. Chairman, the release of the policy record is in a new phase--of 30 
days.  I would have some concern if I thought that release might be accelerated.  I think we all 
would.  

MR. MORRIS.  But in that event, you could contemplate that we might only release to the 
public the almost meaningless directive that we’ve published in the past.  I don’t see how, if we 
were advised by a court that we had to release it earlier, that the court would permit us to simply 
release such an innocuous statement.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Mr. Morris, at this particular point you’ve stepped outside of 
your own realm of expertise.  You had better listen to our counsel as to what--  

MR. PARTEE.  We had a memo from the counsel on this.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  --as to what a court would or would not permit us.  Mr. O’Connell.  

MR. O’CONNELL.  Mr. Chairman, I stated earlier the possibility that the Court of 
Appeals may render a judgment to confirm an interpretation of law requiring immediate release 
of a directive policy action.  Assuming the directive were included in that record, we are taking 
the position that the most immediate time frame within which that Record of Policy Actions can 
be formulated, finalized, adopted by the members of the Committee, and then be ready for final 
action would be the period of time we are now operating in, namely, roughly a 30-day period, no 
matter what were the immediacy the Court should render.  So it’s within that time frame that I 
express the view that I see no adverse impact, even should the Court of Appeals render the 
judgment of which I speak.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. O’Connell.  Mr. Jackson.  

MR. JACKSON.  I think we ought to incorporate it in the record just like it’s proposed.  
We just had a long discussion this morning about our living within the spirit of the Sunshine Act, 
and I think this is just evidence of that intent.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you see, these specifications are now reported in the policy 
record, and what we’re really talking about is the inclusion of these specifications in the 
directive to the New York Reserve Bank as well.  Which means, as far as the monthly policy 
record is concerned, these numbers would be reported twice instead of just once, as is the case 
now.  But if you take the instruction to the New York Desk--and I think this was the main point 
that the [sub]committee worked on--it’s a fuller statement and more honest statement as to what 
the New York Desk is instructed to carry out.  Is that correct?  

MR. PARTEE.  That’s exactly it.  



2/15/77 - 39 - 
 

  
 

MR. COLDWELL.  I raise a question, Mr. Chairman.  If we were to, at a later date, decide 
there were to be a reserves intermediate target or something, would you also advocate that that 
be a part of this?  

MR. PARTEE.  If it were a short-run target, absolutely.  It would appear down here in the 
operative instruction.  Art, I’d forgotten what we had in the longer-run statement.  Do we now 
use reserves?  We had proposed that, at one point, to carry out the intent of the previous 
subcommittee report.  That is, it’s a longer-run thing if you look at it; reserves and--  

MR. BROIDA.  Oh, yes, Governor Partee, I’m sorry, it does say to foster bank reserve and 
other financial conditions. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, but we don’t specify the numbers.  

MR. COLDWELL.  We don’t specify the amount.  

MR. PARTEE.  Because we don’t have a specified target, you see.  

MR. COLDWELL.  That’s why I said, if later on you did, you would include that in your 
directive.  

MR. PARTEE.  I’m not sure--depending on what we did, it might appear in the long-run 
paragraph rather than a short-run paragraph.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Well, you have both.  It would appear in one place or the other.  

MR. PARTEE.  No, I think we could amend it, you know, and anyway amend their 
operation.  We would amend the instructions.  And as a matter of fact, it seems to me that the 
instruction--because it is specific and is what we’ve told the Manager to do--is more amenable to 
a modification of [this] kind, than is the case now in our current [specifications].  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Lilly.  

MR. LILLY.  Just a question of how this would be carried out.  As I understand, if this 
were adopted in the Committee’s directive and instructed in this form, on page 3 we would show 
the weekly average federal funds rate of about 4-5/8--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No.  

MR. LILLY.  4-5/8 to 4-3/4. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That is exactly what we would release.  

MR. HOLMES.  It would not show the range for the funds rate, Mr. Chairman? 

MR. LILLY.  4-1/4 to 5, which gives you the little range within the big range.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes.  



2/15/77 - 40 - 
 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  In this particular instance.  

MR. COLDWELL.  That’s not presently reported in this.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes it is.  I just checked that.  It was reported in the last policy 
record.  

MR. PARTEE.  My guess is that this is just the second time we’ve done that.  

MR. HOLMES.  Would it say 4-5/8 or 4-5/8 to 4-3/4?  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It’s at 4-5/8 to 4-3/4.  

MR. PARTEE.  I think that’s what it would have to say.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, at least I’ve been very precise that we shouldn’t.  This was 
released February 10.  

MR. BROIDA.  Well, this is part of a January meeting, which will be released on Friday.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh, I’m sorry. Yes, but this has been approved by the Committee. 

MR. EASTBURN.  We need to reemphasize what Chuck said, that the big advantage of 
this is that it does away with the specification sheet, which I think always made us vulnerable--as 
far as our public posture is concerned--in having some kind of a secret document.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I honestly don’t see that, because the policy record contains 
the numerical specifications now, and that particular sheet is a piece of a working paper for the 
Committee.  I don’t think we’re vulnerable.   

The advantage I see is that when you segregate and look solely at the instructions to the 
New York Desk at the present time, those instructions are incomplete.  And the substance of the 
Partee [sub]committee recommendation is that the instruction to the New York Desk as we 
publish them be made complete.  And that requires specification of the numbers.  These numbers 
are reported now in the policy record, released after approximately one month.  

MR. COLDWELL.  Is there any possibility, Mr. Chairman, that this may trap you in your 
testimony with Congress.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don’t see--I considered that very carefully, and at a certain time I 
was a little opposed and seeing some possible difficulty.  And my next objection was that it was 
simply repetition--why do we have to say the same thing twice?  But I finally--my present 
position is that there is a slight advantage in saying it twice, in [the] sense that [our] instruction 
to the New York Desk, looked at separately, is more complete.  

MR. GARDNER.  Mr. Chairman, I have one final concern, and that is, twice, I think, it 
appears that you [are] given the discretion in this statement of calling the Committee together.  
Now if it appears “the Manager will notify the Chairman and will then decide,” this could--I may 



2/15/77 - 41 - 
 

  
 

need counsel’s assistance on this--but this could conceivably create a position where you might 
be criticized for not calling the Committee together.  You might-- 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  To the extent that that is a difficulty, we lived with that difficulty 
for some time thus far without trouble or embarrassment, you see, because that is contained in 
the policy record now, and has been for some time.  

MR. COLDWELL.  I think the rules of the Committee permit calling a meeting by a 
certain number of members anyway.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that this doesn’t technically mean you can’t call a 
Committee meeting anytime you want to.  This just says the Manager would notify you if [the 
directive] is significantly inconsistent, and there may be other reasons for calling the meeting.  

MR. PARTEE.  It’s an instruction to the Manager, not to the Chairman.  

MR. JACKSON.  It imposes a duty on the Manager, though.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any further discussion desired?  Let’s have just a show of hands.  
Members of the Committee in favor of the Partee [sub]committee recommendation, would they 
kindly raise their hands.  Those opposed.  The majority is clearly in favor.  We don’t need a 
formal vote on this.  

MR. BROIDA.  Mr. Chairman, can we interpret the prior vote to cover this directive with 
the numbers inserted? 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think we should.   

We still have an opportunity--one that we’ve delayed time and again--to act on the report 
of our [sub]committee which has considered [public] agency [securities].  

MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, excuse me, there is a point--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Sorry, I overlooked that.  Now, as for the changes in language 
which Mr. Wallich has recommended, I share the sentiments expressed by Governor Partee.  I 
have resisted the word “target.”  I never use it because it can lead to misinterpretation.  And your 
main point, Mr. Wallich, namely the need to accent the attention that we give to the monetary 
aggregates, I don’t think that you would advance that any by using the word “target.”   

You take the testimony that we have given before the Banking Committees.  We’ve 
accented the monetary ranges, our objectives with regard to the growth of various monetary 
aggregates.  That has been the main thrust of that testimony.  And I don’t really think that it  
would be advanced any by having the word “target” as a modifier of range.   

But what is the sentiment of the Committee?  Those in favor of having the word “target,” 
kindly raise their hands.  Well, there is no strong sentiment at the present time, but with your 
usual eloquence, Henry, in time you may possibly persuade the members of the Committee.   



2/15/77 - 42 - 
 

  
 

Let’s turn to the report of our subcommittee on [public] agency [securities].  Mr. Volcker 
served as the chairman of that group.  Mr. Volcker, would you be good enough to report.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You may recall, Mr. Chairman, this group was appointed 
specifically in response to a question about whether we should be purchasing what might be 
called some special agency issues.  More specifically, WMATA, the Washington Metropolitan 
Area Transit Authority, and whether that was an appropriate kind of security for us to be buying.   

Our charge was more general, just to examine lists in general of what we should be buying.  
I’m not sure that the Committee, faced only with the WMATA issue, would have reached the 
unanimous [result in the] report very easily.  But we came up with the unanimous report quite 
simply based upon a broader consideration of what kind of agency [securities] it was appropriate 
to be buying, in the sense that we found we had been buying [securities of] some agencies, of 
which WMATA was certainly one.  They were not currently issuing any securities in the markets 
and didn’t have any real prospect of [doing so], and there were relatively few outstanding.   

And we considered various alternatives as to how the instructions or directive might be 
changed to exclude some of these issues.  And what stood out, I think quite naturally, was, under 
present conditions--unlike those that existed when the directive was originally formulated--with 
the Federal Financing Bank [now] in existence, and in fact [with] the Federal Financing Bank 
picking up a lot of these older agency issues--we could simply change the directive to exclude 
securities that were eligible for Federal Financing Bank purchase.   

The practical consequence of this would be to concentrate on purchases in the federally 
sponsored agencies.  These are the agencies that are not now eligible for the Federal Financing 
Bank because they have private ownership--FNMA [Fannie Mae], Home Loan Banks, and the 
Farm Credit [System], primarily.  This is where the action has been; these are the agencies that 
were specifically mentioned by the Congress [as being ineligible for the Federal Financing 
Bank] when the [Federal Financing Bank] legislation was formulated, and so we unanimously 
concluded that the simple, straightforward thing to do would be to confine our purchases to 
agencies not included in the purchase authority of the Federal Financing Bank.  In fact, in 
practice this means very little at the moment because those [eligible] agencies are selling their 
issues to the Federal Financing Bank, and we are not purchasing any significant amount of them 
currently in any event.  So it regularizes to some degree the de facto situation that exists.   

It has the further merit, as the subcommittee saw it, of providing rather visible support for 
the intention of the Federal Financing Bank to purchase these more singular-type issues, and we 
felt, I think consistent with the thinking of the Committee as a whole, that the Federal Financing 
Bank concept should be supported, and the Federal Reserve generally had supported the 
development of the Federal Financing Bank.   

So this is a step, in a sense, consistent with that earlier view [and] recognizes the de facto 
situation that the Federal Financing Bank is buying these other issues, and [it avoids] any 
necessity on our part of selecting among agency issues.   

The one exception to the general statement that [only] agency issues other than the 
[government]- sponsored-[agency] issues are being purchased by the Federal Financing Bank is 



2/15/77 - 43 - 
 

  
 

GNMA pass-through securities.  This Committee, as a matter of practice, has not purchased 
those issues anyway.  This would, in a sense, formalize its decision not to purchase those issues 
because they are eligible for Federal Financing Bank purchase.  That’s the only one [of the 
government-sponsored agency securities] that I am aware of that is eligible for purchase by the 
Federal Financing Bank, of any significance certainly.  It would not involve any change of 
policy on the part of the Committee because we are not purchasing them anyway.   

So I think I can report a unanimous recommendation that we meet the issue with which we 
were presented by [means of] this simple change of adding a few words to the instruction--that 
we will limit our purchase to issues not eligible for the Federal Financing Bank.  It will involve 
very little change in practice, but a change in the way we describe practice.   

We are aware that new agencies may arise in the future, and if [they do], then we 
conceivably would want to make a different decision then.  But we felt we had to face that 
decision in the future anyway, and this doesn’t prevent us from [doing so].   

One other point I might mention.  We did not interpret our mandate as looking more 
broadly at the practices of buying agency issues, including the size of the issue that might be 
eligible for purchase, the ones that would remain eligible, the percentage of those issues that 
might be purchased.  Some question was raised in our discussion about that.  The [System Open 
Market] Account Manager has been looking at the issue and is preparing to make some 
recommendations.  If the Committee so desires, those recommendations could be filtered 
through the subcommittee if you want to keep it in existence for that purpose.  I don’t think we 
have any strong feeling one way or the other, other than some feeling that the thing ought to be 
looked at.  And the Account Manager ought to look at it anyway.  And our basic 
recommendation is the Federal Financing Bank.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I have one concern about this rule.  I would love to see the Metro 
Washington issue now in our portfolio, I’d like to see us get rid of that, and for a very obvious 
reason.  [The presence of] this [asset in our portfolio] is dug up by individual Congressmen, and 
they come forward with the argument:  “Now you have supported and rendered financial 
assistance to the City of Washington.  You bought their securities.  Why don’t you buy the 
securities of New York City, and why are you discriminating against New York?”  How much 
do you hold, Alan?  

MR. HOLMES.  $117 billion, according to table 1.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I should just add, Mr. Chairman, which I did not 
say--that the subcommittee contemplated that we would not sell those issues that would in the 
future not be eligible for new purchase except as part of any general sales program which was 
undertaken in any event.  Since they have been at the very least extremely rare, I think in 
practice we are not contemplating that particular issue, or any other particular issue, that it would 
be sold out of the portfolio.  

MR. COLDWELL.  But we did agree that where opportunities arise when we were going 
into sales, we ought to view that as our prime--  



2/15/77 - 44 - 
 

  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Certainly.  

MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, would it be acceptable to the Committee if we discussed 
with the Federal Financing Bank whether they would like to take over?  This may be very 
difficult.   

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Sell these to the Federal Financing Bank?  

MR. HOLMES.  Yes, this would be an unusual sort of transaction.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Why not do the unusual thing--get them to buy it?  

MR. PARTEE.  And maybe take the financing back.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Give it to them.  Sell it to them at a market price.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  On the substance of your concern, Mr. Chairman, I don’t 
think the [sub]committee was of one view that there is a concern [but] I would have the concern 
that it’s hard for this Committee to distinguish among issues that are fully guaranteed by the 
federal government.  That, in effect, the decision about support of a local instrumentality is made 
by the Congress in providing the 100 percent guarantee in the first place, and it’s a little hard for 
us to second-guess that one if we are buying guaranteed agency issues.  And that’s of course why 
we slid into this other approach, where that kind of consideration is absent from our 
recommendation.  

MR. PARTEE.  There’s a big difference.  Unfortunately, the people who comment on this 
don’t recognize this--it stirs up concerns.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I must say my main interest in the work of your subcommittee was 
in getting rid of the D.C. issues.  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We thought we were accomplishing that purpose and 
have accomplished the purpose in terms of new purchases.  We haven’t accomplished it in terms 
of--  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That will have very little influence, I think, on congressional 
opinion, but maybe municipal finances from this point on will be handled so wisely, so prudently 
around the country that this problem will not arise.  

MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman I have only one question about the report.  Let me just 
check this with Paul.  It’s a nice way of getting rid of these bits and pieces.  My recollection was 
that the financing bank was originally sold to the agencies as an optional source of financing.  
That is, it was wasn’t mandatory.  For a while, the Treasury wanted to make it mandatory that 
the agencies would do the financing with the financing bank.  The way it was left, as I recall, it 
was optional; they could do it if they wanted to or not do it.   

So it does suggest as a possibility, you might have some fully guaranteed agency in the 
future that doesn’t use the financing bank.  It goes out on the market itself, and then we may not 



2/15/77 - 45 - 
 

  
 

be providing--we could not be considering this, as I understand it, as we would consider another 
agency, because of this narrowing, this particular determination we have made.  Now, is that 
appropriate?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think conceptually you are correct.  If my memory is 
right, virtually all these agencies--not by the terms of the Federal Financing Bank legislation, but 
by the terms of their own substantive legislation--can’t go into the market without some other 
device where the Secretary of the Treasury can force them into the Federal Financing Bank.  
That may not be 100 percent true, but I remember big discussions we had with the Post 
Office--that the terms of the Federal Financing Bank legislation don’t require it, but there’s a 
fancy provision in the Post Office legislation which gives the Secretary of the Treasury the whip 
hand so that he can force it, and he currently is forcing it.   

But I think the conceptual implication is correct.  And I can speak for only one member of 
the subcommittee--[I] would have thought that that was desirable, to support the Treasury’s 
effort to get them all in the Federal Financing Bank.  

MR. COLDWELL.  I think this is [desirable], too, Chuck.  We encourage them to come 
into the Federal Financing Bank.  They decide in their own judgment that they want to issue 
something separately--why, then, they ought to stand on their own.  

MR. BLACK.  Could they get as attractive a rate by doing it on their own, you think?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  No, but some of them have wanted to anyway.  
Historically, they wanted to be independent of any other government financing source.  

MR. JACKSON.  Most of these require the Secretary of the Treasury’s approval?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Most do, but I can’t swear that every one of these 
eligible agencies do.  In the case of GNMA pass-throughs, I don’t know what the situation is, but 
that’s one that the Treasury didn’t want to get into the financing bank.  Whether they have the 
power to force them out, I don’t know.  

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think you are right.  I agree with the thrust that we gave the 
financing bank a lot of special support in listing it and putting it into our own assets, and so 
forth. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  As the memorandum made clear, if I didn’t make it 
clear, we can, under the terms of this, buy the Federal Financing Bank issues themselves.  They 
are currently financing through the Treasury.  But if they ever finance themselves, they would be 
eligible for purchase by, and presumably would be purchased by, the [Federal Reserve] System.  

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, then, are we ready to thank Mr. Volcker and his 
[sub]committee?  Is there anyone among us who is unwilling to thank Mr. Volcker?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You want us to look at this other--  



2/15/77 - 46 - 
 

  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let’s think about further instructions to the [sub]committee.  I’d 
like to have that before me, and we will think about that later.  For the present, I think this is a 
good report, and is there any feeling on the part of the Committee that the recommendation not 
be carried out?  Well, I’m instructed by the Committee to thank you for--  

MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, does this mean that the Committee has adopted the new 
guidelines that are--  

MR. PARTEE.  Should we move to adopt then?  I so move. 

SPEAKER(?).  Second. 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any questions?  Gentlemen we are three minutes late. 

END OF MEETING 

 




