









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


  
 

  
 

TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL 
 

May 5, 1978 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files.  The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding.  Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted.  In some instances, words have been added in 
brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or 
misstatement. 
 

Errors undoubtedly remain.  The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy 
at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in 
preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions.  The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 
 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 
involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable.  Deleted passages are indicated by 
gaps in the text.  All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under 
applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 
 
 

 
 
          
 



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 5, 1978

                  

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on

Friday, May 5, 1978, at 9:30 a.m. This was a telephone conference

meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., except as

otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those

participating.

PARTICIPATING: Mr. Miller
Mr. Baughman
Mr. Gardner
Mr, Jackson
Mr. Partee
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Willes
Mr. Winn
Mr. Volcker
Mr. Black, Alternate for
Mr. Eastburn

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

(Dallas)

(Minneapolis)
(Plattsburg, Missouri)
(New York)

(Richmond)

Broida, Secretary
Altmann, Deputy Secretary
O'Connell, General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Burns (Dallas), R. Davis (New York),
Kichline, Paulus (Minneapolis), and Truman,
Associate Economists

Mr. Holmes, Manager for System Open Market
Account (New York)

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations (New York)



5/5/78

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations (New York)

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of
Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Mr. Broaddus (Richmond), Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

                                                       

                                                                    

                                                                  

                                                                     

                                     

                      

         

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of 
May 5, 1978 

 
 

 [Secretary’s note:  This session began with a roll call to determine attendance at the Reserve 
Banks, followed by a statement by the Secretary indicating those present in the Board Room.]  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER. Gentlemen, the reason we have decided to have a conference 
meeting of the FOMC this morning is because of the aggregates that have been reported.  As you 
know, at the last meeting we specified that we would operate with a federal funds range of [6-3/4] 
to 7-1/2 percent but that we would not go above 7-1/4 percent without consultation.  Conditions are 
now such that we felt it would be well to have this discussion.  Rather than use the procedure of 
sending everyone telegrams and just have you react to a message, it seemed better to me to have an 
opportunity for us to exchange views.  That’s why I thought it best to get us on the phone.  I hope it 
isn’t inconvenient to anyone.  What I propose to do is to have some brief reports from the staff and 
then make a specific recommendation for your consideration and discussion.  To start off, I would 
like to ask Steve Axilrod to report on the latest projections on the money aggregates and on what he 
sees [in the offing] for the April-May period. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data on M1 that came in for the week 
ending April 26 were somewhat stronger than we had been anticipating--on the order of about $1 
billion stronger--and the very preliminary data we have for the week of May 3 suggest added 
strength.  On the basis of those numbers, our estimate for the rate of growth in M1 in April, which 
last week had been 14-1/2 percent, is now, in round numbers, about 17 percent.  And our estimate 
for the rate of growth in May, given the high starting point we now see around the May 3rd week, 
is up to around 8-3/4 percent.  Thus the 2-month growth for [April and] May is running at around a 
13 percent annual rate, well above the 8-1/2 percent upper end of the range decided on by the 
FOMC at the last meeting.  M2, on the other hand, is not showing as much strength relative to its 
range.  It is not above the top of its range as is M1.  Time and savings deposits have been running a 
shade weaker than had been projected at the time of the FOMC meeting; thus the strength in M2 is 
purely the result of the strength in M1, which is approximately 3/7ths of M2 in weight.  We now 
have an April estimate for M2 of 10.7 percent, a May estimate of 8.1 percent, and for the two 
months an estimate of around 9-1/2 percent, which is the upper limit of the range decided on by the 
FOMC.  
 
 I’d like to add two or three points to that, Mr. Chairman, if I may, to put it in a little 
perspective.  For M1, that April growth rate would bring the growth from the fourth quarter 
average to April ’78 to 6.9 percent at an annual rate.  If our May estimate is correct, the growth 
from the fourth quarter average to May would be 7.2 percent, given the somewhat slower growth 
that we had, of course, in the first two or three months of the year.  For M2, [comparable] numbers 
would be 7 and 7.3 percent.  Thus, on that basis, M1 growth would be a shade above the upper end 
of the longer-run range and M2 growth would be well within the longer-run range from the fourth 
quarter to either the April or May dates.  Secondly, we have made an effort to see what factors may 
be causing this very rapid growth in April.  Perhaps the fundamental one we’d mention is the 
upward revision in nominal GNP growth for the second quarter, which now seems to be close to 17 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

2

percent at an annual rate, which Mr. Kichline will report on shortly.  [With] such an annual rate of 
growth, of course, M1 is likely to grow quite rapidly. 
 
 A second point is that there has been in April a marked increase in the amount of 
[non-withheld] tax payments getting to the Treasury.  In April of this year, [non-withheld] tax 
payments are over $21 billion.  The average of such payments in the preceding three years was 
around $15-1/2 billion, so there is an overage on the order of $6 billion.  To the extent people 
mobilize demand deposits in order to make these payments, that mobilization tends to raise the 
level of the money supply.  Our seasonals wouldn’t have caught up to the $6 billion overage; they 
would have allowed for the increasing amount last year and in the years before but not that big of 
an increase.  To the extent that this is affecting money growth, it might add anywhere from 4 to 8 
percentage points, in round terms, to the April rate of growth, which we really had not allowed for 
in setting up our estimates earlier.  
 
 [If that] explanation is correct, we would expect the level for May 3rd to have been coming 
back and it hasn’t, so that [puts] some doubt on the explanation.  But more than that, if the 
explanation is to be accurate and if the May 3rd level doesn’t come back, surely for May 10th it 
would have to come back sharply--maybe with a drop on the order of $5 billion. We’ve allowed 
only about a $2 billion drop for that week in our projections, so there is some uncertainty in our 
minds as to what exactly will happen.  If it comes back to the earlier levels we’ve been projecting, 
which would be a drop on the order of $4 or $5 billion, the May rate of growth would be 
substantially lower than 8 percent; it ought to be approaching 1 or 2 percent rather than 8 percent. 
So there is some question as to whether we do or don’t have a temporary factor that’s going to 
[reverse].  There is either going to be a sharp comeback or not. 
 
 The third special factor is the stock market, where activity rose radically in mid-month and 
has remained relatively high subsequently.  We have not been able to find any relationship thus far 
between M1 growth and stock market activity in a sense of causation.  I believe there probably is 
some effect from a special unexpected activity [but we’ve] not been able to quantify that or to find 
any consistent relationship in the past thus far.   That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Steve.  I would ask Alan Holmes, [who is] on the line at 
New York, if he would like to add anything at this point from his view or vantage point. 
 
 MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, as the Committee knows we are having difficulty hearing--  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Alan, I think some are having difficulty hearing you.  You might 
just get closer to your transmitter. 
 
 MR. HOLMES.  As you know, the [Treasury] auctioned [unintelligible] on Tuesday and 
[unintelligible] bonds on Wednesday.  Yesterday both of those turned in a very good report.  The 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

3

[10-year] bonds were light and had premiums of 5/32 and the long bond was almost half a point 
while [unintelligible] rise.  After the money supply figures were announced yesterday afternoon, 
however, those premiums dropped away and at mid-morning both of them are showing a discount 
to the issue [price].  Those are the most important things that have been happening in New York.  
Treasury markets are--  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Alan.  I’m going to ask Jim Kichline, who’s with us 
here, to comment briefly on economic developments since our last meeting. 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  Since the last meeting of the Committee, preliminary data on GNP for the 
first quarter have become available.  Real GNP is reported to have declined about 1/2 percent at an 
annual rate, a weaker performance than we had anticipated at the time of the meeting.  Although 
there’s reason to suspect some upward revision of these data in coming months, it is nevertheless 
clear that activity in the first quarter was poor.  Much of the slowdown still appears attributable to 
transitory factors, including the adverse effects of the winter weather and the coal strike, as well as 
some special influences involved in the deterioration of the trade balance.  Compensating for the 
weaker than expected first-quarter performance, it appears likely that the rebound in the current 
quarter will be very strong, with our tentative thinking pointing to real GNP growth of 8-1/2 
percent or perhaps larger.  
 
 Statistics on the business situation in the second quarter are limited but support a picture of 
vigorous activity.  Retail sales continued upward in April and [auto] sales especially have been 
strong.  The employment figures for April, available this morning, show another sizable gain in 
employment, with nonfarm payroll employment rising over 465,000 strike-adjusted for the month. 
The labor force also rose considerably, but the unemployment rate declined by 0.2 to 6.0 percent. 
Industrial production data for April are not available.  It appears, however, that the gains will be 
substantial but less than the exceptional increase in March.  On the price side, the recently available 
consumer price index for March and the producer price index for April registered substantial 
increases.  We believe the data are roughly consistent with our earlier forecast of inflation at around 
7 percent this year. 
 
 In short, economic activity looks very strong this quarter.  But when allowance is made for 
the transitory factors affecting the pattern of the first and second quarters, real activity in the first 
half is likely to be around 4 to 4-1/2 percent, annual rate, [about] the same as in the second half of 
last year.  The information available has not led us to change our view that the pace of activity will 
slow appreciably from the pace in prospect for the current quarter. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Jim.  I’d like now just to give you my viewpoint on the 
situation and what I think we might consider doing. 
 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

4

 MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, before you do that, could I ask Steve Axilrod if he adds M3 and 
M4 in there, will he get a different picture than from the M1/M2 picture? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Well, I don’t have current figures on M3 and M4, Willis.  But the savings 
flows at thrifts have been running only a shade higher than they were in January and February, so I 
think M3 would be well within its long-run range, just like M2.  Banks have continued to issue 
large amounts of negotiable CDs, so of all the Ms [have been strong]; M4 is the one that had been 
showing the most strength relative to its 1977 performance up until this recent behavior of M1 and 
I would think M4 would continue on that trend. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, to go to my own observations, one is that I think what we 
have been doing recently in terms of monetary policy has been prudent and has been perceived to 
be rather decisive.  The move up 1/2 percent in short order on the federal funds rate, as you know, 
has been interpreted as aggressive action but very much called for in the circumstances.  It actually 
has been well received in the marketplace as positive evidence of our determination to take action 
to curb inflation and to be [responsive] to current conditions.  So I think what we have done so far 
has gone down extremely well and has been effective.  It has generated a good deal of credibility 
and a good deal of support for what we’re trying to accomplish. 
 
 Now we come to these numbers.  On a raw basis alone they would indicate the possibility of 
a further tightening, using our additional 1/4 point.  The reason I think we might not want to do that 
is because, looking at the real economy and listening to what Jim has just said--that it appears we 
have a very high level of nominal activity in the second quarter, which is consistent with a push 
forward from the low activity in the first quarter--this [situation] may indeed be transitory.  My first 
concern is that we [shouldn’t] begin to take further action before we hardly let the other moves 
work their way through; that could be an over-stepping that we would regret later if in fact this is a 
transitory situation.  Add to it the fact that we are not yet sure enough about whether there are or 
are not other extraneous factors, which Steve outlined.  That makes me concerned that we don’t 
become a little [impetuous]--moving in a knee jerk way instead of having a more steady hand and 
looking at a steady course.  
 
 I look at the other factors in the economy and I do not see evidence that at this point begins to 
concern me in terms of the relationship of money and the probabilities for real activity.  I don’t see 
inventories accumulating out of line.  I don’t see a rush of orders.  I really see the first and second 
quarters as being averaged together and I begin to look at the money averages together.  And then I 
consider some of these other factors and I feel we’re far more on the track that we’re seeking than it 
would appear from the raw data.  Then I look at the other things we’re trying to accomplish at the 
Federal Reserve, in terms of building a sense of steady, prudent, determined action, and I see that 
we might find ourselves less effective on some of our other objectives if we seem to be rather too 
quick on the trigger.  I wish we could, therefore, look at a program where we would continue the 
federal funds rate in the neighborhood of 7-1/4 percent and where the Board might consider next 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

5

Thursday, when we would be free of the effects of the Treasury financing, an increase in the 
discount rate of 1/2 percentage point, and let that be our next statement of our determination.  Then 
we’d get some more data on these [money] numbers before we begin to move too rapidly on a 
tightening.  This is overly brief and I could elaborate and embellish, but that’s the bottom [line] of 
how I see it.  I might at this point run down the list and get the reaction of the members of the 
Committee.  Paul, perhaps you would lead off and give us your reaction. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t know why we didn’t [unintelligible] the need to 
express, Mr. Chairman.  I do think the inflation numbers that were [released] for the first quarter 
and the more recent information [are higher] than I really anticipated.  And that’s an adverse sign. 
My own feeling is to stay at 7-1/4 percent but make sure the federal funds rate doesn’t go below 
that.  That might mean that on the average I’d rather have it come out a little higher than a little 
lower, but if it stays right at 7-1/4 percent that would be all right.  I suppose the only difference I 
would have is that I’d like to see the discount rate [increase] before next Thursday to [indicate] our 
concern without too long a lag.  But this general [approach of raising the discount rate] 1/2 point--
coming in [with that] as our action before the next Committee meeting--I agree with.  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, that’s a good point, let’s come back to that later.  I think it’s 
something we’ll want to discuss.  Steve Gardner. 
 
 MR. GARDNER.  Well, I think you’ve made a very modest request and I could go along 
with it without difficulty.  The thing I think we should remember, because this is a political world, 
is that what we have done so far has been reasonably accepted and I think that will help us if we 
have to go further.  But your request is quite reasonable and I would be able to support it. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Steve.  Willis Winn. 
 
 MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I share Paul’s feeling in that I’d like to see the 
discount rate as a response to these numbers and let market [rates go] up anyway.  I don’t need to 
hit too much on the problem of the Treasury.  The longer we wait--and being advised in terms of 
the size of these numbers [unintelligible]--the opposition politically tends to build against the 
increased rate.  If we go up [now], we could be able to increase the [unintelligible] approval rather 
than disapproval.  But my guess is the market will turn on us because disintermediation, I suspect, 
will increase pretty much.  So we’ve got a bigger personal problem along with [unintelligible].  I 
would be inclined to stay with the 7-1/4 percent funds rate but on the discount rate I couldn’t 
possibly [disagree]. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you very much, Willis.  Mark Willes. 
 
 MR. WILLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I have a slightly different view than some 
of those enunciated so far.  I suppose it hinges in part on the slightly different estimate as to how 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

6

much strength will stay in the numbers as we go down the road.  I’m concerned primarily about 
two things.  One is that I think the inflation outlook is a little bit worse.  It seems to be getting a 
little worse each time we look at it.  [Second], I think the argument that you made with regard to 
how the most recent policy actions have been received is right and I have the feeling that even 
some additional action, if necessary, will also be received in the same way.  Therefore, I think it 
would be a plus not only in terms of inflation but in terms of our basic confidence in the economy.  
Third, it seems to me that if we’re looking at nominal increases in GNP of the kind that Jim and 
Steve have talked about--[an expectation] we share by the way--the rates of growth in M1 and M2 
will be under persistent upward pressure throughout the rest of the quarter.  Therefore, we’re going 
to have to move rates up rather significantly to try and keep those numbers in [line].  And finally, I 
just have the feeling that last year we tried to get a [unintelligible] through the last three quarters 
and we persistently overshot our objectives for the aggregates because of the special factors that we 
kept seeing.  I’m very concerned about [having] that kind of performance again.  So I would have a 
rather strong preference not only to raise the discount rate but to use the full range for the federal 
funds rate. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Mark, thank you.  Reminds me why I used to call it the annual 
non-recurring change.  Last year it seemed that you had extraneous factors every month.  Let’s 
hope that that’s not the experience this year.  I might point out that one reason we have had good 
market reception to our [action] is that I think we stated our policy well and prepared the world to 
know what we were going to do.  We may need a little more prep time for people to be convinced 
that some numbers have [come in] here that require the next step.  I don’t know but my [sense] is 
that we need just a little more prep time.  Henry Wallich. 
 
 MR. WALLICH.  Well, if somebody had told me at the last meeting what these numbers 
were going to turn out to be--and had I believed him--I would certainly have voted for [moving] 
more quickly and going this week to 7-1/2 percent on the funds rate.  Now, we have some slight 
hope that the numbers will reverse themselves.  They should have reversed themselves this week if 
the tax phenomenon was really the main cause and they haven’t done so.  So this is a somewhat 
weak hope.  There is, of course, a question of whether our long-term targets are realistic and 
whether we can expect the velocity increases that [were implicit] in those.  For that reason I’m not 
quite as worried as Mark Willes about longer-run overshoots.  [I have a] concern that we will [be] 
giving a demonstration of no action in the face of these measures.  I would have preferred, 
therefore, to move now on the discount rate increase; an early time is second best.  I could find an 
argument in favor of putting it off--that we would like to have these data, if they are as bad as they 
appear now, in the open.  I think that would give us a lot more support.  But that is only a question 
of the week.  I think it is likely that we’re going to be under continuing pressure and my preference, 
therefore, would be to go to 7-1/2 percent. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Henry.  Chuck Partee. 
 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

7

 MR. PARTEE.  Well, I would support your recommendation for waiting a week or two, Mr. 
Chairman.  These are extraordinary April numbers and I have the impression that the week of May 
3 that Steve was talking about, which is preliminary, could revise considerably.  It sometimes has, 
either way, in the past.  In addition, it does seem to me that the number is so high that it’s giving us 
some kind of a false signal.  Therefore, I’d like to see it settle down.  But I must say that I don’t 
think that really has to do with the question of moving on up in due course, because I think we’re 
now facing a very real problem.  I think the economy has a great deal of strength.  When you [add] 
460,000 to a nonfarm employment figure that, remember, was already increasing at a very rapid 
rate throughout the winter when production wasn’t doing anything, I have the sense of a good deal 
more steam in the economy than we may be picking up in comments from businessmen at this 
point or seeing in the current statistics.  Also, it seems to me that the inflation problem is much 
worse than we have previously recognized because I now am convinced in my own mind that food 
prices are going to be [rising at a] double-digit [pace] this year.  And food prices I’ve always felt 
are far and away the most sensitive thing from the standpoint of touching off wage demands and-- 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Chuck, there was a disconnect.  Nobody has heard anything you’ve 
said.  Are we all back on the line? 
 
 MR. BROIDA.  The Board room is.  Are all the Presidents on? 
 
 OPERATOR.   All right, go ahead. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I suppose no one heard what Chuck was saying. 
 
 SPEAKER(?).  That is correct. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, Chuck, that was a brilliant speech.  Can you shorten it? 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  You heard nothing at all!  Well, I was just saying that I’m prepared to go 
along with the idea of waiting a week or two to move the funds rate to 7-1/2 percent but I think it is 
a question of waiting rather than not doing it.  The money numbers [may quiet down].  I would 
expect them to quiet in time; they always do.  Nevertheless, the average is going to be very high for 
the second quarter and I believe the economy has a great deal more strength than is now generally 
recognized.  I also believe that inflation has a great deal more strength, particularly in food prices, 
which have such a sensitive effect on wage bargains and wage determinations.  So it’s really just a 
question of timing more than anything else.  I like the idea of getting the discount rate [increase] in 
before we take a marked further upward movement in money rates.  I think, Paul, what you were 
suggesting was what we used to call “err on the side of tightness.”  I would construe that to mean 
that we resist strongly a reduction in the funds rate below 7-1/4 percent and if it tends to drift up a 
little, we might let it go 5 or 10 basis points or even 1/8 point higher if the market is producing 
what I think it is quite possible that the market will produce, particularly after the discount rate is 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

8

moved. It may be that a week from now it will be quite easy to slip in the movement up to 7-1/2 
percent.  But I think even a week’s time is a valuable thing to gain on the Washington scene and it 
does permit us to see--along the line of Steve’s argument--whether or not we get a $5 billion 
downward revision in that May 3 preliminary number, which would make us look at April 
somewhat differently. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Chuck.  Phil Jackson. 
 
 MR. JACKSON.  I’d wait until the next FOMC meeting before we move further--to give us a 
chance to review the entire fiscal policy at that time, recognizing that our better knowledge just two 
days from now might well form a basis for doing something even beyond the 7-1/2 that is presently 
under discussion.  If all the facts fit together, they would support that position.  But it strikes me 
that [moving] more than 1/2 percentage point during the intermeeting period is not appropriate, 
given the basis of the knowledge that we have on which we would be acting. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Phil.  Bob Black. 
 
 MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, I think you have made a good case, and Chuck has reinforced 
it.  [Unintelligible] done the same thing, but it looks to me as if all these options that we face at this 
juncture are pretty risky.  In view of the recent behavior of the price indexes, though, I really feel 
that failure to act pretty decisively in the face of growing evidence that the strength in the economy 
is burgeoning and that monetary growth rates and inflation are accelerating might be to some 
people the most dangerous [scourge] of all.  Mark Willes stated my case and his position 
eloquently as well as [unintelligible].  I would be inclined to go ahead.  I think there is a real 
incentive for banks to go out and [extend] credit on the basis of reserves that they didn’t have 
expectations [unintelligible]. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Bob.  Ernie Baughman. 
 
 MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I continue to hear reports around here of extremely 
strong [business activity] expressed generally across [a wide] spectrum [of industries].  The real 
estate area appears strong.  I continue to hear reports also of a rising flow of foreign [unintelligible] 
in this part of the world.  My preference would be to move the funds rate above 7-1/4 percent 
[unintelligible] at least show that if the market concludes that we are [unintelligible] at 7-1/4.  With 
[respect to] the discount rate, I would think it timely to move whenever the Board is ready to 
approve the requests it has.  [Unintelligible] increase when they meet next week. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  When is that meeting, Ernie? 
 
 MR. BAUGHMAN.  On Thursday. 
 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

9

 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thursday.  Thank you.  I think that [covers] the comments of all the 
members.  I’d like to ask Chuck if he would speak to the question of timing on the discount rate 
increase.  Would it be all right if we kicked that around here and tried to look at the timing based 
upon moving the rate up to 7-1/4 and then holding it steady for the week during the financing and 
say we are prepared to move on it as soon thereafter as we felt it appropriate?  I might add that we 
have one other piece of strategy in our thinking, which is that our [interagency] coordinating 
committee has been working on the problem of disintermediation and has some thoughts of what 
we might do there.  It is unlikely that we can get that in place until next week.  Wednesday or 
Thursday would be the most optimistic [estimate of when] we could accomplish that.  Thursday 
would be optimistic even.  That’s another step that we might well want to be taking to provide for a 
continuing flow of funds to thrifts at a time when rates are getting to a point where we may have 
some disintermediation.  That has been a [factor in] my thinking about moving the funds rate.  I’d 
like to get in place a way to avoid disintermediation before we get these rates moving too rapidly.  
Chuck, on the question of timing, how do you see that? 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think probably Alan could answer the question of the dealer positions 
[better] than I can.  I would like to give them another few days.  Especially with the probability that 
we would move 1/2 point, I think we ought to give them just a little [time] to clear out their 
inventory.  Therefore, I wouldn’t move today and I wouldn’t move Monday.  Next Friday I don’t 
like because that’s a bad day from the standpoint of fairness because the news system is closed 
down essentially for the weekend.  So that leaves Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday of next 
week. I might say that we could move as early as Tuesday, depending on what Alan says about the 
dealer positions, except for this question on the coordinating committee.  I think we have a clear 
chance of being able to get them prepared to do something that will deal to some degree with our 
[disintermediation] problem.  I know we can’t get it done before Wednesday; in fact, I’m not sure 
we can get it done on Wednesday--perhaps Thursday or Friday but more likely the next week.  I 
think it would be very good strategically if such an overt move as a sizable increase in the discount 
rate were either accompanied by or promptly followed by some special efforts to deal with the 
disintermediation problem.  Therefore, I guess I lean toward Thursday with the possibility of 
Wednesday if we can get other things in place fast enough. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Again, this is one of those questions where logic might say the 
sooner the better, but there may be something to be gained by [waiting] a couple of days to put in 
place some of the other actions we could take that I think will demonstrate a more concerted, 
positive, and coordinated effort.  Alan, how do you see it? 
 
 MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, I think the market is very [unintelligible] maybe a half or a 
little more than [unintelligible] but I don’t think that is [unintelligible]. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  So as far as you’re concerned, there is no reason to delay unless 
getting the coordinating committee [action] in place would be helpful? 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

10

 
 MR. HOLMES.  That could be the [unintelligible].  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, just to focus on this action, by my count there are ten of us 
present.  I believe we have one Governor who is not here and there is one vacancy on the Board.  
So we have eleven members and one is absent, which makes ten.  I count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 who have 
indicated a concurrence with my recommendation.  And I would say my recommendation should 
be interpreted as following the Volcker technique of handling the 7-1/4.  I think Paul’s statement of 
that was extremely wise under the circumstances and it would be consistent with my thinking.  I 
count four voters who would prefer to move more rapidly.  I catch a sentiment that the Governors 
should move as quickly as they can on the discount rate.  I think the Governors will take that under 
advisement.  Is there more to be said, or shall we consider this [completed]?  Is this something that 
requires a vote? 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  With the coordinating committee, [unintelligible] going 
back further on the discount rate? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Paul, it well could.  I think that’s something we’d better sit down 
and think about.  Actually Alan is in a sense right.  We have created an atmosphere now where the 
market anticipates everything.  And the Wall Street Journal reported that we’re obviously going up 
on the discount rate, so everything is now anticlimactic, I guess. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Ordinarily I would want to wait longer after a Treasury 
operation to review the discount rate but in this case given what the [unintelligible] the 
expectations, I’m a little afraid that if we wait too long it will be so anticlimactic it will-- 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, it could well be.  I think the point is well taken, and the 
Governors can certainly take that into consideration. 
 
 MR. WALLICH.   I would add that from the point of view of the exchange markets to delay 
both actions would be adverse.  A discount rate action would indicate that we’re responding in 
some way. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that’s right.  I agree with that. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  The exchange markets are doing pretty well, aren’t they? 
 
 MR. WALLICH.  They have been down [and then] a little up. 
 



5/5/78   
 

 

  

11

 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Paul, we don’t want [them] to get too far ahead of themselves.  
Well, our Secretary tells us that because of the instruction we may need a vote.  Should we have a 
vote, Mr. Secretary? 
 
 MR. BROIDA.  Mr. Chairman, this is a difficult one; it’s a close call.  And I’m not sure Tom 
O’Connell agrees with me that a vote is required. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, when in doubt, vote.  I would put before the Committee a 
proposition that we operate on the 7-1/4 between now and such other time as events cause us to 
consult again or until the next meeting, erring on the side of 7-1/4 being the bottom.  And that I 
think is the only action of this Committee.  The discount rate matter is one the Governors will take 
up separately and we appreciate your advice and counsel.  Would you call the roll? 
 
 MR. BROIDA.   
  Chairman Miller       I vote for my own proposition, oddly enough 
  Vice Chairman Volcker      Yes 
  President Baughman       Yes 
  President Black      No 
  Governor Gardner       Yes 
  Governor Jackson       Yes 
  Governor Partee       Yes 
  Governor Wallich       [For] unity I vote yes 
  President Willes                  No 
  President Winn           Yes 
 
  Now it’s 8 to 2. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Gentlemen, thank you very much.  We’ll be in touch if anything 
else is needed.  Otherwise we will see you at the next meeting, about 10 days hence.  Thank you.  
Bye. 
 
 

END OF SESSION 


