









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


  
 

  
 

TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

December 19, 1978 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files.  The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding.  Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted.  In some instances, words have been added in 
brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or 
misstatement. 
 

Errors undoubtedly remain.  The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy 
at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in 
preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions.  The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 
 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 
involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable.  Deleted passages are indicated by 
gaps in the text.  All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under 
applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 
 
 

Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 
 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 
 
          
 



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

December 19, 1978

                  

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, December 19,

1978, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman
Mr. Baughman
Mr. Coldwell
Mr. Eastburn
Mr. Partee
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Willes
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Balles, Black, Kimbrel, and Mayo,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively

Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. O'Connell, General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, Keir, Kichline, Paulus,
and Zeisel, Associate Economists



12/19/78

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market
Account

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for
Domestic Operations

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations

Messrs. Coyne and Guenther   , Assistants
to the Board of Governors

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

Mr. Henry, Associate Director, Division
of International Finance, Board of
Governors

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Eisenmenger,
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,
Kansas City, Boston, and Chicago,
respectively

Messrs. Brandt, Broaddus, Fousek, and Keran,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Richmond, New York, and
San Francisco, respectively

Mr. Mullineaux, Research Officer, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

Mr. Levin, Manager, Securities Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

                                                  

                                                        

                                 

                                                

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
December 19, 1978 

 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  I appreciate everyone’s 
willingness to meet so late in the morning, given your usual preferences for early sessions.  I’ve 
taken the liberty of trying to develop a format for today’s meeting that I hope will prove useful and 
beneficial.  If not, we can certainly adjust it back.  I would like to experiment with some way that 
would accomplish all of our purposes and perhaps make it easier for the Committee to get our work 
done in the allotted time.  What I am going to suggest is that we go directly through items 1 
through 5.  Item 4 we’ll be hearing from the staff on the economic review and 5 we’ll be hearing 
from our Economist on his views.  
 
 Then what I would like to do is to get the round robin in, where every member of the 
Committee gives comments on his views of the economy--without necessitating numerical 
variances from staff--and indicates any important signals, regionally or nationally, seen that would 
cast light on our overall evaluation.  But indicate at the same time what this implies from your point 
of view in terms of policy direction.  Again, not numerically but in terms of does this imply 
tightening, easing, steady as we go, or substantial this or substantial that.  And by the way, we can 
get how everyone sees it and after the coffee break perhaps we can then focus on the specifics of 
the directive and the guidelines and see if we can in that way streamline somewhat the process 
without in any way curtailing the search for inputs and comments.  But by making comments on 
both the economy and the monetary outlook at the same time, I think it will shorten the process 
from going around twice.  I’d like to try that today, if you are willing, and see how it works.  
 
 The first order of business is to approve the minutes of the actions taken at the last meeting; 
they have been circulated.  Are there any comments or corrections?  Hearing none, we’ll record 
those as approved.  And the next item is to deal with foreign currency operations, the report on the 
operations since the last meeting.  Scott Pardee. 
  
 MR. PARDEE.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Scott.  Any questions?  Henry. 
  
 MR. WALLICH.  It’s reported that support for the dollar in Europe may flag because of the 
oil price increase and the desire to see that reduced in terms of their local currencies.  In fact, the 
drop that you note in the dollar has already undone something like 1/3 of the oil price increase, as 
far as the countries with strong currencies are concerned.  Have you heard anything on that?  
 
 MR. PARDEE.  Yes, well, if I seem a little agitated, I’ve just gotten off the phone with the 
Bundesbank on that precise point.  And all I got was a lecture.  Obviously, this is not official policy 
on the part of the German government or any other government, but I was told it was about time 
that we did something on fundamentals and all that.  So it’s not the official policy but it’s one of the 
things in the market that’s poisoning the atmosphere and leading to further sales of the dollar.  We 
ourselves found in our intervention yesterday that we got an unusual cluster of Middle East names. 
  



12/19/78  
 

  

2
 

 SPEAKER(?).  What does that mean? 
 
 MR. PARDEE.  Well, the selling was coming out of the Middle East more.  The New York 
market itself was quiet; it was quiet from noon on.  It was a heavy cluster of names that came out of 
the Middle East. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Phil, did you have a question? 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  Just to clarify that last comment, that’s all. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, Dave? 
 
 MR. EASTBURN.  I have a question about the Greenbook; it’s on this subject and perhaps 
Ted could address it.  The last paragraph of the Greenbook supplement talks about the prospects for 
the dollar in the next year and concludes that with an improvement in the trade surplus and the 
relative inflation performance the dollar should about hold where it is.  I would have thought you’d 
say it might improve.  Would you comment on that? 
 
 MR. TRUMAN.  Well, I think it’s fair to say there’s a possibility it might improve, but the 
consensus of the staff here was that the dollar would be about where it was--and in fact the 
Greenbook was written in the early part of last week. 
 
 MR. EASTBURN.  Before this. 
 
 MR. TRUMAN.  Before this, so that suggests that there would be some improvement 
certainly from current levels.  In fact, as far as the staff when we do this forecasting, it’s sometimes 
helpful to use a number rather than words as we do in the Greenbook.  So that tends to include a 
range of plus or minus 2 percent.  Again, I think the consensus, for what it’s worth, is that there 
would be some improvement--maybe even a 4 to 5 percent improvement from where we are today. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Chuck. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Just to follow up on that, though, Ted:  If the price rise for oil means that 
our trade balances are less good by a few billion dollars by the end of the year, isn’t it true that 
other countries would be proportionately even less well off as a result?  That is, we import less oil 
than Germany, Japan, Switzerland, or France, at least, and so I should think they would have a 
greater deterioration relative to previous expectations than we would. 
 
 MR. TRUMAN.  Well, you reminded me of something that I didn’t say.  The other thing 
we had not included was the OPEC price rise.  For the year as a whole, that has very little effect 
compared to what we’ve been assuming before.  We’ve estimated now maybe 3/4 of a billion 
dollars for the year as a whole.  However, it adds to the current account deficit of the United States, 
we would think, about $2 billion at the end of 1979.  That means that the pattern we’ll have 
throughout the year is going to be that we may have some sort of initial improvement and then it’s 
going to be flatter than we expected.  And, in terms of what Scott was just mentioning, that does 



12/19/78  
 

  

3
 

not suggest that you are going to have the kind of dramatic improvement that was embodied in the 
Greenbook forecast.  Now, as far as the impact on the United States versus the rest of the world, the 
fact is that our oil bill per se is approximately twice as large as that of any other country.   
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Relative to GNP or what? 
 
 MR. TRUMAN.  No, not relative to the GNP, but in terms of the oil bill.  So the figures--
that $2 billion is the largest number that’s around.  While it is true that we have a lower dependence 
on imported oil than Japan or Germany, we have a large overall oil bill and, therefore, any increase 
will add to the psychologically important [dollar amounts.] 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It is also larger relative to our balance of payments, 
which I think is the main-- 
 
 MR. MAYO.  Yes, I think that’s more important. 
 
 MR. PARDEE.  You also have had the kind of psychological imponderables and the one 
that Henry raised. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  You mean our oil bill is a larger proportion of our imports than would be 
the case in Germany?  
 
 MR. WALLICH.  Because our imports are small; the oil proportionate to GNP-- 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  [Unintelligible.] 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  That’s hard to work through.  Then our exports must also be smaller 
relative to-- 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  They are. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Scott. 
 
 MR. PARDEE.  You also have the psychological imponderables beyond just the 
forecasting tools the economists normally use in terms of the expectations towards policy.  
Governor Wallich raised one point--that the Europeans may allow their rates to rise.  And there is 
the feeling that perhaps the United States may let the dollar drop as a way of financing this.  So it’s 
not just taking previous trends and projecting them forward.  It’s this policy context we have to 
consider.  
  
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Scott.  We need an action to ratify the transactions 
since the previous meeting.  I think the details have been circulated.  Are there comments or 
objections?  Hearing none, we will record that as approved and move on to domestic open market 
operations and the report from Mr. Sternlight.   
 



12/19/78  
 

  

4
 

 MR. STERNLIGHT.  [Statement--see Appendix.]  
 
   CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Peter.  Questions or comments? 
 
 MR. WINN.  Can you elaborate on your last comment a little bit? 
 
 MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, as I mentioned, the dealers had a very poor year in 1977--the 
worst since we have kept records of this.  As a group, the primary dealers had losses on the order of 
$100 million.  This past year was not that bad, but it was a poor year.  The figures we have together 
at this point suggest a magnitude of roughly $30 million lost through nine months of the year.  This 
is a volatile industry; people are used to ups and downs, but I am concerned that there are some 
longer-term factors at work there.  I think [given] the growth in the number of dealers, they tended 
to be very aggressive in their competition with each other, paring down margins.  They have tried 
to take positions because they can’t make money on the spreads as much anymore.  They seem to 
guess wrong quite frequently and take losses on positions.  Just a series of factors, mostly 
[involving] the aggressiveness of their competition, has impaired the profit opportunity.  I think the 
electronic means of communication that they have now has tended to [unintelligible] up the 
competition as they scramble to make the best possible market to customers.  And then many 
customers are operating almost like dealers in the rapidity of their buying and selling activity in the 
market. 
 
 MR. KIMBREL.  Peter, have the losses been concentrated in a few dealers or are they 
pretty generally scattered throughout? 
 
 MR. STERNLIGHT.  In ’77 losses were very general.  Only a few dealers made very slim 
profits and almost all of them made losses.  There’s been more of a scatter--more dispersion--this 
past year.  A few have turned in a not too bad performance and some have been quite heavy losers. 
  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Bob Black. 
 
 MR. BLACK. What are the implications of that for monetary policy, Peter? 
 
 MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, I think the Treasury depends on a vital, healthy government 
securities industry for the underwriting of its debt.  I think market participants depend on a healthy 
industry just because many seek to make liquidity adjustments in the government securities market. 
We are dependent on it in the execution of monetary policy--having a vital market out there where 
we can buy and sell securities as we need to adjust reserve positions. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Phil. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  Peter, were the losses you’re talking about concentrated in a few firms 
or is there a wide dispersion between profit and loss? 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

5
 

 MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, as I mentioned, there was wide dispersion in the ’77 losses.  In 
this past year, maybe about half of the firms have had losses.  And some of the losses were quite 
substantial--enough to give, on balance, a loss for the industry as a whole. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  But there is still interest in becoming a dealer bank? 
 
       MR. STERNLIGHT.  Less than earlier, although there are still firms that seek to get in, not 
because they expect to come in and make a lot of money in the government securities but because 
they see it as necessary to round out their activity.  A large corporate underwriting firm may see 
this as a desirable adjunct to its business in the corporate area. 
 
 MR. MAYO.  Peter, many years ago there was some effort made to suggest that the 
Treasury should sell its securities on a commission basis and go like the stock market on the 
turnover in the secondary market.  I haven’t heard anything about this for years.  Is that dead or 
does what you are describing here give any impetus to that discussion? 
  
 MR. STERNLIGHT.  Well, every once in a while one or another dealer comes up with the 
suggestion.  I wouldn’t say the Treasury might have to give it renewed consideration. 
 
 MR. MAYO.  Are any of the dealers that have a very broad base in other parts of the 
securities market using the government operation as a loss leader in any way? 
 
 MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think one could say that to some extent, yes.  I think that’s part of 
this desire to enter an industry where the profit experience has been poor recently.  They still want 
to get in just [for the] prestige factor because they see it as a desirable way to peddle their corporate 
securities. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Peter.  We need an action to ratify the transactions 
since the previous meeting.  [A report] has been circulated.  Are there any comments?  Are there 
any objections?  Hearing none we’ll record that as approved and move to item 4 on the agenda, 
which is the staff report on economic situation by Jim Kichline. 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Normally I would say thank you.  In this case I’m not sure I can 
say that.  
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  What part of Las Vegas did you come from? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I think with these odds, Jim, we’ll call you Jimmy the what.   
Well, anyway I’ll thank you.  Before we start our discussion of this, Steve, would you give us your 
comments on how you see these relationships? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  [Secretary’s note:  This statement was not 
found in Committee records.] 



12/19/78  
 

  

6
 

 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Again, can one say thanks for that clear-cut definition of policy? 
Thank you for outlining the choices.  Before we start the go-around, are there any particular points 
that need clarifying?  If there are technical questions that could be handled elsewhere, that might be 
better.  But if there are any things that should be clarified here--  Yes, John? 
 
    MR. BALLES.  This is sort of a belated question back to Scott Pardee.  You referred to the 
lecture that you got from the Bundesbank this morning, Scott. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That was after he lectured them. 
 
 MR. BALLES.  What do you think they mean by a credible anti-inflation policy? 
  
 MR. PARDEE.  He said higher interest rates.  He said it three times.  And I said, “We’ve 
got higher interest rates.”  So we got into jawboning back and forth.  Let me get back to fiscal 
policy, the whole range of things that we’ve been discussing over the month.  The problem is 
simply that the numbers haven’t come through to support all of the things that we said over the 
months about winding down inflation and turning the trade balance around.  The trade balance is 
improving--that [will happen] in time.  But it is more a question on the inflationary front.  I 
wouldn’t accept what the Bundesbank has to say about our policy.  We have to have our own 
deliberations.  They wouldn’t accept what I had to say about their policy. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  You said Merry Christmas. 
 
 MR. HOLMES.  That’s later this week. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, Bones. 
 
 MR. KIMBREL.  I just have a question to Jim.  Did I follow, Jim, that you were suggesting 
that maybe because of the weather the housing growth has been borrowing from the future?  You 
would [expect] some considerable weakening because of borrowing-- 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right.  I might say there’s no way to understand the fact that we 
have had a great deal of strength in that sector.  We checked with a number of major builders and 
there has been a suggestion that the weather has been quite good and that, combined with their 
expectation of generally tighter mortgage market conditions, [has led them] to try to push their 
starts through.  To whatever extent that argument is correct, one would expect somewhat greater 
weakness later on. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Jim, what about the seasonal adjustment in November?  Could a 
small increase in actual starts with good weather show up as a bigger number in the seasonal 
adjustment?  
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  I don’t believe the November seasonal is that big.  The December and 
January ones are quite big.  I might note that the only area that increased in November was the 



12/19/78  
 

  

7
 

North Central area.  And in October that’s where home sales just went through the roof; there was 
something like a 120 percent increase. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  In the Northeast? 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  In the North Central region.  Every other area in the country was down 
on the starts figures this month. 
 
    MR. COLDWELL.  Sounds like a good explanation until you start adding in the future 
figures of the home builders and other mortgage groups that are making commitments at a faster-- 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right.  You can get caught with the lags in this process, as you 
know, and things could fall apart right quickly.  I noted in reading the Redbook that sprinkled 
throughout each District Bank’s report was essentially a tightening flavor in the mortgage market 
and a slackening of housing activity.  But it’s clearly not evident in the numbers that we have in 
hand.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Nancy. 
 
 MS. TEETERS.  You’ve moved up your price expectations.  Is that the result of the rise in 
crude oil prices?  Is that the major impetus behind that?  
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  No, we have had an expectation of about an 8 percent [increase in crude] 
prices.  We haven’t changed that much for 1979.  It’s the energy side, where I think we just 
underestimated the impact of natural gas prices--for example, what had been happening to gasoline 
prices.  That’s really the key.  We did not change our [crude] price projection at all.  In addition, I 
might say, we have not been encouraged by the performance of unit labor costs.  The third-quarter 
numbers, for example, showed [initially] an increase of around 5 percent in unit labor costs.  
Revised figures of a week or two ago showed a 7 percent increase.  Productivity is estimated to 
have been lower and compensation a bit higher.  So the underlying patterns seem to us to have 
deteriorated some more. 
 
 MS. TEETERS.  But the gasoline prices started up before the OPEC price increase.  You 
didn’t think--  
  
 MR. KICHLINE.  No, that’s right.  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  This doesn’t include the OPEC thing. 
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  No, it does not.  We had 7-1/2 percent.  We are at 7-1/2 percent. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Which was from January 1, incidentally.  So you have to realize 
that it is only less in the beginning and more at the end. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

8
 

 MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right; it’s 7-1/2 versus 10.  And we don’t have the extra 2-1/2 
percent on average, but the latter half of the year looks poor. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Paul. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, after that conversation I would just offer an 
observation.  It’s hard for me to see how you get down to this 7 to 7-1/2 percent range in prices in 
the second half of next year unless you are putting an awful lot of weight on the President’s 
program.  But that’s not my question.  My question is budgetary.  I think you have by the full 
employment measure of stimulus actually negative stimulus--if that’s the right term--in the first 
quarter, which surprises me a little bit with the tax reduction, so any comment you would offer on 
that I would appreciate.  But also I get the sense at least the money market analysts in New York 
for some reason are beginning to project a substantially larger budget deficit this year than the 
official estimate. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Which year is that---the ’79 fiscal year? 
 
 MS. TEETERS.  You get a recession, Paul. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, it’s not early enough to have--  They also have a 
very large one in the following year.  That’s maybe a recession, but I don’t think a recession is the 
full explanation this year.  All I asked for is comments from the staff about this possibility. 
 
 MR. MAYO.  Isn’t this true of the New York community generally--that they are always 
projecting a bigger budget deficit? 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  What surprises me about this is that some of them have 
been ahead of the government in projecting a lower deficit in recent years and lower expenditures, 
which has turned out to be the case.  Now it seems to be reversed.  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, it’s hard--  Jim, let’s get it back in focus.  Jim, tell us about 
all that new employment and personal income that’s going to [generate] all that revenue.   
 
 MR. KICHLINE.  Well, the question on the full employment surplus or deficit, from the 
fourth to the first quarter there is virtually no change, [even] with a tax cut.  At the same time we 
have the social security tax increase, which is a partial offset; and on the expenditure side we have 
a fairly slow growth of expenditures related to the Commodity Credit Corporation expenditures, 
which have boosted this quarter a bit and we anticipate will not in the first quarter.  So it’s really 
that there are offsetting items going on within the accounts, so we don’t have much change in fiscal 
thrust right now. With regard to the budget deficit numbers, I guess we feel fairly comfortable with 
what we have now.   
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Which is similar to the Administration’s figure. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

9
 

 MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right, though we would like to think that we have done our own 
work.  We do have differences in various categories.  We have some outlays a bit lower.  We think 
there will be a little bit in the way of shortfalls, not a great deal.  But we have somewhat higher 
interest payments so they are offsets.  But in total we are quite close.  I was under the impression 
that most of those who have higher deficit numbers are operating with different economic 
assumptions.  That was my general impression. 
 
 MS. TEETERS.  Well, it is also vague in the accounting.  That is, the social security tax 
increase--even though the major part of it is an increase in the ceiling and doesn’t take effect until 
the latter part of the year--shows up totally in the first quarter. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I understand that.  Still that’s only half the tax reduction, 
or a little more than half. 
 
    CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Ladies and gentlemen, I think we are perhaps ready to try to get 
your inputs individually.  Through careful analysis of past meetings, it has been determined that the 
proper procedure today would be to start with Henry Wallich, who isn’t here, and go clockwise.  I 
suppose he is frightened about the possibility of being the lead-off!  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  He had a very brief statement today, didn’t he? 
  
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I would ask for three components, or two particularly, on the 
economy as you see it, in terms of any variance from the staff forecast.  It need not be numerical; it 
can be qualitative or quantitative.  Also, I would particularly like each of you to comment on how 
you read the implications for monetary policy at the moment, particularly [regarding] the directive 
between now and the next meeting.  So we will start with you, Phil, and when Henry comes in we 
will pick up. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have not made enough 
headway toward slowing this economy down.  I am very sorry to see the large increase in real 
GNP. That sounds cruel to say, but accompanied with that is a major increase in inflation and 
another further jump of 0.7 percent even on the average wages.  I can’t in good conscience look 
forward to that kind of package for 1979, where we are looking at a minimum of 8 percent.  And if 
this has to be restructured in the latter part of the year, I suspect it would be even higher.  
 
 If the Committee decides to buy the idea of skipping the January meeting, then I think we 
need greater leeway and more flexibility to meet the shifts in January and I will address that 
problem later on.  A basic problem to me is that inflation is not showing any slack in it whatsoever 
that I can see.  The aggregates to me are totally unreliable.  We haven’t seen anything that would 
educate me that the staff or others who have been commenting even know which direction these 
things are going to move over the next few months.  The ATS may have been a complicating 
factor; it may be something else.  So I am giving my attention primarily to market conditions, loan 
demand, and the strength of the economy.  Now on all three counts, it seems to me that we are 
burgeoning fast and I am very sorry we didn’t catch some more of it before we hit this quarter.  
Consequently, in my view the staff estimate, while still credible in the sense of the GNP, I think is 



12/19/78  
 

  

10
 

unsatisfactory totally in terms of the rate of inflation and I would apply considerably more restraint. 
  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Phil.  Henry, you were the lead-off man, but we 
skipped you.  So we are going to come back to you.  We are not going to omit you. 
 
 MR. WALLICH.  You want me to [comment now]? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Please. 
 
 MR. WALLICH.  Well, it seems to me that the economy is now in a state of demand-pull 
inflation--aggregates or no.  We are beginning to push against the capacity limits.  The Redbook 
reports particular areas are filled with considerable pressure, although the general tone of the 
Redbook was not all that strong.  We are getting inflationary rate pressures, I think, in part as a 
result of monetary developments that occurred quite a while back.  We can’t expect the present 
aggregates to have much influence, and I doubt that the present aggregates tell us much about the 
future course of the economy because there are so many reasons why they might be weak and 
might not be reflecting the economy.  
 
 I think loan demand at banks at the present time is a better indicator; the banks are selling 
off securities.  Individuals and businesses are buying the securities because they want to get rid of 
their cash balances, and what remains is strong expansion through bank credit.  Now, one has to 
ask oneself, as Jim Kichline did, how does the present bulge carry forward into the future?  The 
consumer seems to be borrowing from the future and there one cannot foresee much strength.  But 
strong consumer buying can trigger temporarily inventory accumulation; and likewise pressure on 
capacity can induce additional investment.  I don’t think anybody would be investing now in order 
to get capacity for the next few quarters.  But he would be looking beyond possibly a small dip in 
the economy and would realize that at last the capacity limits have been reached and he has to do 
something to enlarge his plant.  
 
 All that suggests to me that there is some underlying strength here that we don’t observe.  
Furthermore, I think we have been continually wrong in our evaluation of the inflationary risk.  As 
I look at the forecast that we have made over time on inflation for this present time--namely, 
October or November of ’78--we started out fifteen months ago with an estimate of 6.1 percent and 
we gradually upped it and it’s coming to over 8 percent.  On unemployment we have done the 
reverse.  We thought unemployment would be 6.6 percent fifteen months or a year ago and we’ve 
gradually come to see it at 5.8. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  How about real growth? 
 
 MR. WALLICH.  Real growth has been slower than expected also. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Also working down throughout the projection? 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

11
 

 MR. WALLICH.  Yes.  That reflects the poor productivity performance [which] is another 
inflation factor.  So I think not only have we done much better on unemployment than we expected 
and much worse on inflation than we expected, but we also seem to have a built-in bias toward a 
low inflation forecast, whatever the cause of that.  When I see we are going to get down to 7.3 
percent in the second half of next year, I wonder, like Paul does, if we shouldn’t add a point or two 
and allow for a worse outcome.   
 
 Well, all this pushes me in a direction of greater tightness.  I think tightness is really a 
relative term here.  With inflation expectations rising, nominal interest rates don’t mean what they 
seem to; and to maintain real interest rates where they were, nominal interest rates have to go up.  I 
would agree with Phil Coldwell that we should at this time look at interest rates and not look at the 
aggregates because they are so disturbed.  So that points to a money market directive.  I also agree 
with what Steve Axilrod said in the way of widening the funds rate range.  In my case, I would 
want to widen it in an upward direction. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Henry.  Frank. 
  
    MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I don’t think we understand what is really going on in the 
economy. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I’ll go along with that. 
 
 MR. MORRIS.  I think it’s because we haven’t had enough experience judging the reaction 
of both the consumer and the investor to an economy with a high rate of inflation. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s right; we haven’t had any experience. 
 
 MR. MORRIS.  Quite clearly, the numbers coming in over the past month are vastly 
stronger than I had expected and I think stronger than any of us had expected.  And I think it’s 
quite possible that the fourth quarter will be even stronger than the staff has projected and perhaps 
the first quarter as well.  At the same time, we are getting these conflicting signals between what is 
going on in the real economy and the behavior of the aggregates.  I think it’s quite clear that we are 
not for long going to have a very exceptionally strong economy coupled with very weak growth in 
the aggregates.  One of these two things has to come to an end, and I don’t think we are sure which 
one is going to give at this moment.  
 
 This suggests to me that this is an extremely poor time for the Committee to be planning 
not to meet for seven weeks, unless we are prepared to give the Manager a lot of room on the fed 
funds rate to respond to changes in the aggregates.  I think it would be very poor management on 
our part to leave for seven weeks anything like the kind of directive we gave the Manager last 
month.  It seems to me most probable that we are going to face a bulge in the aggregates in the next 
three months, and I suspect it will be bigger than the bulge that Steve and his group has given us in 
their projections.  I think both domestic and international considerations require us to move pretty 
promptly against the bulge in the aggregates.  I think the exchange markets would certainly be 
carefully observing any resurgence in the rate of growth in the U.S. money supply.  I realize that 



12/19/78  
 

  

12
 

suggesting that we meet again in three weeks will place a big burden on the staff and I simply 
suggest that they respond by giving us not the full Greenbook-Bluebook treatment but some simple 
updating.  But I think we are in a too unstable situation to consider not meeting again until 
February 6th. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.   Thank you, Frank.  Ernie. 
 
 MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I, too, am impressed with this conflicting evidence.  
As a result of that, I am more ambivalent than usual today in terms of policy.  [Let me mention] a 
couple of facts that may be of interest.  As you know, we have a large builder on our board who 
builds pretty much around the country and also a bit abroad.  He reported that he recently bid an 
identical building in Houston to one he bid a year ago and now has it about completed.  And the 
current bid was exactly 25 percent higher than the one a year ago.  He was citing this as an 
indication of the rate of increase of construction costs in that area.  He indicated a similar estimate 
for the Chicago area of 20 percent.  He noted also that the ability to lease promptly is easing off as 
a result of these higher costs and the necessary higher leases.  He expects that that will bring on a 
slowing in the rate of construction for that type of property.   
 
 Conversations I have had recently with businessmen in a wide variety of activities suggest 
to me that we are probably going to see more investment, particularly in new equipment and 
possibly in the total of business fixed investment, than is being reported in the surveys and than is 
currently being projected.  In fact, I would expect that the projection may be low in that particular 
component.  Our banks are experiencing--and expect to continue to experience at least for some 
time--very strong loan demands.  In connection with that, they are expecting to make some further 
upward adjustment in the prime rate.  Small banks report that they are having more difficulty 
upstreaming loans, and large banks report that they are having more difficulty downstreaming 
them. I think an indication of a little tightening up in the market is that they are all getting a little 
closer to that situation which they will call “loaned up.”  
 
 It is interesting that drilling activity is off significantly in the Southwest in the last month or 
two.  The explanation given is that there is a temporary localized glut in [natural] gas.  And in those 
circumstances, where they can, they like to schedule their output to the local market as compared to 
moving into the international market.  I simply report that; I don’t know whether that is a valid 
explanation.  That drilling activity is down, I think is a fact, but I’m not sure about the explanation. 
 
 We see a few indications of the effects of higher interest rates and tighter credit on activity. 
 Cattle feeders, for example, find that they use up their credit line with about half as many cattle in 
the lot now as they did when cattle were much lower in price.  And in one instance a builder and 
operator of warehouses has reported that he has had to cut back his plant substantially because he 
couldn’t get the volume of financing that he would like to have.  But his volume is up very sharply; 
his business is so terribly good that he is turning away customers, with no credit to meet their 
needs. 
 
 Well, from all of this, I come out in the total pretty close to where the staff comes out.  As I 
have indicated, I would up the investment figures a bit, I would reduce the personal expenditures 



12/19/78  
 

  

13
 

figures a bit, I’d up prices a bit, and I’d up nominal GNP somewhat.  But those are not major 
differences.  As to credit policy, I could go today either with standing where we are and observing 
a bit longer in view of what’s happening on the aggregates--I would not be prepared to abandon 
them as Phil apparently would be--or I could be comfortable moving to a little higher fed funds 
rate.  On balance, I think primarily because of foreign [exchange markets] and inflation--not 
because of domestic economic activity projections--I would be inclined toward a little additional 
restraint as reflected in the fed funds rate.  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you.  John. 
 
 MR. BALLES.  Without repeating some of the comments that have been made by the four 
preceding figures that I am in agreement with, I would stress that in my judgment--and I have been 
arguing it for some months--we are and have been at practical full employment, both with respect 
to labor and plant capacity.  And I think that if inflation continues as it has been for some time now, 
it will be a key problem in terms of a threat to a stable growth path.  There’s not much we can do 
about overshoots that have occurred in the past couple of years.  They have occurred and there are 
long lags, in my opinion, in the impact of policy and we are beginning to see [the effects] now.  
Just as in football, when in doubt, punt.  So having said all of that, I think we are at the stage of a 
cycle where if in doubt because of this inflation danger we should lean on the side of more 
restraint.  Now that the Board staff has reduced its economic forecast somewhat for the year ahead, 
there is very little difference remaining between our staff and the Board staff and it’s not worth 
going into what the fairly small differences are.   
 
 The slowdown that we expect comes not only because of the distortions that have been 
produced by inflation but also because we can’t continue a growth rate such as we have had over 
the past year or two in the face of having reached a practical full employment point.  I do 
suspect--and it’s no more than that--that this strength we see in the fourth quarter, which is greater 
than anticipated, and certainly greater than I had anticipated, is borrowing from business in the 
future.  I’m just getting too many signals that there is a mood out there in the country of “buy 
before prices go up even further.”  And to a limited degree that explains the surge of consumer 
spending, especially on the big ticket items, but that I think is going to run out of gas sooner or later 
and maybe sooner.  And that further reinforces the expectation that we had that going from the 
fourth quarter of this year to the fourth quarter of 1979 real GNP will be probably under 2 percent; 
1.8 percent is what we show specifically, which is a bit less optimistic than the Board staff.  
 
 Of all the imponderables we are trying to wrestle with today, I suspect the biggest one is the 
confidence factor and how it is going to impact both consumer and business spending in the future. 
[Doing what] we can do to reinforce through our posture--as it’s perceived by the public, banks, 
businesses and consumers, and especially by foreigners--that we are going to be resolute in 
following a policy that will wind down inflation is about the only way we are going to get back to a 
more stable economy.  So in view of the uncertainties in the projections, both of real magnitudes 
and the aggregates, and because inflation continues to be an unresolved problem that there is no 
visible evidence as yet of it slowing down, I’d lean on the side of a bit more restraint.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, John.  Mark. 



12/19/78  
 

  

14
 

 
 MR. WILLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With regard to inflation, I still see about 8 
percent.  It’s not surprising that we continue to see high numbers.  It just takes a long time to [see 
the effects of policy tightening].  We are going to see high numbers from now until sometime fairly 
far into the next year and, unfortunately, we have to be just a little patient on that.  
 
 With regard to real growth, [I’d say] somewhere between 2 and 3 percent.  The only real 
difference we have with the staff on the outlook is that we still remain substantially more optimistic 
about business spending than the staff does.  A typical comment from businessmen that I’ve talked 
to is that of a worldwide manufacturer in our District who says, “We have gone essentially four 
years without major business spending and we are essentially at full capacity.  We don’t care what 
interest rates are, we’ve got to build the plants.”  We just have a feeling that there is something 
there.  
 
   With regard to the international situation, I think Chuck is right.  The economics of that 
price increase should have redounded to our benefit.  And because that didn’t happen, I think 
Scott’s response is also right that what people are looking at is some assumption as to the policy 
response rather than the economics that are involved.  I guess that is the most worrisome thing.  
They still don’t believe us when we say we are going to stick with it.  They think at the least sign of 
trouble we are going to back off, and I think that’s too bad.  
 
 With regard to policy, I did the same thing that Henry did only on a slightly different issue--
looking at policy moves rather than history on our forecasts of prices and unemployment.  I don’t 
know whether it’s Christmas or what, but I feel as I listen to the Committee that I am rapidly 
turning from a hawk into a dove because I am starting to get nervous about repeating what has been 
a fairly typical mistake for the Committee.  And that is that once it gets religion it goes too far.  As 
anxious as I am to get [the aggregates] down, I want to get them down slowly precisely so we don’t 
precipitate the recession that I think we can avoid if we are careful.  Now having said that, 
intellectually-- 
  
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You have turned soft.  You are only recommending 11 percent! 
 
 MR. WILLES.  I am not willing to jettison the aggregates.  They’re imperfect but they are 
one of the few things that we have some strong analytical and theoretical base for.  I think they are 
just fraught with problems.  Steve mentioned the possibility of a shift in demand.  If that’s going on 
at the same time we have ATS going on, we could badly fool ourselves in looking at low numbers 
and think we are doing something when in fact we haven’t done anything.  So I think that’s a very 
real risk.  And how we hedge that against my previous concern, [which] is just to keep from going 
too far and causing a recession, I’m not sure I know.  In the short run it seems to me that the 
problem is not quite as difficult because we have had such a long period of strong growth.  So if we 
err a little bit on the side of weaker growth for a month or so, I don’t think that’s going to have any 
lasting impact.  And if the international situation tells us that somehow we need to have a little 
further response, I wouldn’t object to that.  But I must say that I personally am getting very close to 
feeling that we need to be really careful so that we don’t go too far too fast and cause a major 
problem. 



12/19/78  
 

  

15
 

 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Bob. 
 
 MR. MAYO.  Well, Mr. Chairman, we just witnessed a new form of “Mark” intervention!  
To capitalize on what John was saying a minute or so ago on the strength of the fourth quarter, I 
would add to consumer restlessness that prices may go up, producer restlessness--and maybe 
consumers, too--with regard to potential strikes and still a potential for mandatory controls, even if 
those mandatory controls take the form of court-enforced voluntary controls, if I may put it that 
way.  We are going through an interesting phase of suits in this day where everybody sues 
everybody, testing what the executive power really is with regard to voluntary controls.  I wish the 
President well on this.  And yet I see success as being closer to the mandatory controls which we 
all abhor.  
 
   When I add all this up, Mr. Chairman, I find that an 8 percent inflation factor for next year 
is unfortunately too low.  I hate to be that much of a pessimist, but I feel that it may be closer to 10. 
I hope feverishly that I’m wrong.  But I see again food doing worse than the 8 percent--worse being 
higher.  And even though the oil figures in the cold light of day are not that much different from 
what had been put down in most of our assumptions, there’s the psychology again.  As Scott has 
said about the Bundesbank, I think we are getting into an emotional state on the inflationary impact 
here, too.  It is a frustrated state rather than a constructive state, and this bothers me as much as 
anything.  
 
 Having said that--and maybe this sounds inconsistent--although I have no real quarrel with 
a 1-1/2 to 2 percent increase in real GNP next year, I think the first quarter may be somewhat 
stronger than the staff predicts.  And it may well be that we will get into a negative growth period 
by the end of the year.  So we may have the worst of both worlds in 1979, in that inflation will not 
have cooled down under the impact of greater unemployment by year-end and some mild recession 
by year-end. But we’ll have both the inflation and the soft economy looking ahead to twelve 
months from today.  
 
 I, therefore, find it even more difficult than usual, as I guess Ernie mentioned as well, to try 
to interpret this for policy.  Yet I think we have no alternative on the psychological side but to 
maintain our resolve in keeping restraint in place even at the chance that we’re going to be accused 
of causing any recession anyway at this point.  I don’t say that in a defeatist attitude, but I think we 
still have to edge [rates] up just a little tighter partly because it’s expected of us in the whole aura 
here of worrying about what to do about inflation.  We are the last bastion in the eyes of a great 
many people and I think it would be a mistake just to hold still right now.  There are risks but I 
think we have to tighten a little further--not dramatically like we did November 1, but a little 
further. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Bob.  Roger.  
 
 MR. GUFFEY.  Mr. Chairman, with respect to our view, it’s not greatly different from the 
staff’s projections.  We would be a bit less optimistic about growth in 1979 and then again about 
the distribution throughout the year.  We think there’s enough strength going into the first quarter 



12/19/78  
 

  

16
 

[to be] fairly strong in ’79.  If we’re somewhat less than the staff, this implies in the latter part of 
’79 that there would be more weakness than the staff implies.  As far as the inflation [projection], 
we are a bit higher--something around 8-1/2 percent as opposed to something less than 8.  And on 
unemployment we’re about the same.  It is not, I think, surprising that we are getting some fairly 
strong growth in the fourth quarter.  As Ernie Baughman and others noted particularly in the 
Southwest--and it’s true in the Tenth District as well--we are at full capacity, not only in terms of 
plant and equipment, but also human resources.  There’s almost no unemployment at all, at least in 
our part of the country.  A very strong fourth quarter and a very strong first quarter of ’79 seem to 
be in train.  
 
 Having said that, and now turning to policy, I would join those who have some real concern 
as to how far we have moved already and how much further we should move--bearing in mind that 
we’ve moved rather dramatically in the last 60 days as far as tightening interest rates.  We do have 
some weak showing in the aggregates, although as some others have said [it’s not clear] what all 
that means.  It’s heartening so long as it doesn’t last too long.  I have a feeling that we’re going to 
see some growth in the early part of 1979--perhaps much greater than the staff is projecting--and 
I’d like to be in a position to act against any really substantial growth in the aggregates early in ’79. 
 That implies, of course, higher rates.  But for the time being, unless there’s a reason dictated by the 
international situation that we need to go up, I would prefer that we stay essentially where we are 
with maybe a modest increase to 10 percent.  But I’d be very hesitant to move [the funds rate] 
above 10 percent unless there’s some dramatic event internationally that requires us to move 
further.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Roger.  Well, we’ll leap across the table to our 
colleague. 
 
 MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, the trend of the economy in our District roughly parallels the 
staff observations.  Loan demand continues to be strong and we don’t see any serious indications of 
excessive inventory accumulation.  As for Christmas retail sales, any information we can get seems 
to indicate they will be fairly strong.  
 
 However, we base our projections of the future, as you know, on an analysis of various 
rates of money growth.  And as surprising as it may be for any of you to hear it coming out of my 
mouth, I would [echo] what I believe Mark said, and that is we should keep a wary eye on the 
possibility of continued and perhaps excessive moderation of growth in the aggregates.  The 
softening of aggregates growth has not prevailed long enough for me to shift gears and suggest that 
we abandon restraint, which certainly is a necessary element in dealing with inflation.  On the other 
hand, if the aggregates continue to grow at a moderate or less than moderate rate through future 
meetings and we tolerate that, we could have serious consequences.  
 
 For example, if there is an 8 percent growth of money over the next year, we think that the 
output growth would be upwards of 3 percent.  If money--this is M1 in the old context--grows at 6 
percent, we would anticipate that real GNP would grow at about 2 percent.  But if we were willing 
to tolerate a reduction in money growth to, let’s say, 4 percent, we think that we’d have almost no 



12/19/78  
 

  

17
 

growth in real GNP.  And we think money growth at that rate over a prolonged period--one quarter 
or two or three quarters--could really precipitate a serious recession. 
 
 My prescription for monetary policy at this meeting would be essentially what alternative A 
or even alternative B provides with perhaps a widening of the fed funds range.  However, I do think 
that we should keep a close eye on whether or not aggregate growth does continue to moderate, 
because I think we could be in as much trouble as a result of an excessive prolonged reduction in 
the rate of growth of money as we are today in terms of the inflation that has resulted from three or 
four years of excessive growth of the aggregates.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Larry.  Bones. 
 
 MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, it’s our judgment that we would prefer to see some slight 
additional firming.  Loan demand continues strong, but we are not observing any real likelihood of 
a crunch.  It seems to me that funds would be available at a price.  And indeed, we aren’t very 
comfortable in feeling that the money growth moderation we have experienced recently will prove 
very lasting.  Productive capacity and help wanted ads lead us to believe very strongly in our area 
that we’re very close to full employment. 
 
 While we would not want to suggest that we feel a recession is inevitable or not inevitable, 
we are alert to the fact that the consumer pull-back could be real and a continuing discussion of this 
as an inevitable event will be [a self-fulfilling prophecy].  We are more impressed at the moment 
by the fact that the nervous reaction and the lack of confidence in our foreign exchange markets 
need some continued attention on our part.  Likewise, the domestic financial markets I think are 
more and more beginning to question our willingness to face the fundamentals of continuing 
mounting inflation.  So, with what would appear to be little assurance that prices and inflation 
expectations are going to improve in the near term, I think we would like to see some additional 
firming but of a very modest amount. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Bones.  Dave. 
 
 MR. EASTBURN.  Well, I would hold steady for this meeting, and I’ll try to give the 
explanation for that position.  It seems to me that until recently there have been two general 
scenarios about the business outlook.  One is the one that’s in the Greenbook, which is a gradual 
steady downward movement without recession.  The second is that that will continue on down 
through the zero point and we will have a recession.  A third one, which I think is gaining more 
currency and which I find more intriguing, is what might be called the "last gasp" scenario.  [In that 
scenario] the economy is now showing strength because it’s in the last phase of expansion.  And it 
will be seeing a fair degree of strength through the rest of this quarter and the first quarter, which 
will lead to higher interest rates than most people are now forecasting--more along the [lines of the] 
Salomon Brothers forecast than the Board’s flow of funds forecast--and then lead to a recession in 
the second half of the year.  I think that is becoming a more and more likely possibility.  
 
 In view of that, we have been re-examining “Poole’s rule,” which you may remember.  Bill 
Poole formulated the [rule] that when you have prolonged and substantial deviations of money 



12/19/78  
 

  

18
 

growth from the trend rate of growth, you will have a recession.  We find that we are not in danger 
of that at this point, but we have a concern that we might be in danger of that [soon].  And we feel 
that we need to be careful about further restraint and unexpected weakness in the money supply. 
 
 So my position on that account would be that we ought to hold steady now and watch and 
see for more evidence with the aggregates.  I would prefer a money market directive in that kind of 
situation and I would widen the funds range.  As far as meeting dates are concerned, I think we can 
either have a shorter [intermeeting] period or have telephone conferences.  I think telephone 
conferences probably could take care of it if necessary. 
 
    CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Dave.  Willis. 
 
 MR. WINN.  Things are rather bizarre in Cleveland.  I hope you won’t think that I am 
following the Cleveland tradition in my comment.  I’d like to take a little different path.  I think we 
are frozen in a pattern of operation that should be reexamined when you think about our focus on 
rates.  If we examine other underlying conditions, we assume that it’s going to take up to 14 to 15 
percent on the [short-term] interest rate to get the braking effect that we want in terms of our 
present tack.  I suspect we could do the same thing with maybe a 1/2 or 3/4 percentage point 
increase on the long-term end of the rate range.  And I think maybe we ought to think that through 
a bit.  
 
 Usually we put our brakes on at the end of a cycle and then end up with over-capacity in a 
number of areas.  Then when we try to stimulate things, we feel equally frustrated on the other side. 
We are faced with looking at problems of commercial and industrial building where we probably 
have a 1-1/2 to 2 year run without going into over-capacity.  Yet that’s very interest-rate sensitive 
to the long-term rate, but 14 to 15 percent on short-term rates is not going to slow that a bit.  And if 
we could effect some slowing down and braking at that end of activity, we might be able to rush 
that very quickly with a change in the rate level because rates are the chief cost factor in a great 
deal of that kind of construction activity.  I wonder if we shouldn’t think a little more clearly on our 
focus of what we are trying to achieve in terms of strength and whether a slight increase of that 
might avoid a very big rise in short-term rates, [which is] what I’m afraid it is going to take to 
accomplish our purpose.  I’m thinking about not only the braking effect, but the stimulating effect 
that may be far more effective at that end than the [short] end where we are focusing most of our 
attention.  
 
 The second comment I’d like to make is that the wage factor, at least in our state, is 
certainly starting to get out of control.  [That’s true of] everything from the state legislature on 
down, [including] the Teamsters and others.  So the wage factor is a very big problem in terms of 
people’s thinking and what they’re [doing].  
 
 The third comment I’d make is that I consider the retailers the soft underbelly of the future. 
 I’m not quite certain as to how that [sector] is going to behave.  We have had sales stimulus from 
the pre-Christmas season but very little price cutting, as I recall.  And whether we will get an after- 
Christmas price cutting and change attitudes or not, I don’t know.  But it seems to me that that’s 
very sensitive to where we go in the future.  



12/19/78  
 

  

19
 

 
 [Let me make] two other incidental comments.  Cleveland doesn’t confine itself to 
Cleveland in terms of its investment interest.  I get all kinds of danger flags pointed to the Southern 
California condominium real estate markets, à la the Florida markets a couple of years ago.  More 
people have been beating my ear on the dangers happening there, which always are pointed at the 
other fellow, I guess. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Any chance of it coming to Washington? 
 
 MR. WINN.  It would be welcome, I’m sure.  The natural gas [situation] that Ernie 
mentioned is not restricted to Texas.  It’s also prevalent in Ohio; excesses are being reported and 
they have no storage space.  It’s partly that the winter weather has been mild in contrast to previous 
winters.  So we do have excess showing in that area.   
 
   I’m concerned that we may be closer to changes in trends than we have been previously, 
and I think this needs to be watched very carefully.  And I share the feeling that maybe seven 
weeks is too long between meetings, with the international and the domestic situations.  My 
personal feeling is that because of the psychological factors and the focus on us and the strength 
that I agree is prevalent throughout [the economy, it] requires further attention on our part.  So I 
would feel that perhaps a little more modest braking would be appropriate but I’d like for us to 
consider the long-term end rather than the short-term end.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Willis.  Bob. 
 
 MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, we were a bit surprised by the strength in the fourth quarter.  
I don’t think it has really altered our overall picture of next year except to push a little further in the 
future the weakness we thought might occur somewhere around the second or third quarter.  As far 
as the year as a whole is concerned, we still hold our early forecast of the rate of growth in real 
GNP of 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 percent.  We are still less optimistic than the staff regarding inflation and we 
put that somewhere in the neighborhood of 8 to 9 percent.  We would also come out ahead in our 
own [forecast] on the unemployment rate at the end of the year, putting it at about 6.5 and maybe a 
little bit higher than that.  
 
 Now, for the approach to the policy decision, we follow this procedure that we have been 
using for some time that I described in that memo we distributed to you.  In using this, we 
recognize that there has been a lot of weakness or slowdown in the growth of the aggregates 
recently, which is very encouraging.  But I think we have to bear in mind that these are low partly 
because of the effects of ATS.  They also may be low for the reason Steve stated--that there may be 
a downward shift in the demand for money relative to GNP.  And we also have to bear in mind that 
they are built upon this very rapid rate of growth in M1 early in the year.  
 
 So with these points in mind, we continue to think that our main objective should be to try 
to bring down the long-term rate of growth in M1 somewhat gradually.  We described the strategy 
that we’ve been following in that memorandum of mine.  This calls for a rate of growth in the year 
ending the third quarter of last year of 8 percent and in the fourth quarter of this year of 7.5 percent, 



12/19/78  
 

  

20
 

which incidentally looks like exactly what we’ll get.  The implied deceleration reflected the 
relatively slower [unintelligible].  Let me move on to the first quarter.  We had suggested that it 
come out at 7 percent and we think looking back to the first quarter of last year maybe that’s too 
much deceleration, so we raised that to 7-1/4 percent. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  But year-over-year, Bob? 
 
 MR. BLACK.  Yes, year-over-year. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.   The first quarter of ’78 to the first quarter of ’79. 
 
    MR. BLACK.  That’s right.  To take care of it, we raised this from the 7 percent we had to 
7-1/4 percent.  But even with this adjustment, we have a path of the implied growth rate in 
December-January of 4-1/2 percent.  Against this background, the rates of growth that are the 
trigger points in the Bluebook are too high for us.  Alternative A calls for 7-1/2 under a money 
market directive and alternative B calls for 7 percent.  And if you put back in the effect of ATS, 
that means that we’re willing to accept double-digit rates of growth on an old basis before we 
actually act.  So translating that into measurements that we would use, we would favor an 
aggregates directive and we would put the range for growth of M1 at 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.  We 
would really rather not specify at this juncture a rate of growth in M1+ and M2 because at this 
stage of the cycle typically we have a slowing in these, and I think it could lull us into a sense of 
safety and prevent our reacting in case we do get an excessive rate of growth in M1.  Turning to the 
fed funds rate, we would [prefer] 9-7/8 to 10-1/2 with a highly asymmetrical midpoint of 9-7/8.  It 
is a little further on the midpoint than anyone else has suggested. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  I think that’s as asymmetrical as you can get. 
 
 MR. BLACK. It’s quite asymmetrical.  But seriously, we don’t foresee any circumstances 
that would suggest we ought to lower the rate below that, particularly in view of [the current] 
situation and the recent OPEC price action.  But we do want leeway to move that rate up in case the 
M1 does go beyond 4-1/2 percent.  Now, we really don’t expect this.  Our guess is that we could sit 
right where we are and the aggregates will come in at this lower rate.  So we would anticipate 
remaining about where we are, but we’d like to move in case we are wrong in that.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Bob.  Nancy. 
 
 MS. TEETERS.  My view of the economy is that it’s remarkably well balanced, 
considering the stage of the cycle that we are in.  And, as you well know, I still feel very strongly 
that we should sit still and see what we are doing.  There are very conflicting numbers--a lot of 
inconsistencies in the data that we have.  I would strongly recommend that we stay where we are.  I 
think we’ve gone far enough.  We’ve moved dramatically in the past 60 days and we have very 
conflicting information coming out of the market.  And I see no reason to tighten further.  I find 
myself saying that I’m really quite gratified that the monetarists are being consistent at this point.  
If they really looked at the money supply-- 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

21
 

 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Did you ever doubt?  They’re all on this side of the table.    
 
 MS. TEETERS.  So my strong recommendation is that we stay where we are.  We might 
widen the range on the fed funds.  However, if you observe the actual numbers on the fed funds 
rate, they’ve been right at the top every time.  You know, if you give them the range, then the rate 
goes to the top of the range rather than the midpoint.  We didn’t give much of a range this time but 
the rate has still been at the top of it.  The weekly average has been around 9.8 percent. 
 
 MR. HOLMES.  The midpoint is 9-7/8, which is 9.875. 
 
    MS. TEETERS.  And I would go for a market directive. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  All right, thanks, Nancy.  Chuck. 
 
   MS. TEETERS.  Wait, I’m not finished.  I agree with Chuck that Switzerland, Germany, 
and Japan should have taken an action [unintelligible] in the value.  There’s another inconsistency 
out there, and that is this downward pressure on the short-term value of the dollar.  However, the 
foreigners are coming in here and buying everything they can put their hands on, which means that 
their long-range evaluation of our economy has to be very different from the short-term evaluation 
of the economy.  It seems to me there is something also inconsistent in the international situation, 
just as there is an inconsistency in the domestic situation.  I’m done.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Now, Chuck.   
 
 MR. PARTEE.  They could be two different entities doing these two different things.  Well, 
I was going to emphasize just briefly without a long-run go-around the very strong nature of the 
conflicting signals we are getting on the economy.  We have an assumption, if you believe the 
figures, that not just durable goods but nondurables too are very strong.  Attitudes are weakening 
quickly and we have the P&E surveys [indicating] a future weakening.  But durable goods orders 
and indications of capital spending--and the kind of thing Ernie mentioned on the cost and volume 
of nonresidential building and that the Chicago economist reported--suggest great strengthening in 
the capital goods area.  And we have employment and the nominal GNP going up like mad.  And 
the money numbers are very weak; it’s not just M1 but M2 also.  In the last couple of months they 
have been weak, and M2 shouldn’t have been affected adversely by ATS.  Indeed, if anything, it 
should have been positive because of possible shifts from thrifts into the banking sector.  
 
 So the pattern that I see is that the real numbers we have are strong and numbers that might 
indicate the future are weak.  And I don’t know what to do with it.  It could be a last gasp, as Dave 
suggests.  On the other hand, it could be a new boom, as Henry seems to suggest.  Certainly, 
Henry’s view of the process--that is, that heavy final sales could bring inventory demand, which 
could bring output, which could bring capital spending--is the way that the economy operates.  
That could easily be the case, and we might be at the beginning of a totally undesired boom in the 
economy.  I just don’t know which it is.  I’m more inclined-- 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But you’re going to have to vote.   



12/19/78  
 

  

22
 

 
 MR. PARTEE.  I have a position I’m going to take which allows me not to do that.  I would 
say this:  The trouble is that we are up against capacity constraints and this has been very bad news 
to have this last burst because it means we have no room on the up side.  We can’t make an error on 
the up side.  If we do, we will greatly aggravate what I believe is now becoming a horrible inflation 
outlook.  I don’t think anything could have been worse than the announcement effects of the OPEC 
price increase.  On the radio and the television around town in the last couple of days they’ve been 
pointing out that that increase is double the wage guideline that the President specified.  Now, what 
does that lead [people] to believe?  [I’d say they’d feel] that they can’t settle for that wage 
guideline.  And I think that kind of effect is going to rapidly spread.  It’s not just the real effects of 
the price increases; the announcement effect of the price increase is just terrible.   
 
    I have no idea where inflation might go in the period to come.  I do think that if we are 
going to have continued strength in the economy along the lines I’ve seen recently--and if we are 
going to have rapid price escalation, which is possible--then it’s got to show up in the monetary 
numbers.  On the other hand, if we are going to have weakness in the economy developing, it’s 
going to have to continue to show as weak monetary numbers.  
 
 Therefore, I’m strongly, strongly, directed toward looking at monetary aggregates, [weak 
though] they may be, because I think it’s the only decent kind of steering mechanism we have in 
this kind of environment.  I would say that we ought to be guided by the monetary aggregates.  If 
they do explode--and they could well explode in January and February, Bob, because I think every 
past experience we have had would suggest that, unless this is the turn, we are going to get another 
mark-up in those monetary aggregates--we’ll see it and react against it by raising interest rates.  
And if they don’t explode--if they weaken further--we will see that and we can react by reducing 
interest rates.  So, I think now is the time for the Committee to show some flexibility in interest 
rates on the basis of what it sees developing in the aggregates, and that would be what I would 
recommend.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.   Thank you, Chuck.  Paul. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, like everybody else, I see a little more momentum 
in the economy than we anticipated.  And I would anticipate that that would continue a while into 
the new year.  [So I see] not much short-term danger, though I do continue to think that there’s a 
substantial risk of an actual downturn in the latter half of 1979, let’s say.  But the question is where 
that risk comes from.  How we can best minimize it?  I think the risk of aggravating that chance by 
tight money is very small.  The decline in the money supply that I see looks very temporary to me 
[based on] all historical experience--a temporary aberration when the economy is expanding as fast 
as it is.  I suspect it will show up in large part as a bad seasonal adjustment factor when we get all 
finished with it.  
 
 So, I’d want a lot more evidence before that figure frightens me into any easing of interest 
rates against the background of a persistently high rate of growth in the money supply.  I think a 
much greater risk for the economy is a perpetuation of what we saw before November 1--the falling 
away of confidence reflected in the feeling that there was no grip on inflation or on the exchange 



12/19/78  
 

  

23
 

rate.  I think that is the kind of event that could not only maximize the chance of a recession but 
maximize the severity of a recession if and when it appears.  And we have the very evident fact, 
which many people have commented on, that inflation is getting worse and not better.  
 
 When one looks at those risks, I don’t think we have any choice.  I don’t think we can 
afford to sit here passively at this time.  I think we are maximizing the risks of both inflation and 
recession--and severe recession--if we aren’t alert to moving in a somewhat more restrictive 
direction.  I think, as other people have suggested, that we ought to be ready to move quickly if the 
aggregates begin moving up again, but I think we also have to move if the exchange markets 
suggest that necessity.  I do not think we can hold this exchange market by intervention alone.  I 
think that’s purely a fatuous view of our abilities in these circumstances.  
 
   When I look at this, I don’t know whether we absolutely have to move immediately.  But 
given the impact of the oil price and the effect that has on confidence, I would think a little 
prophylactic move might be wise, in terms of moving before the exchange market gets any worse 
than it has gotten in a very mild way.  I’d be guided from there on with an eye both on the 
aggregates getting too high or the exchange markets coming under pressure.  And under no 
circumstances would I give any sense of easing or backing away from what we have already 
accomplished.  I think that’s the worst possible action we could take at this point, regardless of 
what happens to the aggregates in the course of the next month. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for two hours of attention.  
This go-around has indicated about as much unanimity as I’ve ever seen--namely, confusion.  But 
one interesting point I noticed is that I don’t believe anyone actually suggested easing.  The 
discussions were around standing pat or firming or being prepared to let the results of the 
aggregates direct us in the coming weeks.  I suggest that we take our break now and perhaps we 
can pick this up again with some suggestions when we come back.  Let’s break until ten past [the 
hour]. 
 
              [Coffee break] 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, ladies and gentlemen, we can reconvene.  I did not indicate 
my own position.  I might say, as I said to some during the break, that the meeting this morning has 
a certain Biblical quality in that it seems to me the first shall be last and the last shall be first.  As I 
read the discussion--which proves that we [must] have logic here--it seems to me that in the nine 
months I’ve been here, as you look over the difficulties from month to month [and] look overall at 
the objectives, there has been a definite and I think unanimous policy objective of slowing the 
economy and doing so while maintaining balance and doing so on a smooth basis without undue 
shocks.  We’ve now seen the aggregates begin to move down.  That’s encouraging but the 
economy itself has surprised all of us, I think, with its strength in the fourth quarter; it should have 
continued the slowing process that had been evident in the third quarter. 
 
 To be consistent with our policies, it seems to me that what is indicated is a slight degree of 
additional restraint with, I hope, some greater flexibility to act in the interim based on the facts--
what happens in the economy and what happens to the aggregates in particular.  And [we ought] to 



12/19/78  
 

  

24
 

be prepared to continue the process we’ve been at until we find that point where there is a smooth 
and gradual turndown in the economy without major disruptions.  
 
 It also seems to me from the sentiment expressed here that we might plan an interim 
consultation; I might suggest that we plan an interim consultation on January 16 by telephone, 
recognizing that seven weeks is too long and that a full-blown meeting a few weeks from now will 
probably [not be warranted].  We won’t have any new data of any significance because of the 
nature of this time period, [but I suggest] that we make an agreement to consult again--not wait to 
see events but plan it so that we’ll be in touch with everyone and make sure that there are no 
indications of new directions. 
 
   Now with that in mind, I’ll ask Steve to outline a proposal for your consideration--again, a 
little different procedure this time.  If we could put before you a proposal and then ask the voting 
members of the Committee to indicate as we go down the list whether this is acceptable to them or 
whether any parts are not acceptable--and if so what they are--I think we could focus on a 
consensus more rapidly.  Steve, will you please give your inputs? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a brief introduction, I would say that the 
data we are getting on automatic transfer seem to be giving us a reasonable handle on evaluating it 
and we are going to be continuing with that data [collection] through January.  Therefore, I think 
it’s possible to move back toward giving M1 more equal weight than has been given to it in recent 
months, particularly in light of its weakness.  I would suggest returning to the period when M1 and 
M2 were given just about equal weight.  I would suggest a range, Mr. Chairman, for M1 of 2 to 6 
percent--that is taking 1 percentage point off of the top of the alternative B range.  And for M2 I’d 
suggest a range of 5 to 9 percent, which takes 1/2 point off of the top and bottom, or a range of 
5-1/2 to 9 percent.  One is not far superior to the other.  
 
 On the interpretation of M1, if it does happen that our ATS data are showing instead of the 
2-1/2 to 3 percentage point shift that we have built into this--if the shift happens to be 5 or 6 
percentage points or vice versa, of course, [if it is less than we assumed]--we would bring that 
promptly to your attention to indicate that the range was out of kilter.  I would suggest for the 
Committee’s consideration the fed funds rate range of alternative B but it might be desirable to 
interpret that as moving rather immediately to 10 percent and letting the rest of the adjustments 
within that range depend on developments with regard to the aggregates.  
 
 With regard to those developments, I would suggest the possibility of interpreting the 
aggregate ranges somewhat asymmetrically--that is, that the Manager be more sensitive to 
movement of the aggregates toward the tops of their ranges.  That is, be more willing to tighten the 
funds rate as the aggregates move toward the tops of the ranges and less willing, or less inclination 
to move promptly in easing as the aggregates move toward the bottoms of the ranges.  This would 
be just a suggested interpretation.  All of that could be accomplished with either a monetary 
aggregates or a money [market] directive, but I think more consistent with past Committee practice 
would be a monetary aggregates [directive]. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

25
 

 MR. ROOS.  If you have an M1 range of 2 to 6 percent during this next period, what do 
you factor in as being the M1+ addition that you put in? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Well, I would suggest that that would be probably at the bottom of where 
it is--maybe 0 to 4 or 1/2 to 4. 
 
 MR. ROOS.  I mean the growth rate of M1+ in, let’s say, the next 4 to 5 weeks.  What does 
it look as though that’s going to be? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Well, we have under alternative B a growth rate of a little over 2 percent 
for the December-January period.  I think consistent with the suggested M1 and M2 ranges would 
be a growth rate just a shade under that.  So I would say 1/2 to 4 percent or 0 to 4 percent. 
 
    MR. MAYO.  Is there a reason, Steve, that you’d stick to a range for M1 and M2 rather 
than just putting a cap on each of them? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  For M1 I think the weakness of the last couple of months makes it 
desirable to begin to give some credence to continued weakness.  Thus I think it’s probably 
important to not only have a cap on the upper limit but to have a lower point where you may want 
some response--although I suggest that the response would be not prompt but delayed.  You’d have 
to get right down to [the lower limit] to respond.  That’s the reason for having a range instead of 
simply a cap.  I also think now we are beginning to get a handle on experience with ATS and can 
interpret it better for you.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Does everyone understand the proposal? 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  He didn’t give a funds rate range. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes he did, 9-3/4 to 10-1/2. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  With a move to 10. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  An immediate move to 10 is a suggestion.  Does everybody 
understand this? 
 
 MR. EASTBURN.  Could I ask a question about that funds rate range?  Steve, would you 
contemplate a reduction to 9-3/4 percent?  Does the bottom of that range really mean anything? 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  Well, I was suggesting that possibility if M1 and M2 came in at the 
bottom of their ranges, literally, down to 2 percent [for M1] or 5 percent in the case of M2, giving 
some weight to both.  That is, if it was down on M1 but up on M2, no. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You have a money market [directive] on the down side and an 
aggregates on the up side. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

26
 

 MR. AXILROD.  That’s right.  That’s what I was, in effect, suggesting. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You have to get to the bottom limits to reduce [the funds rate] but 
on the tightening you can do it on the way up.  It’s a new Federal Reserve invention. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  That’s why I didn’t know whether it was an aggregate or a money  
market--  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It’s a hybrid directive.  Yes, Mark? 
 
 MR. WILLES.  Can I just make sure I understand the arithmetic?  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, please.  I want everybody to understand it before we 
comment on it.  That’s one of the rules--that we understand before we play. 
 
    MR. WILLES.  The forecast for December is 2 percent and if you had 3 percent ATS that 
would be 5 percent for December.  If you had your proposed 6 percent cap on M1 for the two 
months, that would allow 10 percent growth in January--or if you add another 3 percent for ATS, 
13 percent in January. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  It would say that at that rate of growth the Manager would be at the top 
of the funds rate range.  Since I don’t know that you could affect that [M1 growth] in that month, to 
"allow" is a funny word.  
 
 MR. WILLES.  You would move [the funds rate] before you get to the top, with an 
aggregates type directive. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  I would assume that with this directive and those specs the Manager 
would be at the top of the funds rate range at that point.   
 
 MR. PARTEE.  And, Mark, might I point out that December’s not in the bag.  I think the 
biggest weeks are still to come.  Historically, you know, major movements occur right before 
Christmas and right after Christmas--the window-dressing.  We have less than the normal amount 
of confidence in our forecast for December than for other months at this time of the month.   
  
 MR. WILLES.  I’m not trying to delay the issue; I’m trying to understand. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  With those facts, if it worked out that way, I would assume that the 
Manager would be at the top of the funds range. 
 
 MR. WILLES.  So that, theoretically, you could get about 8-1/2 percent for the two months 
if you add ATS back in.  But that would be with the funds rate moving up potentially as high as 
10-1/2. 
 
 MR. AXILROD.  That would be my understanding. 



12/19/78  
 

  

27
 

 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Any other questions about the substance of the proposal?  Then let 
me just ask how the members react to that.  Paul. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, these are my feelings.  I’m nervous about any 
decline here, as I said.  But with the asymmetrical aspect, I guess I could live with it.  I would 
prefer having the lower parts of the ranges even lower.  But I can live with it. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay.  Ernie. 
 
 MR. BAUGHMAN.  I can live with it. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I would prefer [on M1] a 1 to 6 range and the 4 to 8 
range on M2.  I’m willing to buy the fed funds rate but I’d like to throw in for Committee 
consideration a slight amendment to it.  I’d agree to the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 range and the move to 10 
but I’d like to see a little device we have [used]--not recently but a year or so ago--called a zone of 
indifference to permit the Desk to play it in the 10 to 10-1/8 range without kicking back much.  
This I think provides a little more flexibility for the Manager and at the same time it does give a 
picture of slightly greater restraint in the initial move.  The 10 to 10-1/8 would be a kind of zone of 
indifference in which the Manager could play. 
 
   MR. PARTEE.  What he does is he hits 10 and then errs on the side of tightness. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Right, and he hits 10-1/8 and he errs on the side of ease.  It allows a 
little more flexibility than this business of naming a single rate.  I think we have been caught on 
that too much.  It also provides a little bit of lack of knowledge to the market; maybe they won’t 
nail it quite so tight.  I guess with those changes, I’d be willing to [go] with it. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Sounds like you don’t buy it. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  All right, I don’t buy it if that’s the way you want to interpret this.  I 
was trying to see areas in which I could move and still-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, but you have substantial differences on the ranges of the 
aggregates, as I understood you.   
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Well, 1 percentage point on one end of M1, and 1 point on each end of 
M2. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you.  Dave. 
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  As I indicated earlier, my preference would be for alternative A straight 
through, but I think that the proposal is acceptable.  I do have a concern, as I indicated to Steve in 
my question, about a reduction in the funds rate given the international situation.  And I’d like to 
suggest that if that appears to be imminent we have a consultation on that. 



12/19/78  
 

  

28
 

 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay.  Chuck. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, I find your proposal acceptable.  I would say that I’m becoming 
increasingly concerned that we do not find ourselves in a lock as we begin to move into a period of 
weakness.  I think this tends to do that because we don’t really allow for any downward movement 
in the funds rate.  That’s all right with me because of the international situation but I would like it 
understood that if these aggregates are really weak--or if other things develop in the economy that 
look very unsettling--we can reconsider.  I say that because I think we are going to have to start to 
consider the possibility of actually reducing interest rates in the economy.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay.  Nancy. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  I find it unacceptable.  I think it’s absolutely the wrong time to take 
another increase in the tightening of credit.  What it will bring about is an increase in the prime 
rate. I’m sure you are going to go to 10-1/2 percent within ten days on this thing.  And that’s going 
to get all the hawks sending the prime rates to 13 and 14 percent.  It’s just sort of verifying their 
action.  I would recommend staying with the scenario of “A.” 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay.  Henry. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  I think we have to focus more on the funds rate than on the aggregates.  I 
think it’s a delusion that we are steering the aggregates by means of the funds rate.  The funds rate 
now has a special function, namely to regulate the dollar situation.  So I don’t think we should have 
any decline in the funds rate.  I think we should consult if the aggregates point downwards, as has 
been suggested.  That’s a wise precaution.  I would give the funds rate a wide range in terms of the 
aggregates: M1, 0 to 6, and M2, 4-1/2 to 8-1/2.  On the funds rate itself, I’d say 10 to 10-1/2 and go 
to 10-1/4. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay.  Mark is next. 
 
  MR. WILLES.  I would like first to make a commercial, Mr. Chairman, and disavow that I 
am a monetarist.  We hold a balanced portfolio in Minneapolis.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  He’s like an Episcopalian not being a Catholic. 
 
  MR. WILLES.  Someday when we have more time we will explain the substantive 
differences between the monetarist and what’s even worse, I might say, and that’s a rational 
expectations-ist.  But that’s another story. 
 
 I can live with the specifications that Steve gave, on the assumption that we really don’t 
envision any circumstances where we’ll let the fed funds rate drop this time and we’ve built in a 
mechanism where if the aggregates do become strong we’ll move the rate up.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you, Mark.  Willis. 



12/19/78  
 

  

29
 

 
  MR. WINN.  I can accept the suggestion made by Steve.  I think I would prefer dropping 
the ranges to 0 to 6 on M1, 4 to 8 on the M2, and 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 [on the funds rate]. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But you would accept the specifications?  Well, I would certainly 
agree that we could go with this proposal at this time.  I would think that the idea of erring on the 
up side of 10 with a little flexibility makes a little sense.  I think the Desk could see the advantage 
of not letting it drop below 10 again and, therefore, err a little on the positive side.  It seems that 
there are 2, 4, 6, 7 members who would be agreeable as specified.  I don’t know if the others would 
feel, despite slightly different preferences, that they also could go with this with the one 
modification.  Why don’t we run down a vote and see? 
 
  MR. BAUGHMAN.  I understood a semi-commitment to the suggestion--I believe it was 
Dave’s suggestion or someone’s--that we not let the funds rate drop.  And I thought the inference 
there was below 9-7/8.  Your comment I construe as indicating the inclination to not let it drop 
[below] 10.  Could we get some clarification on that? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, no.  Unless a change in the aggregates indicated a shift, if 
we’re moving to 10 now, that 10 would be operated erring above 10.  But changes would move 
from that point in either direction.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  But I think the answer is yes, that we’ve got to have pretty weak aggregates 
to drop below the 10. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We would consult.  We are going to consult on the 16th of 
January in any case, but we would consult in the meantime. 
 
        MS. TEETERS.  Mr. Chairman, what does this move do to the economic forecast? 
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  Well, in terms of 10 percent, that’s really only 12-1/2 basis points, and I 
think the answer is really nothing.  If we begin talking about going to 10-1/2, that’s really quite 
different; we’d be talking about a weaker economy, particularly in the second half of 1979.  
 
  MS. TEETERS.  How much weaker? 
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  Jack, do you remember?  I think you’re talking, I don’t know, about 1/4 
or 1/2 percentage point.  We are already taking a couple of tenths off because of the OPEC effect in 
the second half.  So you’re talking about an economy that in our view would be less than 1 percent 
real growth. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  And what do you think the probability of two quarters of negative growth 
would be if we went to 10-1/2? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  One [in] three. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

30
 

  MR. AXILROD.  Governor Teeters, I think one factor you’d want to consider in this is how 
permanent that 10-1/2 is.  It’s a question of whether or not Jim is talking on the assumption that it 
goes to 10-1/2 and stays there.  It would be a somewhat different outlook, I’m sure, if it went to 
10-1/2 and came back down in a few weeks. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Well, I haven’t seen anything come back down since I’ve been here. 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  I’m just adding that as a point. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Look at the roller coaster, what I call Mount Everest.  It came 
back down.  
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Even the economy hasn’t gone down. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  One of the problems is that growth was supposed to be about 
3-1/2 percent in the fourth quarter and it’s over 4 percent.  That’s one of the problems, 
unfortunately.  Well, let’s run down your check list.  I will vote for that proposal.  
 
      MR. ALTMANN. 
        Vice Chairman Volcker   Yes 
        President Baughman    Yes 
        Governor Coldwell     Yes 
        President Eastburn     Yes 
        Governor Partee      Yes 
        Governor Teeters      No 
        Governor Wallich      No 
        President Willes      Yes 
        President Winn        Yes 
  
        The vote is 8 to 2. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Thank you very much.  We completed that action at 11:40; we are 
doing very well.  I don’t know if you liked that procedure or not but I think that we got all the 
comments.  Perhaps you can give me privately your evaluation of whether that’s going to be a 
better way to do it or not.   
 
  We now need to move to a few other important matters.  Item 8 is the consideration of the 
Manager’s recommendation with respect to foreign currency operations.  Alan Holmes. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, my recommendations will fall in three categories: routine 
swap rollovers, the System open position, and the System’s warehousing facility for the Treasury.  
The System has seven D-mark drawings totaling $451 million equivalent and six Swiss franc 
drawings totaling $114 million maturing between December 30 and January 26.  All are first 
renewals and I recommend that they be rolled over at maturity should we not be able to pay them 
off.  Now, if the January meeting is cancelled, then we would need approval at this time, I think, of 



12/19/78  
 

  

31
 

the rollover of an additional $2.04 billion D-mark swaps, $350-odd million Swiss franc swaps, and 
$85 million Japanese yen swaps, which mature by mid-February.  Those approvals would normally 
be done at the regular January meeting. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  We’d have a February meeting before February 15, wouldn’t we? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, we have one on the 6th.  
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Typically, we have asked for renewals covering a period after the next 
Committee meeting.  It gives us a little opportunity to work out repayments ahead of time.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But Chuck was pointing out that some of those come due after our 
next meeting. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  That’s right, but typically we ask for renewals of [any swaps maturing] a 
week to 10 days after the next Committee meeting.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  There’s very little [likelihood] that we are going to pay off--what was it--
over $2 billion? 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Two billion, 40 million.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  The answer is that we have to roll them over.  The authorization 
would be to roll them over in the absence of acquiring the currencies with which to repay. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  That’s right. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  May we have your approval for that proposal?  Hearing no 
dissent, it is so ordered.  You have other proposals?  
 
     MR. HOLMES. Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Our heavy intervention in the exchange market 
brought our open position to within less than $200 million of the $5 billion authorized by the 
Committee last Thursday.  An intermeeting rise in that limit would have required publication this 
Friday, and given the speculation both in the market and in the press about U.S. use of its foreign 
exchange availability, it seemed desirable to avoid the possible announcement effect.  In these 
circumstances, the Treasury agreed with the Chairman’s suggestion that they provide from their 
own account any marks needed for intervention Friday until this Committee meeting, until the 
Committee had a chance to consider the question.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  So this was a period of 100 percent funding by the Treasury 
which, as you know, is unusual and it should be noted. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  For two days. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  For two days. 



12/19/78  
 

  

32
 

 
  MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, I think a good case can be made for suspending the overall 
open limit authorization.  Such action would underscore the System’s commitment to the 
November 1 program and particularly avoid the need for an intermeeting change in the 
authorization that might [cause] a market misreading because early release of that information 
would be required.  I’d prefer this course of action.  But I think the same objectives can be achieved 
by a sufficiently large increase in the open limit.  An $8 billion open limit would permit the full use 
of our D-mark swap line--we only have $2 billion left in that line--and also allow for an additional 
$1 billion for intervention in Swiss francs and in yen.  That seems to me to be reasonably 
acceptable, although I’d prefer a suspension [of the limit]. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, this is a point on which we don’t have strong feelings.  I 
might say that we’ve been somewhat concerned about a series of [announced] actions that would 
allow foreign currency traders to track what our intervention has been.  Therefore, one of the 
reasons for a larger open position than we normally would like for control purposes has been to 
give us flexibility to maintain confidentiality on the degree and the extent of our intervention.  So 
for the same reason, we could go one of the two ways.  Recognizing that the limits of the swap 
agreements themselves provide the outside limit, we could just have no specified limit.  We 
recognize that the Desk is in very close consultation with the Subcommittee, which is really 
tracking this carefully.  Or we could do as Alan suggests and put in some limit that gives us leeway 
of about $3 billion until the next meeting.  Now, we really have no strong feelings.  If there’s any 
preference on the Committee, we could go either direction.  Henry. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  Well, either way is possible.  I think naming a number like $8 billion tips 
off the market in an undesirable way.  However, suspending the limit entirely, even though we 
certainly would maintain very close consultation, I think is not ideal in principle.  So I’d look for an 
alternative way.  We could suspend the [limits on] intermeeting changes, which now are $100 
million on the overall open position in any one day and $300 million for the intermeeting period.  
We could suspend that in particular for the intermeeting period, bearing in mind that every dollar 
number here is multiplied by two because we’re now going 50-50 with the Treasury.  And we 
would not, as I understand it--subject to being better informed--have to publish any of what we do 
in this area because it comes under the procedural instructions, which we don’t publish, [whereas] 
any [change] in the authorization does have to be made public.  Furthermore, even if it were to be 
published, the intermeeting limit wouldn’t tip off the market; it wouldn’t tell the market [anything 
about] the accumulated magnitude of past or future operations.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But we would still have to suspend the aggregate limit. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  No, you can’t do that. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, they are different things. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  You’d have to give [the Desk] room on the aggregates. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We either have to give a specific number or a suspension. 



12/19/78  
 

  

33
 

 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Are you suggesting that you can take the aggregate limit 
and put it under the procedural instructions? 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  The aggregate limit would disappear under this proposal.  You would not 
be without some control.   
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s not [a good idea] to eliminate the [limit on 
the] aggregate open position.  (A) I don’t think it’s desirable from a public relations standpoint; and 
(B) I don’t think it’s desirable from the Committee’s standpoint. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I happen to have a preference along with Governor 
Coldwell on this.  This is the basic limit and I think the Committee probably ought to have one.  I 
would swallow the public relations disadvantage and make sure it’s big enough, but I could go 
either way in the end.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  As I say, there’s no strong feeling.  If there’s any sentiment for 
setting an $8 billion limit--the previous one was $5 billion--we’ll move it to $8 billion.  That would 
be perfectly fine.  It will be disclosed; whether that will create any concern or not, I don’t know.  It 
shouldn’t.  It would indicate to people we’ve gone over $5 billion.  Any sentiment? 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I favor the $8 billion. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think I have some preference for a limit, but I think we [unintelligible] 
and if it turns out-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Why don’t we then consider the proposal to move the limit to $8 
billion?  Are there any comments or dissents?  Hearing none, we will approve that.  Oh, 
incidentally, I should say because Henry said it, but I’m not sure it was disclosed properly and 
perhaps you are [not aware], our relations with Treasury from here on are going to be on a 50-50 
basis.  We have arranged that with them.  Now they have resources.  Alan, you have further 
recommendations?  
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, I’d also like to recommend that the authorization to 
warehouse foreign exchange for the Treasury be raised from $1-3/4 billion, which the Committee 
approved last week, to $3-1/2 billion.  That increase in the authorization last week accommodated 
the successful sale of $1.6 billion Treasury D-mark bonds last week.  The Treasury plans to 
proceed with the Swiss franc offering in January and is considering a second D-mark offering and a 
Japanese yen offering early next year.  It would seem prudent, at least for the time being, for the 
Treasury to retain maximum flexibility by keeping the foreign exchange proceeds of these bond 
sales available for us for intervention if it’s needed.  Warehousing accommodates that need for 
flexibility without involving the Federal Reserve in any exchange risk.  Warehousing does have an 
impact on reserves in the banking system, but since that impact is known in advance, it can be 
offset by domestic open market operations whenever necessary.  It’s just another reserve factor.  
 



12/19/78  
 

  

34
 

  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It reverses out when we use the D-mark for intervention.  
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Yes. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  So moved. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Any other discussion? 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Is $3-1/2 billion enough? 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  I think so for this stage.  We have to do some rethinking with the Treasury 
over the next few months. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We’d probably have to raise it if they go to the market again in 
February. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  This will take them through several months. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Well, we have $1.6 billion already and what’s the Swiss franc sale--$1.2 
billion? 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  It’s not finally decided, but about that level.  We probably would need 
another increase.  We could go to $5 billion now.  That would be one way of handling the second 
D-mark [offering].  We could do that now if the Committee so desires. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Either way. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  This has the effect of transferring income from us to the Treasury, doesn’t 
it?  But it’s income that we would be transferring anyway. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  It all comes out of the same pot before we get through.    
 
  MR. PARTEE.  If it were $5 billion, you’re talking about maybe 4 percent or so, so that’s 
$200 million in income. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  We would lose because we would hold lower-yielding-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Which we don’t have and we transfer to them so they take it 
directly.  It’s the same difference. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The magnitude would be approximately-- 
 
 SPEAKER(?).  Debt management. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Very much so.  Henry. 



12/19/78  
 

  

35
 

 
  MR. WALLICH.  I hope this doesn’t sound too esoteric.  We are making a very 
fundamental decision here.  We’re getting to be like every other country that has foreign exchange 
reserves.  In the past, we only had gold and SDR.  Here we have foreign exchange reserves and we 
are now making a decision on how to finance these reserves.  For all countries this is a very 
important decision.  It tends to affect their money supply--their domestic monetary management.  
So we should be well aware of what it is we are doing.  The reserves belong to the Treasury.  This 
is one very important decision, which I guess is set by law in our country, although not necessarily. 
 The Treasury owns the gold and the SDR, but we could own the exchange reserves; it makes a 
great deal of difference in a country who does [own them] because the balance of power between 
the central bank and Treasury is influenced thereby.  We seem to be in the present framework the 
financier of the balance.  We supply the money, we face the money market consequences, which 
seem easy so long as all we have to do is offset a few billion by open market sales that we give to 
the Treasury, and we compensate that by selling our own securities to the market.  But some day it 
could be different.  It could be large relative to our portfolio.  So I think we ought to first think 
about what it is we are doing on a structural basis.   
 
  Second, until we’ve arrived at a better understanding, I would argue for a small increase in 
the warehousing limit.  It gives us time to think; it gives us time to talk to the Treasury again about 
this.  If there should ever be a problem, the limit would tend to give us a chance to review the 
situation. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I have been going on the assumption that at this stage of 
discussion this Committee did not want to buy that foreign currency position and own it for its own 
account and for its own risk.  I may have misread that; some day that might be a decision we’d like 
to take.  At the moment I think if we did that, we’d be accused of moving the potential foreign 
currency exchange risk outside of the budgetary process, where it now resides with the Treasury.  
See, we are taking up foreign exchange; if there is a loss here, it will be a Treasury loss in their 
accounting under the appropriations procedure.  So I’ve assumed that.  I’m not saying it wouldn’t 
be good policy for this nation for us to own those reserves.  But I think we want to do a lot of 
homework and a lot of preparation before we make that decision because it has some political 
repercussions. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  You’re not speaking about owning foreign exchange, I think, Henry, but 
rather of developing a position where one of our assets is an exchange rate guaranteed, non-U.S. 
security.  That [involves] proportionately fewer U.S. securities in our portfolio and that might 
sometime become large.  I agree with the principle you are expressing, but we more or less 
participated and agreed and urged Treasury financing--say, a $10 billion figure.  And it seems to 
me that having been so prominent in the discussion of that, it’s up to us to be prepared to finance up 
to $10 billion in that.  It won’t get that large because we’ll probably use up some.  So, although I 
agree with your principle, I don’t see any problem with the $5 billion figure that’s been suggested 
because we’ll reach it soon and I can’t imagine that we would say to the Treasury, “don’t go to 
Japan; we were wrong back in the fall.” 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Especially since we urged it so hard. 



12/19/78  
 

  

36
 

 
  MR. PARTEE.  Yes, so I don’t see-- 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  Well, at some point we might want to raise the point of who is to own 
these reserves.  This is very important. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s a question that’s coming--to consider downstream.  Dave 
Eastburn has been trying to get his word in edge-wise. 
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  I think this is a very good point.  I had worried about it when that wire 
came through about the warehousing procedure.  I just wonder whether one way to tackle this 
would be to have a staff paper on this, Mr. Chairman, which lays out the alternatives and the 
implications for the moment of the various ways to go. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, we certainly can. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, may I just point out that at this particular moment the 
United States is not faced with the problem of having net holdings of foreign exchange.  We’re still 
relatively short at the moment, and so all the foreign exchange assets we have could be used to 
repay debt.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  To repay debt.  It seems appropriate to me--in fact, [if we do not], 
I think it would be somewhat of a breach of faith since we’re the proponents of this process, which 
is essential if we’re going to finance our current account deficit in a way the deficit nation should 
do--to make this policy shift.  And for the central bank to make it more difficult or more 
inconvenient for the Treasury I don’t think is an appropriate way to go.  On the other hand, I think 
it’s a big issue. I think it would take a lot of study and a lot of staff papers to decide that we would 
want to become the holder of foreign currency reserves ourselves.  So I’m not saying we shouldn’t 
look at that.  Anybody else?  
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I would subscribe to Henry’s view in a way; I think we ought to have a 
look down the road.  I agree with you, however, that there’s no way we can’t support this in this 
initial phase.  But I think we ought to look at the longer-range implications of this and who is going 
to hold the funds and what financing is done.  So I’d like to go ahead and raise our warehousing 
limit.  If it takes $5 billion, that’s all right with me.  But I do think the study needs to be made. 
 
  MR. HOLMES.  That’s all. 
 
    CHAIRMAN MILLER.  All right.  Now we move to a kind of pro forma subject, item 9, 
the discussion of the report of the Subcommittee on the Directive.  Chuck.  Excuse me?  
 
  MR. AXILROD.  There was an additional thing that the Committee may or may not want 
to take up with regard to this warehousing.  Unless action is taken, half of it will have to be 
renewed in six months and then the other half in one year.  Under the current circumstances, the 



12/19/78  
 

  

37
 

simplest thing might just be to have it renewed in one year, rather than going through a 6-month 
and then a 1-year procedure.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Oh, I think that makes sense because it will be used in the 
meantime.  Certainly some of it will be used. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  It does have the advantage of bringing it back to our attention in six 
months.   
 
  MR. AXILROD.  Well, we have to simply divide it up in half.  As this builds up whatever 
half is going to be in six months the Committee will simply have to take an action to roll it over for 
another six months.  It’s purely a housekeeping procedure, and it’s a question of whether the 
Committee wants to go through that housekeeping business in six months or one year. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Well, it’s housekeeping only if we don’t make a decision to change the 
direction in terms of ownership. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It seems inconceivable to me that we wouldn’t hold their 
currency.  
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  No, I’m not saying that.  If we decided as a result of a long-range study 
that we are going to hold these ourselves, not Treasury, it will matter.  We’d have the flexibility in 
six months. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I don’t think we’ll have any problem in buying them. 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  That leaves it then that half of this comes due in some sense in six 
months and half of it comes due in one year. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, my preference is to go for the year, so we don’t have this 
[twice].  We are going to study some things in the meantime.  I think if we go to the Treasury with 
a proposal or plan, they would be perfectly amenable to a plan.  But my preference at least is not to 
have these housekeeping issues keep rolling in here.  What is the preference? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  You’d rather have a year. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, I would rather have a year. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think that’s right.  There’s no possibility in six months unless there’s a-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, I think we have to do so much homework with the Congress 
before we’d want to hold these because of the implications to us.  We might be bringing ourselves 
under the appropriations process by starting this. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Well, we have swaps.  



12/19/78  
 

  

38
 

 
  MR. MORRIS.  Would the loss be the Treasury’s? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, we’d take this from the Treasury, you see. 
 
 MR. MORRIS.  Would it be chargeable to the budget or would it be chargeable to the 
Exchange Stabilization Fund? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It’s chargeable to the current account.  That was one of the big 
legal and accounting decisions that had to be taken to get them to agree to do this.  If they had to 
charge it to the Exchange Stabilization Fund, they were out of resources.  If there is any currency 
exchange loss, it will be booked as you go as an additional interest cost, in effect--an additional 
cost of holding a resource. 
 
  SPEAKER(?).  It will be a realized loss? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I think they’ll follow the process of realized and unrealized so that 
they’ll put it into the quarters as they go by.  They’ll follow FASB, and count it on a realized or 
unrealized basis, which makes sense, because otherwise you build up a big blob and it may come 
all at once.  This way it goes in [currently].  And it can go either way.  You can have an interest 
reduction or an interest increase.  The cost of these initial ones was quite satisfactory, I thought: 
5.95 percent for 3-year notes and 6.2 percent for the 4-year.  So you already have roughly a 3 
percent cushion on the exchange risk that would bring you out even.  
 
 Well, what is the preference?  I don’t have a strong preference.  Would you prefer six 
months or twelve months?  Incidentally, the deal before was half and half.  How many would 
prefer to go all the way to one year for the whole thing and let’s work it out?  That would be my 
preference, I think.  How many would prefer six months?  Looks like the twelve months have it.  Is 
that all, Steve and Alan?  I didn’t mean to cut that off-- 
 
  MR. ALTMANN.  Any dissents? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Oh, this is a vote? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Do you want to be recorded as dissenting or would you join the 
[majority]? 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Oh, I’ll join. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Now we turn, Chuck, to your directive. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, may I just ask a question before Chuck gets into this about 
how you intend to proceed in considering this issue?  It is certainly of enormous importance; it’s 
something your predecessor had planned to place before this Committee for consideration.  I am 



12/19/78  
 

  

39
 

talking about how we conduct policy.  It affects the way we go about either cooperating or not with 
the Humphrey-Hawkins proposal.  
 
  The proposal and the memorandum reached us on Friday morning and I don’t think it 
reached any of the other Reserve Banks [earlier].  I don’t know of anybody who got it before 
Friday, which meant that there was, in effect, only one workday in which to consider it if we were 
traveling Monday.  My question is:  Is this going to be taken up for action today or is there a way 
that after it’s presented and discussed more time could be made available to really consider this 
with our research people and others and react to it?  I think it’s vitally important.  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  It depends on the issue.  For example, if the Committee agrees to the 
proposed meeting schedule, then there won’t be any January meeting.  And then I think we will 
have to do in February--in terms of a report--what is suggested here because there won’t be any 
meeting prior to February to change the thing.  Some other issues could be delayed. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  If anyone shares my feeling on the importance of this, that might be an 
argument to have a January meeting devoted in the main to an in-depth consideration of this.  I 
think it’s terribly important and nothing that should be decided without a lot of thought being given 
to it.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Let me answer your question very simply:  It’s the will of the 
Committee.  If the Committee is comfortable making a decision today, I think that will be the 
process.  If it isn’t, we’ll have to schedule sessions as necessary or alternative means to get us to 
where we need to be.  We do need by February 6 to have at least a conclusion on how we will 
handle it for our February 20 report.  It would be a precedent and could be hard to unlock it.  So we 
ought to make a very conscientious decision.  But I think it’s the will of the Committee.  If there’s a 
general feeling that this needs another meeting for further discussion, we’ll have to find a way to 
arrange that.  
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Many of these proposals follow directly [the 
requirements] of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act; we haven’t got much choice.  They’re presented as a 
decision of the Subcommittee on the Directive but they’re really just translating the Act into what 
we have to do. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Well, Paul, we at least worked on it over the weekend and I think there are 
some-- 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s not true of every one but it’s true of many. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, let’s give the subcommittee a chance to present it and we’ll 
see how it goes.  We’ll see how good they’ve done their homework.  There are, however, five 
members of this subcommittee and we only have two dissents within the group, so probably that 
means-- 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

40
 

  MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I might say that we did, of course, consider this with 
some time pressure because it’s something that has to be instituted very shortly into the new year.  
But it seemed to me, and I think to the other members of the committee, that many of these 
decisions were procedural in nature.  They had to be taken but they were procedural.  Where we 
had quite fundamental issues--for example, running on nonborrowed reserves as an operating 
variable--we did not take them up because there just was not sufficient time.  That certainly could 
be discussed at a later date.  Although it has been discussed time and time again for the last decade, 
it could be discussed once again.  We do have a couple of dissents, as everybody can see because 
we’ve put them very prominently in the beginning of the material.  And we also presented the 
material in a way so that we could go through these eight recommendations one by one.  They start 
on page 2 of the memo.  And I think that’s the best way to do this, to go recommendation by 
recommendation.  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Wouldn’t it be wise to see if there is unanimous approval of any 
recommendation?  Let’s get that one out of the way.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, recommendation 1 is simply expressing as the Committee’s intent 
what the law requires us to do.  It says that we have to specify [long-term growth ranges for the] 
money and credit aggregates for the calendar year.  And recommendation 1 is simply an expression 
of the Committee’s intention to do that.  So I don’t think there could be much dispute about that 
recommendation. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Is there a different interpretation?  I’m asking for sheer knowledge, 
because I’ve not had a chance, as you know, to even look at this with any care. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  For some reason, Phil didn’t get it. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I didn’t get a copy until Monday, Larry, so-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s because he was nearby. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  That’s because I was too close.  You have in effect said, I think, that 
the law says we must do it for the calendar year.  My question is:  Does that mean a different 
interpretation [is possible]?  Say you do this in February; does that mean that calendar year or does 
the law say that the July meeting has to look at the next calendar year? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Both. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  It does require both in the law. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The law replaces old Concurrent Resolution 133, so it’s the-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We tried to sell a revision midyear just in the current year; they 
wouldn’t buy it.  And instead of much worse things, the compromise was for the revision of the 
current year plus a preliminary look at the next year. 



12/19/78  
 

  

41
 

 
  MR. COLDWELL.  What were you talking about?  Who were you trying to sell?  I haven’t 
gotten caught up with this. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I would say, Phil, the expression is very general; it’s monetary and credit 
aggregates.  You could conceivably drop M1, drop M2, have nothing but credit, or have different 
credit aggregates.  There’s good flexibility but specification of an aggregate for the current calendar 
year and in a tentative way for the forthcoming calendar year in the July meeting seems to me to be 
required by the law. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, this one is procedure.  Does anyone have any problem with 
this? 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  Excuse me.  There is one decision, isn’t there--whether it is to be year-
over-year? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  That’s recommendation 2.  That’s later on. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, Willis.  
 
  MR. WINN.  Isn’t this just a reporting requirement, not an operating requirement?  In other 
words, we have to report twice a year on this basis but there is nothing to prevent you from looking 
or acting in the interim period when conditions change. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s correct, that’s specifically in the law; it says that our-- 
 
  MR. WINN.  It’s a reporting requirement, not an operating requirement. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s correct. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  But you’ve got to tell why in July you didn’t come out the way you 
started. 
 
  MR. WINN.  That’s still a reporting requirement, not an operating requirement. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  That’s correct.  We can change it at any time and we could go broader than 
that, I think.  Well, we could report this to the Congress and be operating on something entirely 
different, but-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That would be a little deceitful. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  I really think that that is getting too complicated. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We’d have to keep too many books.  One second, Larry needs the 
floor. 



12/19/78  
 

  

42
 

 
  MR. ROOS.  I would suggest, though, that Congress isn’t going to be lying in a docile 
posture--letting us switch our processes and our signals to meet our own needs.  I would agree with 
Nancy that we’ve got to think of the Congressional relations aspect.  If they think we’re trying to 
dodge the intent or the spirit of the Humphrey-Hawkins bill, I think all whatnot will break loose 
and we’ll really be forced to do things that we don’t want to. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I think we have to report our intentions and we should report them 
honestly; there’s no question about that.  But if we are reporting intentions, and if there is a big 
strike in the interim or if there is an oil boycott, we would change our program.  And we would say 
that’s why we had done it.  That’s what you’re talking about.   
 
  MR. WINN.  Otherwise we are locked in the ages-long controversy between automation 
and judgment as a policy. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  If there’s a big overshoot, you have to show it. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  One final question on the first point, Chuck.  You have used the word 
“targets.”  Is this advisedly [or] required in the law? 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  The word “targets”? 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Yes, rather than “guidelines” or “ranges.” 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  “Ranges” is the word in the law. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  The word “targets” is used in your next to last line on the first page. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  The first [sentence] is right, though. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I was just hoping we’d stay away from that word. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, it says the objectives and plans with respect to the ranges of growth. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  In the past, we’ve tried to stay away from the word target, if possible.  
[I’d start that sentence with] “These ranges or guides should…”  It’s semantics, I know. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  These ranges or guides.  Sure, why not?  And the next [sentence] 
says “ranges.”  Okay.  Do you want to move to proposal 2, Chuck?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, proposal 2 does get to the question of how we define the calendar 
year.  There seem to be three possibilities.  One could say that it’s December to December.  Well, I 
suppose one could say it’s the last day of December to the last day of December, but in practical 
terms it’s the month of December to the month of December.  We rejected that on the grounds that 
the base is too unstable, especially since December is such a volatile month.  



12/19/78  
 

  

43
 

 
  One could say it’s the quarterly average--the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter; that’s 
consistent with the way we look at GNP and quite a few other numbers in the economy and it gives 
you the effect of the passage in time.  That’s our committee’s proposal. 
 
  One could also say a calendar year average to a calendar year average.  For example, the 
Germans use that, I noticed.  The difficulty we see with that is that, in effect, the averaging 
procedure is so much more elongated since you really pick up the whole profile of the previous 
calendar year in determining the base.  And after that it becomes very difficult to affect very much 
the figure you specify for a calendar year; once you’re into it [there’s] hardly any time at all.  For 
some purposes we might want to use the average year over average year in terms of references.  
But we think what is consistent with the way people report and analyze and use our data and the 
GNP data is to make it fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.  That’s all the second recommendation is. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  May I speak to that?  I’m not speaking with any great knowledge 
because, again, I haven’t thought this out.  But I’m wondering, Chuck, in terms of the midyear 
report where you’ve gone through half of the year and know what that average has been, at least in 
preliminary terms, and you have the remainder of that year to forecast.  You’re coming back, in 
your terms, to a quarterly average of the fourth quarter of the prior year and the fourth quarter of 
the year you are in.  I wonder if, in the July reporting period, it doesn’t give a little better picture of 
the year in which you’re doing this to have an average over the whole year. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Or, alternatively, to have both of them. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I just don’t know.  I must say, as an economist who has been forecasting 
for a long time, that I can’t even remember a year average on anything.  I just never use it in 
analytic terms myself; maybe some people do. I think it’s a very interesting device to create 
confusion because the year-over-year average is always different than the developments of the year 
as it goes on.  I think where it might be used, Phil, is let’s say in July you have an [overshoot] and 
you don’t think you can get it down or that it is inappropriate to get it down within the year to the 
range you had set earlier.  Then I think you use the next year, which you are permitted to do in 
July.  That is, you could say we are running over for various reasons and you cite them. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You would adjust the current year upward. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  You would adjust the current year upward and you could very well say 
we’ll have a more gradual adjustment period that would run into the following year.  That’s the 
way I would use it rather than to take the yearly average. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I was trying to think of your comment in relation to the GNP number.  
If you use the GNP number, [after] the first [half] of the year, you know what your first half GNP 
has been.  I guess forecaster minds work differently, but it seems to me that after I get past the first 
half I have some idea what that first half has accomplished already and then I look at the second 
half and add to it.  And it’s a cumulative figure moving ahead. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

44
 

  MR. PARTEE.  You mean so you get an average.  I just never do that myself. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Chuck, you say you never do it.  Almost all of the GNP 
figures that are discussed at this time of the year are yearly figures.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I never discuss the yearly figures; I think they’re highly misleading. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You can’t read the newspaper without reading that 
number. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think it’s become much more common to talk fourth quarter-to-fourth 
quarter.  That’s the way the Council [of Economic Advisers] presents their estimates of the GNP. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  As a matter of fact, they’re presented both ways.  They still are.  The 
budget document has year-over-year and the Council report has fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.  
And they are a consistent set of numbers.  I think people do them differently. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Jim, what do you use in the Greenbook? 
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  Well, we present both but generally in the presentations here we talk 
about fourth-to-fourth. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  And this Bluebook change figure, you use fourth quarter-to-fourth 
quarter rather than the average?  
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  That’s right--or third-to-third, say.  In terms of the policy period, for 
example, it’s the third quarter over the third quarter.  
 
  MR. AXILROD.  Those are all quarters, depending on the time period, Governor Coldwell, 
third-to-third, fourth-to-fourth, third-to-fourth.  They’re all quarter-to-quarter. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, point-to-point is just too sloppy.  So it’s some sort of period 
to another period.  What is the sentiment here?  Is this an issue on which there is a difference of 
opinion? 
 
  MR. BAUGHMAN.  Do you contemplate that in the July report you would cast the 
discussion largely in terms of the change from the fourth quarter to the second quarter?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  What’s happened so far and what that implies for-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We wouldn’t start one of these new periods from a base in July; 
we would go back to the fourth quarter of the prior year.  
 



12/19/78  
 

  

45
 

  MR. BAUGHMAN.  Would you tend to cast the conversation in terms of quarterly 
averages all the way through as compared with when you’re reporting in July maybe getting hung 
up in a lengthy conversation of June? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, it seems to me that it will be in the report.  We haven’t written the 
report; and the Chairman will testify and he hasn’t testified.  But it seems to me that he would talk 
about how the year has developed thus far and the implications of that for the second half of the 
year--that is, the second to the fourth quarter--and whether that has implications for the coming 
year. 
 
  MR. BAUGHMAN.  But there’s an inference, I think, in picking fourth quarter-to-fourth 
quarter that there is not a shorter period that’s really meaningful to talk about.  No shorter than a 
quarter, or about three months. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  [No shorter] than a quarter?  Well, I sort of agree with that.  That bears on 
one of our later recommendations. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  What is the will of the Committee--to approve this proposal or to 
disapprove it?  John.   
 
  MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, there is another aspect of this that I would like to spend a 
minute on.  Personally, I’m in favor of Chuck’s view that a more meaningful way of measuring the 
change is from fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter rather than year-over-year.  But another 
consideration that would influence how I would come out on this has to do with the following.  
Under the current procedures, we’ve got a certain spread of percentage points [on the ranges] for 
M1, M2, etc.  On M1, it’s a 4 percentage point spread, with 2 to 6 percent; on M2, it’s a 2-1/2 
percentage point spread--6-1/2 to 9.  But in terms of actual operational ranges, in fact there is a 
much narrower spread because it depends on our practice to update these targets each quarter.  And 
so the range, in practice, I think has been only one-fourth as wide as the 4 percentage point spread 
on M1 and the 2-1/2 percentage point spread on M2.  As far as I’m concerned, if we were to retain 
the same practice of having these present percentage point spreads and go on for a full year, the 
ranges would be far too wide for me to personally be comfortable with.   
 
 [Given] the very short time available to think about this, I would suggest as a kind of 
compromise that we narrow the ranges if we are going to go from fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter 
to a 1 percent spread for M2 and 1-1/2 for M1.  I’ll give you some illustrations:  from 3-1/4 to 4-3/4 
would have the same midpoint, namely 4 percent, as the present 2 to 6 percent range.  An M2 range 
of 7-1/4 to 8-1/4 for a year ahead, fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, [has] the same 7-3/4 percent 
midpoint as our present 6-1/2 to 9 percent range.  But the issue I’m concerned with is that in 
practice the 4 percentage point spread we allow ourselves for M1, and the 2-1/2 for M2 are not 
really that wide because we update them every quarter.  And I think we would have too much 
sloppiness in the steering mechanism here if we allowed those same percentage point spreads to 
exist in our specified ranges for a full year ahead.  
 



12/19/78  
 

  

46
 

  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, I would like to reserve judgment on that.  I don’t think it 
really comes up at this point.  And I think actually the 4 percentage point spread we have now is a 
special one.  We’ve had 2-1/2 point spreads on M1, from 4 to 6-1/2.  And if you would look at that 
out for a year, you are still talking about the same scatter; you can be only 1-1/4 percentage points 
off of your midpoint after a year.  And cutting it down to a quarter doesn’t change that.  It just 
means that on a shorter period of time you could be 1-1/4 percentage points off.  So, I would have 
strong reservations because I’m the one who will have to explain why we don’t hit these things.  
And the narrower the target, the more we’re going to miss it. 
 
  MR. BALLES.  That’s a very good point; the cone gets wider as you go up. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, we slip the base every quarter now. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s the problem.  Where we get the problem now is slipping 
the base.  If we stuck by our original one-year projection and had a 2-1/2 point spread--  Now, we 
are off the subject, but we may want to create a band rather than a cone.  There is a lot to be said for 
that.  But I think that’s a separate question.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I do think this is a separate issue. 
 
  [MR. COLDWELL(?).]  What other recommendations do you have? 
 
    MR. PARTEE.  Well, there’s recommendation 4, which has a great deal to do with the 
question of whether we can say that what the Committee has done has some relationship with what 
the President wants done.  And I think [following] your suggestion would make it less likely that 
we’d consider it consistent.  
 
  SPEAKER(?).  And that comes up in recommendation 4? 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I think it does. 
 
  MR. BALLES.  In any case, it comes up in February. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It comes up every meeting because I don’t know that you can bind 
future FOMCs to having only certain spreads.  I think any FOMC can put on any spread they want. 
 New people come on and change their minds. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Chuck, is your base drift on this question?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The only base drift I see has to be very publicly reported.  It has to be that 
we have given up our original expectations per se on 1979 and either intend or don’t intend to make 
up for it in 1980.  That’s the kind of base drift there will be, an annual base drift. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  No base drift in July against our February? 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

47
 

  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, you go back to the fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.  You just 
change-- 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It would be an annual base drift.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Yes, an annual base drift. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  [Unintelligible.]  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Annually there would be a base drift but during the year I think 
we’d merely move our targets if we decide to change them.  We would reaffirm them or say we’ve 
moved them up or down; we’d have to admit we were wrong. 
 
 MR. BLACK.  To put it in slightly different terms, the base drift would become more overt 
and less covert. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, being spread out so that you-- 
 
  MR. MORRIS.  It’s one of the few real virtues of Humphrey-Hawkins. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Just on the narrow point, do you want to go fourth quarter-to-
fourth quarter?  Can we get that one solved? 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Can we have the happy medium of fourth-to-fourth on the February 
and July and an average in July also?  Or would that be a problem? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think that would be a problem.  If we shift between February and July 
[how we define] the year the way you’re talking about, I think the [Congressional] committee could 
very reasonably say that we’re trying to obscure what’s happening.   
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Well, actually, if you have fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter, you’ve got an 
implicit [number for] year-over-year.  By July you’re there, and it seems to me that if we’re asked, 
we should give the calendar year [objective]. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Going, going, gone.  What’s number 3? 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Recommendation 3 has to do with meeting periods--a rather sensitive 
subject.  There are really two aspects to this recommendation.  One is that we feel it’s necessary for 
the Committee to change its February and July meeting dates so that it will meet at a time in 
February, for example, when the staff has been able to analyze the President’s objectives and yet in 
time for the report to be written.  In July there will be a midyear budget review and perhaps some 
new specifications or objectives; and in any event a report has to be written and delivered by July 
20th.  At the minimum we think we have to change the February and July dates as we specified 
here to February 6 and July 11.  February 6 is farther from the deadline of February 20 because we 
figure it will be a harder report to write.  July 11 is closer to the deadline, July 20, because we think 



12/19/78  
 

  

48
 

it will be easier and, in any event, to have it a week earlier would interfere with the Fourth of July.  
So, those two changes we thought we had to make. 
 
  In addition, we made two changes in dates from the calendar previously sent out to you just 
to even out a little bit the time intervals.  We had to change the May date from the 15th to the 22nd 
and the August date from the 21st to the 14th.  Otherwise, we left all the dates the same.  It’s on the 
table here.  You’ll see that we changed May to the 22nd and that we backed up August a week in 
order to give us two 5-week intervals rather than a 6-week and a 4-week interval.  In future years, I 
think we could do better with this but we felt some obligation to try to [stay] as closely as we could 
to what had previously been suggested to you as tentative dates. 
 
  Now, the third aspect of this calendar is that it proposes excluding formal physical meeting 
dates in January and June because they would necessarily have to be at times that would involve 
only 3-week intervals.  We felt that, in view of the fact that a full review of our situation was 
coming up and the reports would be written and all that, it would be better to skip those and have 7-
week intervals, understanding of course, that there could be telephone conferences.  In the future, I 
believe that we will never be able to avoid [a 7-week interval] in the December-January period--
assuming we don’t want to meet between Christmas and New Year’s Day, and I assume we don’t.  
But for the July meeting, I think in the future we’ll be able to cut that to a 6-week interval rather 
than the 7-week period we now have.   
 
  So there is first the change in the February and July meeting dates; second, the changes that 
we made in the May and August dates; and third, the question of skipping the January and June 
meetings.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  What is the pleasure of the Committee? 
 
    MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, could I [ask] whether we could consider changing the May 
meeting to the 30th?  You have seven weeks between the May and July meetings and five weeks 
between the May and April meetings. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You would rather go to six and six? 
 
  MR. BLACK.  I’d rather go to six and six. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The only reason we didn’t do it was because Memorial Day is a holiday. 
 
 MR. BLACK.  Won’t most people observe Memorial Day on the 28th?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, apparently that’s not true in every state. 
 
  SPEAKER(?).  Some places observe it on the 30th. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  We have Confederate Memorial Day in Virginia.  
 



12/19/78  
 

  

49
 

  MR. PARTEE.  I seriously considered that and, as a matter of fact, if it had been my choice 
alone, I would have moved that date. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I think the arrangement the committee has suggested 
would be worthwhile.  I would suggest, as we’ve already heard in today’s discussion, that we opt 
for telephone updates in the January and [June] periods. 
 
  MR. GUFFEY.  Mr. Chairman, this is a troubling recommendation to me in that, among 
other things, it is cutting the meeting dates from twelve to ten and lengthening the intervals 
between meeting dates--particularly as we move into 1979.  It’s going to be a tough year, as 
demonstrated by the discussion around this table today, it seems to me.  
 
  There also appears to be an alternative that may or may not have been considered by the 
committee but seems to be a reasonable one as far as I’m concerned.  And that is that we move all 
of the meeting dates to the second Tuesday instead of the third Tuesday of the month, thus 
maintaining a full 12-month schedule and having no interval between meeting dates greater than 
five weeks--very much the way we have done it in past years.  Because of the shortness in coming 
into this procedure I think we might still adopt the recommendation of a telephone meeting for 
January, but nonetheless a full-blown meeting in January by telephone.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I have a note here from Murray Altmann that one of our difficulties is that 
the BIS meeting is every second Monday and, therefore, we would have to make it the second 
Wednesday, or our people who go to BIS meetings can’t get back.  Even then it’s not all that good 
to bring them back from Switzerland immediately to an Open Market Committee meeting.  We’ve 
taken a look at almost every combination, Roger.  If you take the first Tuesday, which also might 
be proposed, then you would wind up with very little new economic data for the month because it 
isn’t out yet.  I don’t know, but I guess we didn’t really look at the fourth Tuesday; that wouldn’t fit 
the need anyway of the July and February dates.   
 
   CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Have you considered going back to quarterly meetings? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  No, not seriously, although some people may think that moving from 
twelve meetings to ten is a tendency in that direction. 
 
  MR. WINN.  The second Wednesday--isn’t that a possibility? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, except that it means that Paul or Henry and staff--Scott or Alan--will 
be very tired.  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The [second] Tuesday doesn’t come early enough in 
February and July, I suspect. 
 
  MR. GUFFEY.  Yes, I think it does. 
 
  MR. WINN.  It does in July but we could make an exception. 



12/19/78  
 

  

50
 

 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Maybe in this particular year, but it wouldn’t regularly.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, we’ve heard sentiments around.  How many would accept 
this schedule for 1979 with or without the Coldwell codicil, which is the telephone meeting? 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Everybody or voting members? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Everybody.  Okay, that looks like it.  Is anybody unhappy with 
that? 
 
  MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, there is just one element of unhappiness about Memorial 
Day.  I don’t know if anybody observes Memorial Day on-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We will refer the Memorial Day issue to the subcommittee; this 
will get our schedule going for February. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  Yes, although we will have to do it soon, because people like to get their 
calendars [scheduled]. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  May I offer another amendment?  The official holiday is on Monday the 
28th and the natural holiday is Wednesday the 30th.  And then there’s the 31st, which is a 
Thursday.  You might think of putting the May meeting on that Thursday, the 31st. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  So you want to cancel the May meeting? 
 
  MR. BLACK.  You’ll just not have as good input from me if you have it on that day. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You’ll have a hangover on Memorial Day? 
 
 MR. BLACK.  Not a hangover, but I’ve got some complications. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  What will you have, a Memorial Day [unintelligible]? 
 
    MR. BLACK.  We don’t observe it except in spirit; we don’t actually leave the Bank.  And 
there is logic to making these intervals six weeks instead of five and seven.  I wouldn’t have 
brought it up if there wasn’t. 
 
  MR. KIMBREL.  Bob, you’ve lost that one, come on. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We can go another week more and have it on June 5. 
 
  MR. WINN.  I would just raise the question with respect to January, in view of the 
uncertainties that are prevalent.  I’m wondering what the public relations aspect of it is, even 
though we hold it by telephone, to say that there is not a meeting in January. 



12/19/78  
 

  

51
 

 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Wild enthusiasm, I would think. 
 
 MR. WINN.  I think we are missing the market aspect of this. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, I do think we can discuss it really quite well. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I don’t think anybody will know the difference unless we-- 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, not having the January meeting, we won’t release the policy record 
for today’s meeting until a little later.  Other than that, I can’t see-- 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Well, why would that necessarily follow, Chuck?  Would that necessarily-- 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Yes, I think so. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  The release is three days after the next meeting.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The reason we release it when we do is because until then there is an 
operational instruction.   
 
  MR. ROOS.  But wouldn’t you consider a telephone meeting in January a meeting? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I would rather not. 
 
  MR. MAYO.  Well, that’s the problem.  I think it should be considered a meeting.  If we 
are going to have it, I’d consider that we are going to spend several hours.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  You know, we do have telephone meetings that--perhaps I should defer to 
the Secretary.   
 
  MR. MAYO.  But they are different.  This would be a mandatory meeting on a [specified] 
date.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  It’s not mandatory.  I think the Chairman said that he had every intention at 
this moment of calling you up on the 16th.  
 
    CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s right, to consult on that date.  So we wouldn’t have an 
official meeting or we wouldn’t have problems with new policy directives and the release of the 
other-- 
 
  MR. ALTMANN.  Any actions taken at that time would be reported in the policy record 
[for today’s meeting]. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

52
 

  MR. PARTEE.  Just as we do when we have a meeting by telephone late [in the 
intermeeting period], it’s reported maybe a week or ten days later. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  I think Willis has a good point.  I hope we don’t advertise that we are 
skipping-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  If anybody asks about it, don’t you tell the truth?  It’s that we are 
having it a couple of weeks [later] because we have to prepare for the new presentation to Congress 
and we have to wait until we get the budget to do it. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  I think we ought to go ahead and say that because they are going to be 
waiting for the policy record three days later. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I’d inform everybody.  My first reaction is that I don’t think there 
will be any feeling of letdown because it’s very logical.  If we have to report on the 20th of 
February, we don’t have the data until quite late in January.  It’s hard for us to do otherwise. 
 
  MR. ALTMANN.  Mr. Chairman, our practice has been to respond to questions about the 
date of the [next] regularly scheduled meeting.  We have always given out that date.  We don’t give 
out this proposed schedule, for example; it’s not regarded as a fixed schedule.  
 
  MR. COYNE.  We do give out the schedule; we have for the last couple of years. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, Joe, all you have to do in giving out the schedule is to add a 
paragraph to your release saying that this has been scheduled at this time to permit preparation for 
the new reporting required under Humphrey-Hawkins.  
 
  Okay, where do we stand on meetings?  There seemed to be acceptance of the proposal, 
with I guess a careful hope that you do something about Memorial Day--perhaps cancel it.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I don’t know; the careful hope came from both directions. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  I am prepared to move in either direction; it’s that particular time that 
causes me a problem.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The Board does have to deal with the question of how we organize to be 
responsive to the mandate of Congress.  It is a question we all have raised.  First of all, there is 
nothing in that bill that calls upon the Committee to adopt explicit economic objectives for the 
calendar year [or] for the two calendar years and we would recommend that the Committee avoid 
doing so.  We in general would; Nancy may want to say something here.  
 
  Secondly, there is nothing here that requires that the Committee develop monetary paths 
that it considers most probably quite consistent with the objectives that the President has set.  And 
we would propose that the staff not be directed to develop that path that would be most consistent 
with the President’s objectives.  Rather, we propose that the staff be prepared to talk about the 



12/19/78  
 

  

53
 

probabilities regarding whether or not the ranges specified for the monetary alternatives for the 
year are [consistent with or how they are] related to the President’s objectives and also the question 
of the consistency among the objectives.  In other words, at this point we are not proposing a major 
change in the way the staff material is prepared for the Committee nor are we proposing a major 
change in the way the Committee specifies its objectives.  We simply suggest that the staff have in 
mind in its collective wisdom what it thinks the relationships are between the monetary alternatives 
and the economic objectives stated by the President.  That’s our committee’s recommendation.  
 
  I think Nancy ought to be permitted to speak on this for a minute and I think you might 
want to hear from Jim Kichline, who is really going to have to organize the research that backs up 
the Committee’s [decisions]. 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Well, that is my dissent, as I am sure you all have [seen].  I feel very 
strongly that the object of policy should be toward [achieving] what I consider to be the ultimate 
goals for policy, mainly output, employment, and prices--and one that we have no control over, 
which is an acceptable distribution of income.  I feel that money is really one of the tools and not 
the end of the policy and that we should start moving toward focusing the policymaking on our 
ultimate objectives rather than on an intermediate, in-between type of objective.  And it seems to 
me that one of the major objectives of the Full Employment [and Balanced Growth] Humphrey- 
Hawkins Act was basically to improve public understanding of economic policymaking and to lay 
out what it is we want to accomplish rather than to get ourselves hung up on M1 or M2 or 
something of the sort.  
 
  Now, part of the reason that I think we need to do this is that I think there are 
inconsistencies going on at the present time in the policymaking.  One of them is the tendency of 
the Administration to opt for the most optimistic possible economic forecast that they think they 
can get by with.  And there is also an inconsistency in the conduct of monetary policy because I 
think there has been a tendency to opt for the lowest rates of growth in the money supply--that 
[they] can get so low that you can’t achieve them and achieve your other objectives.  And one thing 
that I think Humphrey-Hawkins may do is to force both sides to face up to the inconsistencies as 
they are presenting them to the American public.  So I would opt for going forward with saying 
that here is what it takes to meet the President’s objectives and then be very forward in saying we 
are not going to achieve those objectives because we can’t live with the amount of money supply 
that is implied by the objectives [the Administration] is trying to get to.  I’d do it in a probability 
form because the econometric models are not perfect.  I don’t know a single econometric model 
that does not have a great deal of somebody’s judgment in it.  I know that you are not going to get 
it directly on the nose as you go through here.  But I think it’s a mistake to formulate all our policy 
strictly in terms of money.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I’m not sure I understand this issue.  Under the Humphrey- 
Hawkins we are to make our report with respect to the ranges of growth or diminution of monetary 
and credit aggregates, taking account of past and prospective developments in employment and 
unemployment, etc.  So, won’t we have to look at the prospective [developments] as we see them?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  But the President will have specific short-run objectives for the economy. 



12/19/78  
 

  

54
 

 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But we’d say here’s our monetary policy and it is based on the 
fact that we expect unemployment to be slightly different or substantially different [than the 
President’s objective].  Won’t we have to say that? 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  If we think it will be. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  So are you arguing about what you know in advance [as to] 
whether we are?  Because if it happens to be consistent, Nancy, we have covered your point, 
haven’t we? 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Not the point.  The President will present a rather full-blown economic 
forecast and you can read this Act in such a way that the Federal Reserve is to look at that forecast 
and say what kind of growth in the money and credit aggregates will be necessary to achieve it.  
And it may be that the-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, I don’t read it that way.  Do I misread it? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  It’s really point 3, I think, Mr. Chairman. The relationship of the aforesaid-
- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, first we say what our plans are--the objectives and plans of 
the Board of Governors and the FOMC. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  And that has to do with the monetary aggregates. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  [It says] the “relationship.”  It doesn’t say that we tell what it 
takes to get the President’s [objectives].  We say what we are going to do, and then we give the 
relationship to the President’s [goals].  Either it’s going to be consistent or inconsistent. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t think it necessarily implies forecasting a 
Committee forecast. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  [It says] taking into account the prospective relationship of our 
objectives and plans.  Take into account [prospectively].  
  
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We can take account of the future, but we don’t have to 
say this policy will produce X GNP. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, but you can’t hardly say that you have taken into account 
prospective employment unless you have taken it into account. 
 
    MS. TEETERS.  I think we have a real danger here.  We may very well be in a situation 
where we will state our monetary policy and it’s only going to take the outsiders about two seconds 
to figure out that because of our monetary policy the President can’t achieve his objectives.    



12/19/78  
 

  

55
 

 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  If that’s the case, we ought to be saying so under three. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think that’s right, if it is obviously that [inconsistent].  I don’t think that it 
is.  Many times before, the outsiders have said that the monetary policy was not consistent with 
general objectives, and in fact it turned out to be consistent.  So who knows?  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But our reports to the Congress this year have rather consistently 
been at variance with the Administration on growth of the economy, for example.  We said here are 
our ranges and we expect the economy to grow at this rate and it was always less than the 
Administration’s.  I don’t think that will [lead to] any particular crises.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  It may lead to more of a crisis in this period [unintelligible] because then 
the [Congressional] committee will make its recommendations for different policies to the 
Congress, so Congress could instruct us to do this. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But most of the time it will be in the range of uncertainty 
anyway.  Nobody can say with full conviction whether it’s consistent or inconsistent.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I’m just trying to reconcile this difference of opinion.  It seems to 
me, having decided what our objectives and plans were, if we then came to the point of what is 
their relationship to those in the President’s economic report and found a variance, I think we 
would have to report that.  
 
  MS. TEETERS.  Which means then you would have to give your forecast.  Yes.  
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, if you’re at variance.  If you’re not at variance, you’re really 
saying you are consistent with that forecast.    
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Yes. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Have we actually, in our own practices, ever discussed or agreed upon what 
our ultimate economic objectives would be and then attempted to make our monetary policy 
decisions consistent with the achievement of those objectives?  Or have we really sort of played 
around with our monetary policy and then asked our people to project what they think will be the 
result of that monetary policy.  This has disturbed me. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I don’t [know], Larry.  We may have gone procedurally one way 
or the other.  But it has been my experience that we have been adopting monetary policy for the 
conscious purpose of achieving a slower growth rate in the economy than was in the 
Administration’s forecast.  And we have been reporting this publicly all year.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  But we haven’t been prepared to say that the Committee’s economic-- 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

56
 

  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Oh yes, I understand.  What we have said is that I have listened to 
everybody and I’ve said what I think.  That’s correct. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  You remember we passed that through. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That’s what we contemplate continuing. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay, I see.  Now I’m getting the point.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  And then furthermore not directing the staff to develop an economic plan 
that would be consistent with the President’s but to develop reasonable alternative economic and 
monetary plans and then talk about what the relationship [to the President’s economic goals] might 
be.  
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, this language “the apparent consistency or 
inconsistency of alternative monetary growth rates with the President’s economic goals”--isn’t 
quite clear to me, Chuck, just semantically.  In the discussion I think we made clear that what we 
did not want the staff doing is coming in and saying that X is consistent and Y is inconsistent.  
Then if we get asked, we’d have to quote that. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Dave.   
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  My point has been covered. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Are we covered?  Anybody else? 
 
  MR. WILLES.  Well, is Jim going to describe how he proposes to do this? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes.  
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  I think our intent is to use the econometric model more intensively to 
sort out the impacts of alternative monetary policies.  So there would be more extensive and in-
depth analyses of the alternatives on the real side and price side of the economy, given rates of 
growth of the aggregates that would be in the Bluebook.  And in that process we’d be sure that we 
have covered in one of the alternatives or one of the ranges explicitly the forecast of the 
Administration, so that qualitatively we’d be able to talk about where that fits.  We are talking 
about aggregate ranges ultimately so I think in most cases we won’t have a great deal of difficulty.  
I would perceive much of the difficulty not to rest with rates of growth in nominal GNP but 
probably in the real and price split; I view that as being a potential source of problems.  
 
    So within the ranges we would anticipate that we will cover and provide the Committee 
with information that would discuss explicitly the nature of the Administration’s forecast for the 
next two years I guess it is.  We have tended to go out, as you know, three years or so using the 
econometric model. We would want to give a somewhat longer flavor to that exercise using the 
model. 



12/19/78  
 

  

57
 

 
 MR. WALLICH.  Jim, say for instance that we had a range of 4 to 6-1/2.  Would you then 
indicate how 4 and 6-1/2 would be implemented [relative to] the President’s program? 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  That’s what we have now.   
 
  MR. WALLICH.  So if you found that the President’s program fell within that range, that 
would be the conclusion to be drawn.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  That it’s reasonably consistent.  
 
  MR. WALLICH.  If we found that it fell outside, we’d tell the truth.  But are we sufficiently 
sure to be able to assert that the President’s program is unachievable by our policies?  I doubt very 
much-- 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think any nominal GNP is achievable.  I think it’s the price/real [GNP] 
relationship that comes to [unintelligible].  If he said he wanted a 20 percent increase in nominal 
GNP, I’m sure you could achieve it with monetary policy.  Then he might say it would be 8 percent 
real and 12 percent prices.  We might think it would be 4 percent real and 16 percent prices.   
 
  MR. WALLICH.  Then there are real possibilities.  Suppose he proposes a 20 percent 
nominal increase.  Wouldn’t we then say we don’t want to pursue that objective? 
 
  MS. TEETERS.  It seems to me that the other thing generally that you can do on this is to 
state that you are not going to hit it 100 percent.  Jim this morning was using some probabilities as 
to what the chances of a recession are, for example.  And it seems to me that we would want to use 
that route in order to convey the degree of uncertainty that I think is still associated with this sort of 
thing. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  Well, I think very much we should convey the degree of uncertainty 
because our model results are just one point in a wide spectrum.  
 
  MS. TEETERS.  It depends on how wide a spectrum.   
 
  MR. KICHLINE.  I might note that in this exercise that I reported today on probability 
distributions we would hope to do some more experimenting.  But in the future, obviously, we can 
talk a little bit about confidence intervals associated with the model forecast.  We do have the 
standard errors.  And we can indicate the uncertainty of a point forecast. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Mark. 
 
  MR. WILLES.  I’d just like to point out--I think it supports the subcommittee’s 
recommendation--that we do not currently have any place that I know of in the country, let alone in 
the Federal Reserve System, an econometric model that can be used with any great confidence 
through the kind of simulation that we are talking about.  So while we go through the exercises, I 



12/19/78  
 

  

58
 

think the real point we ought to understand is that there is no way we can say on the basis of those 
exercises whether our proposed policy is consistent or inconsistent with the President’s programs.  
So in a way we have a dilemma that isn’t as bad as we think because we don’t have to lie or 
anything else.  We really don’t know based on those models whether we are inconsistent or not.  
It’s an entirely different kind of discussion than I think would be implied by what we have been 
talking about so far.  My fear is that we are going to mislead ourselves into thinking that we can 
determine with more precision than we can exactly what the options are that we face.  
 
  We hope to have for the Committee, in a few months, some simulation views in the MTS 
model to indicate that there is really nothing we can say about the breakdown in nominal GNP 
between prices and real output, with any degree of confidence at all, based on the way that model is 
currently working.  And that’s not a criticism of that model any more than any other.  It’s just a 
fundamental difficulty we are having [in] how these things are being done.   
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We are going to face some serious problems on our first go-
around because the Administration’s plan will face the dilemma of whether it’s opportune to 
forecast more inflation and therefore to have a lower budget deficit.  It is an interesting dilemma 
because the more inflation they forecast, the more they meet their target on the fiscal deficit.  And 
the more they are optimistic on inflation, the more their deficit will go up.   
 
  MS. TEETERS.  However, there is a lag.  The entire inflation catches up about 18 months 
later on the expenditure side. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, is it okay if this first time we go about it the way that is described 
here? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, we will have to see. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Yes, I think this will have to be a probing thing. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  We may have to spend all day on the 6th. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, number 5, I think is pretty easy. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You said that about the [meeting] dates! 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  We went out of [order]; I lost my page.  Oh, there it is.  We just have 
[proposed] some minor word changes in the directive to conform to the expressions used in the 
Humphrey-Hawkins Act.  It might be possible also, in the future, to discard the first several 
paragraphs of the directive.  The [rest of the] committee impressed on me the wisdom of waiting 
until we find out what the Merrill decision is before we decide on that.  So this involves just a few 
minor word changes.    
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  This is on the ranges only, not the directive in the-- 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

59
 

  MR. PARTEE.  Yes, really the main thing is the phrase used in expressing our long-term 
monetary objectives, which follows the Humphrey-Hawkins language.  A couple of other word 
changes [are suggested] because of other factors; we are talking about annual rather than moving 
12-month targets.  So I don’t think there should be any discussion. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Anybody have any problem on 6?  Larry, do you have something? 
 [Unintelligible] can’t believe it. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  I always have been, Mr. Chairman.  Some of them don’t fly well.  But 6 is 
where I have really very serious concerns and I’d like to express them.  In 6 the recommendation 
the subcommittee made, in effect, provides that the long-term aggregates decisions and the 
short-term decisions on targeting the fed funds rate really need not be related by a fixed rule.  I feel 
that the spirit of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act is--even if it isn’t written into law, it is the intent of 
this Act--to call on us to set specific annual aggregate target ranges.  And I believe that our ability 
or inability to accomplish those ranges, at least under ordinary circumstances, will be judged very 
critically by the Congress.  
 
 Certainly if you look back, our record in setting ranges and staying within them has been 
rather spotty since 1975 when we had the Concurrent Joint Resolution 133.  We have computed 
that out of 44 attempts to stay within certain short-term aggregate ranges we missed 22--50 percent 
of the time.  I don’t think in this new Humphrey-Hawkins arrangement, we are going to be able to 
remain as invisible or as unaccountable in this regard as we have in the past.  And in order to 
achieve the objective that we read into Humphrey-Hawkins, I think the short-run aggregates targets 
must be closely tied to these longer-run objectives.  And I think that we must be prepared--whether 
it’s on a fixed basis or on an automatic basis--to do everything humanly possible to see that the 
funds rate is adjusted almost automatically whenever aggregate growth deviates from the 
prescribed ranges.  This is the fundamental disagreement we have had. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I think it is fundamental.  I think the last sentence of recommendation 6 is 
the one to read.  We wanted to assist you in saying what the Committee decisions ought to be from 
meeting to meeting by tracking what has been happening in a very explicit way and by having the 
staff provide alternative feasible routes for getting back [within the ranges].  We had in mind 
maybe a 3-month adjustment period and a 6-month adjustment period.  That may have to vary 
some, but we don’t want to be caught with a fixed rule that forces the Manager to do something 
between meetings that hadn’t been anticipated.  And that’s all we are saying here. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Chuck, I would agree totally with the wording of your last sentence; however, 
it’s the early part with which I strongly disagree.  And if it’s in order, Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to 
either circulate or read a very brief substitute in wording that I would recommend for the early part 
of Chuck’s number 6.  It would read, unless I am out of order, sir-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, please read it. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  “The spirit of the new law clearly requires changes in the present procedure 
for formulating short-term tolerance ranges.  The change in the formulation of the long-term ranges 



12/19/78  
 

  

60
 

will tend to focus greater attention on actual performance relative to these ranges when setting 
short-term policy objectives.  Therefore, we endorse proposals to relate short-term tolerance ranges 
to the long-term growth ranges by a mechanism that would ensure that the agreed-upon long-term 
ranges are achieved on an annual basis.”  And then we would follow the exact wording of the last 
sentence.  I will be glad-- 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think that ought to be subject to a straight vote, Mr. Chairman.  He 
is suggesting changing the recommendation to the inverse of whether or not that’s-- 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I think that might be said about this recommendation, 
Mr. Chairman.  We did look at this thing entirely aside from Humphrey-Hawkins.  These last six 
months, however, have reflected some considerable thinking by the Subcommittee on the 
Directive, right or wrong, as to what the substance of this should be apart from 
Humphrey-Hawkins. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Dave, you have [a comment]? 
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  Yes, if I may speak just briefly. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, please. 
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  A good deal of what Paul referred to was produced in the Philadelphia 
Bank because we were concerned about the slippage between short-term and long-term 
[objectives].  We did a good deal of research on this and we were persuaded that the only way 
discipline could be introduced into the process was to have some very direct linkage between the 
short- and long-term ranges.  However, Humphrey-Hawkins came along just about the time we 
were in the midst of this discussion.  And in considering the impact of Humphrey-Hawkins on this, 
I am persuaded that that itself introduces enough discipline into the process that I don’t think we 
need to do it by mechanical means.  Now, I may wish a year from now that I felt the way I used to 
feel about this.  But I think that we do have that kind of discipline in the Humphrey-Hawkins 
process and that we don’t need that [automatic] kind of mechanism.  And that mechanism does 
have other disadvantages.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, how many prefer the-- 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  May I ask a question before you take the vote, Mr. Chairman?  May I 
ask what in your view, Chuck, Humphrey-Hawkins actually does require?  You started out your 
comment that the new law “does not require” and Larry started his with the spirit of the new law 
“clearly requires.”  Maybe you could say literally that yours is correct and his is, too, if the 
difference is that he’s looking at the spirit and you are looking at the literal parts of the law. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, he changes a sentence in another part of it.  But I think what the new 
law requires us to do basically is to say what kind of economic results we are going to have--not 
what kind of monetary aggregates [in terms of] target estimates, but what kind of monetary 
aggregates we have in mind as a means in the process of getting to the general economic results 



12/19/78  
 

  

61
 

[we want].  And I think, since we won’t be slipping the base, that is what it requires us to do and 
what I would expect the Chairman to say-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  What do you expect me to say?  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Many [times in the] middle of the year it doesn’t look as if we are going to 
have monetary aggregates for the year that we thought in February were appropriate.  And the 
reason is that the way things have developed they are no longer appropriate and, therefore, we are 
changing our target for the year.  I think that is quite a different thing than saying we are going to 
live by a fixed monetary rule, which is really what Larry is suggesting. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  Is this required?  Do we have to have this one way or the other on this 
matter? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It’s subject to change at any time. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I understand that. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But I think there needs to be some understanding on how we are 
going to be operating. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  If we are going to have a fixed rule, we have to have it in place in 
February. 
 
 MR. COLDWELL.  I’m certainly not prepared to vote for a fixed rule, but I’m not sure I’m 
prepared to vote for the other one either. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  Would there be a way--and this is what I was driving at earlier--whereby 
those of us who saw fit could communicate to Chuck in writing a point of view on this?  [I ask] 
because I always feel that we have mass resources in our research departments and I would like to 
have some of our professionals, who can articulate this a hell of a lot better than I, put something 
down in writing before this decision is made.  And they didn’t have time to do it.  I think this is a 
very gutsy decision that we will have to live with. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I have trouble with it on two counts.  I don’t see how the 
Committee can lay down a rule that requires future Committee members to vote a certain vote.  I 
don’t see how you can do that.  As a matter of procedure, I don’t see how you can vote today and 
say that next July every member of this Committee is now committed to a certain mechanical 
process.  Even if you voted that, I don’t think it would be valid.  Members could throw it out 
because it’s just wrong procedure.  No Committee can bind a future meeting-- 
 
  MR. ROOS.  How we perform in February in setting the directive will be affected 
materially by what our attitude is on an issue such as this.  All I am saying is that we should have as 
much background as possible made available to the Committee prior to taking whatever action it 
takes in February.   



12/19/78  
 

  

62
 

 
    CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, that’s fine.  It seems to me that what is being suggested is 
that at each meeting of the FOMC there will be available data as to a track that could return us to 
our range, if we are off it.  And at that point members of the Committee can vote to get on the track 
or vote not to get on it.  I think that’s the only procedure we can accept.  We will have new 
members; we will have two new Governors coming on.  They can’t be bound to vote [a certain 
way] later.   
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Also, Mr. Chairman, there’s a question of what we decide at the meeting as 
to what we authorize the Manager to do.  We think the time for the decisions is at the Committee 
meetings and not-- 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  But if you present the choice, the Committee has a choice to 
decide to return on a 1-month basis, a 3-month basis, a 6-month basis, or to say in its reports that 
we have decided for factors that have come up to change our long-range objective. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  But, Mr. Chairman--and I’ll promise I’ll hush up after this-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  No, this is very important.  Don’t hush up. 
 
  MR. ROOS.  It seems to me that the very reason that Chuck’s committee developed this 
paper was to give some guidance to this process even though they can’t bind future FOMCs.  And 
if there’s a purpose in this memorandum being circulated, I think there’s a purpose in certain 
aspects of the memorandum being debated even though we can’t bind anybody.  That’s my only 
point. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes.  Well, I think the point has certainly [been made].  I think 
Ernie Baughman had a [comment]. 
 
  MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that a way of handling this today--and I 
would propose a motion unless there is already one on the table--is to accept number 6 as an 
interim posture but not as a policy action at this point in time.  That will leave the door open for 
continuing exploration. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Yes, I think that’s right. 
 
  MR. BAUGHMAN.  [Unintelligible] and a number of others, which I suggested in the 
conversation.  In fact, I’ll have to admit that as I read the discussion pertaining to 6, I found it on 
balance a little more persuasive to come out a little differently on it than this specific 
recommendation.  It seems to me there is something there and we need to keep the door open for 
further exploration, but at the same time we must move ahead to get a February statement out. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Paul. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

63
 

  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I think this comment of Ernie’s makes half the 
point I was going to make.  I think there was a lot of sympathy, which should not be overlooked, on 
the subcommittee for paying more attention to the long-term averages.  I felt that and I think some 
others did.  That may not come through here very strongly because you read the [conclusion] of 
rejecting the mechanical [link] and I think that is precisely what the subcommittee did.  It had 
sympathy for paying a lot more attention to the long range but it followed a different track in 
saying any of the mechanical devices we fooled around with have flaws and we shouldn’t be bound 
by a particular mechanical device.  And that’s precisely where I came out:  We should pay more 
attention, just don’t have a particular mechanical device.  And I would say semantically in this 
proposal of Larry’s that I just don’t agree that the spirit of the new law clearly requires changes in 
the present procedures.  As a matter of fact, I don’t know of anything in the new law or in the 
discussion that implies that.  It may be a good idea to change them, but I don’t think we can refer 
back to the spirit of the law.  
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, what is your pleasure here?  Do you want to vote on this or 
do you want to keep it as an open and continuing discussion from meeting to meeting?  Or do you 
want to settle one? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I like Ernie’s proposal. 
 
  MR. BALLES.  I do too, Mr. Chairman.  And I must say, going back at least three years 
ago, I have been harping on this lack of getting from the short run to the long run.  And one time I 
suggested a mechanical rule, which got sympathy but no action, and a number of other people 
around the table have subsequently come up with various devices.  But when everything else is said 
and done, we really have had such big overshoots--or undershoots, as the case may be--because we 
haven’t disciplined ourselves sufficiently on this Committee to get from the short-term to the 
long-term [objectives].  If we can do that by a means other than a strictly mechanical rule, that’s 
fine.  But I think we have to do it by one means or another and, therefore, I support Ernie’s general 
proposal that we leave the matter open for further discussion.  I think it is one of the most important 
procedural aspects of this whole shooting match. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Would that be satisfactory to everyone? 
 
  MR. MAYO.  It’s a big step forward, I think, Mr. Chairman. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  To keep it open? 
 
  MR. MAYO.  Well, no.  To work in the direction that Chuck’s committee has given us 
here. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I think that’s absolutely right.  And in any case, we will be getting 
options before us in every meeting.  All right, we will proceed to 7--before we have another 
dissent. 
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I would like to dissent on number 6, Mr. Chairman.  



12/19/78  
 

  

64
 

 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  You dissent on keeping it--  
 
  MR. COLDWELL.  I’m not prepared to vote on that matter yet.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I don’t think number 7 has to be decided.  What it means, in effect, if we 
don’t decide it, is that in February we will continue as we have today to have a short-run 2-month 
growth range that is the trigger range for determining action.  We tried simply here to develop an 
arithmetic equivalent that will be more stable for cosmetic public relations purposes.  It wasn’t to 
have any effect on the way the Manager responded or the speed with which he responded to 
changes but simply to give something that would reduce the amount of instability in the reported 
monetary aggregates we are looking at as our specialized targets.  But there is disagreement.   
President Volcker doesn’t care for it too much; I really pushed this in part because of the people, 
like President Eastburn, who wanted to have a long-run profile for the Committee, but he’s not sure 
about it.  So I would suggest that we just drop this. 
 
  MR. BALLES.  Before you do that, I’d like to strongly support that.  Going back to the 
predecessor committee on which I served and the ideas that surfaced, we had all sorts of 
conversations about the instability you get in looking at a 2-month horizon.  Not only the weekly 
numbers but even the monthly numbers are 90 percent random fluctuation.  In all the statistical 
tests we made, you have to go to something like the 3-month average to get some idea of the true 
underlying trend.  I think this is a great step forward and I would recommend not to deep six it. 
 
  MR. MAYO.  I feel much the same way, Mr. Chairman.  I would say if number 6 was a 
great step forward, this is even a greater step forward. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Paul Volcker.  Go ahead. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t want to prolong this, but I think there’s a certain 
confusion here.  I agree that looking at the trend over a period of time is the only way to make 
sense out of the way these numbers are moving.  The question here, as I see it, is what you are 
looking at in a particular decision at a particular Committee meeting.  And what you are looking at 
then is what will happen before you can make another decision next month.  And I think the typical 
question that you are asking is the one that Mark asked earlier, and which somebody asks at almost 
all these meetings:  Should we react to a 10 percent rate of growth in the money supply next month 
or should we react in the other direction if it only goes up 2 percent?  What is that relevant range?  
Now, mechanically these things come out the same.  I just think it’s a little more confusing in the 
communication among ourselves to obscure the next month by this long-term averaging the 
chairman of the subcommittee referred to.  Where we are discussing annual averages or quarterly 
averages, the trouble with the averaging procedure is that it is so elongated that there is very little 
time left to affect the average.  That’s precisely the problem.  
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Let me add, the baloney is what the baloney is, no matter how you slice it. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I won’t say anything about [unintelligible].  Frank Morris. 



12/19/78  
 

  

65
 

 
 MR. MORRIS.  I want to support John Balles.  I think this recommendation represents a 
big step forward.  I think it will not only improve our performance and prospective monetary policy 
by adding a longer period for the short-term objective, but I think it will also make communications 
to the public much easier to understand. 
 
   MR. PARTEE.  That is the main intent. 
 
  MR. MORRIS.  For example, at the current meeting, the 6 to 10 on M2 in the directive for 
the 2-month period means [something] like 6 to 7-1/2 on the 3-month period.  I submit that the 
latter will be much [easier] for the public to understand and will give us a better perspective of 
what we are doing than the 6 to 10.  So I really strongly believe that’s the best thing in the whole 
report. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  The [subcommittee] chairman was about to throw it out.   
   
 MR. MORRIS.  Yes. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Steve. 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  Mr. Chairman, I consider the [unintelligible] for M1 as against [M2] at 
the end-- 
 
   SPEAKER(?).  I was talking about M2. 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  Yes, I understand, but it doesn’t always come out the favorable way.  
And without speaking for or against one approach or another, I just wanted to be sure that the 
Committee understands that there is absolutely no difference between the two approaches.  If we 
have done our math right, the Committee is going to be reacting in absolutely the same way as it 
reacted in the past with absolutely the same weight.  We have adjusted the ranges, given the 
projections now.  This is not something that makes any substantive difference in the procedures.   
 
  MR. MORRIS.  I beg to differ on that point.  And the reason is this.  In the 3-month period 
you have three pieces of information plus one guess.  That is, you have the one month that’s 
known, the second month where we have a lot of information, and then the third month, which is 
sheer guess work and for which the information value is extremely low.  Now, I submit that is 
better than having one month for which we have some information.  For example, we don’t know 
much information about December; we have a little information on it but our December projections 
could be way off. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  There is nothing in this procedure that affects how much 
information you have.  You know every past month, you know half of the present month, and you 
don’t know the next month.  Whether you add it up together or not, that’s what you know.  
 
  MR. WALLICH.  It’s like putting a constant in an equation; it doesn’t make any difference. 



12/19/78  
 

  

66
 

 
  MR. MORRIS.  I think the difference is that the longer the short-run guideline and the more 
months of information we have in that guideline, the more likely the Committee is to make up for 
any past undershoots or overshoots.  And that I think is-- 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Dave has been trying to get the floor. 
 
   MR. EASTBURN.  I would just like to say that I did, as Chuck indicated, have sympathy to 
this at the outset.  I’ve had some reservation since and it seems to me it is not central to the whole 
Humphrey-Hawkins process and procedure.  And I would suggest, given the differences that there 
are, that we not pass it at this time and come back to it. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  I would [note], Mr. Chairman, that this was in the Bluebook this time.  But 
it was so far buried that I at least didn’t find it the first time through.  It’s Appendix 4 that presents 
the information in the new style.  I would suggest that next time we ask [the staff] to do it in 
Appendix 1, as an alternative, and we can discuss it more in February. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Why not even bring it right up into this text here? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  Well, we’ll bring it up into the text, then. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  All right, now I want to hear from Bones. 
 
  MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, many of the regional Banks have [unintelligible] but we, 
too, heartily support this.  I guess if there’s anything that hasn’t been said, it’s that we feel any 
significant developments during that period would tend to balance out.  Any one monthly variation 
would not have the significant impact, so we do support [this]; some of our staff did some work 
early this spring related to this, so we are supporting it. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Well, for something that is being tossed out, it sounds like there is 
a lot of support.  Steve, do you have any preference? 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  I don’t have any preference.  I really believe strongly--and we thought 
about this [hard but] I don’t know how to get it through to the Committee--that it makes not one bit 
of difference.  We’re narrowing the range to make up for the averaging process.  The different 
multiplication, if we have done our math correctly, should [result in] the same degree of 
responsiveness.   
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Were you saying that if the aggregates are too high, a longer 
period will keep them high longer? 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  No, it won’t go as high, but they will be not as high longer. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Bob Mayo. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

67
 

  MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman, I think it makes two bits of difference, if I may use the 
phrase, with regard to Frank’s point on communications with the public.  I think that is the main 
advantage of this.  I hope we are all smart enough around this table that we can divide by 2 and 
divide by 3.  [If] not, we are in trouble. 
 
  MR. AXILROD.  It isn’t all that clear, because for example this time your M1 would be a 
very low range.  You’d have to explain to the public that really, we are letting the growth in, but the 
growth is going to be in January.  But it’s going to be below because we are averaging January with 
a low November and December; you have that slight problem.   
 
  MR. MAYO.  But we always have this problem.  Again, I’d rather use it that way--the 
bigger figure. 
 
  MR. EASTBURN.  I move that we not pass 7. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Is everybody more or less willing to accept that at the moment, 
despite the preferences? 
 
  MR. MAYO.  Just so it doesn’t die. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  It’s not going to die; it’s going to be immaterial.  All right, put it 
in the Bluebook someplace. 
 
  MR. PARTEE.  The last recommendation, Mr. Chairman, is a non-recommendation.  It had 
been proposed by some that we add to the long-term targets specified under the Humphrey- 
Hawkins bill something like reserves or the monetary base or one of the basic monetary aggregates. 
We can see no particular purpose for doing so because whatever problems there are in specifying 
the long-term money numbers for M1, M2, M1+, and M3, and so forth, will exist also in specifying 
the monetary base.  So we don’t see any advantage to doing that. 
 
 MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, my stomach is too empty to argue vehemently, but I’d like to 
express a weak disagreement with Chuck. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  I’m surprised it’s weak.  It’s only physically weak.  Does anybody 
else have any comment on that?  Yes, Willis. 
 
  MR. WINN.  I, too, would share the feeling that this is sort of a back-of-the-hand treatment 
to a problem.  I grant that it’s not a good guide and I don’t insist that it be in the targets or ranges, 
but I think we have made a mistake in the past in ignoring the supplemental information that this 
provides for us.  And I’d like to see an examination in somewhat more detail of whether this 
supplemental information tells us something about what’s going on in the aggregates, particularly 
with respect to the future, that we have chosen to ignore.  I don’t advocate that it be part of the 
specs. 
 



12/19/78  
 

  

68
 

  MR. AXILROD.  Mr. Chairman, if I may make a suggestion.  We have been somewhat 
neglectful recently in the analysis of reserves and the monetary base in the Bluebook.  And actually 
I think it might be desirable to put, without specific figures even, some analysis of what’s going on 
in there. 
 
  MR. WINN.  That’s really all I’m talking about. 
 
 CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Bob, you had a point. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  I was just going to say that I agree the committee didn’t have time to 
address this.  But I would hope that it would continue to push on and address it not so much as a 
target but as an operating variable in lieu of, or in combination with, the fed funds rate.   
 
    MR. PARTEE.  We have been trying to do that.  And I must say it’s a very complex 
question.  
 
  MR. BLACK.  I know it is.  But there’s a substantial volume of opinion that this will be a 
better way to [operate] and I think we need to explore it. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Henry. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  I’d like to register some sympathy for reserves, not for the base.  
Particularly if we should have the Merrill decision going against us, I think we’d have to take a 
serious look at this. 
 
 MR. PARTEE.  As an operating variable. 
 
  MR. WALLICH.  As an operator. 
 
  VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We are going to look at the use of reserves as the 
operational variable, are we not, Mr. Chairman? 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Your committee is going to be looking at that.  That’s very nice.  
Bob, is the memo that you circulated being handled in any way? 
 
  MR. BLACK.  Well, I think this addresses many of the same questions. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  That’s what I was wondering. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  And I really prefer this method of doing it.  The reason I couched it in the 
form we had it before is that that’s the way we’ve been discussing it. 
 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Do you feel they are making progress on your viewpoints? 
 
  MR. BLACK.  Oh, yes. 



12/19/78  
 

  

69
 

 
  CHAIRMAN MILLER.  Okay. 
 
  MR. BLACK.  In Larry’s case, the mechanistic tying of the short-term [growth] rates with 
the long-term rates did not bother me quite as much because I do think it will force out into the 
open a more conscious consideration [of the] relationship. 
 
[Secretary’s note: The raw transcript ended at this point.  It seems likely that the meeting ended 
here, but there may have been additional discussion.] 




