









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


  
 

  
 

TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 
 

February 28, 1978 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files.  The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding.  Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted.  In some instances, words have been added in 
brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or 
misstatement. 
 

Errors undoubtedly remain.  The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy 
at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in 
preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions.  The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 
 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 
involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable.  Deleted passages are indicated by 
gaps in the text.  All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under 
applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 
 
 

Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript 
 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

 



2/28/78

Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 28, 1978

                  

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, February 28,

1978, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Burns, Chairman
Volcker, Vice Chairman
Coldwell
Guffey
Jackson
Mayo
Morris
Partee
Roos
Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Winn,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Messrs. Black, Kimbrel, and Willes, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr. Broida, Secretary
Mr. Altmann, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, R. Davis, T. Davis,
Eisenmenger, Kichline, Scheld,
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate
Economists



2/28/78

Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market
Account

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations

Messrs. Coyne and Keir, Assistants to the
Board    Governors

Mr. Wallace   , Staff Director for Federal
Reserve Bank Activities, Board of
Governors

Mrs. Farar, Economist, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Messrs. Boehne, J. Davis, and Parthemos,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Cleveland, and Richmond, respectively

Mr. Brandt, Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta

Mr. Kareken, Economic Adviser, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

                                                  

                                                        

                                

                                                                      

                                                         

                                                           

                               

                                             

- 2 -



 
Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 

February 28, 1978 
 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, we will start our meeting.  I am glad to see all of you 

once again but I had hoped, as I know all of you did, that this meeting would be chaired by Mr. 
Miller.  He is testifying this morning and he has had his difficulties, but I am reasonably confident 
that they may be cleared up this morning.  We all have our duty and we will perform it.  It has been 
a somewhat difficult period for all of us and some mistakes have been made, and I=m responsible 
for two mistakes.  Well, I don=t know how many I=m responsible for, but I=m responsible at least for 
two that I can think of immediately involving this Committee.  The first was to advise you not to 
take up the long-range targets at the January meeting.  That was a mistake.  The second was 
postponing our regular meeting a week.  That was the second mistake.  I think that, under the 
circumstances, these mistakes are understandable; I hope they are.  Nevertheless, they were errors 
as things have turned out; they were hurried suggestions.  From now on, no matter what happens, 
we will proceed according to our regular rules--not deviating to the left nor deviating to the right 
one inch.  A motion to act on the minutes would now be in order. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  I move [that the minutes be] approved. 
 
SPEAKER(?).  Second. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Approval has been moved and seconded.  And I take it there is no 

difficulty.  We had a report of the Examination of our System Open Market Account.  Is there any 
desire for discussion of that report? 

 
MR. COLDWELL.  I move acceptance. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Balles. 
 
MR. BALLES.  Just a comment, Mr. Chairman.  I guess it=s from the Board=s annual report 

that the press picks up this news--that it looked like a $100 million loss last year in foreign 
exchange operations.  When I had my staff look into this, it turns out that much of that goes back to 
the middle of 1971 or whatever, but we=re still amortizing some of the losses from that point in the 
foreign exchange operations.  I=m informed by my staff--and I checked here [at the Board]--that 
there=s actually been a small profit in each of the last several years.  The only reason I make this 
comment is that it might be a little misleading the way the thing is reported.  Whatever the basic 
source of the information is, it leads to some misunderstanding among the public and the press.  I 
don=t know what if anything can be done about that, but I simply raise it as something that might be 
looked into a bit. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I don=t know what we can do about the report, but this question 

will come up in Congressional hearings and then we ought to make not only the points that you 
have just made but the additional point that we held onto our gold, and that=s why we got into this 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

2

loss.  Gold then was worth $35 an ounce and, if I remember the current quotation correctly it is 
something like $181. 

 
MR. BALLES.  Right. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  If you take that into account, as you should, and if profits in terms of 

inflated dollars mean anything, we=ve made an enormous profit. 
 
MR. BALLES.  Good point.  It simply came to my attention because Table II of Bill 

Wallace=s report had a line showing losses from foreign exchange in 1978, and I think the figure 
was close to $100 million. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, and I have seen figures of this sort cited by distinguished 

columnists. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Governor Wallich covered that in his testimony recently, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  I did refer to this when they complained about the heavy foreign 

[exchange] losses and I made the point that we retained gold. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  While we=re on that subject, we sure are hoarding that gold as if it 

were there never to be used.  Well, we may possibly have further comments on that when we come 
to item 3 on the agenda, and we=ll be there soon. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment in light of Mr. Balles=s comment on 

the losses in the foreign currency transactions?  I was going to bring it up [under agenda item 3] but 
it bears on the System portfolio.  The System portfolio is enormously profitable and it is well 
managed, but there are computations you can make by which you can establish putative gains and 
losses that would have been realized in certain conditions if maybe sales had been made to realize 
them.  Take our coupon portfolio of only between $60 and $70 billion.  At the end of 1976 it had an 
unrealized capital gain on it of $2.1 billion; at the end of 1977, it had an unrealized loss on it of 
minus $1/2 billion.  So it was a swing from an unrealized gain to an unrealized loss of 
approximately $2.6 billion, but it was not realized.  That doesn=t mean that we are not receiving an 
appropriate interest on the portfolio.  But it is a very sizable loss [if one makes] another calculation, 
which is really an estimate and can be challenged in many ways. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the first figure could be challenged too, but go on. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  Well, you can say that the average maturity of the portfolio is on the order 

of 3 years.  What has happened to a 3-year note in the market?  It has gone down.  If the portfolio 
were to consist all of 3-year notes, which of course it does not, we would have had a loss on the 
order of $4 billion from this.  Again, as I say, this is a purely theoretical computation, but I mention 
this because I anticipate that it will be pointed out that there are losses on the foreign currency 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

3

operations.  And it needs to be remembered that in proper economics there are unrealized losses on 
the portfolio that are much larger. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I hope that if and when or as this is debated in the Congress, this will 

never be pointed out because that would only add to the confusion.  After all, we could, by 
pumping reserves into our commercial banks, add enormously to the security holdings of the 
System and run up our profits to--well, let me say to any conceivable figure.  

 
Well, a motion to accept the examination report has been made.  Is there any-- 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Let me just say for the record, Mr. Chairman, if I may, that 

there was a reference in the examination report to some custody control standards in the acceptance 
division, which is a fairly small part of the operation.  There were some differences of opinion, if 
that=s the right [term], about the standards that had been followed there for some years, and some 
changes are being made.  I think it=s incorrect to leave the suggestion that there was some sense of 
weakness, at least on our part.  There may be a difference in the way this can be controlled, and 
changes are being made in response to the examination report.  But there should not be any 
implication that something weakened during the year there.  The procedures had been followed for 
many years.  The new ones may or may not be better; they=re different, anyway.  I just didn=t want 
to leave an implication that something had weakened during this period in that area. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Was such an implication intended, Mr. Wallace? 
 
MR. WALLACE.  No, Mr. Chairman, it really wasn=t.  Conversations between our staff and 

members of the New York Bank staff indicate that changes are being made to correct the 
difficulties that we pointed out.  I believe Miss Young from our staff, who did this examination, 
and Mr. Ozog at New York have worked out whatever these differences were.  So I think Mr. 
Volcker=s comment is correct. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you very much.  Any other comment on the examination 

report?  If not, a motion to accept the report was already [made]; if seconded we can move on. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  So moved. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that it has been seconded.  Again, [I hear] no objections, so 

we=ll turn now to Mr. Pardee for his report on foreign currency operations. 
  
MR. PARDEE.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Pardee.  Are there any questions or comments? 
 
MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, this was the first time I was aware that the limitations we 

place on the Manager are limitations on gross transactions.  It seems to me that the procedure has 
some question marks.  The objective of the limitations is to assure the Committee that our net 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

4

exposure will not exceed a given amount.  And it seems to me that the limitations for the future 
ought to be placed in terms of a net change, not the gross transactions; they don=t carry nearly the 
same meaning. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that=s a fair question.  Mr. Wallich. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  We have [limitations on] both.  The principal one that is stated in the 

Authorization, which is the basic document, is in terms of the net exposure.  And the exposure 
limits were not overrun.  [The Desk] was well within those.  What was overrun was the [limit on] 
gross transactions.  The reason for having that is not that it=s more important than the overall 
exposure limit but that a lot of things can happen in an unchanging net exposure.  For instance, you 
can go from plus to minus a billion in a day and it shows no change in the net exposure. You=re still 
exposed a billion, only you switched the position the other way.  And that was the reason why a 
gross transaction limit was [imposed].  That doesn=t mean that it can=t be lifted very easily, but this 
Committee should be aware of what=s going on and the Subcommittee should be more aware. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Coldwell. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  I think there was another reason too, if I recall correctly, for the 

establishment of the gross limits--to achieve some balance in the Desk=s operations in foreign 
currency transactions.  [The goal was] that we not be intervening constantly in the market, but 
intervene with a balanced approach without heavy, massive intervention.  A net limit, as you 
pointed out, would perhaps reveal nothing. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Jackson. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  To what extent do you try to unwind our position in periods of relative 

calm? 
 
MR. PARDEE.  I=m sorry, but we haven=t had a period of relative calm in which we could 

really begin to unwind our positions.   
 
MR. JACKSON.  I misunderstood.  I thought you said there was relative calm for an 

extended period of-- 
 
MR. PARDEE.  That=s right, but it was a very, very tenuous one.  During that period, as I say, 

the same issues that everybody else was worried about were still there.  And if we were seen as a 
buyer of [marks] in that period, we could have had a bigger problem on our hands.  We had 
discussions on several occasions with the Bundesbank on the possibility of their picking up some 
marks for us and on a couple of days we might have ended up with some if the market had turned 
in our favor.  We also carry at this stage a rather substantial accounting loss on the operations we 
have engaged in up to this point; and when the turn comes, we should be in a position to take a 
profit.  I=m rather reluctant to start unwinding this early, both because of the sensitivities of the 
market and this profitability question in the back of my mind. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

5

 
MR. JACKSON.  Do you perceive our function to be to make a profit [and not] a loss or to 

counter a disorderly market? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  The first function is related to the conditions of the marketplace.   And, as I 

say, we did discuss actively with the Bundesbank this [issue of] when they might pick up some 
marks for us but the conditions were not right.  The second consideration--I=ll say it because it was 
discussed earlier on--is this question of relative profits and losses.  But that is not the first objective. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  As of noon, or whenever it was on Friday, we had picked 

up quite a few marks.  The market was having a rally.  Unfortunately, the market turned again 
during the afternoon, but that was the specific instance when you got up to $85 million, I think. 

 
MR. PARDEE.  The two-way approach does provide us with marks.  And once the market 

turns in our favor, then we will be net buyers of marks without the market necessarily paying much 
attention to it.  But  if we go into the market flat out and simply start buying ourselves marks, it 
would be a matter of a day or two before they=ll say,  “Aha!  The Federal Reserve is covering its 
debt; that means the upside risk of the dollar is limited.”  Already the operation with the 
Bundesbank, which has a serious liquidity problem as a result of the international [situation] in 
reabsorbing some of that, is seen in the market as putting a damper on the dollar rate.  It=s a very 
sensitive situation. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Partee, please. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, I think there are two questions here and they=re really aspects of the 

same question.  The one that was raised by Frank Morris about the Desk exceeding its limit is 
whether there needs to be an intra-day limit on gross transactions.  I think perhaps there does, but I 
do think as a matter of strategy it is desirable sometimes to show your presence and then to offset it 
later in the day.  And I believe that is exactly what happened on Friday.  You had a large gross but 
the net wasn=t very big for the day.  You apparently sold in the morning and bought in the afternoon 
and largely offset [the sale].  And I think that kind of thing is to be encouraged where it can be, 
particularly with the market as volatile as it is between Europe and New York.  As the day 
progresses, that offsetting of gross sales--to the extent it can be accommodated--I think is desirable; 
it reduces the net exposure on the day.  Then extending that thought to Governor Jackson=s 
[question], I think over time you also want to be looking for opportunities where you can reduce 
the net exposure position.  I=m sympathetic, I believe, with the idea of relenting on the daily gross 
limit but I don=t think I would do away with it entirely because I imagine we could get very, very 
large gross figures.  We might even have a very large gross figure that you expect to offset later in 
the day and you can=t offset it.  So it can lead in a way to an exposure that=s unanticipated.  But 
given the kind of markets we have, I think a $100 million limit on gross [transactions] is probably 
too low. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think this is a fair question, but one that I think we can 

postpone until the next meeting when I believe the rules under which we operate are to be 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

6

reexamined by the Committee.  In the meantime, I think we ought to have some discussion, 
perhaps some studies by our staff and by some interested members of the Committee.  Perhaps 
before this meeting is over, we shall want to formalize that.  Any other question or comments on 
foreign currency operations or the dollar problem as it now exists?  Very well, if not, a motion to 
ratify the transactions since the previous meeting would be in order. 

 
MR. MAYO.  So moved. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Seconded. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  A motion to ratify has been made and seconded.   I hear no 

objections.  We will pass on to Mr. Holmes=s recommendations. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, in March the System has 17 swap drawings, totaling $541 

million, maturing.  It seems unlikely, although it=s not completely inconceivable, that we will be 
able to acquire that amount in the market.  I recommend that the Committee approve the rollover of 
these swaps on maturity for 3 months.  In all cases, these are first renewals; they=ve only been 
outstanding for 3 months. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The recommendation is clear.  Is it acceptable to the Committee? 
 
MR. MAYO.  I don=t believe we have an alternative. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  We could just pay it back. 
 
MR. MAYO.  Take it out of your left pocket! 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any objections to Mr. Holmes=s recommendation?  I hear none.  I 

take it that it is acceptable to the Committee.  Any other recommendations? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Well, Mr. Chairman, in April we have a little different situation.  We have 

six swaps totaling about $136 million that will mature.  As they mature, they will have been 
outstanding for 6 months--the maximum called for in our swap arrangement without a special 
agreement between the Bundesbank and ourselves.  I really think it is premature to make a 
recommendation concerning these drawings at the present time, but I would like to have 
preliminary discussions with the Bundesbank, which they are also very anxious to have, either at 
the Basle meeting in March or slightly before that.  While I have no recommendations, I think it 
might be worthwhile to point out to the Committee the options it has before these swaps mature.  
First, they could be repaid.  If we are lucky, we can buy the German marks in the market, 
conditions permitting, or directly from the Bundesbank.  This is one very clear option. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  In the latter case, we need not be lucky; we just do it. 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

7

MR. HOLMES.  That=s right.  I should point out, however, that from an immediate profit and 
loss point of view, for those people who are interested in that, these swaps are the most expensive 
drawings that the System could repay.  This arises obviously from the fact that the drawings were 
made at rates of about 43-1/2 to 44 [cents] per mark, compared with a rate on our last drawing of 
about 49-1/2 [cents] per mark, representing the 13 percent appreciation of the mark since last 
October.  Now, I remain confident, along with Scott and I think many others, about the chances of 
[eventually] unwinding the swaps at a profit or at least without a loss.  In fact, the dollar would 
only have to regain about half of its losses against the D-mark since last October to reach the 
break-even point.  And I think that=s obtainable.  Consequently, I personally would not be overly 
concerned about showing a loss on the repayment of any individual drawing.  I think we should, 
however, consider whether it would be preferable to pay down other drawings, minimizing our 
losses and the Bundesbank=s losses.  We have other drawings at different rates that we could pay 
down, perhaps even showing a bit of profit.  I think that=s something we ought to consider and I 
have no recommendation at this time. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  But what difference does it make, Alan?  If we take a loss on this one, we get 

a profit on something else. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  That=s right in the long run; but in the short run we show a big loss.  That 

doesn=t bother me, but I just want to point out that if we repay those we maximize our book losses. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You say you maximize them.  You say that there are many who 

agree with your judgment [about the dollar].  I=m sure that is right, but there are many more, 
judging from the behavior of the market, who seem to disagree with your judgment.  I think it is 
that kind of a question. 

 
MR. HOLMES.  That=s right.  I think we ought to consider it and I have no recommendation 

right now.  We can wait until we get closer to the [time the drawings mature] for a firm 
recommendation. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Also bearing in mind that profit and loss, while a significant 

consideration, may well be swamped by other factors such as the extent of our exposure as far as 
members of the Congress and perhaps the market both are concerned. 

 
MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, another option that the Committee has is that we could 

request the Bundesbank to routinely roll over the maturing swaps for 3 additional months with a 
possibility of another renewal.  In many ways, this is the very simplest approach that we might 
follow.  It would not, for example, raise the issue of our 50-50 loss-sharing arrangement with the 
Germans as a request by us to the Bundesbank for a direct sale of German marks might do.  Again, 
this is something to be explored.  I have no recommendation.  I want to point out that this is another 
option that the Committee has. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You mean go beyond a 6-month period or 9-month period?   
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

8

MR. HOLMES.  That=s right.  It is provided for by mutual agreement between two parties in 
our swap agreement.  But it takes a special agreement to do that.  Another possibility, and it=s only 
a possibility, is that other sources of D-marks might become available to the System--should, for 
example, the Treasury decide to sell SDRs, borrow foreign currency, or draw on the IMF.  Now, 
this is not [beyond] the realm of possibility, but it=s a very remote possibility--though one that may 
be available to us before the problem arises.  I think there is another approach the System could 
take.  That is, we could request a special swap facility of a longer maturity--say, two years--with 
prepayment options, of course.  Such an arrangement would be roughly similar to our special Swiss 
franc arrangement and could be useful if in early April concern about the System=s acquisition of 
German marks to repay the swaps or fear that the System is running out of D-mark resources are 
putting great pressures on the market.  That=s something you can=t judge now but that=s another 
possibility.  I think there are a number of possibilities and the final choice can only reflect market 
conditions as they exist in early April in light of whatever actions, if any, may be undertaken by the 
Administration or the Treasury in the international area. 

 
MR. COLDWELL.  If I hear you right, Alan, you are talking about doing some of this 

negotiation in what--March or April? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  I would like to have preliminary talks with the Bundesbank and be clear 

about exactly how they feel.  They know the same possibilities that I listed here.  But I would like 
to be able to feel free to talk to them quite frankly about the possibilities and get their thinking on 
this. They=re anxious to do that. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  I think we have to bear in mind that the Bundesbank has some particular 

interest in this matter.  One is their concern about the expansion of their monetary base and their 
money supply, which would be triggered if we were to repay by drawing on the Bundesbank.  The 
second concern they have is that they are uneasy about the 50-50 [loss-sharing], which suggests 
that we should not do something that provides an opportunity for re-raising that issue.  I think those 
are the two principal concerns that might come up. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  Would the latter come up, particularly with this 2-year thing? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  It could; it could indeed.  That=s why I think preliminary negotiations or talk 

about this would be useful. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  May I ask a factual question? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Please. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  As you acquire marks in your day-to-day trading, are they put into the 

System=s account or are they used to repay [swaps]? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Well, they would go into the System account until we accumulate enough to 

make a decent repayment.  We wouldn=t do that with every million that we buy. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

9

 
MR. JACKSON.  What would you consider a decent repayment? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  $10 or $20 million.  It can be very flexible. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Which priced drawing would you apply the proceeds to when you make 

such a repayment? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Well, I think that=s what you have to decide.  Do you pay off using a first-

in/first-out approach?  Or do you try to pick one where the rate is comparable to what you paid? 
 
MR. [PARDEE].  In the past we have done both, but we mainly look to the earliest maturities 

if we don=t face this problem with the second renewal.  Usually, in the cycles that we get into, those 
are also the most expensive swaps, so we do take our losses early in the repayment cycle and the 
profits later on.  But following the normal approach, if we were to acquire marks over the next 
couple of weeks, we would repay first those swaps that are coming up in April and take the 
substantial losses, reducing our average rate as time goes on.  We also have-- 

 
MR. JACKSON.  This is a policy question that should be addressed as we [review] these 

issues at the next meeting, so that we will know what the policy of the Committee is toward the 
swap agreement. 

 
MR. [PARDEE].  We also have a substantial negotiation with the Treasury because they are 

in debt, too.  And sometimes we have to make accommodations for our part in the operation. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Also, I don=t think that this is a policy we could arrive at unilaterally. 

The Germans will have their views as well as the Treasury and I do think we have to leave 
considerable room for flexibility to those who operate the Desk in dealing with that issue.  

 
Let me return if I may to the question we considered previously on net versus gross exposure, 

or possibly retaining both but changing the limits perhaps along the lines that Mr. Partee had in 
mind.  I think this should be examined not only by the staff but also by a subcommittee of this 
family.  I=m going to ask Mr. Wallich to serve as Chairman of such a subcommittee and include on 
it Governor Coldwell, Mr. Volcker, and Mr. Black.  And that subcommittee could also consider the 
question of the repayment and what recommendation if any to make to this Committee.  But I don=t 
think we would want to lay down a rigid policy; others are involved, as I noted.  Yes. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Just a comment on this loss question.  I think this certainly 

should be secondary to [the Desk’s] objectives.  But my recollection is that whatever we do with 
the German swap is going to be swamped by the continuing repayment on the Swiss swap.  So, for 
any relevant reporting period, we are going to show a loss whatever we do and, therefore, it=s not 
going to appear as something special in terms of the overall reporting result. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Did you comment on the Swiss transactions in the past month? 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

10

 
MR. PARDEE.  I just mentioned them; I didn=t go into a description.  If you wish, I can 

describe the reasons behind them. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Some criticism has been made of our being involved in the Swiss 

transactions.  What was your defense for it? 
 
MR. PARDEE.  Well, the thing is that we have operated exclusively in German marks since 

1975, but that=s not the only currency that is the source of the disorder or unsettlement in the 
exchange market.  Occasionally the Swiss franc clearly is.  This very morning we have a higher 
Swiss franc, which tends to be pulling up a number of other currencies.  And I had to discuss with 
people at the Desk whether we should today consider operating in Swiss francs.  Our view is that 
when the Swiss franc is the source of the unsettlement, then we should consider intervention in 
Swiss francs to see if by calming that market we can calm the broader markets for the dollar.  But I 
know what the criticism is and I feel it very strongly myself.  We got into a very deep hole in Swiss 
francs.  It=s not that important a currency in the broad spectrum of international financial relations 
and I have been very sparing in use of this agreement that we had with the Swiss National Bank--to 
the extent that at the outset when we decided to go into the market, I negotiated with the Swiss 
National Bank that half of our operation in New York would be for our account and half for theirs.  
Now, the agreement is that the first $25 million that we do in New York is theirs.  And from there 
on, we might consider whether we would intervene or not.  So, on that basis, I have limited our 
intervention to $69 million.  We have made a gesture in the Swiss franc market.  On the days that 
we have operated, we have been reasonably effective.  But we cannot get ourselves into a stampede 
in that particular currency, given this loss problem on our earlier debt.  I would also [note that] 
there are times when there is a technical case and a philosophical case for intervening in other 
currencies. But we have avoided that because of the broader policy consideration on maintaining 
this operation strictly in marks, with occasional operations in Swiss francs, when I think it is 
absolutely defensible to the Committee and to the world at large. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You say “absolutely defensible to the Committee.”  You are 

engaging in a bit of rhetoric now. 
 
MR. PARDEE.  Well, I=m hopeful it is defensible to the Committee.  I have not heard any 

direct criticism and I=m willing to hear it. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Have you heard criticism from the Treasury? 
 
MR. PARDEE.  They have agreed at a policy level, but they have warned us to be 

light-fingered.  And I have been. 
 
MR. MAYO.  Is there any intervention by the Bundesbank in Swiss francs?  Is that a fair 

question? 
 
MR. PARDEE.  They don=t. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

11

 
MR. MAYO.  They don=t? 
 
MR. PARDEE.  They do very closely coordinate their operations.  They=re on the phone back 

and forth most of the day. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, may I say what Scott was saying just a trifle differently?  It 

seems to me that there are times when intervention in the Swiss franc--if that=s the problem in the 
market and that=s pushing the market--makes some sense as long as it=s limited.  And since it=s a 
small market, it usually can be quite limited.  And if you can have even more of an impact on the 
D-mark--which is being pulled up by the Swiss franc--with a lesser amount of intervention using 
the Swiss franc, I think that is reasonable in the overall market context in which we operate. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  There are two considerations I would like to put forth, Mr. Chairman.  One 

is that when one is trying to defend a world currency like the dollar, one ought to think of doing it 
in not just one other currency like the D-mark but to broaden it.  After all, the Germans deal in 
dollars, and that means they=re dealing with the biggest thing there is.  But if we deal only in 
D-marks, we=re trying to pull our currency up or keep it from becoming disorderly in just one 
direction and all the burden is put on that one currency.  So there is quite a case for [operating in 
other currencies].  Second, we have told the market that we have $20 billion worth of swap lines 
and that has been frequently cited as an indication of the magnitude of our resources.  I=m a bit 
surprised that nobody has ever said, “Which of these currencies would you really be prepared to 
sell in the market in maintaining the dollar orderly?” And, of course, the answer is very few. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I hope you wouldn=t give that answer too quickly. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  Oh no, I never would because that would have the obvious effect of 

making it seem that our resources are much less. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Or that the whole swap network is a charade. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  I think we do need to think of broadening the scope [of our operations].  At 

the same time, I=d like to suggest that we think again about the scale of operations.  We went into 
this enterprise of raising the scale of intervention, as we had some new reasons--the President=s 
statement, the Treasury coming into the arrangement--to think that there might be strength for the 
dollar.  These were special occasions which justified a somewhat stronger effort.  But I think those 
special occasions have passed now and we ought to think whether we ought not revert to the earlier 
scale of operations, which was substantially smaller--always, of course, bearing in mind that the 
scale of intervention has to be commensurate with the scale of disorder.  If the market gets very 
disorderly, there=s got to be more.  But in relation to a given degree of disorder, I think we ought to 
reduce our scale of operations. 

 
MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I agree with much of what Henry was saying about 

reducing the scale of operations, but something he said bothers me considerably and it=s something 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

12

about which I wanted to check with the Desk.  At least publicly we have been saying that we are 
intervening to counter disorderly conditions.  And yet we are using the Swiss franc, in effect as 
Henry has been saying--obliquely anyway--as a means of achieving a higher dollar rate. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  I did refer to disorder. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  But is there a conflict here between using another currency as opposed to 

intervening only in disorderly [conditions]? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Well, if that other currency is a source of disorder or rapid movement in 

rate, which is one measure of disorder, then I think it is justified to use that currency--if [the 
disorder] is localized in that area. 

 
MR. PARDEE.  Since 1973 we have operated in five different currencies--the German mark, 

Swiss franc, Belgian franc, Dutch guilder, and French franc--under conditions in which those 
markets were particularly disorderly.  This is the one occasion where we have limited ourselves 
strictly to the mark and the Swiss franc.  The question of having a rate objective is a delicate one.  
The market thinks and wants us to have a rate objective quite often.  As I mentioned, the market is 
pushing us to these benchmark numbers, but we are trying desperately to adhere to the floating rate 
principle of not having a rate objective and avoiding the kind of box that other central banks have 
moved into when they were actively intervening.  The Bank of England did, as does the Bank of 
Japan regularly.  They tend to fix on a rate--peg a rate and then have to back away.  And that=s 
when your scale of operations has to grow very big and then you have to have a disorderly retreat.  
Well, we have had to retreat but we tried to limit the disorder in those periods of retreat.  It=s a 
difficult gap to fill, but I think our main emphasis is avoiding pegging the rate. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  Would you or Alan like to comment on the scale of operations point that 

Henry made?  Would you say that the scale of operations has increased over time relative to the 
scale of disorder? 

 
MR. HOLMES.  I think they have been [comparable]. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We will [get] absolutely nowhere, because nobody knows what 

disorder means, including those who operate the Desk.  Yes, we=re using words to justify what 
we=re doing.  Actually we=re in there under the umbrella of disorder, though there is a thought in the 
minds of practically all concerned to stop or check the deterioration in the value of the dollar in the 
foreign exchange markets.  We might just as well speak very honestly and openly in this room.  If 
we don=t do that, we=re in trouble.  Gentlemen, I don=t like the language of disorder; there is an 
element of disingenuousness about it--not intended, but I believe it=s there.  Having said that, and if 
you still want to pursue this question-- 

 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, I question that, Mr. Chairman.  Do you [at the Desk] think that you=re 

defending, say, 2.04 more strongly than you defended 2.07?  I put it in your terms, I think. 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

13

MR. HOLMES.  I=ll say “no” to that right now, Chuck. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  The reason I asked the question was that I didn=t have the same impression 

that Henry had.  It was, as Scott said, a very quiet period for the most part since the last meeting 
and it was only with this new wave of selling of the dollar that our operations have picked up again. 
 So I was a little surprised at your comment, Henry. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  Well, I have some data here, though they are approximate only.  They 

show that in January the Treasury and the System in combined operations, both averaged on the 
days on which we did operate--there were 10 days--something close to $90 million.  In February 
we’ve operated on a fewer number of days, so far, and we had $70 million on average per day.  

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  This is on the days we operated? 
 
MR. WALLICH.  On the days we operated.  This is well above the amounts we had in 

October, November, and December. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Oh, yes, but the 70 is less than the 90. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  Henry, you implied that we=re in a new period in which the “presence” 

pronouncement of the joint Treasury-Federal  Reserve [statement] somehow no longer has the 
weight it had before, and I=d like to understand why you feel that way. 

 
MR. WALLICH.  Well, we had a chance to change the perception in the market, technically 

to shift the demand curve.  It may have had some such effect, but that effect has been established 
and absorbed now and we=re back in the old game of meeting pressure on the dollar.  I think we 
should not now, because we moved to this higher scale, go on spending more money than we 
originally [had in mind] to do.  We entered into a new ballgame as far as magnitude is concerned 
and I think it was justified; it was a campaign.  Now I think the time has come to review the results 
of the campaign and in my opinion beat an orderly retreat. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think this is also a matter that your subcommittee may want to 

make a recommendation on.  The frame of reference originally was procedural only.  But I don=t 
think you need restrict yourself to that.  Any thought on this subject now, I think, would be helpful. 
 Mr. Willes. 

 
MR. WILLES.  I was going to change the subject. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  Could I go back to Governor Partee=s question for just a moment?  He 

asked if you defended 2.04 the same as you defended 2.06 or something like that.  You said “no.” 
 
MR. PARTEE.  I said, “Did you defend it [more strongly]?” 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

14

MR. COLDWELL.  All right.  I think the question is not that but would you defend against a 
quarter percent reduction or deterioration in the exchange rate harder now than you did before? 

 
MR. HOLMES.  I don=t think there is any discernable difference in our-- 
 
MR. PARDEE.  It=s a question of the trigger point in the scale in which we are prepared to 

operate at the moment.  In the early operations back in October, November, and December, we 
were prepared to allow a quarter of a percent or a half percent drop in the dollar rate before we 
went into the market.  And at that moment we would offer 20 million marks perhaps, and then back 
away.  We backed away repeatedly as one or two or three banks each saw us there and said, “Aha! 
They are not willing to do 50 million marks” and they blew us out of the market repeatedly. We 
came in and we reported to you big operations, big increases in swap debt--$600 million in 
December, I think it was--and we were not being effective in the job we were trying to do.  One of 
the important shifts for us on this active approach was the ability to stay in there when we did go in 
and take these fellows out of the market.  Sure, on the days that we are operating we will operate on 
a bigger scale, but we=ve also been out of the market.  There was a period of nearly four weeks in 
which we were completely out of the market except for some modest operations. 

 
MR. COLDWELL.  But when do you go into the market?  That=s the question. 
 
MR. PARDEE.  This is not so much on a quarter percent or a half percent.  Yesterday I let the 

dollar drop a whole percent before we made a gesture to the market, which was sufficient at that 
stage.  People saw us, [said] “Okay, fine” and then they went back about their business and the 
dollar rebounded.  It=s that kind of credibility that we need; then we don=t have to operate on a big 
scale.  As soon as the market recognizes that the Federal Reserve is [in the market they say], “Fine, 
we can buy dollars now.”  But it is when the market turns to us and says, “Where are you fellows?” 
that we then have to do the big amounts.  That=s the scale of disorder that we=ve had. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I do expect that this will be the last meeting at which I=ll be 

presiding. In view of that, I=ll make a comment now which previously, under normal conditions, I 
would have delayed making.  But in making this comment, I must advise the Committee once again 
that everything that is said in this room at all times must be treated on an absolutely confidential 
basis.  

 
There are differences within the government about steps that can and should be taken to deal 

with the dollar problem.  The more active our intervention is, the more excuse others within this 
government have for not taking some of the more fundamental steps that need to be taken to restore 
the integrity of the dollar in foreign exchange markets.  That is a political consideration of the very 
greatest importance and one that I think we should very much keep in mind.  And I would strongly 
support Governor Wallich=s recommendations about the scale of our activity, not only for the 
reason that he stated, or even mainly for the reason that he stated or implied, but primarily for the 
political reasons that I indicated.  Namely, [we should do so] to maintain a certain element of 
pressure on others in the government to the effect that this intervention activity is of ephemeral, 
transitory significance and that other steps that can be taken should be taken without further delay. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

15

 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  I think I understood the reports to suggest that when the Swiss 

announced their new posture, which in a couple of respects presumably makes it more difficult for 
people to acquire Swiss francs, the dollar responded favorably.  It would seem to me that that 
should simply divert speculative funds from the Swiss franc to the German mark and have a 
negative effect on the mark-dollar relationship.  Why is my view erroneous in that respect? 

 
MR. PARDEE.  There were some sales in Swiss francs going into marks but the basic unit for 

dealing [in the market] is the dollar.  The dollar rate moved generally across the board against other 
currencies.  There will be some movements in and out of these other currencies and between these 
other currencies. 

 
 MR. PARTEE.  It=s a bit like trading in bills, I think--the old argument.  You=re supplying, I 

guess, much needed or much desired foreign currencies through your swaps and there will be 
arbitrage between the currencies.  And the question is:  Do you get more by trading in a range of 
currencies or in only one currency and assuming the market will make the arbitrage?  It’s a lot like 
the bills only-- 

 
 MR. PARDEE.  Less so in the spot market than the forward market. 
 
 MR. BAUGHMAN.  I assume it would be erroneous to take the next step and say that if the 

Germans also had done something similar to what the Swiss did that that likewise would have had 
a favorable effect on the mark-dollar relationship. 

 
 MR. PARDEE.  Oh, yes. 
 
 CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we=re finally ready for your question, Mr. Willes. 
 
 MR. WILLES.  The second question:  Is the probability that the government will take the 

kind of fundamental steps that you talked about going up, going down, or staying where it was? 
 
 CHAIRMAN BURNS.  If anything, it’s probably going down.  On the other hand, the 

probability of certain bridging actions short of fundamental actions has gone up some. 
 
 MR. BALLES.  Could you explain, Mr. Chairman, for my benefit at least, what bridging 

actions are? 
 
 CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Bridging actions would include the sale of gold into the private 

market, the sale of SDRs to central banks, or the executive taking certain action on the energy 
problem such as imposing a ceiling on imports or imposing a special tariff.  The President can 
certainly do the latter and I believe he can do the former.  I would consider these bridging actions. 
The most important bridging action we=ve made no headway with, namely the sale of Treasury 
securities denominated in foreign currencies.  But I personally have not given up on that because I 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

16

think that=s by far the most important and by far the most effective bridging action that can be taken 
at this time.  Yes, Mr. Roos. 

 
 MR. ROOS.  Would you include in your bridging actions or your fundamental actions a clear 

signal that we are determined to decelerate monetary growth relative to the rate of monetary growth 
of other nations involved?  Would a clear signal by either this group or by the government that we 
are determined to come to grips with that not have an immediate beneficial effect in regard to this? 
 Isn=t our rate of acceleration of monetary growth relative to these others a very real and very 
specific factor in the [difficult situation] we find ourselves in? 

 
 CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that is a question that we can best consider a little later in this 

meeting when we turn to the longer-range targets. 
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That=s correct, Mr. Chairman.  I don=t want to leave the 

impression that our monetary growth has accelerated relative to the Germans, in particular.  I think 
in fact it=s the opposite. 

 
 MR. ROOS.  Excuse me, sir, but from the graphs I=ve seen the trend in the direction of our 

monetary growth relative to the direction of monetary growth in many of these other nations I think 
is a negative factor.  Certainly, inflation in Germany is higher than it is here, but the trend-- 

 
 SPEAKER(?).  It was lower. 
 
 MR. ROOS.  The rate of growth of inflation is lower?  
 
 MR. WALLICH.  The rate of money growth [in their] M3 is higher than in our M1, but not 

higher than our M3, which is really a different number. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Their M1 is higher than our-- 
 
MR. ROOS.   The direction of the trend-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think that Mr. Roos is fundamentally correct if he=s thinking of 

periods of a year or longer.  There has been a deceleration in monetary growth rates and of inflation 
rates around the world in contrast to the United States. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  In inflation rates. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I believe in monetary growth rates as well.   Well, it depends on the 

period.  If you take longer periods--I=m not sure about this--I think as a broad generalization that 
would stand up. 

 
MR. TRUMAN.  I think, Mr. Chairman, that you=re right.  Though in particular in the 

German case, as Governor Wallich was commenting, I think the deceleration, if any, is 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

17

imperceptible relative to the United States.  But for most of the weaker countries, there has been a 
sharp deceleration in their rates of monetary expansion. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, perhaps the time has come to move along in our agenda. 

 Oh, I=m advised that Mr. Holmes has still another recommendation. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, regrettably, I do have one final recommendation.  As you 

know, the Committee has authorized an open position of $1.75 billion in foreign currencies.  At the 
present time, we have a leeway of exactly $106 million, which is not very large relative to potential 
[operations].  Hopefully, we won=t have to [breach] that.  In between Committee meetings under 
the procedural instructions, our leeway would go up to around $2.15 billion; it would go up $500 
million from where we started at the beginning of the Committee [meeting] until the next meeting 
of the Committee.  There=s no necessary reason why the authorization has to be exactly what is 
permitted in the procedural instructions, but obviously the authorization is the important [rule]; 
that=s what rules us.  So I would certainly recommend that the Committee at this meeting, since this 
has to be an action of the full Committee, increase the limit on the open position to $2 billion, 
which happens to be the limit on our German mark swaps. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let me ask you a question, a procedural question.  You say this has 

to be an action of the full Committee.   Could the full Committee delegate this power to its Foreign 
Currency Subcommittee? 

 
MR. HOLMES.  I believe it could, but I leave it to a parliamentarian. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, we have Mr. Holmes=s recommendation. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  That would give you about $350 million in leeway if we went to $2 billion? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Yes, about $376 million. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  Didn=t you say [the open position limit is] $1.75 billion right now? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Yes, but they=re $100 million under that now. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  I beg your pardon? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  We have $100 million of leeway and an additional $250 million would 

make it roughly $350 million. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I personally would prefer to have that power delegated to the 

Subcommittee rather than have an enlargement at this time.  But this is something for the 
Committee to decide. 

 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

18

MR. COLDWELL.  What=s the purpose of that?  I don=t understand your reasoning for the 
delegation. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The reason for the delegation has been stated indirectly by Governor 

Wallich, who wants to keep a tighter rein on the scale of operations at the Desk. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Chairman, I would prefer, I think, not to do it through that device.  We 

have a $300 million limit on the Desk before the Subcommittee, as I understand, needs to approve 
an increase, and I would rather see us reduce that $300 million.  But I think this [issue] of overall 
exposure is properly a full Committee responsibility and I think the full Committee ought to 
discuss whether it wants to have an exposure of as high as $2 billion, rather than leaving it to the 
Subcommittee.  I would be agreeable to the $2 billion.   

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You’re agreeable to $2 billion? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Yes. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Leaving it at $2 billion or enlarging it? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, it=s $1,750 million now, as I understand it, and the proposal is to raise 

it to $2 billion, which would give the Desk in practical terms $350 million leeway.  That leeway, 
however, could be constrained by the Subcommittee. 

 
MR. HOLMES.  It is constrained by the Subcommittee. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  And I think $2 billion is suitable.  I hope you don=t use it, but as a matter of 

protection, I think we need to give you that [leeway]. 
 
SPEAKER(?).  I would second that. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  No action would mean you=d have what? 
 
MR. HOLMES.  A [limit on the] total of $1,750 million, which would give us a leeway of 

about $100 million. 
 
SPEAKER(?).  About $100 million? 
  
MR. HOLMES.  Right, a little over $100 million. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  You could go over that on a really bad day. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, my reason is thoroughly defensible.  We can hit an 

emergency and while we can get to the Subcommittee reasonably promptly-- 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

19

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You say reasonably promptly.  I would say promptly. 
 
MR. HOLMES.  Sometimes, Mr. Chairman, we can=t find people; it sometimes takes time.  I 

would like to have something authorized by the Committee that would protect us in case we do run 
into an emergency situation because getting to the full Committee is much more difficult than 
getting to the Subcommittee or to you. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the recommendation is certainly a reasonable one.  What is the 

consensus of the Committee? 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  It seems logical to me to go to the $2 billion, which is the 

size of the German swap.  We might have to use that whole swap. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any objection?  I hear none.  That recommendation is accepted.  

Let=s move on to Mr. Kichline=s report on the economy. 
 
MR. KICHLINE.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kichline.  We=re now ready for a discussion of the 

economic outlook.  Let us keep in mind that the economic discussion will bear critically on our 
consideration of the longer-term ranges for the monetary aggregates.  Partly for that reason and 
partly also because of time constraints, I think it would be best not to raise purely technical 
questions at this time.  Those questions can be addressed to the staff later on. 

 
Let=s turn to the outlook for the coming year, indicating in particular the degree of agreement 

or disagreement [with the staff projection] or any special point of view that you may have with 
regard to the economy, or agreement or disagreement with the analysis--I think, very able analysis-
-upon [which the staff projection is based].  Mr.  Partee, please. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll start today by saying that I agree with the staff 

projection.  I think it presents a very reasonable configuration.  I had felt earlier that the car sales 
and housing starts figures were a little high and I think now they’re very much in accord with my 
expectations of the most probable [outcome] for the economy as the year goes on.  [The staff 
projection] does call for only about a 4-1/2 percent rate of growth on a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-
quarter basis, which is very close to the CEA projection contained in the Economic Report--maybe 
a trifle lower, but just a very trifle lower than the CEA.  I think we can take that to be, in the 
absence of anything else, an indication of Administration desires as well as the projection of the 
Council [of Economic Advisers].  

 
I do think that there are some uncertainties in the situation that lead me to say that there is 

also a chance that the economy will be weaker than projected.  Jim did not mention the stock 
market.  The stock market continues to bother me quite a bit.  There has been a fairly [large] 
decline in the six weeks since the last Committee meeting and I think it indicates a continuing lack 
of confidence about the prospect for business and the prospect for business profits that can be 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

20

undermining in effect.  I agree with the thrust of Jim=s comment that we ought to have a sharp 
recovery from what seems to have been a weather-induced and an energy-induced shortfall here 
earlier this year, but I=m not quite as sanguine as he was.  Sometimes strange things happen in the 
course of the dynamics of a slowdown that can affect the subsequent recovery.  In particular, what 
bothers me is the fact that incomes are also being negatively [affected].  And an income loss, even 
temporary in the first instance--if it feeds through to demand and smaller sales--can have the 
beginnings of a change [or of a] groundswell in the economy.  So I do think there are some 
questions.  

 
I also continue to be bothered very much by the world outlook, which hasn=t been touched on. 

That=s not so much the declining value of the dollar which is, I think, inflationary in its character 
for the United States.  But I still don=t see clear signs of a [foreign] recovery of the sort that is 
anticipated and underlies the trade deficit estimates and so forth in the Greenbook.  So I think there 
are some questions about the economy that we=ll have to look at very carefully as the weeks pass.  
But I agree that the most probable course is that there will be a quite moderate, continuing 
expansion, barely enough to reduce the unemployment rate over the next year or so. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Baughman, please. 
 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I have no particular differences with the general 

forecast.  I think it=s a reasonable one.  I think there is a reason for being concerned about the 
prospect for accelerating inflation, which is recognized there, but I think it=s recognized 
appropriately.  The main thing I wanted to comment on is that, as I look over the scene in the 
Southwest, I don=t see any indication of any easing in the boom that is going there.  In fact, it seems 
to be strengthening rather than weakening.  It seems to me that the prospect is that it=s going to tend 
to spread and influence other areas--that it=s going to contribute strength rather than weakness to 
the general economic picture.  

 
I might mention a few little things that possibly have somewhat broader interest.  One of the 

things that we have inherited from the demonstrations utilizing farm equipment--in connection with 
the agricultural situation--is that some farm equipment loans now have a restrictive clause that this 
equipment may not be used in any public demonstrations.  A couple of bankers have told me 
recently that they are carefully reworking their bond portfolios.  This is apparently in the 
anticipation that credit markets will tighten up somewhat and that any weak bonds will look rather 
bad in their portfolios; so they are undertaking to move them out at the present time. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Does this refer to municipals? 
 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Municipals were mentioned specifically in this connection, but I have 

the impression that it=s not exclusively municipals.  In the Greenbook or the Bluebook it was noted 
specifically that this does not show up yet--whether or not it will eventually--in the yield spreads.  
But it=s something I wanted to mention in case other people are hearing similar [comments] so that 
it might be appropriate for us to know it. 

 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

21

We=re seeing what I would characterize as really a rather spectacular rebound in cattle prices. 
 It=s quite possible that that=s being overdone.  And we have reports that the snow birds of the north 
are flocking to the south, apparently in their pickup trucks, in such numbers--into a rather [snowy] 
south I must say--that they=re interfering with the ability of the day-to-day activity that is being 
carried on in some of the so-called valley cities.  They=re fairly small cities we=re talking about and 
they=re just so jammed with people that you can=t get into the banks, get through the streets, and [so 
forth].  That=s all I have to say. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Eastburn. 
 
MR. EASTBURN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I=d like to take some issue with the snapback 

scenario that seems to be quite prevalent.  We=ve been doing some research on the question of  
uncertainty and this research suggests that there is some connection between the level of 
uncertainty about inflation and the effect that that has on unemployment.  Apparently there is a 
connection.  And the relevance of that for the current situation is, I think, that we have been 
experiencing external shocks to the economy in the form of the weather and the coal strike, and it 
may be not appropriate to think of this as simply temporary, as it was last year.  The reason is that 
the declines that we have been experiencing have been larger than they were last year.  If you look 
at industrial production, retail sales, durables, housing starts, and so on, the declines have been 
larger than they were a year ago.  Another reason is this fundamental change in the automobile 
sector, which was strong last year and is weak now.  And, finally, on the demand side there’s the 
overhang of the rapid money growth we=ve had in past months, suggesting that this will increase 
relative demand as compared with a year ago.  

 
So the shocks affect the supply side and the demand pressures affect the demand side, 

possibly accelerating expectations and [increasing] uncertainty about inflation.  As we see data 
coming in, like the consumer price index figures released recently, I think we will be seeing 
uncertainty about the inflationary outlook.  And if our research is right, this will be showing itself 
in real output and unemployment later on.  On balance, I do have some concern, as I gather Chuck 
does, with [what is] perhaps an undue readiness to think that these are simply temporary 
phenomena that will pass, as they did [after the first] three months last year.  I guess this [makes] 
me a little more pessimistic than the Greenbook. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 
 
MR. MAYO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I find I am a little more in agreement with the 

forecast in the Greenbook than perhaps Dave is.  Like Chuck, I=m glad to see the housing starts 
figure move down to what I think is now a completely reasonable estimate.  I think it was high for 
several months.  At our Board meeting last Thursday we had quite a discussion on the outlook, 
with particular reference to housing and to automobiles.  And I found a little more strength of 
confidence in our directors= discussions on both of these areas.  [As] I expected, in both areas they 
feel that financing is adequate and that there will not be any particular problems of crowding out.  
They find their suppliers to be in reasonably good shape, and indeed they are looking quite 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

22

confidently to the rest of the year and would not characterize the outlook for either housing or 
automobiles as weak--perhaps not quite as heady as last year, but still a strong outlook.  

 
I would also mention--although, again, one swallow doesn=t make the summer--that I get a 

little more of an impression of improvement abroad than was implicit in Chuck=s remarks.  We 
have seen some industrial production increases in October and November and in the figures that are 
available for December for some of our friends abroad.  And I am hoping--maybe it=s only a hope 
but this does give us quite a bit of encouragement--that indeed this solution, which is obviously the 
preferred solution, of better business abroad rather than poorer business at [home], will help 
significantly in rectifying our own balance of payments problem and, in [turn], have some effect on 
our sagging stock market before we get too far into the summer.   

 
I’d also note on the credit side that the flow of funds data, which I must confess I don=t 

always look at but I did this time, do show to me that the economy can accommodate the increases 
in credit in ’78 without any increases in interest rates that are in excess of what=s in the Bluebook.  I 
assume those projections are, of course, consistent.  So I come to the conclusion that higher interest 
rates are not impeding our opportunities for economic advance this year and that we are in pretty 
good shape. 

 
On Ernie=s point, the farmers strike and the action in Texas, I can report that approximately 

30 beautiful farm vehicles, including a couple of mobile homes but mostly huge tractors with air 
conditioned cabs, complete with stereo and so forth, were parked outside of my window on LaSalle 
Street about three weeks ago as they gathered to protest to the Board of Trade in Chicago about the 
middle man sucking out all of the profits, et cetera.  They couldn=t have made a worse impression 
because of the luxury of the vehicles, most of which had Texas license plates. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Kimbrel now, please. 
 
MR. KIMBREL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too think that the staff projections appear very 

reasonable this time.  Like others, we too are happier with the projections for the automobile and 
housing numbers.  As we had commented a couple of times previously, we thought they were a 
little ambitious; these appear more attuned to our own beliefs. 

 
It may be only in degree but we are somewhat more optimistic about the unemployment 

possibilities; we may be influenced by our own area but we’re slightly more optimistic about the 
total employment picture than is projected [in the Greenbook].  We seem to be reaching, in some 
areas particularly, a situation that I think simply cannot be characterized as unemployment, so we 
feel somewhat more optimistic.  On the contrary, though, we feel somewhat less sanguine and less 
optimistic about the prospects for inflation, influenced maybe by the continuing high Federal 
deficit and the trade deficit.  We are impressed also by the fallout of the coal strike, both its 
determination of increased utility rates and also the likelihood that the final settlement will be 
somewhat higher than we anticipated and may well contribute to other larger labor negotiation 
increases.  Continued comment by the Administration about voluntary wage and price [restraint] is 
almost a red flag as far as our business people are concerned.  It generates what we would 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

23

characterize as a self-serving expectation of inflation that may very well be somewhat higher than 
the staff projects.  But other than that, we think the [staff’s] numbers are very reasonable. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Morris. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, we are somewhat more pessimistic than the staff forecast.  

Whereas the staff has a 4-1/2 percent real rate of growth from the fourth quarter of ’77 to the fourth 
quarter of ’78, we would be inclined to think more in terms of 4 percent.  The housing sector is one 
area where we differ.  We think that the projected housing [starts] are still on the high side.  It=s 
difficult for us, if we accept the staff’s Bluebook numbers of an 8 percent federal funds rate in the 
last half of this year, to have that associated with only a very modest rate of decline in housing as 
the staff has projected.  On the other hand, while we=re more pessimistic, we=re not entirely 
unhappy about our projection in the sense that, given all of the inflationary forces and the position 
of the dollar and so forth, perhaps a 4 percent real growth rate will not be a bad result for this year. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Coldwell. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Morris just made my speech, Mr. Chairman.  I=m pleased that the 

staff is moving back down the pike a bit from where they were last time.  They have a bit left to go 
to reach what I think is likely for the rest of this year.  I still believe that we=re going to have a 
snapback from the cold weather and the coal situation.  It=s hard to tell whether it will hit the last 
month of the first quarter or the first two months of the second quarter.  Even if it were not for the 
coal and cold weather problems, I think we have an inventory rebuilding problem on our hands 
which is likely to boost activity considerably in the first half of this year.  But beyond that, I see 
problems looming on the construction side, higher prices and maybe some impacts on buying, 
capital spending reductions, and certainly a problem in our international relations.  All of these 
[factors] say to me that we=re going to get lower rates of real growth in the latter part of the year 
and higher rates of inflation.  And I don=t think [the economy] is going to be growing fast enough to 
[produce] any measurable reduction in unemployment in the latter part of the year. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Wallich, please. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  I=d like to look at the situation with a point of view that is perhaps a little 

more broadly [focused] than just the present forecast.  Being where we are in the evolution of this 
cycle, I think we have to look for a soft landing--that is, phasing into a long-term rate of growth 
that is sustainable at somewhere around 3-1/2 percent or so.  In those terms, moving down from an 
expectation of 4-1/2 to closer to 4 percent growth is not an unreasonable thing.  I think we=re sort of 
getting ready for that soft landing. 

 
Nevertheless, we=re developing a number of imbalances that raise questions about the 

sustainability of the position ultimately reached.  One very large imbalance is the net export deficit; 
we have a big hole on the foreign trade side.  We have a moderate-sized hole on the side of 
business fixed investment being partly remedied.  And the Administration keeps saying that we 
have a hole on the side of expenditures by state and local governments, citing their large surpluses, 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

24

which usually include their pension funds.  If you eliminate the pension funds--and I see no reason 
for including them as part of the state and local surplus because they are really private-type pension 
funds, tax demands probably “financed”--there still remains a sizable state and local surplus.  So 
those are the things that are reducing purchasing power.  And that is matched by an enormous 
federal deficit, which threatens to remain even as we get to full employment.  In other words, 
we’ve worked the economy now to a point where the private sector apparently can’t give us full 
employment without the aid of a federal deficit.  This, I think, is a very ominous situation.  

 
Even so, it=s the job of fiscal and monetary policy to try to keep this expansion going as best 

we can, but some things could happen along the way that would throw a roadblock into it.   
Suppose the rate of inflation should accelerate significantly; and some of the things that have been 
said here suggest that that could happen.  Is that the kind of signal then that historically has called 
for central bank action to slow down the economy and maybe significantly reduce the rate of 
growth?  Central banks typically are supposed to act when the economy gets to booming.  But 
without getting it at all booming, it could get more inflationary.  And the question is, what will we 
do then?  Likewise, even without it getting more inflationary in a visible way, the aggregates might 
accelerate, indicating that there=s inflation ahead somewhere down the road.  Then again, what is 
the function of monetary policy, if an expansion can be nursed along only by tolerating more 
inflation or accepting the prospect of more inflation into the future?   These are the difficulties I 
see, possibly along the way to a soft landing. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Volcker now, please. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I=ll be very brief, Mr. Chairman.  I thought initially that 

Mr. Partee made four-fifths of my statement for me, and I think Mr. Wallich just made the other 
one-fifth.  Maybe the proportions are wrong, but I generally do think that the forecast is very 
reasonable, with all the qualifications that Governor Partee mentioned earlier. 

 
I am struck particularly by the continuing lack of buoyancy in plant and equipment where we 

had some hopes that the earlier forecast might be raised.  I don=t see any signs [of that] in talking as 
I do with businessmen and otherwise it=s very unrealistic to think that the survey numbers are going 
to be missed on the upside.  The trade deficit remains a very large problem.  I=m not as optimistic 
about that as the staff is--and they’re not terribly optimistic, but they do have some reduction in the 
forecast for the deficit.  I think that is going to be very hard to achieve against the background of 
what I see going on abroad.  [The latter] has been already mentioned and that=s a pretty big sector 
in the economy that we sometimes overlook and deemphasize, apart from all the problems that it 
implies for managing the dollar in the year ahead. 

 
I think by far the most important [issue] is the one that Governor Wallich just ended up with--

inflation and the risk that it will accelerate during this year.  I think this may create a severe 
dilemma for monetary policy.  I myself do not think it=s something that monetary policy can very 
adequately handle by itself, unaided by new policies elsewhere in the government.  I know all the 
difficulties of that, which leaves me with a little tinge of pessimism about how we can make this 
soft landing that Governor Wallich referred to.  While the expansion doesn=t show gross signs of 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

25

imbalances and excesses, it is getting older; and maintaining a forward momentum against the 
possibility of an increasing rate of inflation may prove increasingly difficult as 1978 wears on.  I=m 
not expecting a downturn during the course of this year--or a recession or real curtailment of 
growth out of line with the forecast.  But one can see problems mounting on the inflationary side as 
the year proceeds, raising questions about 1979.  And I think it is going to create a very difficult 
problem on how to manage monetary policy should the inflation rate accelerate at this point mainly 
due, as I see it, to cost pressures. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Winn now, please. 
 
MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, living in an environment in which it has been difficult to get 

one’s feet on the ground for the last three months, it=s hard to get a perspective on the economic 
scene that is not influenced by the environment.  I don=t have any really basic quarrel with the 
projection of the staff, but I would like to raise two or three questions.  First, with respect to 
structural changes in the financial area that impact on [the economy], to what extent has your 
automobile outlook factored in the very sharp transition that has taken place [on the] terms of 
automobile credit and the normal kinds of rollover?  What is happening as some of these [terms are 
extended] and what does this do to debt and so forth?  Second, what is the reality with respect to 
real estate financing?  Is it for real estate, or are [people] using this device now because of [more 
favorable] terms to finance an expansion of consumer [expenditures] other than in the real estate 
area--for automobiles, living expenses, and other things?  And third, on the aggregate analysis on 
the impact of consumer credit, it doesn=t look too bad, but I am wondering if this area isn=t one 
where we should know more about the individual incidences of these [types of financing] because 
this is likely to affect our behavior down the road.  In some places, the aggregate debt of the 
consumer--if you add real estate plus the consumer debt in certain family situations--really looks 
horrendous. What does this means for us?  

 
The fourth financial item I=d mention is that, while we project an increase in Regulation Q 

ceilings in the future, I would hope that would occur before we reach the active disintermediation 
stage.  We=re having the horrible development of the so-called “honor bond” in the Midwest.  That 
troubles me a great deal and I would like to see that stopped by more legitimate kinds of channeling 
savings rather than this device.  I think this is going to rebound unfavorably on the banks and I am 
really concerned about this device. 

 
MR. MORRIS.  Can you explain what that is? 
 
MR. WINN.  The banks are issuing bearer certificates from $25 up to $10,000 or $20,000 and 

[that’s where] the honor bond comes in.  [You are on] your honor to report it to the IRS.  They are 
being sold as a way of avoiding income tax and I think this is a very bad kind of development on 
the part of banks. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Kichline, have you been following this development? 
 
MR. KICHLINE.  Honor bonds?  I never heard of them before now. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

26

 
MR. EASTBURN.  In Pennsylvania, the banking secretary has ruled against [the honor bond] 

as being unsound. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  It is featured thus far in Ohio; however, the interest [in it] is expanding 

nationwide at a rapid rate. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  I heard [about it] just yesterday, incidentally.  I had an inquiry from the 

homebuilders.  They want to object to the use of this thing because it is diverting funds from the 
thrifts to the banks, presumably on the presumption that people won=t pay the taxes. 

 
MR. WINN.  It=s a disintermediation reaction. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  This is purely at banks? 
 
MR. WINN.  Banks have gone into it.  They call them freedom bonds--freedom from taxes--

or honor bonds.  I think it is a very unfortunate development, which is really a reaction to the 
disintermediation problem.  Some of [the banks] said they are competing-- 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It may be a taxpayer’s revolt, but it=s taking an unwholesome 

direction.  I=m in favor of a taxpayer’s revolt within the law.  Well, Mr. Kichline, you ought to start 
following this. 

 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Are they sold at yields higher than [Regulation] Q ceilings? 
 
MR. WINN.  On the [ones with] longer terms, they are.  And they=re advertising that you can 

use them as cash.  It=s very bad advertising. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  You mean the bank is violating-- 
 
MR. WINN.  No, on their longer terms, I don=t think there is a violation.  But the rates are 

what--7-1/2 percent?  And they sell them up to-- 
 
MR. AXILROD.  It=s not a Q ceiling problem; it=s a different kind of problem. 
 
MR. WINN.  No, but it=s a reaction because of disintermediation. 
  
MR. BLACK.  Why don=t the banks report the earnings--the interest they pay on these--to the 

IRS? 
 
MR. WINN.  They say [to customers]: “We don=t require your social security number.”  
 
MR. BLACK.  How do they get away with that? 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

27

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I thought this problem came up years ago and I thought 
they did have to report [unintelligible]. 

 
MR. WINN.  [Let me mention] three other quick items, Mr. Chairman.  First, the price 

developments are troublesome, at least in our area, with the very rapid rise in utility rates both 
[because] of a very cold winter and the rapid increase in rates with changes in fuel sources--adding 
that [directly] to the fuel bill.  And increases in the telephone rates and other utility rates are 
accelerating very rapidly.  Second, a positive thing:  The machine tool people are reporting quite 
expanded interest in their activity.  How much of this is the automobile changeover that=s still down 
the road for us, I=m not quite [sure], but they=re having a really good year and good interest is being 
shown in [terms of] future orders.  And finally, school financing in the Midwest is really in serious 
trouble and this may be partly a local situation. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  What does that mean--school bonds are not selling or what? 
 
MR. WINN.  Because of tax limits and because of the inner city problem, practically all the 

major cities in Ohio are faced with school closings due to the finance limitations that have been 
placed on them.  Local schools are $40 or $50 million in debt and they-- 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  School closings rather than cutting down on expenditures? 
 
MR. WINN.  Well, some of them are going to have to close because of dates by which [the 

local entities] can get approval for increased taxes.  They got in a mess with the local banks on 
short-term borrowings, and it=s a very, very messy situation, overlain in part by integration efforts 
mandated by the courts.  It’s the [total] school picture--school financing and higher education 
financing.  It is a very serious problem and hopefully the surplus can be diverted in this area. 

 
MR. MAYO.  Is this essentially [because of] restrictive provisions in Ohio law? 
 
MR. WINN.  I think part of it is that, Bob. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Winn.  Mr. Guffey now, please. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you.  We join those who take some comfort in the 

staff=s projection this time.  I have a couple of comments about particular sectors.  With regard to 
housing starts, which have been revised downward somewhat, we think that [projection is] 
reasonable.  There is a development that apparently is prevalent in our area at least that involves the 
construction people, and that is that there is more residential construction going on now under 
contract as opposed to speculative construction.  If they=re under contract, [home building] will 
continue on through perhaps a good part of this year at a fairly high level.  A second aspect of that 
seems to be the consensus that rates will not be a constraining factor in this inflationary period--on 
residential construction at least.  Most people perceive the fact that if they invest today in 
residential construction, it will be the best investment they will have made and, therefore, what they 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

28

pay for the money to build a new home or to get into another home is not much of a constraining 
factor.  

 
One other point that has not been mentioned around this table:  We=re finding rather 

universally throughout our District that the unemployment rate is much lower than the national 
average.  It’s probably down around 5 percent or even below 5 percent in most of the central and 
high plains areas.  As a result, we may get some price-wage pressures as we go along this year. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Jackson. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  I generally concur with the thrust of the staff analysis.  If it could be 

faulted, it would probably be on the inflation side.  I would guess that as the year unfolds, the 
translation of certain changes in food prices, which have been good news for the Agricultural Belt, 
will become especially bad news to the consumer.  Likewise, if the analysis of the slowdown in 
single-family housing starts is accurate--and I happen to feel it is on target--the consequences will 
be further increased pressures on housing costs, probably based on increased rents.  Therefore, with 
a sluggish increase in the supply of rental properties, you=re likely to see very significant increases 
in gross rents, which will show up in the CPI--or whatever the new word is.  I haven=t caught on to 
the new concepts of inflation yet--that if we don=t like the old one it looks like we think of a new 
word to describe it.  At any rate, if you look at those two sectors of the consumer price question, I 
think we=re in for some tougher periods ahead which, in turn, will impact on the general spirit of 
confidence.  

 
I don=t think the fundamentals underneath the whole picture are that bad, though, and for that 

reason I think the overall real GNP forecast is probably about on target.  I=m not as pessimistic 
about the automobile [sector] and other aspects [of the projection] because I do concur with the 
[view] that, thus far, the consuming public seems willing to take on more debt and has a reasonable 
degree of confidence.  I=m afraid that our concept of employment is distorted by the aggregate 
figures.  It seems to me that what we have is a relatively tight labor market among the trained in 
certain geographical locations combined with nightmare situations of severe unemployment in 
other geographical locations and other sectors of the society so that, in the aggregate, we=re seeing 
[the situation] as being worse than [it is] from an economic point of view.  As a consequence, I 
think those people who are employed and are consuming probably have a greater degree of 
confidence than we are giving them credit for having, despite the increasing levels of debt.  So I 
would say net on that score that we will probably see a continued expansion.  I do think the issue of 
inflation, and particularly the dollar, should begin to have an impact on capital spending in this 
country, and for that reason I don=t think we=re likely to be surprised by an expansion in that sector. 
 We would all like to be surprised, I suspect, but I don=t think we=re likely to see it. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Balles now, please. 
      
MR. BALLES.  Turning back to the general business outlook, Mr. Chairman, I can be fairly 

brief.  Messrs. Morris and Coldwell have pretty well expressed the view that we have.  Even with 
this fairly recent somewhat lower [projection] the Board=s staff now sees, we still remain a little 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

29

less optimistic about the second half of the year in particular, especially because we see a less 
ebullient picture in autos and housing, even [relative to] the revised forecast that Mr. Kichline 
talked about.  In autos, I think he said [the forecast was revised] down 150,000 to 10.5 million or 
thereabouts [unintelligible] several months, something no better than 10.4 million of auto sales.  On 
housing starts, we=re still somewhat lower than the Board=s staff forecast.  I think the differences 
come up principally in the second half of the year.  We would expect real GNP growth fourth-
quarter-to-fourth-quarter of 4 percent, close to what Mr. Morris talked about, which implies in the 
second half of the year a real growth rate of less than 4 percent.  

 
I have been interested in some research that our people have been doing lately on what 

constitutes the full employment unemployment rate.  We know the CEA has come out with about 
4.9 percent and [in light of] some of the work we=ve been doing reexamining some of those 
assumptions, we would think that the figure is somewhat higher--perhaps 5-1/2 to 6 percent or 
perhaps above 6 percent.  Having seen a 10 percent increase in employment since the start of this 
expansion, and with about 58 percent of the working age population now at work, it seems to us 
that there=s a considerably large excess in the labor markets of usable types of  labor skills in the 
economy.  I don=t know whether “usable labor” is a viable term, but you get constraints on capacity 
showing up in a number of lines now, at least in the West; certainly the aluminum industry is one 
of those.  I think this provides a real constraint on [the economy’s] ability to grow at somewhat 
above normal rates than would have [been the case] in the past few years.  In short, several 
members around the table have mentioned that we probably will be facing a dilemma that may 
show up especially in the second half of the year, with the economy going to shambles and signs of 
a marked slowing in real growth and an acceleration of inflation on the other hand.  That’s a 
first-class dilemma for monetary policy. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Balles.  Mr. Roos, please. 
 
MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, I=ll be brief.  We have just concluded an extensive series of 

meetings with businessmen throughout our District and there is nothing we heard that would lead 
us to question or to be more pessimistic than the staff [forecast].  There is moderate optimism, 
depending on the elimination of many of these uncertainties that disturb business people.  I would 
subscribe, and I won=t elaborate on it, to John Balles=s concept of what realistic goals for a 
reduction of unemployment should be; we don=t think they=re as low as others seems to think they 
are.  I would subscribe wholeheartedly to Governor Wallich=s concept of a realistic target for a soft 
landing and I think that we should not be panicked by a gradual reduction in real growth to what 
we=re talking about--4 to 4-1/2 percent.  

 
I am perplexed about two things that I=ve heard, and it’s not only what I=ve heard this 

morning.  One is the chronic tendency to be pessimistic about what might happen just over the 
horizon.  I think if we had verbatim transcripts of every meeting we=ve had in the last two years--
and I can=t speak  with experience prior to that--[they would show] the same sort of expressions of 
concern, namely that out yonder later this year or later [next] year, problems are going to arise. 
Some day I assume those problems will occur, but we always seem to be somewhat pessimistic.  
Maybe that=s a way those of you who are much more skilled in the science of economics than I 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

30

hedge your bets.  But what really perplexes me, Mr. Chairman--and I don=t say this to be critical--is 
the fact that so many sitting here today can recognize, apparently all of a sudden, that one of the big 
problems we face is inflation and one of the big inhibiting factors that is stopping businessmen 
from engaging in capital formation projects is their concern about and their uncertainty with regard 
to inflation and that somehow, maybe somewhere along the line, monetary policy ought to concern 
itself with inflation.  If that is literally something that is only occurring to us currently, Mr. 
Chairman, I don=t understand the rules of this game because we=ve all been talking about it for 
some time.  I apologize for those remarks, but those are my observations. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you for your remarks, Mr. Roos.  Mr.Willes now. 
 
MR. WILLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It=s interesting to me in the meeting today to hear 

a number of people express feelings about inflation in stronger terms than I think they have in some 
recent meetings.  That has been typical of my experience with people outside of this Committee.  
[Inflation] does seem to be a concern that more of our people have, and for that reason the major 
difference we have with the staff forecast is on their expectation of inflation.  They might be right; 
we hope they are right.  [But] inflation could well be higher than they have projected and I guess 
the point I want to emphasize is the one that Dave first made--that it=s perfectly consistent to be 
increasingly pessimistic about inflation and, at the same time, to be increasingly pessimistic about 
the real economy.  [That’s] because, given the state of expectations people have, based on what has 
gone before, additional inflation does create additional uncertainty, both from the point of view of 
what that means for the kinds of positive calculations [they] have made and for what that implies in 
terms of what they think government policy might be.  All of those things added together raise real 
questions as to how viable plant and equipment spending projects might be, whether it really pays 
to invest in a new automobile and all kinds of things.  So it=s perfectly consistent to become 
increasingly pessimistic on inflation and on the real [economy] at the same time.  The policy 
dilemma, of course, is that you may then reach the opposite conclusion in the current environment 
[than] you have in previous years in trying to respond to that.  But that=s a discussion for the next 
part [of our meeting]. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Anyone else want to speak, or speak again?  At this time, let me 

make a few comments.  I have no quarrel with the staff forecast.  I want to say only that if I had 
been giving the report, I would have emphasized the degree of uncertainty that attaches to the 
forecast somewhat more than Mr. Kichline did.  I think uncertainty with regard to economic 
prospects has been increasing.  The evidence is all around us.  I think also that the typical view that 
there are no serious imbalances is a mistaken one.  I think there are serious imbalances.  We have 
an imbalance in the realm of foreign trade.  Our imports are certainly out of balance with the world 
economy.  We have an imbalance in the sphere of business capital investment; that is certainly out 
of balance with the growth of our nation=s overall production.  I think consumer credit is out of 
balance with personal income.  I think wages are out of balance not only with productivity but also 
with the level of unemployment.  I think the profits are out of balance with personal income and 
also with the cost of production.  I think the stock market is out of balance with corporate profits.  I 
think the state of general confidence is out of balance with the performance of the economy.  I 
think our governmental deficit is badly out of balance with the behavior of the rest of the economy. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

31

 
I want to make one additional comment connected with the last [point].  I think our federal 

budget is in a very sorry state.  It is a budget that is built on the assumption of nothing better than a 
lucky performance of the economy.  And we may indeed be lucky.  But make the arbitrary 
assumption that we get into a recession and then the presently projected deficit--which is in the 
neighborhood of $75 billion, counting off-budget outlays as we should--could easily go to $120 or 
$125 billion this year or next year.  If it did, would we ever in our lifetime--and I refer to the 
younger men around here who are the great majority--get back to something like financial stability? 
I think, as we turn to the next question, our longer-range targets in the years ahead, members of this 
Committee will have to keep asking themselves a question each time and I think they should:  Who 
will fight inflation if the Federal  Reserve does not?  

 
We probably ought to break for coffee and return. 
 
                                                        [Coffee break] 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We are turning now to consideration of the longer-term ranges for 

the monetary aggregates.  There is an arithmetical point that Mr. Axilrod wishes to bring to the 
Committee=s attention before we [proceed]. 

 
MR. AXILROD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We are almost finished with our revision of the 

money supply series, which this year includes not only the benchmark and seasonal [revisions], but 
we=re also considering some of the changes the Bach Committee has recommended with regard to 
certain techniques of measurement.  [Those involve] relatively minor conceptual problems.  I can 
report to the Committee the results of the benchmark; we have now the revised data from the FDIC 
and have worked it into the series.  [The benchmark revision] would imply for the year 1977 an 
increase in the rate of growth for M1 of 0.4 of a percentage point over what it would be 
unbenchmarked.  The increase is all in the first half where [the benchmark] increases M1 growth 
on the order of 1 percentage point and  there is virtually no change in M1 growth relative to what it 
would  be unbenchmarked in the second half.  The effect of the benchmark on M2 is to increase its 
growth rate for the year 1977 by 0.2 of a percentage point.  I just wanted to report that to the 
Committee, Mr. Chairman, before its discussion of the long-run ranges. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you.  I=d like to make just a few brief remarks to 

introduce the subject.  Let me address in particular the M1 growth rate.  In general, if we are to do 
what we can to reduce the rate of inflation over the longer run, I think we in this Committee will 
need to adjust downward our monetary growth rates.  I think we all recognize that and we don=t 
want to lose sight of that.  Secondly, we should recognize, and I think we do, that M1 grew more 
rapidly than we intended last year and that a reasonable case, therefore, can be made for a 
compensating downward adjustment at this time.  But that, I=m afraid, is only the beginning of a 
true analysis of where we are and where we ought to try to go, insofar as we can arrive at a 
judgment at this time.  If we lower the range for M1 growth at this time, I=m afraid that such a 
lowering would appear to lack credibility in view of the actual performance [of M1 relative to its 
range] during the past year.  The opposite side of that coin is that if we sought to lift the range, I 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

32

think we would run a risk of strengthening inflationary expectations, which are already in the 
process of intensifying.  And I think that such a decision on the part of this Committee could have 
an extremely adverse influence on the foreign exchange value of the dollar at this time.  I=m 
inclined to think, taking things all in all, that we ought to leave the range where it is at present, 
bearing in mind the desirability of lowering it in the future.  And if we do succeed in keeping actual 
growth within the current range, that in itself would mean an appreciable decline in M1 growth this 
year relative to the past year.  And I think that the uncertainty that I and others have pointed to with 
regard to the economy perhaps also argues for keeping the range where it is at the present time. 

 
As for the higher Ms, in view of the likelihood that the inflow of funds to thrift institutions 

will be on the low side this year--I think all the evidence is pointing in that direction--it would be 
realistic, I think, to lower the M3 range somewhat, as suggested under alternative B on page 5 of 
the Bluebook.  Or possibly, instead of lowering both the upper and the lower limits by a full 
percentage point, we might want to lower them by 1/2 percentage point.  But I think some lowering 
would only be realistic and it would be honest.  Well, that=s all I have to say at this time. Who 
would like to speak first?  Mr. Kimbrel. 

 
MR. KIMBREL.  Just a question, Mr. Chairman.  That means you would leave M2 

unchanged? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think I would leave M2, since the problem is clearly one of the 

thrift institutions rather than of the commercial banks.  But some of the influences and thinking on 
thrift institutions with regard to savings deposits [and] time deposits will also influence commercial 
banks. 

 
MR. KIMBREL.  Just to proceed.  I followed you very carefully and [was] right with you all 

the way.  I do think our credibility is involved.  And I think it=s becoming maybe more important to 
hit the targets than it is to set them.  I guess my only possible variation would be on M2.  I might 
lean to reducing the upper end of that 1/2 point also.  But otherwise I share completely your views. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrel.  Mr. Roos now, please. 
 
MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, may I throw out a suggestion that I don=t think represents any 

significant departure from the philosophy you have just enunciated?  It might enable us, however, 
to signal that we=re trying to do something about the problem of inflation and we=re also concerned 
about anything that might have a negative effect on real growth.  [My suggestion is] that we might 
consider reducing the upper end of the M1 range from 6-1/2 to 6 percent and raising the lower end 
of the range from 4 to 4-1/2 percent.  The rationale would be that at 6 percent we would not really 
be doing anything to reduce the rate of inflation--assuming there=s a relationship between this 
aggregate and inflation--below what it currently is, although we would be signaling to the world 
that we=re at least adjusting the upper limit slightly downward, and I think this might have a 
beneficial effect on the dollar situation   At the same time those people who would feel that we=re 
not concerned about any possible softening in the economy would be reassured by the fact that we 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

33

have raised the lower limit from 4 to 4-1/2 percent.  That does narrow the range somewhat, but I 
think psychologically it could have a salutary effect from both points of view. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think this could be a suggestion the Committee may wish to 

consider.  In view of the uncertainty that now exists--and I think we all, in varying degrees, are  
aware of that--it strikes me as being questionable whether this is the right time to narrow the range. 
Also, once we narrow it, we may be stuck with a narrow range; the Congressional Committees 
have been trying to push us in this direction.  Some members of this Committee have thought all 
along that the range should be narrower.  The question raised, I think, is a very fair one.  I 
personally wouldn=t do it at this time.  Mr. Jackson, please. 

 
MR. JACKSON.  Before I start, may I ask Mr. Axilrod a question?  In your relative analysis 

of M2, do you consider the present definition, which includes non-negotiable large CDs, to be 
potentially subject to a substantial error because of the expansion of large non-negotiable CDs? 

 
MR. AXILROD.  Well, of course, the reason that we have not lowered [the range for] M2, 

whereas we lowered [that for] M3, is because the CDs have relatively more weight in M2; they=re 
in both M2 and M3, but they have relatively more weight in M2.  The CDs are quite volatile, but I 
would hesitate to say that the estimate of that particular component is subject to more error than our 
estimate of deposits that are subject to ceilings.  I don=t have a basis for saying that that=s subject to 
more error than the others. 

 
MR. JACKSON.  I bring that up, Mr. Chairman, because as we talk about narrowing these 

ranges as we go through this exercise, I think the uncertainties of our present definitional 
imperfections, as I call them, is a subject we need to bear in mind significantly.  I would endorse 
the proposal that we stick with the [current] 4 to 6-1/2 for M1 and the 6-1/2 to 9 for M2 under the 
circumstances.  I think a half point reduction in M3, given the type of potential problem is more 
realistic than a full one percent.  I can perceive, frankly, a prospect that the thrift industry will be an 
active participant in the CD market--perhaps to the degree we have not previously [seen].  And it’s 
for that reason that I=m not sure M3 will degenerate to the extent that we are proposing. 

 
MR. AXILROD.  I should add that we have not assumed that the thrifts become active in that 

market. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Are you thinking of large CDs? 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Over $100,000. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Is there any clear sign of that developing? 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Not yet.  But if we get pressures on rates of growth in the thrift industry, I 

can [conceive], particularly if the level of outstanding commitments stays large and the inflow [of 
funds] is restrained, that [thrifts] may turn to this as a way to raise funds as an alternative to 
borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Bank System.  That would, of course, impact on [the M3 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

34

growth] rate.  I think it=s important, as we communicate this to the world and to our Congress in 
particular, that this not be perceived as a weakening of our resolve on the inflationary front.  But on 
the contrary, with the changes that we=ve seen in velocity and financial technology and so forth, 
and particularly as the pressures of increased inflation are upon us, it is entirely possible that by 
maintaining the present ranges we will have a very responsible monetary policy in light of these 
conditions rather than irresponsible. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 
 
MR. MAYO.  First a question to Steve.  I think I=m correct in interpreting what you=ve been 

saying here and in the Bluebook that what the staff has set up for M2 and M3 does assume on the 
various dates an increase in Regulation Q ceilings. 

 
MR. AXILROD.  Yes, of 50 basis points on time deposits. 
 
MR. MAYO.  I find that a difficult assumption to make right now in our consideration of the 

targets for M2 and M3.  If it were completely in the hands of the Board of Governors, I wouldn=t 
make this point, but I have a very definite opinion that the Federal Home Loan Bank Board may 
have something to say about this and that there will be considerable opposition in various quarters 
to a raising of  Regulation Q.  If I am correct or even partially correct on that, I think we might be 
ill-advised to continue in our M2 and M3 targets for growth or our growth range statement here an 
assumption that would encompass an increase in Regulation Q.  I would, therefore, wholeheartedly 
support what the Chairman has said [with regard to] a beginning of the eventual need to lower the 
targets, particularly for M1.  I would wholeheartedly support the idea that our credibility [and] our 
determination as to whether we do believe in a 6-1/2 percent top on M1 is being tested right now in 
the public eye.  Until we get the performance record well under 7 percent, I wouldn=t want to 
change that 6-1/2, so I would subscribe to the Chairman=s status quo recommendation on M1 
without reservation.  I would, however, suggest that we go to alternative C on both M2 and M3 and 
lower the M2 target by 1/2 percentage point from where it is now and the M3 target by either a full 
point or, as in the case of alternative C, by 1-1/2 percentage points. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo.  Mr. Wallich now, please. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  Well, on the previous occasion when we discussed the long-term ranges, I 

would have preferred raising the upper limit of M1 to 7 percent.  I=ve changed my mind about that 
for two reasons.  One, we=ve overshot that M1 ceiling anyway, and the Committee does not seem to 
be [of a mind] to get on a track that would substantially lower the growth rate of M1.  Second, we 
have the problem with the dollar to contend with; and as the Chairman=s pointed out, this could be a 
very dangerous signal. 

 
Nevertheless, I think we ought to watch very carefully what the implications of what we=re 

doing are for velocity and interest rates.  The velocity projections seem to be that, with a rise in the 
Regulation Q ceiling of 1/2 percentage point and with interest rates rising the way they are 
supposed to rise under the alternatives--by maybe 125 basis points on the funds rate over a year for 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

35

alternative B--we=ll get a velocity gain of 5.6 percent.  Now, that=s a large gain.  But given that 
interest rates are rising, that=s of course not unobtainable.  The rise in interest rates in itself 
presumably is factored into the projection, so that that 125 basis points on the funds rate is not 
going to have any additional adverse effects on housing beyond those already built into the 
forecast. If we can take this as a rough basis for what we expect about velocity, I think it is not 
impossible that it might materialize and that does not imply impossible interest rate assumptions.  
My own inclination would be to stay at the high end of that 4 to 6-1/2 percent range and if we 
overshoot a little, not to do anything about it as we have done in the past.  

 
As far as M2 and M3 are concerned, I concur with the Chairman.  I would leave M2 as it is in 

alternative B, pulling down the upper margin of that perhaps the next time around to continue this 
tradition of pulling the aggregates down.  M3 allows a certainty to pull down [at least one of] the 
aggregates and maintain that tradition on the present occasion. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  Mr. Partee, please. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I thought long and hard about this, too.  I=m bothered by 

the same kinds of arithmetic that bothered Governor Wallich, and I really don=t know what to do 
about it because I think psychologically it would be a bad time to increase the upper limit of the 
M1 range.  But the arithmetic is that we should anticipate here in the next four quarters a rise of 
certainly 11 or maybe 11-1/2 percent in nominal GNP.  The comment around the table today was 
that the staff=s inflation rate may be understating what will occur.  We certainly know that there=s a 
built-in inflation rate of some considerable size resulting from the cost increases [in] the labor 
contracts that have been negotiated and will pay off regardless in this period to come.  It calls for a 
very large rise in velocity to be able to be within the 4 to 6-1/2 percent range and to be able to 
accommodate an 11 to 11-1/2 percent [growth in] nominal GNP.  And yet not to do so--not to 
accommodate for that--certainly means rising interest rates and a change in the whole economic 
outlook.  That is a rise of size in interest rates and a change in the whole economic outlook that will 
unfortunately affect real activity as well as prices.  In fact, every [study] that=s ever been done 
suggests that the immediate short-run effect will be more on real activity than prices.  I wish it were 
not so, but that=s what every bit of analysis indicates. 

 
So, although I also feel that we will have difficulty keeping M1 within the 4 to 6-1/2 percent 

range, I guess I=d rather continue with it for the time being, and if necessary err a little on the high 
side as time goes on.  I really don=t see any other short- to intermediate-run strategy that the 
Committee can follow.  I wouldn=t narrow that range.  If  anything, I would widen the range if I 
were making a change because I think so much depends on assumptions on institutional changes 
and on velocity and so forth that we can=t with any conscientiousness say that we understand what, 
within a couple of points, is the right money supply increase for the economy to have.  

 
On M2, I would make the same point that Governor Jackson did.  You have to remember that 

a large part of [M2], an increasing part of that, is not subject to Regulation Q ceilings.  And we=ve 
seen some very large increases in large non-negotiable CD sales at the banks and indeed, you 
remember, it even includes negotiable CDs if they=re issued by other than the 350 largest banks.  So 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

36

I think there is more room for expansion there than traditional analysis may suggest on the basis of 
interest rate relationships.  Therefore, I think we=re safe enough to leave that at 6-1/2 to 9.  I would 
leave it in any event because of this tendency for a good many rather simple analysts to draw an 
identity between M2 and GNP growth.  I think they would become really quite agitated at a 
reduction in the M2 range so that the top, and thus the implied increase in nominal GNP, is below 9 
percent. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You were doing beautifully up to this point.  Stop worrying about 

those fellows! 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Well, there are a lot of them in the Street and among the monetarists and 

even in academic circles.  On M3, I would be sympathetic with Bob Mayo=s point of view, except 
that I don=t really believe that the House Banking Committee is the group to tell that growth will be 
a lot less unless we can get an increase in Regulation Q ceilings.  I think it would just cause trouble 
for the House Banking Committee, whereas the person that has to be told that sits in an office in 
another building in town.  And there the problem is to convince them rather than just to assert it. 

 
So I guess I=m being a coward today, but I think I would just cut the M3 range by 1/2 point as 

the Chairman has suggested, realizing that that may be high because it does probably require an 
increase in some sensitive area of Regulation Q ceilings by midyear.  There, too, though, I think 
there might be a tendency to be overly affected by the very poor savings inflow figures that 
generally are inherent for February.  They seem to me too radically lowered to reflect only interest 
rate differentials.  There must be something else going on there, but it=s probably an aberration and 
I think we=ll probably get some recovery in thrift institutions in the period yet to come.  So, for all 
those longish reasons, Mr. Chairman, I support exactly, I believe, what you proposed.  But for M3, 
I would only cut the range by 1/2 point--that is, to 7-1/2 to 10 percent, simply because I think it 
would cause more trouble than it=s worth to cut it a full point at this stage. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Coldwell now. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Partee gave [many] of the same reasons that I would 

to support your package.  I think there are two or three other points.  First, if I understand the 
ballgame here, and I am not sure I do, if we go back to our normal [schedule for] reconsideration 
[of our long-run ranges] we=ll be back to this subject very soon.  And I really don=t want to be 
launching into a whole new ballgame with [another review of these ranges] coming up within a 
month or two.  Secondly, I would strongly resist the idea of narrowing the [M1] range, which 
flaunts the track record we=ve had on this.  We can=t even meet the upper [end of the] range the way 
it is now.   If we narrow it even more, I think it would be a mistake.  Third, on the M3 point, while 
it=s a good theoretical exercise and we can speculate about what will happen to the savings and 
loans and their thrift record, in practical terms I don=t find the Desk paying much attention to M3 in 
the day-to-day transactions.  In fact, [while] M1 and M2 have some relevance, M1 seems to be the 
principal point of contact.  So I guess M3 is a gratuitous type of figure to use--one that we ought to 
pay attention to, but not one that somebody else is paying a whole lot of attention to yet.  And 
they=re likely to as the economics change.  If  I thought we were really going to do something and 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

37

use these ranges in a practical sense of setting policy, then I think my preference would be 
something like a  4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent M1 range, which I think is probably more practical than 
what we have in front  of us.  But I=ll take the coward=s way out and stay with the status quo. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Morris now, please. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, I think I come out in exactly the same position as Governor 

Partee. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  But I think the time has come to say that there are no cowards in this 

room, period.  I don=t want to hear remarks like that. 
 
MR. MAYO.  We=re all realists. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  I only feel cowardly on M3, I think. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  I don=t feel cowardly; I just want to exercise prudence. 
 
MR. MAYO.  Prudence came from New England, didn=t she? 
 
MR. JACKSON.  How do you know the difference? 
 
MR. BLACK.  If he did it, it would be prudence; if you did it, it would be cowardice! 
 
MR. MORRIS.  So I would accept your specifications with the Partee/Jackson proviso of 

only cutting the range for M3 by 1/2 percentage point. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Eastburn now, please. 
 
MR. EASTBURN.  Well, I join the ranks of prudent men, too.  The only question I have is 

that M2 ceiling.  Really, this turns into a factual question more than anything else.  In the short- 
term ranges, it=s expected for the next two months that the large denomination time deposits will 
grow enough to offset the slow growth in time deposits subject to Regulation Q.  I wonder if that 
assumption is true, however, when you=re going a year out and whether, with Regulation Q ceilings 
biting into those smaller denomination time deposits, the relative weights of those would tend to 
shift in that time period.  Making a guess that that might be true, my inclination would be to cut 1/2 
point off of that M2 ceiling. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Volcker now, please. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, it seems to me that the most important number here, 

in operative terms, is probably the upper limit on M1.  And in terms of the mind of the market, and 
I suspect my own mind, as to whether we really mean it and whether we will attain it, I don=t think 
we can afford to lower that at this point against our past record.  I think 6-1/2 percent against the 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

38

outlook that we have is not unreasonable.  I don=t feel so casual about missing it, as some of the 
comments earlier imply.  And that gives me a little concern about what we do about M2 and M3.  I 
recognize the difficulties of reducing those numbers, psychologically and in terms of the audience 
of the Banking Committee in particular.  I=m a little afraid if we put in a high number there not on 
the feeling that it=s prudent--if that=s the right word--to lower the number but in the expectation that 
we will probably come in on the low side of that range, we may be kidding ourselves.  I could 
foresee a warm glow of satisfaction later on when we miss M1 on the upside and we say we came 
in on the low side on the other ones, which we sort of expect anyway.  So we congratulate 
ourselves that among all the targets, we haven=t done so badly in terms of our objectives.  I suspect 
there=s a little trap there.  So I would prefer, I guess, to be a little imprudent in the immediate 
presentational sense and do a little something about M2, like a 1/2 percentage point [reduction], 
and stay with the 1 [point reduction] on the M3 range. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Black now, please. 
 
MR. BLACK.  Mr. Chairman, in your statement a while ago [you said that] if we don=t fight 

inflation, who will, [and that] I think provides a pretty good backdrop for this.  I share what I think 
[are the views of] everyone else here on GNP and inflation and inflationary expectations and that 
the accompanying low level of confidence probably poses the biggest threat to the continuation of 
expansion.  So I think it=s important that we give some kind of reassurance to the business and 
financial community here and abroad that we have some intention of trying to prevent any 
escalation of inflationary pressures.  I think it=s particularly important as the year develops, of 
course, that we avoid a repetition of what I now think in retrospect has been an overly rapid 
expansion in all three of the aggregates.  

 
Getting down to the brass tacks, I would knock a percentage point off both ends of the range 

for M3 and 1/2 percentage point off the top end of the M2 range.  My economic sense tells me that 
we probably ought to knock 1/2 point off the top of M1, but my sense of prudence tells me it=s 
probably best to just leave that where it is. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Willes, please. 
 
MR. WILLES.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I won=t make any comments on the numbers.  I=d 

just like to indicate that there seem to be two points of view expressed.  One is that we don=t need 
to do anything about M1 because it=s nowhere near where we are anyway, so it=s kind of irrelevant. 
 The other point of view is, I think, the one you expressed initially--that we ought to leave it so that 
we can close the gap between where we are and where we say we=d like to be so that we increase 
[our] credibility.  And I=d just like to align myself very strongly with the notion that we ought to 
take these long-run targets very seriously.  We ought to make sure that in the short run we do what 
we can to get [monetary growth] in line with these targets and it=s on the basis of that assumption 
that I think your proposal is the right way to go at this meeting. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Willes.  Mr. Balles now, please. 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

39

MR. BALLES.  Well, I share the view expressed by some others already that the 
announcement effects of these ranges are very, very considerable.  And with inflationary concerns 
in the air both at home and abroad, not to reduce the ranges--I think we all agree--would have some 
very adverse effect on inflation expectations.   Now, having said that, I think I=d agree with Mr. 
Kimbrel=s remark a little while ago that, at this point, it may be more important to hit the ranges 
than to reduce them, in order to reestablish our credibility. 

 
In terms of the specific numbers, I would agree with your proposal, Mr. Chairman, to leave 

M1 where it is.  I agree that M3 should be cut.  I guess I would join the so-called prudent crowd 
and cut only 1/2 point from both the lower and the upper limits.  On the M2 range, I would go one 
step beyond what you are proposing and shave that down by 1/2 point to a 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent 
range.  We=ve all got our variations on the same general theme here of getting some kind of 
reduction and maintaining our credibility.  We haven=t failed to shave the range on at least one of 
the three Ms, I don’t think, every quarter since we first started.  But one question I=m a little 
uncertain about is what will happen if the [proposal to allow] automatic transfers from savings to 
checking is implemented. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  It=s a new ballgame. 
 
MR. BALLES.  We=ll have to address that at the time?  Is that your point? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, it=s a new ballgame, and I think the consequences for the 

monetary growth rates should be taken into account beforehand by the Board.  It should be 
considered very carefully by the Board before making a final decision on that regulation, which-- 

 
MR. PARTEE.  It wouldn=t be for a long time anyhow. 
 
MR. BALLES.  Well, I just assumed that at that point we might have to readjust our view of 

what=s feasible in terms of the ranges. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Oh, if that regulation is adopted by the Board, it=s a new ballgame 

and it would be a most confusing ballgame for quite a while.  I think the Board will have to think 
very carefully before reaching its decision.  And if its decision is to go ahead, then I think that our 
work in this Committee will be cut out for us. 

 
MR. BLACK.  What is a normal time frame for the Board=s consideration of an issue like this 

one? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think that a significant period needs to be allowed, first for 

study of the proposal.  And second, if the Board decides to go ahead with the proposal, I think we 
need to give the Congress reasonable time to legislate against us if that should be the inclination of 
the Congress.  I think it would be unwise for us to put any such regulation into effect immediately.  
So first we have to weigh the regulation.  If we decide in favor of it, we ought not to put it into 
effect immediately because of our Congressional problems.  I think decency and good relations 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

40

with the Congress require that members of the Congress have a reasonable amount of time to 
legislate against us, if that should be their wish.  There is a great deal of interest in the Congress on 
this issue.  And, as you know, the savings and loans are carrying on an extensive campaign.  Mr. 
Guffey now, please. 

 
MR. GUFFEY.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I would join what appears to be a consensus with 

respect to retaining the M1 range.  I=d like to specifically align myself, however, with Governor 
Partee=s and Governor Wallich=s comments with regard to probably hitting the upper [area] of that 
[4] to 6-1/2 percent, given the velocity  projections by the staff, which we believe to be somewhat 
high.  Secondly, I’d do nothing with the M2 range, but with respect to the range for M3 I’d join 
your recommendation--I believe it was your recommendation--to cut it 1/2 percentage point.   

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  My recommendation was neutral with regard to a half or a full point. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  We would prefer cutting 1/2 point off M3, recognizing that we quite likely 

could come in toward the lower end of that range.  But I would also suggest to you that you might 
take some comfort from the fact that we have missed the M3 targets since, I believe, the fourth 
quarter of 1975--always on the high side.  So [if] we come in either in the lower part of those 
targets or even miss them on the low side, that wouldn=t be of great concern. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Guffey.  Mr. Baughman. 
 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the staff estimate that alternative B is 

consistent with the general economic forecast might well be given substantial weight at this 
particular juncture.  It does give us no change with respect to M1 and M2.  It gives us some 
significant change with respect to M3, but the conversation around [the table] seems to suggest that 
it=s realistic.  So I would be inclined to take alternative B all the way through, recognizing that this 
doesn=t, based on our best estimates, indicate that we=re making any additional move against 
inflation and that the projection contemplates some acceleration of inflation.  But all things 
considered, it seems to me that that might be an appropriate place to stay at the present time. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Winn, would you be good enough 

to advise us? 
 
MR. WINN.  I vote for prudence under the circumstances.  And I really haven=t any quarrel 

with this [recommendation].  I think we ought to recognize just a little bit that our shifting base 
problem is happening to us in all this, however. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, thank you, Mr. Winn.  The Committee is unanimous on 

retaining the present range for M1, except for Mr. Roos who also agrees with the Committee on the 
midpoint of that range.  As for M2, the majority of the Committee is inclined to leave the range 
where it is presently.  And as for M3, the majority is inclined to lower both limits by 1/2 percentage 
point.  Any further discussion?  If not, I think our rules, as we now practice them, require a vote by 
the Committee. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

41

 
MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, do we have to consider the aggregate versus the [money market] 

directive, or is that-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, that comes later in connection with the short-run ranges.  We=ll 

vote on growth ranges from the fourth quarter of  ’77 to the fourth quarter of  ’78 of 4 to 6-1/2 
percent for M1, 6-1/2 to 9 percent for M2, and 7-1/2 to 10 percent for M3.  And if the Committee 
will bear with me, we shall leave it to the staff to adopt an appropriate number for bank credit, 
which is what we=ve done in a good many--I think most--of our meetings. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I=m not sure why we adopt that number. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  There are very good reasons in dealing with the Congress, and also 

in our own thinking, to pay some attention to the credit side and not only to the money side. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  May I make only a comment with [regard to] setting bank credit?  I think it=s 

not such a very good strategy to be raising the bank credit range at the same time we cut the M3 
range. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let us so advise the staff unambiguously. 
 
MR. BLACK.  Just so they find it compatible. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That=s a very useful reminder.  Well, we=re ready for the vote, unless 

members of the Committee would like further deliberation.  Would you be good enough to call the 
roll? 

 
MR. BROIDA. 

  Chairman Burns  Yes 
       Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 
       Governor Coldwell  Yes 
       President Guffey  Yes 
       Governor Jackson  Yes 
       President Mayo  Yes 
       President Morris  Yes 
       Governor Partee  Yes 
       President Roos  Yes 
       Governor Wallich  Yes 
      

MR. STERNLIGHT.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
       
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Sternlight.  Are there any questions or comments? 
       
MR. JACKSON.  One question, Mr. Chairman. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

42

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Mr. Jackson. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  This weather has produced such a substantial volume of float that our 

capacity for issuing currency has been potentially impaired.  Has any thought been given to 
substituting agency securities for Treasuries so that we would still have additional leeway for the 
issuance of currency? 

 
SPEAKER(?).  It=s not legal. 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  You could have a change in the law. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Excuse me, did I say the wrong thing?  I meant where we=d sell our 

agencies and buy the Treasuries.  Did I say the wrong thing?  I apologize. 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think it would be difficult for the market to absorb big sales of agency 

issues on short notice. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  Has some consideration been given to some careful but nonetheless 

deliberate shift in policy because of these restraints? 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  I=m not aware of such consideration. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The Desk is allergic to any such activities.  Isn=t that true? 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  I think it would be hard for the market to absorb sales. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Hard for the market to absorb even sales of insignificant volume? 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  Small sales?  We have allowed some runoff to occur in agency issues 

as these reach maturity.  That=s just a runoff. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That does seem a very relevant question to me, Mr. 

Chairman.  At the very least, it seems to be an indication that if the law isn=t changed, policy 
somehow isn=t changed in another respect.  I think it does take a change in law; we have at the very 
least a very big yellow light on purchases of agencies--the net increase in agency holdings.  I think 
we probably ought to be going in the other direction. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think it would be a good idea for the Desk to become--I=ll use the 

word “courageous” today--or to become prudent or more prudent and to exercise its greater 
prudence by one of these days making a sale of an insignificant volume of agency issues. 

 
MR. BLACK.  In light of our earlier conversation, I=d say they have been prudent.  And now 

you think they ought to be courageous? 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

43

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the Committee really ought to reach a decision on this--

perhaps it=s too late--and instruct the Desk to be somewhat flexible in that direction. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  We never sell agencies? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And while we=re on that, there is an age-old practice that I would like 

to see changed, but I don=t want to spend more than ten seconds on the point.  And that is when we 
formally vote, we vote to approve, ratify, and confirm the transactions [of the Desk].  I think it 
would be more accurate, and really more proper, simply to ratify them.  It would serve every 
purpose.  But since time immemorial, from a formal viewpoint we have approved, ratified, and 
confirmed.  Those who support me in simplifying our procedure are being very radical today.  On 
confining the vote to ratification, may I have a show of hands? 

 
MR. MAYO.  Mr. O=Connell isn=t here to defend himself. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, he=d have to defend all his predecessors, too. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  It=s going to cause quite a stir in the market when we first start selling 

agencies.  It seems to me that it=s incumbent upon us at that time to explain to the market why we 
are doing it because the stir on the first occasion is going to be pretty substantial, I would think. 

 
MR. BLACK.  You=re going to have to do more explaining to Congress probably, in spite of 

its wisdom. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Peter, could we sell to the Federal Financing Bank? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the explaining we will have to do, if any, is why we haven=t 

done it in the past--not why we are doing it now.  
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don=t see why we can=t do it as part of a general sale when 

we=re selling other things rather than doing it alone. 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  We did undertake in the past, on two occasions, sales of relatively 

short maturities of agencies.  On one occasion it went quite smoothly; on another occasion, it was 
rather upsetting. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Upsetting?  [Selling] small amounts was upsetting? 
 
MR. STERNLIGHT.  On the order of one or two hundred million, is my recollection. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  One or two hundred million?  Well, I would not call that 

insignificant but, you know, I haven=t kept up with this two trillion economy of ours. 
 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

44

MR. JACKSON.  I think it is a policy question that the Committee would be wise to address 
in a definitive way. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think the Committee should address this question.  And it should be 

on the agenda for another meeting.  Mr. Axilrod, you have a genius for brevity and this is the time 
to demonstrate it once again. 

 
MR. AXILROD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  [Statement--see Appendix.] 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any question?  If not, I=d like to go back, if you will permit me, to 

the question that was raised about the inclusion of a figure for bank credit in our longer-range 
projections.  I quickly gave a reason for doing it.  And yet, the fact that we as a Committee do not 
deal with it is troublesome.  I would like to make a suggestion to Mr. Partee, or to your committee. 
We have made an improvement.  We used a credit proxy and that behaved in a wild fashion--from 
our viewpoint, at least.  The bank credit measure is preferable.  I think the measure we really need 
and one that would be more nearly symmetrical with our monetary aggregates--particularly M3, the 
higher monetary aggregate--would be total credit.  Our flow of funds projection gives us a basis for 
that.  And I wish your committee would ponder the wisdom and the desirability of substituting total 
credit for bank credit in our longer-run projections. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  We can do that, Mr. Chairman--or perhaps [consider] institutional credit, 

which is quite [unintelligible] to M3. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Maybe.  I wish you=d think about that pretty carefully and then at a 

later time make a recommendation.  Perhaps in the future, with a wiser or more defensible measure 
of credit, the Committee would want to ponder it or to take it into account.  Well, I=m glad you=ll 
undertake that study to find out. 

 
I think we=re ready now to move on to the shorter-range specifications.  I find alternative B 

entirely acceptable.  The only additional comment I would make is that in view of the position of 
the dollar in the foreign exchange markets--and that is something that is not likely to change 
quickly or dramatically--we ought to think most carefully about doing anything that would lower 
interest rates at this time.  On the other hand, any appreciable rise in interest rates, in view of 
uncertainties that surround the economy, would also seem dubious.  I=d be inclined to stick with 
alternative B and probably with a money market directive.  Let=s hear from the Committee.  Mr. 
Volcker. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We=ve just talked about a little modification of alternative 

B, which I think is basically on the right track.  I think there is a technical reason, as we discussed a 
few meetings ago, for keeping a range of 6 percentage points for M1 if M2 has a range of 4 points. 
 I think statistically that just reflects the relative volatility of the two series; it is more consistent in 
that technical sense.  But going beyond the technical, I would prefer to shade it down in the process 
of widening it from the 0 to 6 percent.  I think our experience shows over and over that when we 
get into these little lulls in monetary growth--which are infrequent enough--if we don=t take 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

45

advantage of them, we just compound the longer-term problem of remaining within the targets.  In 
other words, I don=t think we should set these short-term ranges in a way that [threatens to] trigger 
a relaxation of the interest rate target because we will only make trouble for ourselves in the long 
run, even though the short run may look low relative to the longer-term targets.  [So] the 
substantive reasons for at least shading M1 a bit make it consistent with the technical consideration.  

 
I do think the interest rate constraint is much more important, substantively.  You mentioned 

the international reason, but for the reason I just suggested--thinking in general of the domestic side 
in terms of keeping on our long-range targets--we can say the same thing, namely, that we wouldn=t 
want to reduce [the funds rate] below where it now is. Therefore, it strikes me that the most 
straightforward thing we could do would be to put a lower limit of 6-3/4 percent [on the funds rate]. 
I wouldn=t want to move necessarily right away, so that also suggests that it be an asymmetrical 
midpoint.  I don=t want to go up all that much, which brings me precisely to the logic I think 
Governor Partee had last time.  And we=ve only got three weeks between meetings, so I think we 
are talking about a range of only 6-3/4 to 7 percent.  Anything else we might say would seem to me 
to be a little bit misleading, depending on what other people have to say around the table.  Does 
anybody really mean that we should go above 7 or below 6-3/4 without something very drastic 
happening?  I=ll be interested in seeing whether anybody does, but I wouldn=t want to.  So 6-3/4 to 7 
percent with a 6-3/4 percent “midpoint” reflects pretty accurately my feelings about the situation.  
In that context--I don=t think really inconsistently--I’d take an aggregates directive. You can=t move 
very far-- 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I just object to that.  That violates every canon of the English 

language, really, to have a range of 1/4 of one percent and talk about a monetary aggregates 
directive. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  The question is what [triggers a] move within that 1/4 of 

one percent. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We have gotten to a point of fine-tuning that is far beyond our 

knowledge or understanding or even our good sense.  I=ve made myself clear, I hope. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don=t think your logic is inconsistent, but the nature of the 

directive is not a major preoccupation of mine.  The limits on the range-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Thank you, Mr. Volcker.  Mr. Coldwell now, please. 
 
MR. COLDWELL.  Mr. Chairman, I=d take alternative B.  I have some doubts about the 

figures the staff is [projecting for] the rates of [monetary] growth in February and March.  I have a 
suspicion that the March figure is going to be sharply higher than what [they’re] showing.  But 
there is some leeway in this averaging business, and as long as we are looking at a 6-1/2 to 7 
percent range on federal funds, it doesn=t disturb me a whole lot.  I don=t want to go down from 
6-3/4 percent now that we=re there for the moment, but I don=t want to go up over 7 percent by any 
means until we take a good long look at it.  I would even be a little reluctant to go beyond 6-7/8 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

46

percent, so if we are going to fine-tune it, a 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent range would be my ideal.  But we 
might as well set a particular [rate].  We might even get to 6-11/16 but I hate those 16ths.  So, as far 
as I=m concerned, alternative B is the best. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Coldwell.  Mr. Black, please. 
 
MR. BLACK.  Steve Axilrod has reminded us all that we are approaching a pretty difficult 

period if we=re trying to project the aggregates.  And this year the [tax] refunds are expected to be 
larger and a larger percentage is expected to be paid in March, so I would share Governor 
Coldwell=s idea about the prognostication for the March growth in M1.  I think it=s probably going 
to be right much above the 7.1 percent that the staff is now projecting.  And certainly April, as 
Steve indicated very well, is likely to be pretty strong.  If we=re going to move toward a money 
market directive which I think is probably the best thing to do right now, though I don=t like it in 
general, then I would want to pare those figures for the aggregates ranges down from what we=ve 
got here in alternative B.   [I say that] because, if you=ve got a 6 percent upper [limit] and we don=t 
move the federal funds rate until we are approaching or moving beyond the limits, with M1 having 
declined 0.4 percent in February, you could have a 12.4 percent increase in March [before the 
funds rate is moved] and I think that is too fast.  And with the 8-1/2 percent ceiling on M2, [its 
growth] would also need to be in the range of 12 percent.  So I would want to pare those down to 0 
to 4 and 3 to 7.  If you went for the aggregates directive, I think these ranges would be perfectly 
acceptable and ordinarily that is what I would prefer.  But these are unusual times, so once more I 
would go with the money market directive despite my reluctance to do so. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Black.  Mr. Wallich, please. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  I=m concerned about the wide M1 range.  If you take February as given, 

that means the March M1 growth can move up or down 5 percentage points from where it is 
without triggering the funds rate if we=re on the money market directive; it means a swing of 10 
percentage points that we are allowing ourselves.  What are we gaining?  We think that we want to 
avoid triggering [a move in] the funds rate because if it goes down it hurts the dollar, and if it goes 
up it hurts housing; it=s in a very critical, delicate position.  But we don=t really gain anything, we 
just postpone-- 

 
MR. PARTEE.  It depends on how much volatility there is. 
 
MR. WALLICH.  We can have [by] the next meeting a strong move in the aggregates one 

way or the other, and we are going to be confronted with that situation of moving the funds rate 
whether we like it or not, and we are going to have lost half a month or so.  So I think we are better 
off doing the following:  Setting a narrower range and agreeing to be more ready to have a 
telephone call or telegram if [the range] triggers a movement in the funds rate.  Therefore, we stay 
more in touch with the situation because that is important.  But [we ought to] have more realistic 
aggregates ranges, so I would argue for M1 a range of 2 to 5 percent; that wouldn=t change the 
midpoint.  And for M2, [I’d favor] 5 to 8 percent, which also wouldn=t change the midpoint.  On 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

47

the funds rate, I would be willing to go a little higher and say 6-1/2 to 7-1/4 percent, but with the 
midpoint staying where we are right now and an aggregates directive. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  May I point out one thing?  The next meeting will be held three 
weeks from today.  We will have figures on monetary aggregates that will be worth paying some 
attention to only by Thursday of next week, which is approximately a week and half from now.  If 
there ever was a time to try to stand still, both because of the brevity of the [intermeeting] period 
and because of conditions in the foreign exchange market and the economy, I would think this is 
just  about the time.  Thank you, Mr. Wallich.  We=ll proceed with Mr. Kimbrel, please. 

 
MR. KIMBREL.  Mr. Chairman, these numbers associated with alternative B are rather 

attractive to me.  If I had a personal preference, and absent your very last comment that maybe the 
time does argue for no change, I guess it would be easing down M1 1/2 percentage point [on the 
top and bottom] to 1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, M2 as suggested [in alternative B], and the funds rate as 
indicated there.  I sure would hate to see [the rate] go below 6-3/4 percent and yet I absolutely 
would not during this period want to see it go above 7, although I have a personal bias against 
restricting the range any more than it is.  So I am prepared to accept [the numbers in “B”] as they 
are with the single suggestion that, absent the timing [issue], I=d prefer to see the M1 range reduced 
1/2 point. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Kimbrell.  Mr. Partee, please. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  When we [discuss] the difficulty with the aggregates, everyone is assuming 

that March may be a very strong month.  What if the coal strike goes on?  March could be a very 
low month.  I think there are so many uncertainties in the picture that we can=t really, within a 
range of 10 points, say what M1 is likely to do in the month of March.  I like Paul=s suggestion 
because I think it is the truth.  We aren=t likely to cut the funds rate below 6-3/4 percent unless 
something really dramatic happens--in which case undoubtedly there would be a conference call.  
And we aren=t likely to put the funds rate above 7 in this three-week interval, particularly since for 
half of it we won=t know what the coal miners are going to do.  Therefore, it is a strict 
old-fashioned money market conditions situation and we ought to recognize it as that and have a 
very small range on the funds rate.  I don=t really care [about the aggregates ranges]; I would be 
prepared not to have any aggregates ranges for this three-week interval because I just don=t think 
they are at all reliable.  But I suppose that=s too dramatic a change, so I would take the alternative B 
aggregates as a good proxy for a wide range of the possible experience. 

 
MR. BLACK.  Taking no aggregates--without any ranges? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Partee.  Mr. Morris. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I=m torn.  When I first came and sat at this table--not 

this one but the other one--we used to have directives that said “maintain prevailing money market 
conditions.” 

 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

48

SPEAKER(?).  That=s correct. 
 
MR. MORRIS.  I think you could make a case for doing that for the next three weeks.  On the 

other hand, it seems to me that if we are going to establish a range, we could make a good case for 
having an asymmetrical range.  If we get two months back to back of no M1 growth, this suggests 
to me that it would make just as much sense to go back to 6-1/2 percent [on the funds rate rather] 
than to advance it to 7 percent in case of various outcomes of monetary growth.  I may be biased in 
the sense that I didn=t vote for 6-3/4 to begin with, but it seems to me that if we respond on the 
funds rate because of a very marked slowdown in monetary growth, we ought to be able to explain 
that to the international financial [community] as not signifying any unwillingness to influence the 
money supply.  So it seems to me that alternative B, as written, would be quite satisfactory.  As a 
secondary measure, I would go back to our old 1968 [directive language] for this one occasion and 
say we=re going to maintain prevailing money market conditions, period. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Morris.  Mr. Baughman.  This is turning out to be a 

very interesting meeting. 
 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  Mr. Chairman, I agree with the observation that this is a time to stand 

where we are, and I construe that as meaning primarily staying at 6-3/4 percent.  I can=t visualize a 
development in the next three weeks that would seem [to indicate] that we should go below 6-3/4 
percent on the fed funds rate.  However, it does seem to me that it is possible that there might be 
developments that would cause us to want to go to 7 percent or possibly above that.  But I would 
assume that such developments would call for a meeting of the Committee and, therefore, it seems 
to me that a range of 6-1/2 to 7 is appropriate. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Baughman.  Mr. Guffey now. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  Mr. Chairman, alternative B with a money market directive would be my 

choice but with one minor adjustment.  Everybody seems to have their own adjustments this 
morning, but I think the risks of March coming in strong quite likely are greater than it coming in 
weak and, as a result, I would like to see the M1 range adjusted to 0 to 5 percent with a money 
market directive.  My thought is that if we get up to around a 10 percent projected rate for March, 
we ought to be taking some action.  I’d also take the B alternative on the federal funds range, but I 
would suggest that maybe we put a proviso in that it not go below 6-3/4 percent.  I think we=ve 
done that before and I think it is quite appropriate at this meeting. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Willes, please. 
 
MR. WILLES.  Mr. Chairman, I=m prepared to go along with alternative B, but I would just 

like to make a procedural comment or a theoretical comment or whatever kind of comment.  While 
I understand the arguments for staying where we are, I have difficulty in my own mind knowing 
what it means to stay where we are.  Chuck mentioned the possibility that we could get a very low 
March and I think that is a possibility.  My understanding is that it is precisely in those periods of 
uncertainty of the kind that we are now moving into--and I=m talking about uncertainty in terms of 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

49

the real economy, not money [growth] and that sort of thing--that we ought to pay more attention to 
the aggregates rather than less, because should we have made a mistake in our perception of how 
strong the real economy is, for example, the best hedge against that would be to keep the money 
supply from going very low for several  months in a row.  And, of course, conversely on the upper 
side.  I=m not prepared to debate this today because it=s not the time, but I think one of the real 
issues we have as we go down the road is what kind of uncertainty we have regarding the real  
economy and where that pushes us in terms of how we define staying where we are.  If we think 
about that, we may well find that we want to flip on their heads the kind of rationales that we=ve 
used today and go in exactly the opposite direction. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Willes.  But I do want to remind the Committee, 

once again, that we are talking about an intermeeting period of just half the duration of the 
preceding one.  Mr. Eastburn. 

 
MR. EASTBURN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I listen to the discussion, I think this is an 

illustration of the danger of getting captive to our machinery here.  It seems to me, given the short 
[intermeeting] period and the desire, as I hear it, of most people to stay where we are, that we need 
to tell the Desk to hold the rate where it is and watch closely and have a special meeting by wire if 
necessary, but it probably won=t be necessary.  So I=d accept alternative B and wait for three weeks. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thanks, Mr. Eastburn.  Mr. Jackson. 
  
MR. JACKSON.  I think we ought to be aware that Mr. Holmes=s ego is probably highly 

inflated by the procedure with which we have endowed him the capacity to manage affairs. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  He does very well. 
 
MR. JACKSON.  I know he does, but at the same time it looks like every time he does well, 

we want to make him do better.  So I think that our focus on such an issue is not appropriate and, in 
view of the intermeeting period being discussed, I think we ought to take alternative B.  And to me, 
the aggregates directive will accomplish the same result as the money market directive, because it=s 
highly unlikely that in ten days we will have such wide swings in people=s perceptions as to 
produce any difference. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Jackson.  Mr. Mayo now, please. 
 
MR. MAYO.  I prefer the 6-1/2 to 7 percent [fed funds range], although I agree with Paul and 

others that the likelihood of going below 6-3/4 percent is very, very remote.  I just have a 
constitutional objection to that narrow a range on fed funds.  I prefer a wider range in “normal” 
circumstances.  I like the idea of shading downward [the ranges for] both M1 and M2; 0 to 5 and 4 
to 8 are fine with me--or 4 to 9 for that matter is all right.  I would prefer the money market 
directive.  

 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

50

Apparently I=m playing a little game with the staff on the phrasing of the directive:  Two 
months in a row and again this time I=ve suggested, and the Committee has bought, the idea of 
stating the directive in terms of a weekly average federal funds rate of about “the current level.”  
Each time, the next month the Bluebook comes along and crosses out “the current level” and 
substitutes “___ percent.”  I still think it=s a good idea, when we have the opportunity, to state it in 
terms of the current level rather than the precision of a digit.  That=s a terribly subtle thing, but I 
think it may serve us well if we lose the Merrill case, for instance. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would go along with Mr. Mayo.  Yes, I think Mr. Mayo=s right.  

Any objections to that? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Mr. Broida wants to [comment]. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, please. 
 
MR. BROIDA.  President Mayo, it is not the staff=s intention to suggest to the Committee that 

it not use the phrase “the current level.”  If you look at the second form of the directive, it shows 
the proposed changes from last time in terms of strike-throughs and caps. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, if you agree with Mr. Mayo, that is sufficient. 
 
MR. BROIDA.  Mr. Mayo seems to have the notion that the staff is trying to push the 

Committee-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, no, no.  There=s no such thing. 
 
MR. MAYO.  I=m amused, not annoyed. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  We=ll move on. 
 
MR. PARTEE.  I might note, Mr. Chairman, that page 1 shows that over the last six weeks 

the Manager has deviated from plus 5 basis points to minus 3 basis points from a 6.75 percent 
average, so I think it=s safe enough to say about the current level. 

 
MR. MAYO.  I guess I=m making the same point in a different way that Frank just made 

about prevailing [money market conditions] but in a 1978 environment instead of a 1968 one.  
Terribly minor, but I think it might have some significance. 

 
MR. BAUGHMAN.  That used to be cast more often in terms of net borrowed reserves 

instead of the federal funds rate. 
 
MR. MAYO.  That=s all right. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Mayo and Mr. Baughman.  We move to Mr. Roos. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

51

 
MR. ROOS.  Mr. Chairman, I am impressed with the logic of Governor Wallich=s point of 

view and would like to be recorded as subscribing to his proposal.  But I certainly am also 
impressed with the short time frame and would support and vote for alternative B.  I would, Mr. 
Chairman, if I might, take the opportunity to address one remark to my good friend, Chuck Partee.  
For so long a time now, I=ve had to adjust to finding my aggregates objectives bloodied and 
buffeted, and now the threat of having my aggregates totally amputated is a bit of a shock. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  I can=t believe that myself. 
 
MR. [ROOS].  Well, what concerns me is the setting of a precedent.  I fear that if [Chuck’s] 

proposal had gone [through], next time there wouldn=t be any aggregates here. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, the aggregates are fully alive and we move on.  Mr. Balles 

now, please. 
 
MR. BALLES.  Mr. Chairman, I can=t help observing that occasional backsliding is perhaps 

understandable, but to backslide ten years is a little far back to go. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, that=s what bothers me.  If you just went back 8 years--! 
 
MR. [BALLES].  Governor Partee is playing out one scenario in which you may get a very 

low growth in M1 in March if the coal strike isn=t settled.  But I=d point out another possible 
scenario.  As I look at page 4 of the Bluebook and see the way money growth--whether it=s 
nonborrowed reserves, total reserves, or the monetary base--has been accelerating, I can=t help but 
feel, Steve, that sooner or later that=s going to catch up with us.  Therefore, I share the view of some 
others, including Governor Coldwell and I=ve forgotten who else, who said they felt there was a 
good chance of March M1 coming in at higher than the projected 7 percent.  It=s going to be quite 
interesting to see, when we get to next month=s meeting, how those figures have been revised.  But, 
having said that, I still think there=s a great deal of logic in holding steady as we are, and for 
reasons that have been set forth in detail, I would go with alternative B for this 3-week period with 
a money market directive. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Would anyone else like to speak? 
 
MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, I have no quarrel with alternative B.  I=d just like to see 

something in the release indicating the coal strike as one of the economic uncertainties that we face. 
We have only the weather [mentioned] as a cause of our problems.  And second, is there any 
change in the status of the Merrill suit? 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  On the Merrill suit, the Solicitor General will be recommending to 

the Supreme Court that the Supreme Court take on the case.  That is a favorable development.   
Now, we=re trying to move the two Banking Committees to give us legislative relief, on the 
assumption that down the road the Supreme Court will either be unwilling to take on the case or, if 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

52

it does, may move against us and uphold the lower courts.  The bill has been introduced in the 
Senate.  I had talked to Mr. Reuss before in a meeting, telephoned him the other day, and sent him 
a letter yesterday urging him to introduce the bill without committing himself to it.  Whether he 
will or not, I don=t know.  If he doesn=t, we will get another Congressman to do it.  It would be best, 
however, if the chairman of the committee introduced the bill without necessarily committing 
himself to it.   

 
Well, gentlemen, I think that we=ve had a good deal of discussion, a good deal of banter, and 

some differences; the differences are really very minor.  A very clear majority of the Committee 
favors alternative B.  There was some uncertainty, however, in my own mind as to the directive.  I 
think we=ll need a show of hands on that.  Those who are in favor of a monetary aggregate 
directive, kindly indicate. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.   [It depends on the] ranges. 
 
MR. BLACK.  Yes, it does. 
 
MR. MAYO.  It depends on the ranges. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Let=s say that the range is 6-1/2 to 7. 
 
MR. MAYO/MR. GUFFEY.  On the M1 range? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I=m sorry.  The M1 range that a majority favors is 1 to 6 percent as in 

alternative B.  Let=s make that assumption.  Of course, we could proceed another way but I think 
that=s the most reasonable assumption to make.  The differences are not large, you know.  The 0 to 
6 is a difference on the midpoint of 1/2 percent; 0 to 5,  yes, is a larger difference, but a majority 
clearly favors 1 to 6.  Assuming a range of 1 to 6, would the Committee favor a monetary aggregate 
directive? 

 
MR. BROIDA.  Five.  There are ten [voting members] today. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That means I have no way of helping the Committee. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My interpretation of a money market directive in the 

context in which people have been talking is that people really are very reluctant to see [the funds 
rate] decline below 6-3/4 percent. 

 
MR. PARTEE.  Yes. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  That seems to me the substance of the thing.  Is that 

correct? 
 
MR. PARTEE.  Or go above 7. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

53

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I agree with that side, too. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, actually, I would sum up the thinking of the Committee a little 

differently.  If we had a range for the federal funds rate that is lower than 1/2 percentage point [in 
width], it wouldn=t be 6-3/4 to 7, it would be something like 6-5/8 to 6-7/8.  I think that=s the 
thinking of the Committee at this time.  A range of 6-3/4 to 7, despite the eloquence with which the 
case was first presented by Mr. Volcker and despite the enthusiasm with which it was endorsed by 
Mr. Partee, did not win any more adherents--not because the case was put poorly, but because this 
Committee is stiff-necked and did not want to move in that direction. 

 
How do we resolve this question of the directive language?  I=m not [feeling] very Solomonic 

today.  Let me try again. This time my question is: Will the members of the Committee who favor a 
money market directive kindly indicate their preference by raising their hands. 

 
MR. BROIDA.  Four, Mr. Chairman. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now this time I=m going to proceed a little differently.  How many 

who prefer a monetary aggregates directive would still not feel comfortable with a money market 
directive, whether or not you prefer it?  Let=s have a show of hands. 

 
MR. BAUGHMAN(?).  Whether we will lose sleep, Mr. Chairman? 
 
MR. BROIDA.  Seven. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  In fairness, I think I now have to ask the question:  How many 

members of the Committee, whether or not you prefer a monetary aggregates directive, would feel 
reasonably comfortable with it? 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  With the other specifications? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  With the other specifications. 
 
MR. BROIDA.  Four. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  I don=t think I understand the vote, do you? 
 
SPEAKER(?).  I didn=t vote. 
 
MR. MAYO.  I didn=t either. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  I would like to suggest that a 0 to 5 percent [M1 range] with a money market 

conditions directive would be very acceptable and perhaps equal in my mind to 1 to 6 percent with 
an aggregates directive. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

54

 
MR. MAYO(?).  I feel the same way. 
 
MR. BLACK.  That=s a good statement, except I think your figure is a little too high.  But it=s 

good thinking. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  Talking about the March growth-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, maybe I should have been less fair.  Maybe I should have 

stopped when I asked how many, whether or not you prefer a money market directive, could be 
reasonably comfortable for a three-week period with it.  Perhaps I should have stopped there.  Let 
me pursue this.  Mr. Guffey didn=t understand the question.  Let me stay on this track of fairness, 
though not indefinitely.  How many of you would feel reasonably comfortable with a monetary 
aggregates directive over a period of the next three weeks, whether or not you prefer a monetary 
aggregates directive? 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Money market directive? 
 
MR. MAYO.  Aggregates, he said. 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  With 1 to 6? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  With a 1 to 6 percent [M1] range. 
 
MR. BROIDA.  Six. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Now, we have the narrowest margin on the most subtle point in favor 

of money market directive--not in favor of but willing to live with it for only a three-week period.  
Unless there is a desire for further discussion--  Yes, there is such a desire. 

 
MR. MAYO.  Mr. Chairman, would it be fair for you to ask for a show of hands of those who 

prefer a money market directive with a 1 to 5 or 0 to 5 percent range as against those who prefer a 
monetary aggregates directive with the 1 to 6 range? 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  The 0 to 5 range with a money market directive as against 1 to 6 with 

an aggregates directive? 
 
MR. MAYO.  Yes. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Those who prefer the former would kindly indicate that. 
 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  A 0 to 5 range with a money market directive? 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Three. 



 
2/28/78  

 

  

55

 
MR. MAYO(?).  I=ll resign! 
 
MR. GUFFEY.  So it=s 1 to 6 with an aggregates directive.  That=s the alternative. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, don=t resign.  Apart from missing your cheerful countenance, we 

might be short of a quorum.  I=d be a little worried about that. 
 
MR. MAYO(?).  Sorry about that. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Gentlemen, I think we=re ready for a vote.  The vote is on a growth 

range for M1 of 1 to 6 percent; a range for M2 of 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent; a federal funds range of 
6-1/2 to 7 percent; and a money market directive.  Before we do that, on line 12 of the draft of the 
domestic policy directive, Mr. Broida suggests that we state 1-1/2 instead of 1 percent.  I assume 
that has been checked out by the staff and I assume that it=s [accurate].  Mr. Jackson? 

 
MR. JACKSON.  In our directive, we advise the Desk to take into consideration emerging 

money market conditions including the “unsettled” conditions in foreign exchange markets.  While 
I would be the first to agree that they had been unsettled, by continuing to use that word are we in 
turn continuing to remind the world just how unsettled they are?  Would we be wise to eliminate 
that word and just say “including the conditions in foreign exchange markets”? 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I would eliminate the word [“unsettled” and say] “including 

conditions in foreign exchange markets.” 
      
MR. JACKSON.  That strikes me as more prudent. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I think so.  Any objection to dropping the word “unsettled”?  I think 

it=s better form.  Thank you.  Are we ready for the vote now?  Would you call the roll? 
 

 MR. BROIDA.  
  Chairman Burns  Yes 
  Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 
  Governor Coldwell  Yes 
  President Guffey  Yes  
  Governor Jackson  Yes 
  President Mayo  Yes 
  President Morris  Yes 
  Governor Partee  Yes 
  President Roos  Yes 
  Governor Wallich  Yes 
  Unanimous. 
       



 
2/28/78  

 

  

56

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I want to thank all of you for a very interesting meeting.  I 
didn=t want to say this but I can say it now.  If there ever was a time for this Committee to be 
unanimous, it was today. 

 
Now, I got a note before--this came in about twenty minutes ago and I haven=t had one 

subsequently--which reads as follows:  As of this moment the Senate Banking Committee is now 
voting on waiving the 24-hour rule and will vote now on Miller. That means that Mr. Miller may 
be confirmed or perhaps is even likely to be confirmed by the committee today.  If so, I think that 
would be good news for the System.  I think we=ll have more information at lunchtime.  We are 
going to take luncheon together.  Or for those of you who are [available], I thought we could have 
luncheon together.  Those of you who have made appointments, of course, feel free to keep them.  I 
have no specific agenda, but a room is reserved.  What room is it? 

 
MR. BROIDA.  Dining room F, which has space for 20. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, there are how many members? 
 
SPEAKER(?).  A total of 17 Board members and Reserve Bank Presidents. 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, if all of the Board members and Presidents come, we have 

room for our Secretary and for Mr. Axilrod.  That makes 19 and I shall think about the 20th one. 
      
MR. WINN.  Mr. Chairman, how is Governor Gardner? 
      
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don=t know, but he=s been in the hospital since a week ago this 

Friday.  He is continuing to undergo tests, which leaves us with a great deal of hope, but all of 
which does suggest that there are problems that require further explanation and may be serious.  I 
hope not. 

 
END OF MEETING 




