









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


  
 

  
 

TRANSCRIPT 
 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL 
 

January 5, 1978 
 

Prefatory Note 
 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw transcript in the FOMC 
Secretariat's files.  The Secretariat has lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's 
understanding.  Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, the 
notation "unintelligible" has been inserted.  In some instances, words have been added in 
brackets to complete a speaker's thought or to correct an obvious transcription error or 
misstatement. 
 

Errors undoubtedly remain.  The raw transcript was not fully edited for accuracy 
at the time it was produced because it was intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in 
preparing the record of the Committee's policy actions.  The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 
 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's understanding, the only deletions 
involve a very small amount of confidential information regarding foreign central banks, 
businesses, and persons that are identified or identifiable.  Deleted passages are indicated by 
gaps in the text.  All information deleted in this manner is exempt from disclosure under 
applicable provisions of the Freedom of Information Act. 
 
 
 

 
 
          
 



Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee 
 January 5, 1978 

 
 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on January 5, 1978.  This 

was a telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C. except as 

otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those participating. 

 PRESENT:  Mr. Burns, Chairman 
                                Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman (New York) 
                                Mr. Coldwell 
                                Mr. Gardner  
                                Mr. Guffey (Kansas City) 

        Mr. Lilly 
                                Mr. Mayo (Chicago)  
                                Mr. Morris (Boston) 
          Mr. Partee 
                                Mr. Roos  (St. Louis) 
          Mr. Wallich 
 

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn, (Philadelphia),       
        and Winn (Cleveland), Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market 
        Committee 

                                 
                                Messrs. Black (Richmond) , Kimbrel (Atlanta) , and Willes (Minneapolis), 

Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and 
Minnapolis, respectively 

                            
Mr. Truman, Associate Economists                                                                            

   
                     Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account (New York) 

        Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations (NewYork) 
   

 
 
 

    



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of 
January 5, 1978 

 
                

CHAIRMAN BURNS. The purpose of this meeting is to make sure that all members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee are reasonably well informed about recent developments in the 
foreign exchange market and what this government in conjunction with the Federal Reserve and 
other central banks has recently done.  In line with that purpose, I am going to call first of all on 
Mr. Truman to review recent developments in the foreign exchange markets.  Are you ready, Mr. 
Truman? 
 

MR. TRUMAN.  Actually, if Mr. Pardee is there, the Desk at New York probably-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I am running this meeting in my fashion, Mr. Truman. 
 
MR. TRUMAN.  Yes, sir.  Mr. Chairman, yesterday-- 
 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, I’d like to have you cover what has happened to foreign 

exchange rates during the past month in particular and secondly the scale of intervention by foreign 
central banks.  Then I shall call on Alan Holmes to comment on the scale of intervention by the 
Federal Reserve and more recently also by the U.S. Treasury.  And then I shall call on Mr. Gardner 
to review what has been done at this end.  But first of all, [give us] the raw facts about foreign 
exchange rates and the scale of intervention by foreign central banks and then by the Federal 
Reserve. 
 

MR. TRUMAN.  Well, as you know, Mr. Chairman, since the early fall, the end of 
September, there has been fairly continuous pressure on the dollar, bringing the dollar’s decline, on 
a weighted-average basis--at least through today--to close to 10 percent.  Much of that decline, as 
you know, was against the Swiss franc, the yen, the British pound, and the mark. The decline has 
been general.  Now, in the last several months, net intervention by foreign central banks has been 
something over $12 billion. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And what was it over the entire year [of 1977]? 
 

MR. TRUMAN.  Over the entire year it was close to $35 billion. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right. 
 

MR. TRUMAN.  It was $6-1/2 billion in October, about $3.6 billion in November and 
another $3.6 billion in December.  That’s about $12 billion to $13 billion. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  That’s $13-1/2 billion, according to my arithmetic. 
 

MR. TRUMAN.  It was $13-1/2 billion for the fourth quarter compared with $10 billion in 
the third quarter; it was $4 billion and $6 billion in the first two quarters of the year. 
 



1/5/78 2

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right.  Thank you, Mr. Truman.  Alan Holmes, are you there? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I am not very well prepared for this.  I think I would like to talk mainly 
about what happened yesterday and today when we started to do a little more aggressive 
intervention. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, you might tell the Committee the total intervention that has 
occurred thus far.  It’s something like $900 million, is it not? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  It’s about $900 million--a little over--since the end of September, 
beginning of October.  Since the last meeting of the Committee our total intervention has been 
$295 million.  Yesterday we took a more aggressive approach.  It seemed that the approach was 
aggressive, but we spent no money and the mark went from around the 2.06 level to 2.13-1/2. 
Today, as we expected, we have been tested by foreign banks in particular and some of our own 
banks to see if this policy really means something.  So today we have intervened to the extent of 
$140 million--with half of that for the System account and half for the Treasury account under their 
new swap arrangement with the Bundesbank.  Other intervention today--the main ones--[included] 
Germany,                       and Switzerland,                      in their market and on their behalf we did         
              equivalent of Swiss francs for a total of                        .  Meantime the dollar has reached a 
[unintelligible] in Germany today and [the mark] a 2.15 level.  It went a little bit higher in New 
York and since then has dropped off to a little below the 2.15 level. 
 
  CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right. 

 
MR. COLDWELL.  Do you want us to ask questions now or-- 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, let’s defer questions a little while.  Thank you, Alan.  I am 

going to call on Governor Gardner now to describe certain conversations of critical importance to 
the Federal Reserve System with the U.S. Treasury, and secondly, certain conversations with 
members of the Congress.  Mr. Gardner, please.  
 

MR. GARDNER.  You can hear me, I hope.  Last week we met with the acting Secretary of 
the Treasury.  The Secretary was out of town so we met with the Under Secretary for Monetary 
Affairs.  We discussed this problem and we reached some agreements with them which were later 
reduced to writing.  We have a letter from the Treasury to the Federal Reserve referring to our 
interventions to that point, confirming that they were made in close consultation with the Treasury 
and that the Treasury was fully aware of and in full concurrence with what we were doing.  
Secondly, we asked the Treasury to begin the process of freeing the Exchange Stabilization Fund to 
participate with us.  They also confirmed in writing that they would do that and would meet with 
the appropriate banking committee leaders on the Hill to explain our concern and to point out the 
need for the U.S. Treasury or the United States government to assist and to take a clear 
proprietorial part in these operations. 

 
I accompanied Tony Solomon, the Under Secretary, to Mr. Proxmire’s office and we had an 

hour-long discussion about the dollar, the exchange rate difficulties of the dollar, and the disorderly 
markets.  He pursued questions with the Under Secretary as to what effect might be expected by the 



1/5/78 3

Treasury [in the event] of some action on energy matters and he reviewed the status of and 
expectations regarding our trade balance.  The Under Secretary told Mr. Proxmire that the Treasury 
would like to join us in these activities.  He said he would like to arrange his own swap [line] with 
the Bundesbank of upwards of $1 billion.  [He indicated] that this would not exhaust all of the 
ability of the Exchange Stabilization Fund; they perhaps could go further if the need was obvious.  
Mr. Proxmire agreed to that proposal and accepted the actions that we had done on our own as 
being appropriate.  Prior to our talking to Mr. Proxmire jointly, the Under Secretary had attempted 
to arrange a meeting with Congressman Reuss of the House [Banking] Committee.  He was unable 
to do that because Mr. Reuss was overseas.  But Mr. Solomon was able to talk with Mr. Reuss 
before he left for overseas and received what he characterized as a general agreement with the 
conditions and principles that he had discussed with Senator Proxmire.  The Under Secretary also 
contacted two members of key subcommittees in the House and Senate, Congressman Neil and 
Senator Stevenson, and they were fully advised of the process that was begun on that day.  
Following that development and with the clearance to go ahead, the Treasury arranged a billion 
dollar swap line with the Bundesbank--that was the genesis of the announcement that went out 
yesterday--and the Bundesbank approved it and they have been full partners [in the intervention 
operations] today, as you have heard. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Thank you, Mr. Gardner.  Let me supplement what Mr. Gardner 
has just told you by reading the precise announcement that was issued yesterday.  I am not sure that 
each of you has had the opportunity to see it.  The announcement was quite brief.  Here it is: 

 
The U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board today  
issued the following announcement. 
 
The Exchange Stabilization Fund of the U.S. Treasury will 
henceforth be utilized actively, together with the $20 billion 
swap network operated by the Federal Reserve System.   
A swap agreement has just been reached by the Treasury 
with the German Federal Bank and it is already in force.  
Joint intervention by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and 
foreign central banks is designed to check speculation and 
reestablish order in the foreign exchange markets. 

 
Well, if you’ve heard all that has proceeded so far, I think this is now the time for 

questioning.  Let me take this opportunity--I should have done so earlier--to wish each of you a 
happy New Year. 

 
Who would like to raise a question first?  When you do, I wish you would announce your 

name.  I think I can recognize some of your voices, but not all of them; therefore, please state your 
name before you put forth your question. 
 

MR. MORRIS.  Mr. Chairman, this is Frank Morris. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Yes, Frank. 
 



1/5/78 4

MR. MORRIS.  Happy New Year to you.  My question is: Why was there a delay between 
the President’s announcement last week and the implementation of what I thought was the meaning 
of the announcement yesterday? 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you might broaden that question and ask why there was such 
a delay in the President’s balance of payments statement.  Without going into detail, let me tell you 
that the Chairman of the Federal Reserve System has been very active in recent years and it could 
not be accomplished sooner.  I will not elaborate over the telephone; I will not go beyond that.  Let 
me just say one thing.  The delay was not caused by anything at our end; that I can assure you.  
Next question.  Mr. Coldwell has a question. 
 

MR. COLDWELL.  Alan, I believe you said in your comments that some of our 
commercial banks have been testing us on this announced policy.  Would you clarify what you 
mean by that? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I think it is more foreign banks that have fairly large positions, Phil.  They 
seem to have taken a paper loss and they are now trying to protect themselves by building up those 
positions further hoping that they can eventually drive the rates back down and come out whole. 
 

MR. COLDWELL.  But it’s not our own commercial banks? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Maybe to a very small extent.  We see no significant evidence of that. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Do you have any direct evidence that foreign commercial banks are 
engaged in any such exercise? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Only what we hear through the market, Mr. Chairman. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You mean that you know by the grapevine but you have no direct 
evidence, is that correct? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  We hear it also from some of our foreign central banking friends, but 
there’s no direct evidence.  There are no statistics that are immediately available. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Is there anything on the part of our commercial banks that is worth 
mentioning in this connection? 

 
MR. HOLMES.  I would think not, Mr. Chairman.  I think they’re out to make a profit like 

everybody else but their positions have been moderate. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Their positions are not abnormal. 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Not to the best of my knowledge.  But we will be checking as soon as we 
get some numbers. 
 



1/5/78 5

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, as for their positions, we have numbers through the middle of 
December, do we not? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  That’s right. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And have you noticed anything really abnormal in their positions 
up to that time? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Let me ask Scott to answer that question because he is a little more 
familiar with the numbers than I am. 
 

MR. PARDEE.  Mr. Chairman, we have been following the positions of the banks very 
carefully.  There is a lag of about two weeks in getting the numbers on positions.  We do not have 
access to all of the numbers. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I know, but the dollar has been depreciating for a number of 
months now. 
 

MR. PARDEE.  We have been [seeing] small [moves to] larger positions than normal.  But 
the banks do not take large positions so that they can turn them very quickly.  

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I’ll tell you, I’ve been examining this evidence.  I must do 

some further work on it but my preliminary examination does not indicate anything abnormal.  And 
I say that because we want to be very careful about what we say on this subject.  My own studies 
on that are continuing. 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I agree with that, Mr. Chairman.  This is Paul Volcker.  
I’ve looked at these figures and they are obviously fluctuating.  They have tended to be on the 
strong side [in marks], which is natural in a declining market, but I haven’t seen anything that 
indicates positions of a magnitude or character that are at all threatening to the banks.  There isn’t 
anything that’s out of order with their normal trading instincts. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I can be more specific.  I have examined the evidence for the 

second half of 1977 to arrive at something like a firm conclusion.  I will now be looking at the 
evidence for the first half of the year and see if some sort of a trend developed.  My preliminary 
conclusion is that we have no problem in this area and that I take it is the substance of your remark, 
Paul.  Is that correct, Paul?  
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Yes. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any other questions now?  Mr. Gardner has a question or 
comment. 
 

MR. GARDNER.  Alan and Scott, on this question of foreign banks, is it likely that these 
banks are operating facilities both in the United States and overseas or are you looking at them 
from an overseas standpoint? 



1/5/78 6

 
MR. PARDEE.  Basically, the decisions are being made overseas.  They are still dealing 

with us--or were until this meeting.  We are now out of the market.  They either are dealing directly 
with the New York Reserve Bank or through their branches and agencies here.  It is a service task 
as far as they are concerned. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Mr. Partee has a question now. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  Alan, I just got back from vacation, so I’m really not very well up-to-date.  
I’d like you to discuss briefly, if you would, your operating rationale in intervention.  You are still 
under the dollar limits, I presume; on the other hand, with this announcement you must have a new 
rationale.  You said we were being tested by the banks.  I presume that means that they weren’t 
covering but they were deepening their short positions in dollars.  At some point they ought to 
cover, it would seem to me, if they were convinced that in fact there was a defense of the dollar 
going on.  And when they cover we could have quite a sharp increase in the dollar rate.  
 

MR. HOLMES.  That is certainly what we are hoping for, but in the meantime we are being 
tested.  The banks try to assure themselves that this is a meaningful policy move on the part of the 
United States.  
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, does that mean that you’ll be inclined to move in on any weakening 
of the dollar during the day? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  On any weakening of the dollar, no.  I think we want to make sure to be 
clear that we are not trying to establish a rate.  We are trying to maintain an orderly market and to 
shake out some of these speculative positions that we think are around the world. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  What are your notions as to possible volume?   
 
MR. HOLMES.  That is very hard to judge.  As I said, yesterday we were very active in 

placing orders in the market but we had no takers; today we did have takers. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  That was the cover yesterday, I guess.  And today you get the testing. 
 

MR. PARDEE.  It depends entirely on the approach.  If we approach the market forcefully, 
then the market responds favorably.  But if we start falling back and act defensively, as we have 
over the last three or four months, then we will spend a great deal of money and perhaps lose what 
credibility we have regained. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, it’s a very difficult situation without an awful lot of precedent.  It’s 
hard to say exactly what will occur.  But as I read the statement coming home on the plane 
yesterday, I was inclined to think that it might mean there will be very large scale operations.  I 
haven’t spoken to any of the other Board members about it yet and I just wondered if that was your 
view, Alan.  Do you think that we might in fact be talking about big money here? 
 



1/5/78 7

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  If I can interject here, it’s Paul Volcker.  I don’t think that 
question is completely answerable by any means. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  I don’t either, Paul. 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, [we were] talking about banks in the earlier 
discussion and I think maybe that gets this a little out of perspective.  We’re talking about the 
psychology of the whole market--banks and other people. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’m glad you said that, Paul, because I think that much of this talk 
about banks is pure gossip.  We have millions--[at least] thousands--of individuals involved in 
these transactions around the world quite apart from bankers.  And the notion that it is speculative 
bankers who are testing us and they are the only factors in the market is simply wrong.  I don’t like 
it--it makes absolutely no sense to me--and I’m grateful to you, Paul, for restoring perspective a bit. 
 

MR. PARTEE.  Well, I assume the orders are placed through the banks. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Banks act as agents or they act as principals in the same way that 
they do in the over-the-counter market. 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  You don’t know sometimes whether they are acting as 
agents or principals.  But we’ve had a great psychological wave against the dollar and we hope to 
repair that. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  All right, any other questions or comments? 
 

MR. WALLICH.  This is Henry Wallich.  I’d like to ask Alan what he has heard in the way 
of reports and testimony. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Reports on what? 
 

MR. WALLICH.  Anything on corporate treasurers or on foreign official [holders] who 
might have been in and out of dollars. 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Well, we have heard mainly that corporate treasurers are trying to make up 
their minds, if they do have a long position in marks, whether they should shorten it or if they 
should establish a new position.  I don’t have anything very concrete, but definitely I could say on 
that point that we know a lot of thinking and discussions are going on.  And that’s why we think it 
is very important to maintain a stable momentum as far as the psychology is concerned.  I certainly 
agree, Mr. Chairman, that it is not only banks that are at fault. 
 

MR. WALLICH.  Is there anything in movements at the year-end--for instance in 
connection with the financial accounting standards or rules about taking exchange profits and 
losses into earnings--that could have influenced what has happened and will have an effect on the 
beginning of the year?  

 



1/5/78 8

MR. PARDEE.  In my judgment that should be favorable for us now.  Many of the 
corporations that had a loss before the end of the year actually sold dollars to take those losses to 
their balance sheets.  So we could have either a buying of dollars or an absence of offerings of 
dollars early in this year, once we get the change in market psychology that we are looking for. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Any other questions? 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  May I inject just one other thought, Mr. Chairman?  I 
think the success of this whole operation is not going to hinge on intervention entirely in the short 
run, although that’s the motivation for the immediate change.  I think all those things that we 
worried about before--oil and even domestic monetary policy--are very relevant here and I don’t 
think we ought to lose sight of that. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I want to endorse that completely.  Actually, our intervention so far 
has demonstrated to my mind the futility of the exercise pretty much.  Now, we are getting some 
psychological benefit out of the recent announcement and I hope it lasts.  We are intervening more 
actively and I think we should up to a point, but I don’t want to see this overdone.  This problem 
will be handled satisfactorily--the dollar will regain strength--if and only if we have in place, first, a 
definite and credible energy policy and if we have in place a definite and credible anti-inflation 
policy and a tax policy designed to stimulate foreign investment as well as domestic investment in 
this country.  Now, these are the fundamental aspects of the problem and unless we attend to these 
problems, the dollar in my judgment will remain weak.  But for the sake of better relations with 
foreign countries and on the chance that we may sustain psychology for a while, I am in favor of 
moderate intervention but I don’t want to see the Desk overdo it.  And I think members of the 
Committee should know that I, and in my absence, Governor Gardner, have been rationing the New 
York Desk and not permitting the Desk to [proceed] on its own entirely. 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We have accomplished quite a bit with what we had, Mr. 
Chairman.  
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, you say you’ve accomplished it.  I’m willing to give you the 
credit. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don’t mean me, personally. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I’m not talking about you personally.  By we you mean, I know, the 

Federal Reserve and the Treasury and the New York Desk and the Federal Reserve Board.  Just 
take credit and enjoy it while it lasts.  

 
Any other questions or comments?  The silence is ominous.  Are any of the Bank Presidents 

and Governor Wallich still there? 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, Governor Wallich is there and Paul Volcker is there.  Who 
else is there? 
 

MR. MORRIS.  I’m here, Mr. Chairman, Frank Morris. 



1/5/78 9

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Frank Morris is there. Who else is there? 

 
MR. MAYO.  Bob Mayo is here. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Bob Mayo is there, who else is there? 

 
MR. GUFFEY.  Roger Guffey at Kansas City. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Roger Guffey is there.  Who else? 

 
MR. ROOS.  Larry Roos, St. Louis. 

 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Happy New Year. 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Happy New Year to all of you.  We’re all shouting Happy New 

Year.  If we had banners, we’d just let them fly but then you wouldn’t see them.  Any other 
questions or comments?  Mr. Alan Holmes, do you have a last word for us at this meeting? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I only hope that we can be lucky as well as wise. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, we can all join you in that hope.  Do you have any 
recommendations to the Committee? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I think the one thing we need, Mr. Chairman, is an authorization, at least 
from the Subcommittee, so we will have at least some money for intervention tomorrow. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I am sorry I asked that question! 
 

MR. LILLY.  Let tomorrow take care of itself. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  You know, your best day was yesterday when you didn’t spend a 
penny. 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Those are the days we like, Mr. Chairman, but we can’t expect to do that 
every day. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  No, but you don’t have to intervene every day.  I like the question 
that was put to you, I think by Mr. Partee:  Do you expect to intervene every time the market 
declines?  After the kind of rise that we had yesterday in the market, today in the foreign 
[exchange] market a little reversal in the New York market is only to be expected.  That’s the way 
the markets function. 
 

MR. HOLMES.  Mr. Chairman, we have had that reversal today.  The rate is now 2.1435. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  And what was it before? 



1/5/78 10

 
MR. HOLMES.  It has been as high as 2.1575 

 
CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, considering the movements we’ve had that’s hardly a 

movement at all.  What do you think it would have been if you had stayed out of the market? 
 

MR. HOLMES.  I think it would be back to 2.06 to 2.07. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  I don’t believe it for a minute.  I don’t believe it for a minute and I 
say it loud and clear. 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Compromise on 2.10. 
 

CHAIRMAN BURNS.  Well, I think we’re in a trading range, almost.  Gentlemen, unless 
there is some further question or comment, I want to thank you all for participating in this meeting 
and I look forward to seeing you at the next meeting of the FOMC.  I hear no question or comment 
and therefore this meeting is at an end.   I am informed that this is not a meeting, it is a seminar.  
The seminar is at an end.  Goodbye. 
 

 
END OF SESSION 

 


