









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL 

April 2 1 ,  1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 



FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
CONFERENCE CALL 

April 21,1979 

PRESENT: Mr. Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker, Vice Chairman 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Ms. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey, Moms, Roos, and Winn, Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, and Eastbum, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 

Messrs. R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Parthemos, Keir, Keran, Kichline, Scheld, 
and Truman, Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Fossom, Gainor, McIntosh, and Williams, First Vice Presidents, Federal 

Governors 

Board of Governors 

Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Boston, and San Francisco 
respectively 



-2- 

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Bums, Eisenmenger, J. Davis, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Philadelphia, Dallas, Boston, and 
Cleveland, respectively 

Messrs. Cox, Davenport, and T. Davis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City respectively 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of 
April 21, 1979 

MR. ALTMA”. Good morning. This is Murray Altmann in the Board Room. 
[Secretary’s note: Mr. Altmann called the roll to determine whether all Reserve Banks were 
connected and the attendance at each Bank.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, you are all on. This is the process of consultation 
following [our practice] in recent months when we’ve had variations in the growth of the money 
aggregates from expectations. Our consultations in the past have involved circumstances where 
money growth was weaker than expected and we have wanted to he sure that we had an accord in 
the Committee before deciding on the continuing instructions to the Desk. This time the money 
aggregates are growing more strongly than had been anticipated, so we also would like to get your 
sense of how we should proceed. Let us start off first by looking briefly at what is happening in the 
economy to see what new data or updated data we have that would guide us. Jim Kichline is here 
to give us a brief review. 

MR. KICHLINE. Since the last Committee meeting the Commerce Department has 
published its first preliminary estimate of GNP, which shows real GNP growth of about 3/4 percent 
at an annual rate in the first quarter. The rate of increase in the gross business product deflator was 
estimated at about 9-3/4 percent at an annual rate. Both numbers were about a half percentage point 
less than the staff had estimated. They still are subject to considerable revision, and various hints of 
what may happen [to individual components] suggest some upward and some downward revisions. 
Overall at this point we don’t have additional new information that would suggest to us the direction 
ultimately of a significant change. 

We have received a couple of pieces of new information that seem significant. One 
is the new orders figures for March, which showed that total durable goods orders in March 
declined appreciably, although for the quarter as a whole they remained considerably above, on 
average, the level that prevailed in the fourth quarter of 1978. Nondefense capital goods orders 
declined 4.3 percent, which is a large decline; a good deal of it was attributable to the volatile 
aircraft sector. However, machinery orders, which seem to be a reasonable indicator of the 
underlying trend in capital goods orders, were down in both March and in the preceding month. 
We believe these numbers are consistent with the staff‘s forecast, and at this point they would 
suggest some slowing in the rate of increase in business investment later in the year. 

The consumer price index was released yesterday and showed a rate of increase of 1 
percent for the month of March. Once again food and energy prices were quite high, but the 
increases were widespread throughout all sectors. The one possible helpful hint there is that the 
rate of increase of food prices was down from the very high pace in February. Other information 
also suggests that we may get some relief later this year from the sizable increases in food prices. 



4/21/19 2 

One other final piece of information would be on new auto sales. For the first 20 
days of April they were running at 8-3/4 million units, which is about 112 million below the very 
high level in March. On average we would judge that the auto market remains quite strong. That’s 
all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Jim. Let’s continue with the 
briefings before we come back to any questions. I would ask Steve Axilrod to comment on the 
aggregates numbers themselves. 

M R .  AXILROD. Thank you hk. Chairman. The Committee had a target rate of 
growth for M1 for the two-month April-May period of 4 to 8 percent, and for M2 a 4 to 8-1/2 
percent target rate. We are currently estimating for the April-May period for M1 a growth rate of 
8-314 percent, which would be 314 of a point above the upper end of the range. That [reflects] an 
April growth rate of around 17-112 percent because of the recent sharp rates of growth in the weeks 
of April 1 lth and April 18th that we just published and the preliminary unpublished data for April 
25th that show a further increase of $1.2 billion. That’s after the $4 billion rise in the April 18th 
week and we have assumed a fairly noticeable decline in subsequent weeks. So on the assumption 
that the level of M1 at the end of May will be about $2 billion lower than it is at the end of April, 
we would have a zero rate of growth in May. We believe that there are special factors in the April 
figure that make it reasonable to assume a decline in the level of M1 following this late April 
[period]. There seems to be evidence that the Treasury is accelerating refunds because of some 
laggardness earlier and also accelerating them so rapidly that it may be getting [funds] out that 
would ordinarily have gone out in May. Secondly, there is evidence that the Treasury had delayed 
collecting checks that had been sent in by people to pay income taxes. That, of course, would have 
left more money in private demand deposits waiting for collection by the Treasury as the days have 
been going by in late April. Our staff has estimated the effect of these special factors to be on the 
order of, say, 7 to 9 percentage points in April. The ATS shift, by the way, was worth about 2.8 
percentage points at an annual rate in April. So if you added that to the 17.4 percent, growth [in 
Ml] would be at a 20.2 percent rate for that month. Time deposits as well are running relatively 
strong and for M2 we’re estimating growth for the two-month April-May period at 8-112 percent-- 
the top of the Committee‘s range--with April estimated at 13-1/4 percent and May estimated at 3- 
1/2 percent. 

Very quickly, Mr. Chairman, I think there are two other points that ought to be 
brought to the Committee’s attention. The bank credit figures have been revised-it’s a benchmark 
revision--by the staff. They’ve been revised upward for the last half of ’78 and the first quarter of 
’79. Formerly, in the first quarter of 1979, bank credit rose 11.2 percent; on the revised basis it’s 
12.8 percent. Business loans had been up 17.6 percent; on the revised basis it’s19.5 percent, though 
still showing the pattern of a high January, low February, and an even lower March. Data for April 
suggest a very strong rebound in bank credit. But this too, like the [behavior of] M1, is related to 
some extent to the high tax payments that are occurring. 



4/27/79 3 

Then finally, Mr. Chairman, on the market, short-term rates have dropped since the 
Committee meeting because the market had been expecting a tightening and with the funds rate 
remaining unchanged short rates dropped. Also, there was the unwinding of the Treasury’s large 
cash management bill offering in early April. While short rates were dropping--though they did rise 
this morning because of the large M1 figure that was published for the week ending April 18th.- 
long rates rose. [That occurred] in part because the Treasury has announced a $4-114 billion 
refunding, with half of that going into the 30-year bond area and in part also because the corporate 
market was adversely affected by the bad publicity on public utilities and there were fairly large 
public utility offerings this week. In addition, rates have risen in the mortgage market, partly 
reflecting these corporate bond yields but also reflecting the weakening of inflows into thrift 
institutions. The [growth of] April inflows to S&Ls has been reduced to around 7 percent and the 
data for early April suggest a further weakening of inflows relative to what had happened in 
previous Aprils, and April ’78 was a weak period. So the evidence on the mortgage market is for 
fairly constricted growth in credit availability there. That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Peter Sternlight, are you on the line? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes I am, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Before we turn to Committee members I’d just like to ask 
you for your comments on the market situation as you see it and any comments you would have on 
the directive as it now stands if we were not to give you new instructions. The directive now reads 
--as we all recall it was a money market directive--that with equal weight given to M1 and M 2  if the 
rates of growth appeared to be close to or beyond the upper or lower limits of the indicated ranges, 
the objective for the funds rate was to be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range. 
So, Peter, could you just give us your comments on how you see market conditions now and how 
you would interpret this directive unless we give you any additional [instructions]? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. As for market conditions, I don’t think I’d have anything 
significant to add to what Steve has given. I’d perhaps just note one thing--that, as he said, the 
longer end of the market has been heavy and I would think that’s in part also because inflation 
expectations are continuing quite strong. Also, and this is very hard to quantify, I think there is a 
bit of disappointment in the market that there wasn’t a firming after the last meeting that 
participants in the long market could have interpreted as a strengthening of System intentions to get 
a grip on inflation. But, as I say, I don’t know how much to make of that factor. As for the federal 
funds rate, in the last full week that has averaged 10.09 percent; in the previous couple of weeks it 
was just a shade under 10 percent. We have, of course, been continuing to aim in the 10 to 10-1/8 
percent range. On your question about what the Desk would be aiming for in the absence of new 
instructions, it seems to me that the strength in the aggregates is such as to call for a response from 
the Desk. And it appears to me that something on the order of a 10-1/4 percent funds rate would be 
about what I would be recommending in light of the performance of the aggregates. 



4/27/19 4 

The other factor I want to call to the Committee’s attention is the delicate timing that 
we face now because of the Treasury funding that Steve also referred to. The Treasury announced 
the 10-year and 30-year auctions that are coming up on next Tuesday and Wednesday. If there 
were to be any adjustment to our funds rate objective, I think it would be important to make that 
intention clear to the market today if possible and Monday so that market participants could bid in 
[those auctions with] some reasonable knowledge of where policy is now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. I’m going to suggest that at this time I 
go down the roll--first of the voting members of the Committee and then the other Presidents or 
their representatives--and ask for your views, in light of these circumstances, on what our posture 
should be. If you have any specific questions on the information provided by the staff we would 
welcome those, but I hope the situation is clear enough that we can just get your advice on what you 
personally would recommend at this time. Let’s start alphabetically with Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this looks like another case where the aggregates have 
gone through their usual April acrobatics and I don’t think we really ought to be so surprised by it. 
These deposit shifts that have been incident to the tax payments and refunds seem to defy all our 
efforts to get a statistically reliable seasonal factor. So I don’t think we ought to attach a great deal 
of weight to these April figures, particularly in view of the 7 to 9 points that Steve mentioned a 
while ago was the extra [estimated effect]. I’d be inclined to wait to see if we get some unwinding 
in early May. And even if we didn’t, we still wouldn’t have gotten above the 1-112 percent growth 
target we set. So I think we’re okay at this point and I would hold off. 

CHAIRMAN MILIER. Thank you, Bob. Phil Coldwell. I hope you’re on. 

MR. COLDWELL. I am, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m sorry you missed part of the discussion earlier but I 
think you know the facts and the background in any case. 

MR. COLDWELL. I knew all of the background. I didn’t miss much anyway. I 
have one comment. As I understand it, Steve, you’re talking 17.5 percent M1 growth for April and 
last year as I recall we knocked 6 percentage points off in our seasonal adjustment revision. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

MR.  COLDWELL. So if this were last year we’d be looking at 23 percent. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, we’d be looking at 26 percent with the ATS effect. 

MR. COLDWELL. Either one is exceptionally high. I must admit that this is 
another April package but on general grounds, and more particularly the continuing high rate of 



4/21/19 5 

inflation, I would permit the directive to be exercised as it is written, raising the fed funds rate to 
10-114 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I’d leave it the way it is, Mr. Chairman. The economic prospects 
seem, if anything, a little more sluggish to me than they were when we met in April and I consider 
that more important than what Bob Black has called the April acrobatics. I have no faith in so short 
term a movement; if it continues for 3 or 4 weeks like that, I’ll eat those words but not for now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck Partee. 

h4R. PARTJ3E. Well, we have been looking at the figure moving up for the last 
three weeks, Bob, and it is pretty high. 

MR. MAYO. I need three more weeks. 

MR. PARTEE. As I look at the M1 number, it appears that we are going to have a 
two-month average here that’s very high. It seems to me that the staff estimate for May is making 
full allowance for the oddities of the April figure and, therefore, we will have an 8 percent or 
thereabouts increase for the two months and it could be considerably more. I’m also impressed by 
the strength of the bank credit numbers--both the revision and the April bank loan numbers at the 
large banks--which seem to me to put us back more on the track [prevailing] early in the year than 
in March. And finally, I’m impressed by Peter’s argument on the Treasury financing. These are 
long-term issues and I think if there is a prospect of [our] moving, that we ought to signal it before 
those auctions because it’s not just a standard financing in my view when they’re going to be 
selling a 30-year bond. So I guess I would proceed to follow along the directive as written and do 
what Peter suggested--raise the funds rate to 10-1/4 percent with the idea that if the strength holds 
up we’ll move up further in the range in a couple of weeks. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with Bob Mayo and Bob Black. I 
think that we have a great deal of difficulty with our money supply numbers in April. And I, too, 
am impressed by the weakness that’s been showing up in the first-quarter numbers. We’re 
considerably below where we thought we were when the FOMC [last] met. If I’m wrong and [the 
strong money growth] continues, I can change my mind later. But I don’t think we should change 
from the funds rate of approximately 10-1/8 percent at the present time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Paul Volcker. 

MR. VOLCKER. Let me just say, so far as the aggregates are concerned, Mr. 
Chairman, that while apparently the staff up here doesn’t depart from the general outline of what 



4I21l19 6 

Steve reported, they do have substantially higher numbers for May than the zero that Steve has for 
M1 growth. In other words, they [estimate growth will be] down but not down that far, which 
would give us a two-month figure somewhere above Steve’s projections. I don’t know how much 
this is worth but [our staffs estimates] are all off in that direction. And, of course, we’ve got these 
other numbers like the NOWs and ATS accounts and money market mutual funds continuing to 
rise. So I think we do have a pretty big bulge here, despite the complications of the tax date. In 
general, as you know, I thought we should have been a little tighter before so I’m not disinclined to 
following the directive. That seems to be a minimal [step]; I would associate myself with Mr. 
Coldwell and Mr. Partee in that regard. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Paul. Henry Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I would not give a great deal of weight to these aggregates; 
they are only marginally above our ranges. On the other hand, as I look at the economy I see 
inflation expectations clearly worsening in the face of some straws on the down side in the real 
sector. I’m impressed by the evidence on the inflation expectations in the rise in long rates and the 
declines simultaneously in short rates, which both are in the wrong direction. I’ve been in favor of 
a higher funds rate previously and I would think that the minimum we ought to do now is to go to 
10-1/4 percent. But my preference would be for [going] somewhat higher [on the funds rate] and if 
that could be done later, I would regard that as right. 

CHAIRMAN MILER.  Thank you, Henry. At least that’s a sign of consistency; 
you weren’t paying attention to the aggregates before and you’re still not. I think that’s a good 
move. At least it shows [consistency]. 

MR. WALLICH. Even with conditions changed. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I realize that and I commend you for sticking with your 
guns because that’s the point you made at the last meeting, as I recall. Now we have Roger Guffey, 
who is the alternate for John Balks, as I understand it. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be inclined to join Bob Black 
and Bob Mayo, particularly in view of the fact that we have experienced six months of very slow 
[economic] growth. In fact, [given] the experience in April of the last few years, I’d like to wait 
and get some additional information on [the aggregates]. As a result I would like to stay where we 
are for at least two more weeks and perhaps take a look at it [then]. The aggregates are obviously a 
matter of concern but they jump around so much that I’m not prepared to recommend going up [on 
the funds rate]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Next we have Larry Roos who is the 
alternate for Monroe Kimbrel. 



4/27/79 I 

MR. ROOS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have always previously paid attention to 
the aggregates and still do. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Another consistent one! 

MR. ROOS. As you recall, prior to this surge in the aggregates, I spoke out at the 
last meeting for some ease because of my concern about the undershooting of the [MI] range. I do 
think that we should take it seriously, even though we don’t know whether the present surge is 
temporary or not. There is some historical perspective. Last year at this time of the year the 
aggregates did surge upward and they then remained at a fairly level but higher [rate of growth] for 
a period of time, so I don’t think we can ignore this. I would recommend that the Desk be 
authorized to use the full 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range for the fed funds target and be prepared to 
permit the fed funds rate to move upward toward 10-1/2 percent in an orderly fashion. If this surge 
in the aggregates is temporary, then we can permit it once again to fall toward 10 [or even] 9.314 
percent. So I think we ought to broaden the fed funds [movement] and use the full range and be 
flexible as we see how permanent the present surge turns out to be. 

CHARMAN MILLER. Larry, I commend you for also being consistent in watching 
the aggregates. But I’m not sure I understood what you thought the instructions should be to the 
Desk or what the interpretation should be today as distinguished from over the period. 

MR. ROOS. Well, ideally, I would like to see us say to the Desk that it should move 
[the funds rate] up to 10-1/2 percent if on the basis of its judgment it sees fit to do so. Realistically, 
I would say that to proceed in an orderly way we should move to 10-1/4 percent as quickly as 
possible and [subsequently] move it higher. And if the fed funds rate does continue to move 
upward, Mr. Chairman, I think some consideration should be given to an increase in the discount 
rate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me go on. I hope Ernie Baughman is now on the line. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. I have just come on, Mr. Chairman, so I am not privy to very 
much of the preceding discussion. My inclination would be that in the circumstances the federal 
funds rate should be edged up and the record when it becomes public should show that we were 
resisting at least to some extent a surge in the growth rate of the monetary aggregates. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Ernie. Willis Winn. 

MR. WL”. Mr. Chairman, I think I would join with the group that would like to 
see a little more [evidence] in the behavior [of the aggregates] before we move. I would be 
inclined if we want to indicate concern in this area to do it through the discount rate rather than the 
federal funds rate at this time. We resisted [making a move] when [the deviation from our target 
was] was on the down side and it seems to me that we don’t have enough evidence yet on the up 
side to make a change in our operations. 



4I21l19 8 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Frank Morris. 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I still believe that the economy is in a peaking 
process and I believe that the aggregates have to be viewed in the light of what has been going on in 
the past six months. Even with this bulge, M2 has only grown at a 4 percent rate in the past six 
months, so at the moment I would not make any change. If this strength should be sustained into 
May then I think we would have to move against it. But at the moment I would do nothing. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Dave Eastbum. I hope Philadelphia is 
still with us. 

MR. EASTBURN. Yes, I’m on. I would hold where we are at the present time. 
Judging by last year’s experience, as Larry pointed out, following an April surge May and June 
were still relatively high. If that happens again, I think perhaps we should take action. But I think 
we need to watch that and I wouldn’t take the action right away. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Dave. We have Kyle Fossum on for 
Monroe Kimbrel. So, Kyle, we’ll hear from you. 

M R .  FOSSUM. It’s a close call for us but we come down on the side of holding 
where we are and viewing [developments] for another week or so before we would suggest 
changing. I would report, though, that in a conference call with our Bank‘s executive committee 
this morning the discount rate was discussed and there was some inclination to snug it up a bit. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Kyle. We have Tom Gainor on for Mark 
Willes. 

M R .  GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, we would favor no change. We’d like to see two or 
three more weeks to test whether the April figures are significant. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Tom. John Williams for John Balks. 

M R .  WILLIAMS. We would agree with Frank Morris. We’d be strongly opposed 
at this time to any [increase] in the federal funds rate. We think that April is not the month that we 
want to respond to, particularly if the data are on the high side--April being not a typical month and 
also a very unreliable month. So until we get further confirmation of this upsurge in the aggregates, 
we think it would be very premature to move. We would recommend waiting until the May data 
come in. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, thank you all very much. It shows you that I was 
right at the last meeting when I said it would take a month before we get to be unanimous. We 
haven’t reached [unanimity] yet. It’s a very interesting situation. Without my vote we have five of 



4/21/79 9 

the voting members who would prefer moving up to 10-1/4 percent and four who would like to 
stand pat. Of the nonvoting members we have six who would like to stand pat and one who would 
edge [the funds rate] up. It’s an amazing dispersion and leaves us with a circumstance that is not 
very appealing. After listening, and recognizing all of the risks and difficulties, on balance I think I 
would tend to encourage the Desk to follow the directive that we have and therefore to tighten up a 
bit. I would like to suggest, because with this dispersion I don’t think an official vote does us all 
much good, that we merely view this consultation as a consultation involving advice and [guidance] 
on how the Desk should act. I hope that will be agreeable to everyone because this is a close one to 
call. I think everyone had a persuasive argument on both sides [but] the differences in terms of 
what really will be done are fairly narrow. And that being so, my tendency would be to follow the 
directive as we’ve written it, which the Desk would interpret as meaning they should be moving 
[the funds rate] up to 10-114 percent. Let me just run through [my list] quickly to see if anyone 
objects to that procedure or that conclusion. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. It’s fine with me, Mr. Chairman 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Fine. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Fine. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. It’s fine. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. It’s all right 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul Volcker. 

MR. VOLCKER. Seems to me highly appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. Seems fine to me but we should look again as the data evolve. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Of course. Roger Guffey 

MR.GUFFEY. Fine. 



4/21/19 10 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry Roos. 

MR. ROOS. Fine. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Ernie Baughman 

MR. BAUGHMAN. I agree. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Willis Winn. 

MR.WwN. Yes. 

CHAIMAN MILLER. Frank Morris. 

MR. MORRIS. Okay. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave Eastbum. 

M R .  EASTBURN. I guess it’s all right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Kyle Fossum. 

M R .  FOSSUM. Fine with us. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Tom Gainor. 

MR. GAINOR. Fine. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Williams 

M R .  WILLIAMS. Okay. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you all. You’ve been patient and very, very helpful. 
I appreciate it and I hope we’ll get our [phone] system working a little better. It was so perfect 
before. We’ll put our technicians to work so we can try to get our equipment functioning better. I 
really think this opportunity to consult is valuable, so I hope we can do it from time to time. Thank 
you. We’ll close now. 

END OF SESSION 


	790427confcall



