









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

November 20, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

Staff Statements ADwended to the TranscriDt 

Presentations by Messrs. Axilrod and Sternlight 
at seminar on November 19, 1979 

Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 



Meeting of F e d e r a l  Open Market  Commit tee  

November 20, 1979 

A meet ing  of t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market  Committee w a s  

h e l d  i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governor s  of t h e  F e d e r a l  

Rese rve  Sys tem i n  Washington ,  D.  C . ,  on Tuesday ,  November 20 ,  

1979, b e g i n n i n g  a t  9 :30  a . m .  

PRESENT: Wr. V o l c k e r ,  Chairman 
M r .  Balles 
Mr. B l a c k  
Mr. Coldwel l  
M r .  Kimbre l  
hlr .  Mayo 
M r .  Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. S c h u l t z  
Mrs. T e e t e r s  
Mr. W a l l i c h  

Messrs. Guf fey ,  Morris, Soos, T i d e n ,  znd Winn, 
A l t e r n a t e  Members of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Open ikriiet 
G o m m i  t t ee 

Messrs. aaughnan ,  E a s t b u r n ,  and Willes, F r e s i d e n t s  
G I ^  t h e  F e d e r a l  Rese rve  Banks of Dallas, 
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  and M i n n e a p o l i s ,  r h s p t c t i v e l y  

Mr. A l t m a x m ,  S e c r e t a r y  
Mr. B e r n a r d ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  P e t e r s e n ,  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
Mr. Mannion, - 1/ A s s i s t a n t  G e n e r a l  Counsel  
M r .  A x i l r o d ,  Economist  
Mr. H o l m e s ,  A d v i s e r  for Market O p e r a t i o n s  

Messrs. B r a n d t ,  Henry ,  K e i r ,  K i c h l i n e ,  
S c h e l d ,  Truman, and  Zeisel ,  Associate 
Economis t s 

M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Manager f o r  Domestic 
O p e r a t i o n s ,  System Open Market Account 

- 11 E n t e r e d  t h e  m e e t i n g  f o l l o w i n g  t h e  r a t i f i c a t i o n  of System 
open marke t  t r a n s a c t i o n s  i n  Government s e c u r i t i e s ,  agency 
o b l i g a t i o n s  and  b a n k e r s  a c c e p t a n c e s .  



11/20/79 - 2 -  

M r .  Pardee ,  Manager f o r  Fore ign  Opera t ions ,  
System Open Market Account 

M r .  Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of 

Messrs. Gemmill and Kalchbrenner ,  Assoc ia te  
Governors 

D i r e c t o r s ,  Div is ion  of I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
Finance and Div is ion  of Research and 
S t a t i s t i c s ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y ,  Board of 
Governors 

Div i s ion  of Research and S t a t i s t i c s ,  
Board of Governors 

Div i s ion  of Research and S t a t i s t i c s ,  
Board of Governors 

t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

S e c r e t - a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

Kessrs. Balbach, Boehne, Su rns ,  J .  Davis ,  
Eisenmenger, and Fousek, Senior  V i c e  
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Federa l  Reserve Banks of 
S t .  Lou i s ,  P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  D a l l a s ,  
C leve land ,  Boston, and New York, 
r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Mr. P r e l l ,  Deputy Associa te  D i r e c t o r ,  

M r .  Beck, Sen io r  Economist, Banking S e c t i o n ,  

Ms. F a r a r ,  Economist,  Open Market Secre- 

M r s .  Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market 

Eiessrs. Bakstansky,  Broaddus, Corr igan ,  
and T.  Davis ,  V i c e  P r e s i d e n t s ,  
F e d e r a l  Reserve Banks of N e w  York, 
X i c h o n d ,  i -kw York, and Kansas 
C i t y ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

M r .  B is ignano,  D i r e c t o r  of Econotiic A n a l y s i s ,  
Fede ra l  Reserve Bank of San .Franc isco  

%r. Miller, A s s i s t a n t  Vice P r e s i d e n t ,  Fede ra l  
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Ozog, Manager, S e c u r i t i e s  Department, 
Fede ra l  Reserve Bank of New York 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
November 20, 1979 

[Secretary’s note: On the day before this meeting, the staff conducted 
a seminar for the Committee regarding the experience to date with the 
new operating technique. That session was not an official part of the 
FOMC meeting and therefore was not transcribed. However, copies of 
the presentations given by Messrs. Axilrod and Sternlight at the 
seminar were retained in the Committee‘s files and are appended to 
this transcript.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting will come to order. We need 
approval of the minutes for [the previous] two meetings. If anyone 
would like to so move-- 

MR. MAYO. So moved. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall approve the 
minutes of the two meetings. M r .  Pardee. 

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

MR. BLACK. Scott, you said that the only thing the 
foreigners thought we had going for us was our monetary policy. Do 
you mean in the short run? Do they not see the improvement in the 
balance of payments that has been projected by the staff? 

M R .  PARDEE. They see the projections. They’ve seen the 
projections over the last few years--the forecast of an improvement on 
our trade and current accounts and improvement in our inflation 
picture. And they’re still waiting to see when it will come. 

MR. BLACK. They don‘t believe it, in short. 

MR. PARDEE. They believe it will come sooner or later, but 
they’re not going to bet on it. 

M R .  WALLICH. Do you think they’re looking beyond the 
present cycle toward a more distant future in evaluating the 
improvement in the current account, which is cyclical? 

MR. PARDEE. Well, again, there’s the oil price situation 
and the Iranian situation. Any forecast one would normally make would 
be positive for the dollar, but people are not willing to bet on that 
forecast given the uncertainties in the oil area and the Iranian 
situation. 

M R .  WALLICH. Do you see any important central bank 
constraint in the use of the dollar for intervention purposes because 
of not wanting to do damage to the dollar? 

MR. PARDEE. They’ve talked of it a little but I don‘t see 
[a lot of that]. The Swiss National Bank has been careful not to sell 
dollars this time around. Remember, back in August their selling of 
dollars was one of the elements that triggered the adverse market 
sentiment. They finally decided that the Swiss franc had gotten so 
weak that they would start selling dollars; the first time they showed 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -2- 

themselves in the market then, the market moved away from them very 
quickly so they actually did not sell any dollars. But they're being 
much more cautious this time around than they were back in August in 
selling dollars. 

MR. WALLICH. Thank you. 

MR. COLDWELL. Scott, do you see any further rate changes on 
the horizon abroad? 

MR. PARDEE. Interest rates? I would pray that I wouldn't 
but they face some of the same inflationary pressures we do. The oil 
price has continued to move up. Many of these countries buy their oil 
in the spot markets, and to the extent that spot prices have continued 
to rise this fall it's possible that they will have further inflation 
feeding into their economies. So-- 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I recognize the fundamentals argument. 
My question was really about the near term. Are you seeing or hearing 
any noises about changes? 

MR. PARDEE. That's why I say I would pray that [the answer 
is no] for the time being since everybody has raised their interest 
rates--the Germans, the Japanese, the Swiss, the British, the 
Canadians, and I'm not sure how many more--since October 6 .  The 
Greenbook has a list. I would hope that they're all done for the time 
being--for the rest of this year. But the fundamentals are still a 
problem. 

M R .  EASTBURN. Scott, how understanding would they be of a 
decline in interest rates here? If the economy weakens substantially, 
would they understand that? 

M R .  PARDEE. If '"they" is the central bankers, they might 
understand it or explain it. What has happened so far--the backing 
off of the funds rates and some moving back of [other] interest rates 
from the peaks in mid-October--has been taken in stride probably both 
by the central bankers and the markets. But there is some sort of 
trigger point where people will begin to wonder whether we have lost 
our resolve. I don't think that has happened up to this point. 

MR. BLACK. Suppose that is accompanied by a clear control 
over the aggregates. Would they have pretty much the same reaction? 

MR. PARDEE. Not everybody has the same perception of what 
our control over the aggregates is. It's the reading of the economy 
and the economy is softening. Surely if we could get better control 
of the aggregates as well, some people would say that's fine, the 
Federal Reserve is doing its job. AS long as inflation remains very 
high there are still the real interest rate arguments. Most Europeans 
believe that interest rates have to be positive in real terms in order 
for monetary policy to have an effect; and many people in the exchange 
market believe that. 

MR. WALLICH. Could I just say a word on this? At the last 
Economic Policy Committee meeting at the OECD, from which Charlie 
Schultz and I have just returned, the United States made a long 
presentation [on U.S. economic and financial developments], including 



11/20/79 -3-  

our domestic monetary policy. Charlie and I got just three questions 
on this. The only subject of these three question was this: What is 
going to happen when the aggregates and the economy slow? Are you 
going to let interest rates go down? We, of course, gave the standard 
answer: that when inflation comes down, the money supply slows and the 
economy slows and then it will be appropriate for interest rates to 
come down. I don't know what the reactions were; there wasn't any 
come-back on that. 

MR. BLACK. It sounds as if they accepted that as a 
reasonable outcome. 

M R .  WALLICH. They're not stupid. I think they have to 
accept it as reasonable, but they also figure that it means there will 
be dollar weakness. 

MR. BLACK. They're hoping the aggregates will slow and 
interest rates will remain high--both. 

MR. WALLICH. I think inflation coming down will be the most 
convincing single thing but unfortunately we're locked into a CPI that 
has certain lagged features from mortgage rates and from energy. So 
one can't promise anything. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any recommendations with 
respect to operations, Mr. Pardee? 

MR. PARDEE. I have two, one with respect to current 
operations and one with respect to the swap arrangements themselves. 
Between now and December 28 we have eleven swap drawings for 1 billion 
654 million dollars coming due with the Bundesbank. These are all 
first renewals and need no formal action by the Committee. A second 
renewal--and this is the first one in all of these operations we've 
taken since last June--for 88 million dollars equivalent will be 
coming up in that time span. I will need Committee approval for that 
now so I can renew it should we not have the opportunity to repay it 
by that time. That is my first recommendation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments? 

MS. TEETERS. It's 88 million dollars with whom? 

MR. PARDEE. The Bundesbank. 

MS. TEETERS. All these are with the Bundesbank? 

M R .  PARDEE. Oh, yes. Those are the only swaps we have 
outstanding. 

MR. MAYO. SO moved. 

MR. KIMBREL. Scott, you [requested Committee approval of a 
renewal] in the event you do not have an opportunity to repay it. Are 
you optimistic on that? 

MR. PARDEE. Well, during the last month the Bundesbank has 
been very helpful in channeling marks to us from their non-market 
transactions. That's how we have been able to repay the 300 odd 



11/20/79 -4-  

million dollars worth of swaps. If the Iranian situation quiets down 
and we can resume these kinds of operations, the 88 million dollars is 
at the head o E  the list to be repaid. We try to repay the longest 
maturity first, so I would hope by that time we will have repaid it. 
But [if not], this would be a second renewal and that is always one 
that requires Committee action. 

MR. KIMBREL. I second. 

MR. WALLICH. I share Scott‘s view on the present situation 
as to how we should proceed. I continue to think that if things quiet 
down and we get halfway stable markets, we ought to make it a routine 
to buy a few tens of millions a week or a few million a day, letting 
the market see that these are routine transactions in order to repay 
[swap drawings]. So we get [marks] on that basis without always 
frightening the market when we move in--having the market think that 
we’re trying to cap the rate at that level. But I would agree with 
Scott that until the Iranian situation settles down, this isn’t the 
time to start such a policy. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall approve it. 
Now you have another recommendation? 

MR. PARDEE. Yes. Between now and December 28 all of the 
swap arrangements themselves mature. We have arrangements with 14 
central banks and the BIS and I simply recommend that I be authorized 
to renew them all as they stand. As you recall, last year we entered 
into extensive discussions with the Bundesbank over eliminating the 
50-50 even sharing of risk clause on our drawings. [That was to be 
done] in exchange for shifting to the use of their interest rates 
rather than ours on the investment oE the dollars that arise out of 
our drawings. There is still much to be said for the change and we 
found at that time that the U.S. Treasury agrees in principle, but the 
Treasury is still reluctant to make the change, particularly now given 
that we are heavily in debt to the Bundesbank once again. Up to this 
point the Germans have not pressed the issue this time around. I 
would hope we can wait for a more opportune time. So I’d rather renew 
the swaps strictly as they are without any change and review the 50-50 
problem at a more opportune time. That is my recommendation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion? If not, we need a 
motion. I guess we need a motion before the discussion. 

SPEAKER(?). So move. 

SPEAKER(?). Second. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections? If not, we will approve 
it. Having approved recommendations for the future, we better ratify 
the transactions for the past. Do I have a motion to that effect? 

SPEAKER ( ? )  . So move. 
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no objections, we shall 

approve them. I’d like to say that the question has arisen as to 
whether the Japanese--the yen has been weak, as you know--may want to 
draw on their swap [line with us]. We have given them a preliminary 
indication that in a moderate amount of, say, $ 3 0 0  million that would 



11/20/79 -5- 

be all right. I don‘t know if they will draw or not because the yen 
has strengthened a bit; I don‘t know whether there’s been any 
subsequent strengthening. It‘s the other side of the Iranian 
situation; I suppose that‘s the reason it has strengthened. So I 
don’t know what sense of urgency there is now. Do you? 

MR. PARDEE. Well, they’ve seen some turn in their capital 
accounts. They‘re hoping that their trade account will turn later 
this year, just as a sort of very short-term bridge. They are still 
discussing other measures they might take if they need to on various 
capital controls. And they thanked us very much; they are grateful 
that we have agreed in principle on the swap drawing and they will be 
back to us if they need it. They don’t need the money; it’s just the 
question of having this gesture of cooperation from the United States 
authority at a moment of a little bit of isolation for them. Theirs 
is the only currency other than the dollar that has been heavily sold 
in this experience. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have something like in 
reserves as I recall, so they’re not exactly out of money. 

MR. WALLICH. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been offered; whether it 
will be used, I don’t know. Mr. Sternlight. 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

MR. KIMBREL. Peter, if those two [dealer firms] are 
deleted, you’ll have a net number of trading firms then of--? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think that would make it 34 or 35 or 
something close to that. 

MR. PARTEE. You do business with 35? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes 

MR. PARTEE. With everyone on the list you have some 
activity? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a couple of firms that have 
been added to the reporting list with whom we do not yet trade. One 
that was added several years ago but hasn’t quite brought itself to 
sufficient volume for us to trade with is the Crocker Bank. Also, 
Smith Barney was added to the reporting list just a few months ago and 
it is getting very close to the point of having a trading 
relationship. 

M R .  KIMBREL. What is the split between banks and nonbanks? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. About 1/3 of them are banks. 



11/20/79 -6- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other discussion? Is there a motion 
to approve the transactions? 

SPEAKER(?). So moved. 

SPEAKER(?). Second. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are approved. We 
have Mr. Truman and Mr. Kichline on the economic situation today--the 
[extended] horizons of the American economy. Mr. Truman. 

MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming about the oil price 
decision in December? 

MR. TRUMAN. We are assuming that some of it has already 
been taken and essentially that we're going to get a 20 percent 
increase in December. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said a 23 percent increase or 
something from this December to next December. 

MR. TRUMAN. That's for oil imports. Our actual oil import 
prices are reflecting the higher spot prices that are now occurring 
and there will be a convergence--spot prices will come down. So we're 
getting in the oil import prices in this quarter, as we had even last 
quarter, essentially the anticipation of the oil price increase 
reflected in the spot market. 

MR. KIMBREL. Ted, the dollar amount then in tbis last 
quarter actually would average out to about what? 

MR. TRUMAN. This last quarter we have a $23/bsrrel 
assumption for the import price. But that's very much higher than the 
official posted prices, let me say, of the OPEC countries even with 
the increase that they've had, because of spot-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming, say, in February 
or March for import prices? 

MR. TRUMAN. Well, the price goes up at about a 10 percent 
annual rate after the first part of the year. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're not assuming much impact in 
December? 

MR. TRUMAN. We're assuming 20 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. You said after the first part of the year it's 
about 10 percent. So you have a 20 percent [increase] and then a 
drifting up from that point. 

M R .  TRUMAN. AS far as the OPEC contract prices, we have a 
20 percent increase on the first of January and then 10 percent across 
the year. When you translate that into our import prices, that 
translates into a 23 percent increase fourth quarter over fourth 
quarter. That's because the spot market activity will be [reflecting] 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -7- 

some of the OPEC price increase--in effect, the official contract 
prices--in this quarter as it did last quarter. 

MR. COLDWELL. So you’re looking at a price of about $30 a 
barrel. 

M R .  TRUMAN. About $28 a barrel; we have $28-1/4 in the 
fourth quarter of next year. 

MR. PARTEE. Is your fourth quarter of 1979 price higher 
than you had before, too? 

M R .  TRUMAN. Yes, by about 10 percent. Another way of 
characterizing it, although I decided not to put it into this little 
story, is that a couple months ago we essentially had assumed that the 
real price of oil was going to be unchanged in 1980. Now we are 
assuming, in effect, that the real price of oil will increase by 20 
percent. So, for the fourth quarter of 1980 the price is now 20 
percent higher than we had assumed. I’m not sure if that helps. 

M R .  PARTEE. That certainly wipes out any monetary policy 
effect. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will be fortunate if it is that small. 

MR. PARTEE. Right, that’s what he said. 

M R .  WALLICH. On the other hand, not to seek to achieve a 
monetary policy effect would just mean that that effect would be all 
the bigger. 

M R .  PARTEE. It‘s a large increase. 

M R .  TRUMAN. Shall I continue? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Proceed. 

M R .  TRUMAN. [Statement continued.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. You say the 
current account is essentially in a zero position this year. In the 
way we used to calculate the current account a couple years ago it 
would be what? 

MR. TRUMAN. It would be minus about $15 billion. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It’s a $15 billion difference. 

MR. TRUMAN. The improvement between the two years, rather 
than being $14 billion, is approximately $8 billion. So you still 
have the significant improvement in the level no matter which way you 
calculate it. 

M R .  KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

M R .  COLDWELL. Jim, suppose your presumption is incorrect-- 
that both you and Ted have misgauged [the oil price outlookl--and the 
OPEC price goes up something like 40 percent. 



11/20/79 -8 -  

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in that case, we’d be talking about 
adding another quarter or half point to the deflator and I would think 
taking at least something comparable, if not more, out of the real 
side. And in the short run 1 think there is quite a rapid passthrough 
now of these costs. We’d get some lag effects obviously into 1980 and 
1981, but we do get fairly immediately a rapid increase in prices. 

M R .  COLDWELL. So if there were to be something like a 40 
percent increase in the [oil] price level coming out of the December 
OPEC [meeting], you’d expect this to be hitting the first half of 
1980? 

M R .  KICHLINE. We‘d expect a good chunk of it to hit in the 
first half, but [the effect] carries on. In the current forecast, 
which has an increase of roughly half that size, we have-- 

M R .  COLDWELL. That’s why I doubled it. 

MR. KICHLINE. We think our forecast is likely to entail 
something like a 3/4 percentage point increase in personal consumption 
prices. That is in addition to the other things going on in the 
energy area, of which there are many. If we were to assume roughly 
symmetrical effects, we’d double that, so it gets into the 1-1/2 
percent area. So we would see fairly promptly--namely, in the first 
half--a substantial increase. That is a very bearish outlook and 
hopefully one that won’t come to pass. Even if we have some supply 
side effects in terms of constraining consumption, it seems to me that 
you’re talking about a poor outcome. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’m a little confused. Are you 
saying a 40 percent increase in imported oil prices will bring a 1-1/2 
percent increase in GNP prices? 

MR. KICHLINE. In 1980, right. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Over and above what he already has. 

M R .  KICHLINE. No, that’s the total effect. 

MS. TEETERS. It’s 3/4 point for 20 percent. 

M R .  COLDWELL. 3/4 point in addition. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What percentage of the GNP is oil now? 

m. KICHLINE. I don’t know. The deflators in the energy 
sector in GNP are about 8 percent. 

MS. TEETERS. Ted, am I right that you rather markedly 
changed your outlook for [growth in] foreign economies, mainly because 
of the higher oil prices? 

MR. TRUMAN. Yes. We have marked it down quite remarkably. 
We essentially have real growth over the next four quarters of 1-1/2 
percent, which is slow growth. Only in one of the major countries do 
we have what we call a recession, or negative growth. But we have 
[economic activity in] all the major countries dropping down-- 
essentially growing at half the rate over the next four quarters that 



11/20/79 -9- 

they had over the previous four quarters. And the last four quarters 
have been affected to some extent by the oil prices in 1979. So we 
have a sluggish outlook abroad. And the improvement in the current 
account or the trade balance is very small in terms of volume. I 
don’t think there is much increase in the volume of exports from here 
on in. But the fact is--if I may put it this way--that if our prices 
are going to go up 10 percent, that means we’re going to get something 
like a 12 or 13 percent increase in the value of exports at a time 
when the value of our imports stagnates. That’s where we get the 
improvement in the-- 

MS. TEETERS. But you were counting on [the economies of] 
our trading partners growing at 3 to 4 percent next year and on that 
helping our balance of payments. 

MR. TRUMAN. Well, that was some time ago. A forecast of 3 
percent was reasonable at the beginning of the year. 

MS. TEETERS. But now their [expected growth is] down almost 
to that danger point where they could tip into a recession. 

MR. TRUMAN. It is at the point at which it may be somewhat 
arbitrary [whether we call it a small positive or small negative]. 
Sluggish growth is the way I’d say it. 

M S .  TEETERS. So the possibility does exist that we could 
get a worldwide recession? 

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, and if you add in the United States with 
our forecasts--[unintelligible] others which are less pessimistic, let 
me put it that way--growth for the QECD area, including the United 
States, is about zero. It’s minus 1-112 percent here and plus 1-1/2 
percent there; and we’re about half or 40 percent of the total, so 
it’s essentially zero. 

MS. TEETERS. We’ve never managed to grow at 1 to 1-1/2 
percent without sliding into a recession. Have the others? 

MR. TRUMAN. Well, in the rest of the world, other major 
industrial countries--with the exception of the oil crisis--have not 
had recessions in the postwar period. They‘ve had growth recessions, 
but they’ve not had negative growth or recessions. S o  there is really 
no comparable experience with the exception of the United Kingdom. 

MR. WALLICH. You know, this discussion does not really 
reflect what went on.at the QECD meeting. The numbers are roughly the 
same but there was not a great sense of pessimism and not a sense of 
world recession. Rather there was a mild degree of feeling that it 
was good to have economies desynchronized instead of having the cycle 
moving synchronously everywhere. 

MR. TRUMAN. Henry, let me correct you on that. Our 
forecasts are lower than the OECD forecasts in large part because they 
essentially were dealing with our old oil price assumption of no 
increase in the real price of oil in 1980. So we have a very 
different outlook. Their forecast is close to 2 percent for the same 
G-10 countries, whereas ours is close to 1-112 percent. 



11 / 2 0 / 7 9 -10- 

MR. WALLICH. I know, but by the time this discussion took 
place the recent increases were known so that was reflected in the 
conversation. 

MR. TRUMAN. True, but I would comment that within the U.S. 
government, for example, people are only now in the process of 
focusing on the implications of the [outlook for] oil prices. And I 
think the same is true for most other countries’ forecasts; they have 
not looked at their official forecasts since July. They‘re now 
looking at them and when they finish, I think they will end up with a 
much more bearish picture than they had a few weeks ago. That’s 
somewhat of a hypothesis but I think that‘s what is happening. It’s 
fair to say that that is the process that we went through over the 
last four weeks. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Did I understand you to say that you are 
expecting essentially an equivalent move in the consumer price index 
for these countries, from a 9 percent rate of increase to 7 percent? 

M R .  TRUMAN. This quarter in round numbers it‘s 9-1/4 
percent; a year from now it’s 7-1/2 percent. It looks like their 
consumer price inflation rate peaked last quarter at 11 percent plus. 
[We expect] some moderation. And they don‘t have the assistance of 
housing costs and things like that on their consumer price index. 

MR. PARTEE. You’ve taken into account the higher oil price 
increase in doing that? 

M R .  TRUMAN. We tried to, let’s put it that way. The 
forecasts are all supposed to be consistent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1 still don’t understand this oil price 
business. If the weight is 8 percent and you get a 40 percent [price] 
increase, that’s more than 3 percent of GNP. Why doesn’t it have a 3 
percent impact on GNP? 

MR. KICHLINE. What I was quoting was energy prices. We 
forecast the energy price deflator, which aside from imported oil 
includes domestic oil, coal, and natural gas prices. When you put 
that all together, you find that domestic prices would tend to be 
rising more rapidly as time goes on because of the decontrol. But 
next year, unless a change is made, it seems that the Alaskan oil will 
bump against the ceiling. So Alaskan oil will be constrained in its 
upward price movement. Natural gas supplies are abundant right now. 
Pricing there is permitted to go higher with increasing inflation, but 
in fact the market for natural gas is fairly weak and natural gas is 
readily available, so we have held down the price increases in that 
area. And the coal market is very weak. S o ,  I don’t know right off 
the top of my head how to translate imported oil into the PCE deflator 
context. Do you Jerry? We can provide a memo to the Committee, if 
you like, on the energy sector and its price implications. That might 
help. 

MR. WALLICH. Imported oil is about 3 percent of GNP. 
Imported oil is half of our total oil [consumption], isn’t it? 



11/20/79 -11- 

MR. TRUMAN. Yes. But the point is, as Jim explained, some 
prices move with imported oil and some prices move partially with 
imported oil, and one has to add all those things up. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still haven’t included any indirect 
effects? 

M R .  KICHLINE. That‘s right. And in our forecasting 
exercise they carry well into 1981. 

MR. PARTEE. With respect to Governor Coldwell‘s question, 
in your additive process you haven’t really included any dynamics in 
the business effects. That is, there must be a point at which another 
3/4 percentage point decline in real consumption would have a material 
impact on inventories and capital spending that would run through the 
economy in an accelerated way. 

MR. KICHLINE. That’s right. The 3/4 point effect, for 
example, this year did not carry through fully to our price forecast. 
It’s roughly 1/2 percent. So we have weaker activity as a result of 
higher world oil prices and in fact we assume that‘s going to have an 
impact in other areas in the domestic economy. 

M R .  WILLES. Now I’m confused--not that I wasn‘t before. I 
thought that when you calculated the U.S. deflator the price of 
imported goods [always] came in with a negative sign. 

MR. KICHLINE. It does. 

M R .  WILLES. That means that if the price of imported oil is 
going up relatively fast, that can have a strong impact on the CPI but 
it‘s not at all clear that it will have a direct impact on the 
deflator. 

M R .  KICHLINE. I was referring to the personal consumption 
expenditure deflator. It gets measured there directly and subtracted 
out when we look at the difference in export and import prices. So 
the deflator will always understate the effect--the price impact--on 
consumers of rapid increases in foreign prices. When we look at the 
personal consumption area or the CPI, as you mentioned, we‘re going to 
get the full effect. 

M R .  WINN. My own feelings are perhaps more pessimistic for 
‘80 than yours, for different reasons. I wonder in terms of our 
current analysis how much allowance we should make for the shock 
effect aspect [of developments in the energy areal. For example, when 
we had our [earlier] energy shock, it wasn’t really the price but the 
[concern about] availability that caused people to back off. It then 
picked up substantially. [I wonder] how much shock effect we’ll be 
getting in behavior for the moment and to what extent that may [erode] 
because availability is really not affected though price certainly has 
been in the real sense of the term. So perhaps some of the momentum 
we‘ve seen will pick up again. 

we have the seasonal [issue] of Christmas and then [the 
question o f ]  how much change in attitudes might be expected out of 
that kind of [energy price] development. On the other side, we know 
that the shock effect [from] October 6 caused construction--in terms 



11/20/79 -12- 

of new starts--to turn off completely. That doesn’t show up for three 
months in terms of the set up. In contrast to that, of course, is the 
fact that leasing is just going crazy now because of projected 
shortages: I wonder how much of that will be reversed if availability 
is not [a problem]. So availability versus price and its impact may 
give us a different path than we would get from a normal cyclical type 
of analysis. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. With the rising price of energy--and I’m 
thinking now primarily of electric energy--and a presumed move by 
industry to use it more efficiently, is there a possibility that that 
will give us a lower industrial production index than we might 
overwise have had? 

MR. KICHLINE. We’ve tried to account for that as best we 
can. As you well know, a number of years ago we had a fine idea to 
use for part of the IP index electric power usage as a proxy for 
output. That was pre-1973. And we’ve felt very nervous about that 
ever since 1973, quite frankly. Some of the past data that have come 
in--this was several years ago now--on output measures from the Census 
Bureau have given us some hints that perhaps we weren’t off that far 
in the past. We’ve done some informal checking and we’ve made 
downward adjustments, but it‘s clearly a very hazardous area. We 
could well be understating output from that side rather than 
overstating it. 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. But you’re not continuing to use whatever 
factors were developed? 

MR. KICHLINE. No, we have made adjustments since about ‘ 1 2 .  
I guess, when-- 

M R .  PARTEE. YOU still use electric power. But you have a 
trend factor that’s more-- 

M R .  KICHLINE. Yes, it’s about-- 

MR. ZEISEL. In a sense the productivity factors have been 
changed. 

MR. PARTEE. And then of course you still have output 
[data]. You still have manhours, too, and you can look at the 
manhour s . 

M R .  KICHLINE. That’s right. And we have physical product 
data with a lag that accounts ultimately for about half the series. 

MS. TEETERS. Jim, you had a model that tracked inventories 
that ran off industrial production data, which you reactivated again. 
Is that tracking the GNP data still? Do the inventory numbers in the 
GNP account look to be correct? 

MR. KICHLINE. They do not look out of line. 

MR. COLDWELL. Jim, as I look over your forecast, you have 
some fairly heavy negatives on gross private domestic investment in 
the fourth quarter [and] the first quarter of next year. But in terms 
of the GNP, I assume that your decline in personal consumption 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -13- 

expenditures made the tail wag the dog here. Is that a good 
assumption? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think they're both important. On the 
investment side, the big mover in the short run for some time has been 
residential construction investment; business fixed investment is 
important as well. For 1980 as I remember we have a decline in 
business investment measured from the fourth quarter of about 3 
percent. And durable personal consumption expenditures are down 
around 4-1/2 percent. So we have placed a major emphasis on the 
behavior of personal consumption expenditures, principally the 
durables component. I think it's a fair judgment, but I would weight 
both of them quite high in terms of influencing the [economy's] 
performance in this forecast. 

MR. COLDWELL. Y o u  have government purchases going up and I 
don't have the [unintelligible] proportions here to balance off but it 
looked to me as if you might have an offset here between government 
purchases and gross private [investment], leaving consumption as the 
swing package. 

MR. KICHLINE. In dollar terms, certainly the goods portion 
of consumption is about twice the size of the investment sector. 

MR. COLDWELL. What are the possibilities that the consumer 
is going to confound you still in this fourth quarter and push off the 
decline until the first quarter of next year? 

MR. KICHLINE. I would not be willing to risk any of my own 
money on consumer behavior. I think it's possible. Our view has been 
that the arguments against that strengthen as each month goes by and 
as consumers have been using financial assets or debt or reducing 
savings to finance their purchases. But who knows? It's quite 
conceivable that [consumer spending] will be strong. 

M R .  COLDWELL. My recollection is that the consumer surveys 
have been showing a little more strength lately. 

MR. KICHLINE. That's true. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You really have to get a pretty big 
decline in consumption in November and December to make this come out 
right, don't you? 

M R .  KICHLINE. NO, I think our forecast is that if we get 
zero to a 1/4 percent increase in retail sales in November and 
December, we will hit this number. 

M R .  PARTEE. If you get what? What was the number? 

M R .  KICHLINE. A quarter of a percent increase in total 
retail sales excluding autos. We have a separate auto forecast. 
That's nominal. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In nominal terms. 

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -14- 

MR. COLDWELL. Your October figure is preliminary? 

MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes. It's the advance; it's not even the 
preliminary report. 

MR. COLDWELL. The "flash" or whatever you want to call it. 

MR. PARTEE. And it could go the other way, too, couldn't 
it? 

MR. COLDWELL. It could go the other way. 

M R .  PARTEE. I think we could have a very poor Christmas 
season, which would start out the new year with an inventory clean-up 
job and that kind of thing. 

M R .  SCHULTZ. I don't want to be a Pollyanna, but do you 
have any sense at all of when we will begin to get some very 
substantial substitution in the energy area? Clearly, we're getting 
to the point in energy prices where a lot of secondary and tertiary 
recoveries get to be very attractive. You point out that the natural 
gas substitution can go on both in homes and industrial use. Coal, as 
you say, is very weak. Yet there are a lot of energy plants that can 
be reconverted to coal. At what point does any of this really start 
to occur with a vengeance? Do you have any feel for that at all? 

MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't. We have been getting scattered 
reports suggesting that some utilities have been switching back. 
Those that converted under pressure or for price reasons have been 
switching back and trying to return to the use of natural gas. But 
there are constraints in these areas. I guess our view is that we 
don't know enough about the nature of that market to make a reasonable 
assessment. It's very clear, given price and availability, that the 
incentives today are there to switch. But we don't have a good 
feeling for the technical problems involved in this area. 

MR. WILLES. Just two things, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to 
make a comment very much along the lines of the question asked by Phil 
Coldwell. The national and international companies headquartered in 
our region who deal not only in the manufacturing area but in the 
retail area report exceptionally strong orders and backlogs. They're 
surprised; they can't believe it. So it may well be that the fourth 
quarter is buying a little from the first half of next year and this 
quarter will be a little stronger than we expect. 

Second, I want to tell the staff how much we appreciate 
their finally understanding rational expectations because we noticed 
that in our copy of the supplement to the Current Economic and 
Financial Conditions the page that is supposed to have capacity 
utilization on it was blank. And we think they finally understand! 

MR. PARTEE. You mean rational expectations are an empty 
box? 

MS. TEETERS. Mark, I think you had the only copy with that 
particular page blank. 



11120179 -15- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps we can have Mr. Axilrod's 
statement and then we'll have a coffee break. 

MR. AXILROD. [statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you've given us something to chew 
on other than a donut! 

MR. PARTEE. May I ask just one question? Steve, did I 
understand you to say that you were assuming $2 billion as the initial 
borrowing on alternative C? 

M R .  AXILROD. Alternative C. 

MR. PARTEE. And $1-1/2 billion on alternative B? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

MR. PARTEE. And what on "A?" 

MR. AXILROD. On "A" it's a little over $1 billion. 

MR. PARTEE. All right, that's an important variable that I 
think we ought to-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not saying that that couldn't be 
changed. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, of course. That's one of the things I 
think we ought to vote on. 

MR. BLACK. Could I ask one brief question, M r .  Chairman? 
Steve, you mentioned that under "B" you have a 9-1/2 percent increase 
in M1 from mid-November to year-end. What is the comparable figure 
for "C?" 

MR. AXILROD. For "C," it's between 7-112 and 8 percent-- 
1-112 to 2 percentage points [less]. 

MR. SCHULTZ. That's seasonally adjusted. 

MR. AXILROD. Seasonally adjusted--no, just in the sense 
that I took it from week to week. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These all also assume we get a weak 
number in the next published weekly figure, which we don't know. The 
preliminary figure shows a decline of $2 billion? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it came out substantially above that, 
all these growth rates would have to be smaller between now and the 
end of the year. 

MS. TEETERS. But that's following a week in which we had a 
$3 billion [increase]. 



11/20/79 -16- 

MR. AXILROD. It might be fairer to view it as under "B" 
that we have targeted growth in November of 1/2 of one percent and in 
December a monthly average of 10 percent. Under "C" in November it's 
about 1/4 of one percent and in December about 8-1/2 percent. I just 
want to give a sense that we need to push it up, but the week to week 
[pattern] can vary just depending on how the weeks turn out. 

MR. RICE. Steve, is that 9-1/2 percent growth in M1 over 
the November and December period what you expect under alternative B 
or what would be consistent with the 4-1/2 percent? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's what we in effect targeted to get 
the 4-1/2 percent [growth rate from September to December]. 

MR. RICE. What's the likelihood that we'll get 9-1/2 
percent over the period [to year-end]? 

MR. AXILROD. If the Committee puts in the reserves--the 
reserve path we've designed--we believe we will get it. Where we're 
uncertain is whether that will be with stable interest rates or 
declining rates. Our general view is that it will probably be with 
some decline in interest rates, which is the reason we started that 
path off with borrowing of $1-1/2 billion--a shade lower than we have 
had in recent weeks. 

MR. RICE. But that is the most likely rate of increase? 

MR. AXILROD. It is our collective-type projection of what 
would happen to money. If interest rates didn't change at all, it 
would be slightly lower than in alternative B. 

MR. COLDWELL. Yesterday we talked about the possibility of 
extending our horizon on this. Are you planning to make any comment 
on that, Steve? 

MR. AXILROD. We did put in the Bluebook--for general 
guidance--January figures. And I could-- 

MR. PARTEE. You don't show rates for January. 

MR. COLDWELL. You don't show rates: that's my point. 

MR. AXILROD. I can tell you what we did there. We assumed 
you had a 6 percent M1 growth target for the year 1980. So we 
calculated from the fourth quarter average to the first quarter 
average a growth of 6 percent. And the figure there for January for 
alternative B is a level that gets right on that [ 6  percent1 line from 
the fourth quarter to the first. For alternative A, it's a little 
over that because [that alternative involves] easing now. And for 
alternative C it's a little under it. The level that would be implied 
for alternative B for January gives a January growth rate from 
December of 5 . 7  percent, just on a month-to-month basis. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying that if we continue that 
rate--sort of--for February and March, the first quarter would be 6 
percent above the fourth quarter? 



ll/20/79 -11- 

M R .  AXILROD. It might. I don't know the exact February and 
March [pattern] but it would be somewhere around there. They could 
be, depending on how the averages work out. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, comparable to the 4-1/2 percent path 
that the Committee agreed to for September to December, what would be 
the rate for-- 

MR. AXILROD. I don't have worked out a continuation of the 
4-1/2 percent path because-- 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I didn't mean necessarily the 
continuation of 4-1/2 percent, but what would be the path you would 
recommend for November through January? 

MR. AXILROD. " B . "  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B" is the 4-1/2-- 

MR. COLDWELL. Through January. 

MR. PARTEE. It's a lot higher than that, I think 

M R .  AXILROD. From September to January, the growth rate 
under "B" is 4.8 percent. 

MR. COLDWELL. So from November through January you're 
talking [a bit] higher. 

MR. AXILROD. F r o m  October to January it's 5 . 5  percent; 
there's very little difference between that and 5.7 percent for the 
month. 

MR. PARTEE. How much correction does "C" make on that? 
What is the growth rate under "C" from December to January? 

MR. AXILROD. In "C," from December to January it's 4.4 
percent. We assumed that the Committee would be restraining growth a 
bit below path in the first quarter, so we have it below and then 
coming back up. So in January M1 is a little below that 6 percent 
path. These are all things the Committee can adjust, but that's the 
assumption we made if you went to alternative C. 

M R .  PARTEE. So you'd have 4 . 4  percent for January. Then 
that means you would have something under 4-1/2 percent for the 4 
months. And for the 3 months from October to January growth would be 
about 4-1/2 percent, I guess. 

MR. AXILROD. It would be 5 percent because the January 
growth rate picks up a little relative to the other alternatives to 
begin [to get M11 coming back on the path. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the future, as we said yesterday, I 
think it would be helpful to spell this out with a little more 
precision over a longer period of time. This is related to when we 
next meet and we might just think about that a bit. My inclination at 
the moment is that we might as well meet again in December and 
consider [our targets for] next year in a preliminary way--not all of 



11/20/79 -18- 

next year but I'd look at this in a context of at least through the 
first quarter. And we can't do that very well without some 
preliminary notions about what that whole year should be. But then in 
February, we've got to decide about the year. Now we could change the 
date of the meeting and make it after Christmas and early in January, 
I suppose. S o ,  think about that. 

MR. AXILROD. Does that mean that at the next meeting, Mr. 
Chairman, you'd like us to provide paths with alternative longer-run 
growth rates because the year is starting over and also looking ahead 
3 months, say? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By that time I presume we'll have 
complicated it all by having a new definition of the money supply. 

MR. AXILROD. I think the Board is going to make a decision 
on that shortly. 

MR. PARTEE. Certainly in January we will, [ahead of] when 
we go up to Congress. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it's going to be a little complicated 
to say the least. Well, let's have a coffee break. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like to go around the table and 
get some general discussion of the economic situation and at least a 
preliminary statement of policy. 
specifics. I remind you that Steve expressed the dilemma very well. 
One can argue that from the standpoint of domestic business activity 
it would be nice to get some fairly early declines in interest rates, 
to the extent we can do that consistent with the general framework of 
the money supply decisions we made. On the other hand, [that's not 
the case] from the standpoint of inflationary expectations--which I 
don't think have changed so much--and from the standpoint particularly 
of the unrest in Iran adding to the possibilities of turbulence in the 
oil markets and an oil price decision that we are not going to like. 
That is the major risk we are running and not just in a narrow sense. 
It's a major risk the country is running and the world is running. To 
the extent we can have any marginal influence on that, it points in 
the other direction [for policy]. So there certainly is a dilemma in 
the next few weeks. 

Then we will focus hard on policy 

Let me say that I think you ought to have in mind this 
conundrum regarding the [next] Committee meeting. The 18th [of 
December, our next scheduled meeting date,] is the day after OPEC 
meets, which is fine if OPEC has made a decision. It's fine in one 
sense, although it is obviously very early. The chances of OPEC 
meeting on the 17th and making a decision on the 17th are probably not 
very high. So it will leave us in a state of suspended animation on 
that day. Moreover, I don't think we will be in a position then to 
have absorbed all the distinctions of new and old money supply 
definitions and all the rest, looking forward to next year. There is 
the alternative of meeting on Tuesday, the 8th of January. The 8th, 
9th or 10th of January [are possibilities]. If we did that, then 
presumably whatever decision we make here--subject obviously to an 
interim meeting--is not just for the remainder of November and 



11/20/79 -19- 

December but carries through to the early part of January, by 
implication, as well. We’ll turn to that again later but I think it 
may have a little bearing on precisely what we do here. The dates are 
not ideal; at least the December 18th date isn’t ideal for the two 
reasons that I suggested. On the other hand it’s not at all 
impossible; it is scheduled, so we can proceed on that basis, too. 

Let’s get any general comments you have on the economy and 
the policy implications you see for it. Would anybody like to offer 
any comments? Governor Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, from my standpoint it seems 
probable that the economy is going to decline. To me the timing still 
is a bit [uncertain] as to whether that is going to occur in the 
fourth quarter or the first. quarter. But I think the chances are high 
that the fundamentals will bring the economy to a lower rate of growth 
and probably to negative gEowth. How much of a negative, I‘m not 
prepared to say at the moment. I think there is a good possibility 
that we might have a fairly sizable negative in the first and second 
quarters of next year. The place where I would quarrel a bit with the 
forecast is in the consumption area. I think there is still some 
resilience out there in terms of the rate of change in consumption 
expenditures, possibly even by making use of some [increase in] debt, 
although there it is difficult to see how that can stretch much 
further than it is stretched. An overriding problem that I see is 
that even in the staff forecast we are looking at a 10 percent rate of 
inflation for at least the next nine months and maybe further than 
that depending upon some ocher things, including the potential for a 
very nasty OPEC decision. 

In terms of the economy, I would mention one other thing. 
While we did get some curtailment in the rate of bank credit growth, 
the curtailment was from a 22 percent rate of increase to 18 percent 
or something like that. we’ve missed our guess on that by a very 
[large] margin. I believe our forecast on bank credit growth was 
something like 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent or some range in that 
neighborhood, so [actual growth] is almost double that. I don‘t find, 
as I wander around, any real stringency yet. There‘s an awful lot of 
talk about the price [of credit] bringing things under control [both] 
in terms of mortgage rates and I think to some considerable extent a 
usury problem in certain states, but liquidity still seems reasonably 
adequate for other kinds o f  [expenditures]. 

S o  my preference would be to tilt [policyl a little on the 
tight side now, given the prospects for next year, trying to make sure 
that we don’t have a further expansion [in the aggregates], which 
might bring us to even higher rates of inflation. I’d like to keep 
the Committee’s focus on the inflation side for the moment. I do 
think the chances of [recession] are high next year; and we will have 
to face the problem of to what extent we allow the rates to go down 
next year. But I don’t like the possibility of those rates going down 
now, not only because of the potential [effects on the domestic side1 
for this quarter but also because of the international side. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes. 

MR. WILLES. I have to admit that I don’t know what‘s going 
to happen to the real economy. I’m not sure I even know how to go 



11/20/79 -20-  

about predicting that at the moment because it seems to me that it 
depends so much on what OPEC does and what the Congress does and lots 
of other things. I will go on to say, which will be no news to some 
of you, that in terms of policy it’s not clear to me that it makes any 
difference what the real sector does over the next twelve months 
because I’m not sure that we have any demonstrated ability to have an 
impact on that--in a predictable way anyway. Therefore, for slightly 
different reasons, I end up exactly where Phil did in terms of 
focusing on inflation as the primary objective. 

In terms of how we should do that, I have great concern 
about the process that we are using. It’s not that I think we made a 
mistake in going to reserves. I think that‘s a tremendous step 
forward. But I’m not sure we have done that in such a way that we are 
likely to have a reasonably good chance of being successful. One of 
the things that we know is that if we change substantially the way we 
conduct policy, that is going to change people’s behavior. Therefore, 
all of the old statistical relationships that we have been able to 
look at in the past--relationships between interest rates and reserves 
and monetary aggregates and so on--might well be in the process of 
changing because we have changed our focus presumably from interest 
rates to reserves. So all of the discussion that we have about trying 
to pick a monetary aggregates target and then backing away from that 
step by step to figure out what the reserves ought to be and the 
associated interest rates and so on, just strikes me as being 
backwards. 

It seems to me that the only reasonable prospect we have of 
really making it work is to start at the other end and say, okay let‘s 
fix reserves and then let the system adjust to that. Clearly, we 
don’t know exactly what impact that is going to have because we don‘t 
have any functions that are relevant in the new environment. But it 
doesn’t seem to me that a lot of the things we have been talking 
about--unless we are lucky--are going to lead us to any kind of 
predictable result either in terms of the aggregates or in terms of 
interest rates. So I just feel very uncomfortable with the nature of 
the discussion that we are having in terms of how we hope to reach a 
policy decision. I can construct, given the kinds of conversations we 
have had so far, a relatively simple model that would say that what we 
would end up with are reserves that are totally demand determined. 
And it seems to me that we are trying to do just the opposite of that. 
We are trying to make reserves and, therefore, the aggregates supply 
determined. Yet the mechanisms we have set up would have just the 
opposite result. 
some things we have said this morning, I hope either today or in the 
near future we can discuss in detail the experiment that we are 
trying. I say that because it‘s not clear to me, regardless of what 
the ultimate objectives we set are, that we stand a very good chance 
of getting exactly where we want to go unless we just turn out to be 
lucky. 

S o ,  going back to yesterday’s discussion as well as 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman. 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. M r .  Chairman, I would say with respect to a 
general economic forecast that I would subscribe to what Mark Willes 
has said as to the probable low value [any forecast] would have in the 
present circumstances. It seems to me that the staff projection is a 
reasonable one. I would not be surprised if [the economy] actually 



11/20/79 -21- 

goes down more in the early part of next year than the staff has 
projected, particularly in the measure of industrial production, for 
example. But I'm not sure [that prospect1 should weigh heavily in our 
policy posture today. 

With respect to our region, of course, we have benefited in 
terms of local activity from the oil and gas business; the level of 
that activity is high and is continuing to rise. 
that, of course, domestic production of oil is declining and I'm 
advised that the rate of decline will probably accelerate next year 
because the Alaskan line will have reached capacity. AS it has been 
moving to capacity, it has given us an increase or has offset 
reductions elsewhere this year. So the outlook for continued growth 
of domestic sources apparently is somewhat bleak. With respect to 
softening in economic activity locally, insofar as there is any 
softening it seems to be traceable to usury interest rate ceilings. 
AS nearly as we can tell from fragmentary information, the banks are 
doing a pretty good job of looking across the array of customers, as 
you suggested they should do, Mr. Chairman, in adjusting to the 
current situation and they are trying to avoid just lopping off large 
sectors of borrowers. 

Notwithstanding 

Moving from the economic picture to the policy picture, I'm 
[about] right on track with what Phil Coldwell has suggested. I read 
[the materials for this meeting] rather carefully, I thought, and I 
listened rather intently to Mr. Axilrod's comments. Accepting the 
proposition that we probably should continue the present policy for 
the time being, it seemed to me that alternative C came a little 
closer to that than the alternative B prescription. Obviously, 
there's not a big difference but on balance it seemed to me to come 
out that way. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M r .  Timlen. 

M R .  TIMLEX. I must say that in my judgment the consumer has 
been a great source of strength for a long time and I think finally 
that is going to turn around. I'm particularly impressed by the fact 
that the impact of [the cost of] heating homes in the Northeast is 
going to present quite a challenge to some personal budgets and may 
affect spending plans. I've talked to a number of savings bankers and 
country bankers in New York and New Jersey over the past few weeks. 
And despite the Chairman's urgings, outside of New York City at any 
rate there is no mortgage money in a savings bank or small commercial 
bank. The banks in New Jersey and outside of New York City are even 
changing their terms on consumer loans and are not taking on new 
business. In the state of New York currently the thrifts are very 
concerned about their loss of funds outright to other investment 
outlets. And where they are not losing the money to other investment 
outlets, they are gravely concerned about shifting money from 
inexpensive savings accounts into various certificates. Generally 
that clouds my picture as to the strength of the consumer in the first 
quarter of next year. 

I must say that for the first time we are hearing concerns 
in New York as to the possible implications for our banking system of 
either short-term or long-term withdrawals of OPEC monies from United 
States banks. I haven't heard that too often, but it is a matter of 
some discussion. I would say that from my standpoint the focus should 



1 1 1 2 0 / 7 9  -22- 

continue to be on inflation until we get a better reading of the 
fourth quarter. And I do share the concerns about the position of the 
dollar in foreign exchange markets. Therefore, I would stand behind 
some variation of "C. 

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I think I can endorse a great 
deal of what has been said. I would like to make it very clear that I 
don't think we have any more control of the aggregates than when we 
were operating on an interest rate target. Yet the media and I think 
some of my colleagues here think that we have run out and put our 
hands directly on the aggregates; I don't think that's true. I agree 
with Mark that the fact that we've changed [our approach] is going to 
change the relationships. 
of difficulty and there is going to come a time when we are going to 
fail. We were lucky last month that it turned out the way it did. 
So, keep in mind as we are making policy that we aren't out there 
directly determining the Ms. And I'm a little concerned that when we 
begin to want to expand the money supply we will provide the reserves 
and there won't be any response in the money supply down the line. 

I believe we are going to have a great deal 

I am also very concerned about the consumer. There is no 
housing money; [financial intermediaries] are loaned up. I think our 
policy should basically be steady as you go at the present time. I 
would not want to force the banks to borrow any more than $1-1/2 
billion under alternative B because I do think the economy is going to 
turn down. And when it does, I think it's going to drop very 
suddenly. When people get the first monthly bill for heating oil it 
is going to hit us. I think there is going to be a gasoline shortage 
again and I feel that people quite possibly are going to be very 
conservative at Christmas. I would come out in support of alternative 
B with $1-112 billion of borrowings and I would increase the federal 
funds rate. In other words, I favor a "B-minus" policy. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Increase the federal funds rate? 

MS. TEETERS. I want to increase the range. I might combine 
alternative B and $1-112 billion of borrowings with a federal funds 
range of 10-1/2 to 15-112 percent so that when the signs begin to come 
through very strongly that the economy is weakening the interest rates 
can drop naturally somewhat more than they could before. In other 
words, I would like to "unskew" it a bit without raising the top but 
by dropping the bottom to allow more fluctuations in the rate. And 
when the rate does start to go down, it will have the space to do that 
in a natural way. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff forecast is a 
good one and I certainly am prepared to go along with it. It seems 
pretty clear that the economy is headed for a contraction in the early 
part of 1980. We see evidence of this already but it's obvious that 
the increase in energy prices, the prevailing tightness in financial 
markets, and a continuing [high] rate of inflation will combine to 
make the contraction in 1980 steeper or deeper than was earlier 
forecast. So the outlook is clearly for considerable economic 
weakness in the year ahead. 

In the face of that, it seems that our choice is between 
alternatives A and B; we should be focused more on the effect of such 
a decision in the year ahead. It was pointed out clearly in the 



11/20/79 -23- 

Bluebook that between now and the end of the year it doesn't really 
make much difference which alternative we choose. The main impact of 
a choice between alternatives A and B will in all probability be on 
the financial conditions that prevail in the early part of 1980. I 
agree with a good deal of what has been said. I, too, place a great 
deal of emphasis on the need to continue to resist inflation. 
However, I feel also that at a time when we expect economic weakness 
to occur we ought not to put the economy in a situation where monetary 
policy is exacerbating rather than [helping]. We at least ought not 
to be operating to worsen the real developments in the economy. S o  I 
would much prefer to follow a course that would stand a better chance 
of providing adequate liquidity in a weak economy--not excessive 
liquidity, of course, but adequate liquidity at a time when it is 
needed--rather than being in a posture of having to provide reserves 
at a time when, as Nancy put it, they will not do very much good. 

While preferring to lean in this direction, I would also 
prefer later on by some months to move more quickly to reverse policy 
sooner in the cycle and to tighten monetary policy when it's clear 
that the economy is strengthening rather than risk overtightness in a 
situation that is clearly weakening. So for those reasons I would 
lean toward alternative B and I would also be prepared to stay with a 
federal funds range of 11-1/2 to 15 percent. I think one can no 
longer be greatly impressed with the argument that real interest rates 
are negative. They are now positive and the unfolding situation that 
would be consistent with alternative B would also be one that would 
lean against inflation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pick up on one comment you 
made. You talked about changing policy and I guess I'd ask you what 
you mean by "changing policy." The question comes up all the time. 
What did you mean when you said that--measuring it in terms of the 
money supply? 

MR. RICE. Right, right. In relation to that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This question is going to plague us, I 
tell you. 

MR. RICE. Now, let me just finish. What I had in mind was 
late in 1980 or perhaps even early in t19811, whenever the economy 
begins to strengthen, I would be prepared to tighten monetary policy. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In terms of the money supply. 

MR. RICE. In terms of the money supply and at a much 
earlier point than the Federal Reserve normally does. In this way 
we'd continue to resist inflation rather than err on the side of 
maintaining the situation where liquidity would be inadequate [for a1 
time . 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason I [raise] the point is that I 
think it has some relevance unfortunately for this meeting and for 
every meeting, I suppose. When I appear in public or in private in 
the first question I get is, "Are you going to stick with it?" So I 
say what "sticking with it" means. I go through my song and dance 
about how, particularly with this present technique, we measure it by 
the money supply and that's not inconsistent at all with a decline in 



11/20/79 -24- 

interest rates when the economy declines, particularly if the 
inflation rate is declining. I have done this a dozen times in public 
and dozens of times in private. I was at a lunch yesterday where 
there were some presumably sophisticated people who have heard me say 
this in public dozens of times, or at least a half dozen times, as 
well as some unsophisticated types. And an unsophisticated guy asked 
me "Are you going to stick with it?" I went through my song and dance 
[about howl we are going to stick with it in terms of the money supply 
but that doesn't mean interest rates can't come down. I no sooner got 
finished with this 10 to 15 minute discussion when one of the presumed 
sophisticates--a member of the Washington economic press--says, "Now, 
what I want to know is when are you going to change policy?" I said, 
"What do you mean by changing policy?" He says, "The first time 
interest rates go down." There we are. 

MS. TEETERS. That's why I think we should let them 
fluctuate. 

MR. MAYO. That would be favorable. 

MS. TEETERS. We're going to have to break that psychology. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. 

M R .  MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we are still more pessimistic 
than the staff on the projection for 1980, but they are getting a lot 
closer to us. We are still looking for a recession, something on the 
scale of 1974-75, as the result of the three shocks that we have 
going: the energy shock; what I think now can be called the interest 
rate shock, which is showing up in Boston in the fact that [a 
borrower] can get mortgage money from the Boston savings banks-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They can? 

MR. MORRIS. Yes. The savings banks are offering it. Money 
is available, but the demand is falling off very sharply because of 
the rate--the fact that they are asking 13 percent plus 2 points. 

MR. TIMLEN. Frank, what's the usury ceiling in 
Massachusetts? 

MR. MORRIS. We don't have a usury ceiling. 

MR. TIMLEN. You see, we do. 

MR. PARTEE. You have a particular problem, [Tom]. 

MR. MORRIS. I think we are seeing for the first time real 
price rationing in mortgage markets. In the past, most of the impact 
has been on availability but I think we are in a situation now where 
we could well see a liquidity buildup in the thrifts because the 
demand is not there at those rates of interest. 

The other shock I have in mind is the proposition 13 shock 
because I have been making a lot of comparisons to the '74-'75 period. 
One area of the economy that was a great sustaining force in '74 and 
'75 that clearly is not going to be that way in 1980 is the state and 
local government sector. 



11/20/79 -25 -  

Having said that, it seems to me that the reserve path under 
alternative C looks quite all right and I would start out with the 
initial assumption of $1-1/2 billion in borrowing. And I think I'm 
much more optimistic than either Nancy or Mark about what this 
procedure is going to yield for us. The figures that Steve showed us 
yesterday made it very clear, I think, that over very short periods of 
time the reserves/deposits relationship is very unstable. But as we 
add [timel--as we go from 2 months to 3 months to 4 months--1 think we 
will see, if we can stick with our guns, that relationship stabilize. 
I have urged Steve to give us some cumulative totals as we go along 
and I think they will bear out this relationship. 

M R .  RICE. Question: You are associating $2 billion of 
borrowing with alternative C as-- 

MR. MORRIS. I said initially $1-1/2 billion. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a modified "C." 

MR. RICE. That's what I was getting at. You are modifying 
alternative C by reducing the borrowing level associated with it. 

MR. MORRIS. But I'd certainly move to $2 billion if the 
money figures come through strong enough. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey 

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, we believe the staff's forecast 
to be a good one, particularly with the caveats about additional oil 
price increases that may come out of the December OPEC meeting and 
that would turn the first quarter a bit lower perhaps than our initial 
forecast would suggest. As to business activity in our area, 
particularly in regard to housing and autos, autos virtually have 
stopped selling simply because of credit and prices. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are different kinds o f  [auto] 
credit, [do you mean] consumer credit or dealer credit? 

MR. GUFFEY. Both. With respect to housing, we have two 
situations within the seven states. One is the usury ceiling, which 
of course has cut off all residential housing. But the same is true 
in the other areas where usury laws are not a [factor]. The savings 
and loans virtually have shut their doors. They are not prepared to 
bid for the high priced short-term money and put it out other than is 
necessary to meet the commitments they had outstanding before these 
recent rate increases. Beyond that, retail sales have turned soft and 
as a result there is fairly good evidence that [they] are going to 
move to a lower level. What Christmas may hold I suppose nobody 
knows, but quite likely it will be a bit softer than we would have 
thought some time earlier in the year. 

With regard to the policy we may be considering today, I 
would say first of all that I, too, would opt for "C" or something 
even a bit to the right of "C"--and for a couple of reasons that are a 
bit different than those Governor Coldwell has already expressed. 
One, it seems to me that if we try to move growth in the aggregates up 
in the next six weeks to 9-1/2 percent, as Steve has suggested--or if 
we get zero in November it's 11 percent [in December]--we are going to 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  -26- 

get a funds rate drop. And [the rate1 would be pushing on the lower 
end of the 11-1/2 percent range that we now have or of some lower 
range if we were to set it lower today. I think that would be totally 
inappropriate, not only domestically but also internationally. In the 
discussions that I had on a trip to Europe recently I got very much 
the same question that you said was proposed to you. If they see our 
interest rates drop before they see some [progress] in the fight 
against inflation, then they are going to believe that we have lost 
our resolve and, therefore, act accordingly. And the dollar will 
quite likely come under some pressure. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand your international reason, 
but after your recital on the domestic economy why do you argue that 
[case] domestically? 

MR. GUFFEY. Well, it seems to me that we are going to have 
the same kind of psychology-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a psychology [issue]. 

MR. GUFFEY. Yes. Policy-wise, it seems to me that it would 
be appropriate to adopt " C "  or perhaps something a bit more 
restrictive than that. On the other hand-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You still get a passing grade with "D." 

M R .  GUFFEY. With regard to modifying "C," however, I'd 
maintain the federal funds range that we now have--that's 11-l/2 to 
15-1/2 percent. It seems to me that it would be inappropriate to 
change that range. If my understanding is correct, the first time the 
markets or the world will see that 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent range will 
be when we publish our policy record after this meeting. It seems to 
me that it's important for stability purposes to maintain that range. 
S o  what I would propose is that we adopt "C" with an 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 
percent funds rate range rather than the one listed for "C." Lastly, 
I would hope that we would not take action, as "B" would suggest, to 
try to validate the 4-1/2 percent growth rate that we set in early 
October for the fourth quarter, simply to try to make that come true 
if implicit in that is a drop in interest rates. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. ROOS. 

m. ROOS. M r .  Chairman, I think it's important at this 
stage of our deliberations [to stand] back and again ask ourselves 
whether we really are aware of what we have announced publicly that we 
are going to do. On October 6 we announced that we are going to 
change our procedures to concentrate more on the control of money 
growth. Our experience in the Eighth District is that that 
announcement was received with almost universal approval. And the 
question that my associates and I get is the same one you do: Is the 
Fed really prepared to stick with it? One of the things that 
disturbs me today as I hear the comments is whether we really have a 
common understanding of what "it" is. My understanding is that "it" 
does not entail trying on a monthly basis to adjust what we're doing 
in reaction to what are really short-term economic problems. I don't 
even think that "it" means doing something the week after OPEC makes a 
decision--to meet that immediate need. For this process to be 



11/20/79 -27-  

successful, we've got to recognize that we cannot operate on a day-to- 
day or "micro" basis. 

We have to set longer-term targets; we have to announce 
those targets; and we have to avoid the temptation to be nervous 
Nellies if one week something happens that might frighten us. I don't 
mean that we blindfold ourselves and blindly stick with [our targets] 
but I think we have to set longer-term targets and be prepared to do 
what is necessary to achieve those longer-term targets. One thing 
that I think would be devastating in this regard is to feel somehow 
that we will follow this [new procedure] but also worry about whether 
we ought to reduce the upper limit of the fed funds rate from 15-1/2 
to 14-l/2 percent. That sounds as though we have taken a half step 
but we are not sure where we are going. 

Specifically, I would recommend that we choose alternative 
B, because alternative B--if I understand the staff projections [and 
analysis]--coincides with what we agreed last month to do. And if for 
no other reason than the therapeutic value of sticking, in our first 
month's reactions, with what we decided to do last month, I'd like to 
see us adopt alternative B and [stay with our plan1 to seek M1 growth 
of 4-1/2 percent by the end of the year. Then I'd like us to project 
into 1980 a specific long-term target that will be consistent with 
that. I believe--and if I'm wrong, we're all wrong--that our primary 
responsibility is not to waffle and to ask ourselves if the aggregates 
can be controlled. Y o u  said, and we ratified this publicly, that yes, 
we believe the aggregates can be controlled. That was why we did what 
we did on October 6.  In my view our job now is to get the best minds 
within this System, which I think includes some of our Reserve Bank 
economists as well as [Board] staff, to work out these processes we 
talked about yesterday so that we can demonstrate that the aggregates 
can be controlled. If we fall--if we retreat from what we announced 
on October 6--I think [it will be] the last straw and any credibility 
regarding the Federal Reserve's monetary policymaking will be lost. I 
really think we're on a path of no retreat. I apologize for the 
length of that statement, but let's understand what we've bitten off; 
whether it's right or wrong, we've taken that step and the fat is in 
the fire. Now let's find out the best way to make it work. I think 
that's our mission. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. I have no quarrel with the staff's forecast, 
though I think there is at least a possibility that the OPEC decision 
will be less adverse than they think. In Europe there seems to be a 
feeling that oil is reasonably plentiful and, therefore, that the 
ability to raise [its price] rather drastically is less. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They only buy it at $40 a barrel! 

MR. WALLICH. Well, but at least they've got it. Even so, I 
think it's clear that we're facing a worsening outlook for both 
unemployment and inflation. The [situation] seems to be worse on the 
side of inflation than unemployment and slow growth. So I think we've 
got to weight our approach accordingly--that is, lean more in the 
direction of fighting inflation than taking account of the recession. 



1 1 / 2 0 / 7 9  - 2 8 -  

We have [adopted] a money supply policy for some time into 
the future and we're really talking here about how to phase into that 
longer-run path. Admittedly, we're going to review the path in 
December or maybe in January. But basically we laid down a pattern 
for the future and this ought to satisfy those who like Larry feel 
that we ought to have a fairly firm target. I'm quite skeptical of 
the meaning of this target; I don't think M1 measures what it is 
supposed to be measuring. If we had the revised aggregates--and 
revised them the way I would like to see them revised--that [new] M1 
would be advancing faster. We see bank credit advancing fast, and it 
has grown at a very stable rate all through the year, fluctuating in 
an 11 to 14 percent range. And in the forecast it is not projected to 
slow down; it's currently projected to increase at its [recent] rate 
of growth month by month through January. All that suggests to me 
that we do need continued restraint. I don't see the prospect of 
another blow being dealt to us by OPEC as a reason for relaxing; it 
would seem to me a reason for doing more. Otherwise we'll be in the 
position of the man who was told by his doctor to take it easy because 
he is badly overworked. And at that moment he has a heart attack so 
he says, "Well if things are as bad as that, I might as well go back 
to working a full schedule." It would seem to me that if we are hit 
harder on the inflation front, then the severity of another blow is a 
reason for increasing the effort, not for diminishing the effort. 

I'd like to say a word about the dollar. I think in the 
long run we have to adjust to the prospect that we certainly can't 
keep up with the D-mark. If this inflation is going to go on and on, 
the differential between the D-mark and the dollar is perpetuated. We 
are in much the same position as the French are with the franc; they 
cannot get their inflation down and they're trying desperately to hang 
on. They've had to take one downward step; they'll have to take 
others. I don't think we have to yield on our trade-weighted exchange 
rate, which is the more meaningful measure of the dollar. We ought to 
be able to hold on and our policies ought to be designed to that end. 

Now, I quite share the reactions of the Chairman and of 
Roger Guffey [regarding] people's statements about our policies. AS 
soon as we say interest rates are coming down as a result of a logical 
evolution of our money supply policy, they say: '"Aha, you're changing 
your policy." I think there's an obvious logical defect here. One 
can perhaps differentiate two statements. One is: We're not changing 
our policy, but the environment is deteriorating as far as maintenance 
of the value of the dollar is concerned and maybe that's the logical 
consequence. But we do have to make clear that our policy is the 
money supply, properly defined, and that interest rates therefore do 
have greater flexibility. And if inflation comes down, I think that 
will be fairly acceptable. The problem is that inflation may not come 
down. 

Well, forgive me for that long statement. I just want to 
say briefly that I lean toward alternative C. The only thing, 
frankly, that bothers me about it is the prospect that it will bring 
interest rates down sometime this winter. But I'm aware that we 
presumably will have a chance to reassess that. If inflation comes 
down and we have a serious economic situation, the doors are entirely 
open. But I don't want to prejudice that [policy response] now. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did you say--"C?" 



11/20/79 -29- 

MR. WALLICH. "C." 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles. 

M R .  BALLES. I don't see any basic reason for changing the 
posture that we adopted on October 6 ,  Mr. Chairman. With respect to 
the real economy, the obvious [areas of] weakness that we observe are 
housing and autos, although I must say that on the West Coast the sag 
in housing has been offset by what some builders describe as a furious 
pace of activity in the non-residential construction field. One 
encouraging sign in the housing situation in our area is that the 
state's largest commercial bank and its largest savings and loan 
association recently knocked off a little on their mortgage rates-- 
coming down a half point, though admittedly from very high levels. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From [14-1/21 to 14 percent? 

MR. BALLES. No, from 13-1/2 to 13 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now that is an encouraging sign. 

MR. BALLES. But it is encouraging. 

M R .  PARTEE. I did not know that a savings and loan did 
that. 

MR. BALLES. Home Savings as well as Bank of America. The 
expectation with respect to the general economy as contained in the 
Board staff forecast is quite similar to our staff forecast, which I 
would generally describe as a modest recession by past standards. 
Obviously, there's a great deal of uncertainty surrounding all these 
forecasts today. But that's still, I think, the most reasonable 
expectation. And of course inflation still continues to be the 
greatest danger here, as many of us view it. I think one of the real 
problems we are dealing with is the lags that are built into the 
impact of monetary policy, which we've known about all along. 
Unfortunately they are not predictable. Those lags are variable but 
it is typical in a period of restraint that the bad news comes [first] 
and the good news comes later, in the sense of an observable 
diminution of inflationary pressures. 

The only bad result I see from our October 6 actions is the 
very sharp rise in long-term interest rates. Maybe the school of 
rational expectations has an answer to [why that has occurred], Mark, 
because I can't get an answer from anybody else, including my own 
staff. To the extent that those rates are influenced by expectations 
of inflation I'm still wondering why--I'm totally nonplussed--they 
went up instead of coming down. I think that underscores the point 
that many people around the table have already made, which is that 
psychology is so darn important right now. 
articulated, the real purpose of our October 6 actions was to get 
inflation under control by bringing about a deceleration of money 
[growth]. And we're being observed very, very closely on what's going 
on there. When there becomes a greater public awareness of what 
happened in October--that there was a considerable deceleration in the 
rate of [money] growth--and if the November figures come in as Steve 
has projected them, that will add still further credibility. 

As you so well 



11/20/79 - 3 0 -  

So I think we're right in the midst of a great credibility 
test right now and I wouldn't want to rock the boat by any major 
change in the posture that we adopted with respect to the targets for 
money growth by the end of the year. [I say that] because I think our 
credibility and hence our impact on long-term interest rates and 
inflationary expectations in general will be messed up if we don't 
meet those goals that we've announced. Good or bad we have announced 
them. They are out there and we're going to be judged by them. When 
it comes down to the fine strokes between alternative B and 
alternative C, I think there's not an awful lot to choose; we may be 
involved in unnecessary or unproductive fine-tuning here. But if I 
had to choose between them I guess I would lean a little toward " C . "  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I'd say a couple of things. I have no fault with 
the staff forecast except that my elbow--which doesn't quite have the 
problem o€ Nancy's elbow but maybe it will get that way--tells me that 
the economy will be weaker than in the forecast. The chances are 
greater that it will be weaker with greater unemployment and 
unfortunately maybe even a little more inflation. I still feel very 
strongly that the Fed's job is to concentrate more on the inflation in 
our economy now than on the real sector, again partly because we are 
the only game in town. Even though our effectiveness may be limited, 
psychologically it is far more effective than anybody else's. My 
answer to John Balles on the reason why long-term interest rates have 
gone up is that there has been, even among sophisticates, an almost 
complete turnover and disillusionment as to whether inflation can be 
controlled. This is reflected in long-term rates and it makes our job 
even more of a challenge. 

I welcome what we did yesterday, Mr. Chairman, as well as 
Steve's additional input this morning. But I think we may be engaging 
in a bit of self-flagellation here that is over and above the call of 
duty. We made a giant step on October 6. AS we sit back and look at 
it, it isn't that giant a step in terms of what I would call an 
evolution of monetary policy and its strategies and techniques. We 
have been concerned with reserves before; we just were too timid to 
let the system work. We have freed the reserve control concept now of 
its interest rate bounds to a considerable extent. And yet we must 
grant that we have found no magic formula as to additional ways of 
making this process of monetary policy as simple as some of our 
academic friends believe it can be made. We still have lags; we still 
have multiplier effects that differ; and we still have disputes as to 
how to do our seasonal adjustments. We can go right down the line, 
and we still have basically the same problems we had before. This has 
been a very important step, but I would rather view it more as an 
evolutionary step than a revolutionary step. The press has taken it 
up as a revolutionary step and we can live in the glory of that in the 
short run. I don't think that it is understood yet what we are doing 
apropos of the Chairman's statement about [being asked] when is policy 
going to change. 

I welcome Larry's speech on defining "it" as having a 
longer-term span than many people had argued before; I certainly agree 
that that is true. And it's for that reason that I don't share 
Roger's worry that a big December number is going to get us into any 
trouble. I prefer "B;" I would not object to the Morris formulation 



11/20/79 -31- 

of "C" with the $1-1/2 billion [on initial borrowing]. I do not see 
anything particularly wrong with that. I would take us at our word, 
though, on the releasing of the federal funds constraint and go with 
11 to 16 percent. I would broaden it by 1/2 percentage point on 
[each] side to indicate again our willingness to see the rate 
fluctuate a little more. I see nothing wrong with that. But I come 
back to the point that I think is terribly important: Although I 
welcome the soul searching [and the attention] we are giving to the 
change in technique and the way the Board staff and the Desk have 
approached it, we are still dealing basically with the same animal 
that we did before. We have a chance here to sharpen things up--and 
we have sharpened things up--but certainly there is no way to make 
this process as simple as perhaps some of us would like. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it's pretty obvious that 
the Iranian crisis has potentially great implications for the domestic 
outlook--[morel than the mere availability of petroleum supplies. But 
absent that problem, I would think the staff's forecast would be about 
right. If I had to guess which way the error might be, I would think 
the economy might be somewhat weaker than they are projecting. It's 
certainly true that the economy has shown amazing resilience up until 
now. I guess inventories are in better shape than they were this time 
in the 1973-74 downturn. But when I look at the weakness in housing 
and hear a talk like Frank Morris gave us on the resistance to rates 
and about the lack of availability of funds, I think housing is going 
to be quite weak. 

I think the consumer is pretty well over-extended. I 
gathered an interesting observation from the chief executive officer 
of He said that consumer loan 
demand had virtually dried up at is their consumer 
financing company, but was still present at the bank. I asked him if 
this related to the type of customer the two institutions have. He 
allowed as how he didn't know but said that might be part of it. 

And finally, I would think that if we made an error on the 
[forecast] of net exports, they would probably be weaker than we had 
guessed because of the increasing restrictiveness of monetary policy 
abroad and the generally unsettled international climate. 

Turning to the policy side, I think the most important task 
is for us to hit our long-run targets. I agree, as someone said 
earlier, that we can probably do that pretty well with any of these 
alternatives. Certainly we ought to hit the M1 and M3 targets with 
any of them and I believe we'd come pretty close on M2 with any of 
them. Bank credit I guess we are going to miss altogether. So I 
don't think that there's a lot to choose from in view of the short 
period left, as Emmett Rice mentioned. I have a marginal preference 
for "B." My only concern with "B" is that the lower limit on the 
federal funds rate range might be a little high at 11-1/2 percent. 
Now, last time I argued that we ought not to put that below 11-1/2 
percent because I thought we had a credibility problem. And I felt 
that if [the funds rate] came down before we demonstrated any control 
over the aggregates, we'd have a real problem. But I do think we have 
gained considerable credibility at this point and also the economy 
looks weaker. So against that background, although I'm somewhat 



11/20/79 -32- 

concerned over what Henry and Scott said earlier about the foreign 
reaction, I think the reserve growth needed to achieve alternative B 
may well entail more federal funds rate movement on the down side than 
some might expect. I think the rate might have to go below current 
rates by a fairly significant level so I would want to lower that 
lower limit to 10-1/2 percent. I guess I’d stay with 15-1/2 percent 
for the high end, but I surely wouldn’t object to raising that. I 
might be wrong on this and I would suggest that maybe we ought to have 
a telephone conference if the funds rate approaches either of those 
limits. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, we are plotting a path [for the provision 
of reserves], and there never will seem to be much difference in the 
short run in the paths that we plot because they only work out over 
the long run. But I think there is a difference between alternatives 
A, B, and C. There’s a different implication for the shape of 
monetary growth in the first quarter that transcends the very precise 
[short-run] period we are talking about. In a coming recession, 
whatever its shape or size--and it may be quite different than we are 
expecting right now--1 think it is important that we continue to say 
that it is our job and our intention to provide for a reasonable 
amount of money and credit growth. That’s really about all we can do. 
[And we need to do so] as safely [as possible] with inflation on the 
one side and unemployment, which I would point out to you is projected 
by the staff to be as high as 8.4 percent for next year, on the other 
side. About all we can do is to have that kind of ambition. I would, 
of course, as we have sacrificed the mortgage market, sacrifice the 
foreign exchange market at the right point in the battle to maintain 
moderate growth of money and credit over the period to come. 

Now literally it seems to me that we would stay with 
alternative B here because we have had some shortfalls in monetary 
growth rates in October and some are projected--perhaps [they will 
occur], perhaps not--for November. Remember, all we are doing is 
talking about the path of our provision [of reserves], not what will 
actually develop in monetary growth. But I dislike that a little 
because it seems to me that it implies providing too many reserves in 
December. I think we have to have a strategy for making up shortfalls 
and overshoots, and we haven’t really quite developed one yet. 
Although we have had a shortfall, I don’t like the idea of running too 
strongly in December for fear that it will extend over into the early 
part of next year. So my view is that we ought to try to make up a 
little, but not the full amount, of the shortfall. I think that puts 
me between alternative B and alternative C. The path I would propose 
for the Desk and Steve to work on is 5 percent for the 2-month period 
in M1 and 8-1/2 percent in M2; and I don’t think M3 has any great 
significance in path setting in that time frame. To be fair, it also 
requires the setting of an initial borrowing level and my view of the 
matter is that we should stay with $1-112 billion. I was thinking 
that perhaps it ought to be a little higher, but then I was reminded 
that the reason the borrowing is [currently] above $1-1/2 billion is 
that we’ve had a few misses so to be absolutely even-handed we perhaps 
should have the $1-1/2 billion initial assumption. 

On the funds rate range, I certainly wouldn’t want to narrow 
it. I agree with Larry Roos. We have announced to the world that 



11/20/79 -33 -  

we’ve changed the way we do things. And to appear to be constraining 
[the funds rate1 again or to seem to be moving toward a constraint is 
unnecessary and hardly makes worthwhile the anguish that the market 
has gone through in adjusting to our announcement of the change in 
policy. Now, if we open it up a little, I really don’t care. I think 
for this particular period I would leave the range at 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 
percent; we‘re just about in the middle of that right now and I 
believe there probably won’t be any need to raise it on the top end in 
the period to come. We can open it up later by reducing the lower end 
if in fact the performance of the monetary aggregates comes in below 
our expectations. I guess that’s it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. 

M R .  WINN. To start I’d like to commend Steve and Peter 
again for their performance yesterday. I hope that we can have the 
second verse of modulations on the theme, whether we meet in December 
or January, with the same group. I thought it was an extremely 
productive meeting. As I indicated earlier, I am still concerned 
about the shock impact versus the economic impact. 

First, in the mortgage market I think there will probably 
be more funds available; people are being sold on the idea of paying 
the present prices because these mortgages can be refinanced. Unlike 
our long-term Treasuries, which have call protection, the possibility 
of paying a high price temporarily or at least the prospect of [the 
house] being sold may lead to somewhat more mortgage money being 
advanced than we contemplate at the moment. 

If I were to guess on the outlook for next year--and we have 
not talked about fiscal policy and what that may mean--I’d say the 
prospect of our forecast, as good as it may be, [materializing] is not 
a very high one. I don‘t know whether changes will occur early in the 
year or late in the year but I suspect we will see big deviations as 
economic conditions unfold. 

Second, I agree with Bob Black that the Iranian situation, 
the Cambodian situation, and others portend shocks that are outside 
the energy area but could be quite significant as we look down the 
road. So I’m really uncertain as to what the outlook may be. Another 
shock we face is the fact that we are going to change the [definitions 
of the] aggregates and that‘s going to introduce another uncertainty 
into the picture. In view of that, I would be inclined to go with 
alternative C on the aggregates measures because of the phase-in or 
transitional stage. I’d stay with the present federal funds range, as 
in alternative B, and keep the $1-1/2 billion in borrowing. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN. Chuck Partee has given the precise 
description that I was prepared to propose, though the route by which 
we arrived at that might be a little different. I start with the 
comment that you made, Mr. Chairman, about your sophisticated and 
unsophisticated audiences, which I think is very much to the point. 
We have many non-economic factors that are going to be at work here 
for some time. That’s the real world and I think we have to recognize 
that. I believe the recession is going to be at least as severe as 
the staff has projected and possibly worse than that. And I think the 



11/20/79 -34- 

Fed is going to come under a great deal of pressure as we move through 
the first half of next year. I believe we are going to be in a good 
deal of difficulty with our policy. Given that I think right now we 
should avoid making the recession worse than it's likely to be, I 
think primarily we should [aim to1 meet the targets that we have 
specified. We do have a credibility situation that in my view takes 
first priority. I'm not sure "B" will assure that in the short run, 
partly because of M2. On the other hand, I am concerned that "B" may 
produce a decline in interest rates too soon. "C" is more restrictive 
than I would like to see so this leads me to somewhere between "B" and 
"C," which is where Chuck comes out. I would leave the funds range 
where it is and continue to assume the $1-1/2 billion of borrowing. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we too have considerable 
appreciation for the staff projections but I guess we would assign a 
higher priority for some [possibility] of a tax cut next year than the 
Greenbook seems to suggest. Also, the South and the Sun Belt are 
frequently characterized as areas that will not suffer [in a 
recession] to the same degree as the rest of the country. But I 
happen to have a slightly different view. I think anything occurring 
in the rest of the country is going to happen there. And the same 
[logic] flows to the fact that real price movements and inflationary 
expectations are so deeply entrenched at the moment that I think we 
simply must do something to try to dislodge that. Added to that is 
the significant concern and influence of the foreign exchange markets; 
the unsettled [conditions1 there at the moment are an added dimension 
that I think requires [concern] on our part. We recognize, too, that 
there's almost a belief that we will relax [our policy] too early. 
And that leads me to feel that the realities of our existence suggest 
that a continuation of our present policy may be easier now than 
possibly in 1980 when unemployment or other outside pressures are 
being brought to bear, even if inflation continues unacceptably high. 

So reading these numbers slightly differently from some of 
the others, 1 feel that alternative C is pretty close to where we are 
at the moment. I'd be happy to see that continue, even the 11-1/2 to 
15-1/2 percent [federal funds range]. And I'd prefer to see the 
borrowings more in the $1.8 billion [areal where I believe they are at 
the moment. So I prefer "C" with those [specifications] I'd add. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz. 

MR. SCHULTZ. I think the only economic law I believe in at 
this point in time is Murphy's Law. I don't know how human beings are 
going to behave in this particular period, so I'm torn. It seems to 
me that autos and housing are very weak and the rest of the economy 
continues to hang up there. I have a feeling that at some point 
that's going to change. Consumer attitudes are going to change and 
things are going to get pretty weak rather quickly; and I would like 
to be responsive when that occurs. On the other hand, it seems to me 
that we have some real dangers from oil and other exogenous shocks 
over the near term. I wonder what shape we'd be in if we hadn't taken 
the steps we took on October 6 ,  in view of what is happening in Iran. 
It seems to me that we'd be in pretty bad shape. So my feeling is 
that we have to continue to hold on to this [policy] a while longer 



11/20/79 -35- 

and that puts me somewhere in between "B" and "C." I feel that 
Governor Partee's approach is a very reasonable one. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've disappointed me, Governor. If you 
had come out for "B." we'd have among the Committee members an exact 
split of 5 "Bs," 5 "Cs," and one in between "B" and "C." 

SPEAKER(?). How about that! 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Noncomittee members are irresponsible! 
At one point in looking at this I didn't think there was much 
difference between these alternatives. But I think Governor Partee 
and others are right that there probably is a real difference when you 
compress this into a narrow period of time. Obviously the consensus, 
whether it's the whole group or the voting members with some 
exceptions, is a weak "B" or a strong "C." 

MR. MAYO. The other way around--a strong "B" or a weak "C." 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends on how you define "strong." 
If you would prefer, it's a strong " B "  or a weak "C." There is a 
question of how to phrase this and reach a maximum consensus here. I 
might say in a general way that it would scare me if the federal funds 
rate went up toward the 15 percent area again, considering all that is 
happening. I don't detect any strong "sentiment," shall I say, to 
lower that upper limit. But I don't like it because I do think it 
would be very disturbing in terms of psychology in the markets. And 
our chances of getting long-term rates down in an orderly way I think 
would be damaged. 

MR. WILLES. Why is that, M r .  Chairman? Why would that 
scare you if in the short run [the funds rate] went up? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKFR. Because I think it would lock in these 
long-term rates and raise great concern about credit availability in 
the short run. 

MR. MAYO. Paul, that doesn't bother me for a change. It 
seems to me that we've demonstrated that we're willing to let that 
rate go up to 15 percent and if it does a second time--if it should 
happen--I think less attention would be paid to it. 

MR. WALLICH. I think that's very likely. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right if we weren't in a 
phase of declining economic activity. Then we could get a little 
excitement in this city of ours! 

MR. PARTEE. We've got this concept of a crunch in 
mortgages, which would probably be exacerbated. 

M R .  COLDWELL. HOW would you feel about an 11 percent rate? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the down side? 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. 



11/20/79 - 3 6 -  

C H A I W  VOLCKER. well, I do think we have this problem 
internationally so I'm not all that gung ho on the down side either. 

MR. WILLES. It sounds like you're talking about an interest 
rate target. 

MR. MAYO. I object. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You object to what? 

MR. MAYO. I feel the same way as Mark does, that the 
Chairman is getting too close to [targeting] interest rates. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, I agreed with your whole lecture, 
Mr. Mayo, that we didn't have a revolution but an evolution. 

MR. MAYO. That's right. 

MR. PARTEE. He also said a giant step, I believe. 

MR. MORRIS. But he didn't say whether it was forward or 
backward ! 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That remains to be seen, I think. In any 
event, I believe there is something to be said for not changing these 
[specifications] unless there's a reason for changing them, just in 
terms of consistency with what we did earlier. That's a point that 
several people have made. And I think literally what we did earlier 
is that we said what is the equivalent of "B" but that we would not be 
very disturbed if it came in somewhat below that. So we would not 
ease [if the aggregates were coming in] between "B" and "C." in that 
sense. I think that's where the center of gravity is here. It's just 
a question of how to express it. From the standpoint of consistency 
in posture for a very brief period, I put to you a proposition that we 
stick with the "B" specifications but with the clear understanding 
that we had last time--namely, that if [the aggregates] come in a 
little low because that's the way the cards fall in the next few 
weeks, we don't have to exert ourselves too greatly to make it all up 
in December, although we'd obviously be [leaning] in that direction. 
In that case we would presumably have a decline in the federal funds 
rate of some significance. 

On the other hand, if November [growth] were high, higher 
than is currently being projected, it would be a straightforward "B" 
type of approach I would think. And just what that means for interest 
rates may be a little less clear but probably still the chances are 
for a small decline if the overall projection is correct. I guess "B" 
and "C" should be split from the standpoint of M1 and M2, too. M2 is 
pretty much on target; it's just slightly high in terms of the yearly 
target. For M1 it looks as if we're going to make the yearly target 
all right. 

Let me just try that out on you. Mainly in the interest of 
not appearing to fiddle around at this stage, the specifications would 
be those of "B," as we had before. But if [monetary growth] comes in 
lower than "B" and between "B" and "C, that's not a source of 
concern. A s  for the initial borrowing, we've had suggestions running 
from $1.5 billion to $1.8 billion. Going along with "C," I'd be 



11/20/79 -31-  

inclined to put it somewhere in between, at $1.6 or $1.7 billion to 
start with. I think that expresses a bit that bias toward coming in 
between " B 'I and " C  . And let's leave the federal funds range where it 
is, if that's the consensus. I don't think we're going to hit either 
end of that range. The lower end, I think, would probably require a 
decline in the discount rate, so that's a separate decision. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I did not attempt to specify 
[particulars] because I thought we were going around a second time, 
but where you come out is not far from where I would suggest. I'd 
split this borrowing [range] at $1.7 billion. However, if I heard you 
right, you're taking the monetary growth rates of "B," and I would 
much prefer the growth rates that Governor Partee suggested of 5 
percent and 8-1/2 percent [for November-December]. I believe that's 
what you said, Chuck. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do that. I think that's 
expressing very much the sense of what I am saying, too. But your 
proposal has what I would see as a disadvantage--I don't know whether 
it's a major disadvantage--of having to write a policy record that 
says six weeks after we made the decision [on October 61 we're now 
fine-tuning it for another six weeks. It seems to me, to avoid a 
sense of fine-tuning over a six-week period, we'd be better off 
expressing it the way I expressed it. But the substantive difference, 
obviously, is close to negligible. 

MS. TEETERS. What will be published [in the policy record 
for October 61 is just the 4-1/2 percent for M1 in the fourth quarter, 
Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. All right. 

MS. TEETERS. And I think the language to be released this 
week is 4-1/2 percent [but that] somewhat less than that [would be 
acceptable]. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, if we take alternative B, it's 5-1/2 
percent on M1. 

MR. PARTEE. For the two months 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the two months. But I think the 
record would say that we're confirming what we did last time. 

MR. COLDWELL. But that's exactly part of my problem 
because--if I heard Steve right--if we confirm that, we've got to hit 
roughly 10 percent [for Ml] in December on the basis of his present 
projections . 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If November comes in as low as he's 
talking about. 

M R .  AXILROD. If November is close to zero. If it comes out 
at 3 or 4 percent, it's 6 or 7 percent [for December]. It's that sort 
of thing. 

MR. PARTEE. If I might just tag on, Phil, I think I'd also 
like to extend the projection into January. 



11/20/79 - 3 8 -  

M R .  COLDWELL. I would, too. 

MR. PARTEE. That was sort of my notion of going in between 
8uBu and muC#G and then saying we'd continue that for January until we 
have a meeting and can review it again. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well I think the difference here is, as I 
say, substantively a nuance. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Well, You [may] want to call a meeting of the 
Committee if the aggregates did come in at that high a level, but I 
think a 10 percent rate of growth in M1 in December would be 
unacceptable. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am saying is that if November 
comes in as low as we're now estimating, we probably wouldn't hit the 
10 percent in December. I'm not saying we can't hit it because we 
know we get these things. 

M R .  MAYO. We provide reserves. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Well, we would provide the reserves for 10 
percent and that presumably would force the federal funds rate down 
sharply. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we'd provide [the reserves] 
for 10 percent, as I see it. I'd say we'd come in at 5-1/2 percent or 
lower. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, all right. I think maybe you want to say 
that it's 5-1/2 to 4-l/2 percent, you know. That's one way of doing 
it. But it is a path that we're setting here, or telling the staff to 
set, regardless of where the money supply actually comes out. This is 
the rate at which reserves would be provided, as I understand it. Am 
I right about that? 

MR. AXILROD. That's right. Whatever numbers che Committee 
picks, it's a path; it's difficult to work with a range in this kind 
of thing. 

MS. TEETERS. Steve, what would be the annualized rate of 
growth on, say, alternative "B"  or "C" from October through January? 

MR. AXILROD. For "B" it's 5-1/2 percent essentially. 

MS. TEETERS. And for "C?" 

MR. AXILROD. For " C "  it's 5 percent. And it's 5 . 9  percent 
for "A." 

MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to avoid the prospect of 
needing a 10 percent rate of growth and having to force in reserves in 
December to achieve that. 

SEVERAL. I do, too. 

MR. WALLICH. I think December would be much too early for a 
decline in interest rates in line with trying to say that this should 



11/20/79 -39- 

go hand in hand with [what is happening with] the economy and with 
inflation. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I hate to suggest the 
possibility of moving these numbers and set forth another option. But 
one way to meet your point and the point other members of the 
Committee are expressing is to leave M1 at alternative B as you have-- 
have no change there--but to lower the [associated] M2 because that's 
clearly higher than the Committee intended. Then in constructing the 
reserve path there would be somewhat less reserves. And if it does 
turn out that M2 tends to grow higher than we allowed in there, it 
would put a little downward restraint on M1. That is, the policy 
record would have the M1 [range] unchanged, the M2 essentially 
unchanged, and our reserve path total will be a little lower than what 
is shown here for alternative B. 

MR. WALLICH. But the non-M1 component of M2 doesn't absorb 
a very large amount of reserves, so the impact would be slight. 

M R .  AXILROD. Yes, but for whatever it absorbs if M2 grows 
at a higher rate, there will be less for M1. So it would go in the 
direction of reducing MI below 5-1/2 percent in practice if, in fact, 
M2 was growing as strongly as projected. 

MR. PARTEE. What did we specify for M2 back in October? 

MR. ALTMANN. 7-1/2 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. It was 7-1/2 and we now have 8-3/4 percent? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, we can't really get 7-1/2 percent. In 
alternative C, M2 growth, as you can see, is 8-1/4 percent over the 
two months. [Adopting] "C" would get [M2 growth] down to 8-1/4 
percent. If that were substituted, that might reduce the reserve 
growth a bit. 

MR. COLDWELL. I would much prefer to specify this out 
rather than to adopt something that then is going to be interpreted 
midstream because none of us really knows what the projection is going 
to be or how [growth] is going to turn out. So I would prefer that we 
use 5 percent and 8-1/2 percent with a $1.7 billion borrowing 
assumption and hold the fed funds range. 

MR. MAYO. I would support that, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. PARTEE. How does the $1.7 billion compare? How would 
you interpret that 1.7, Steve? Would you interpret that as a neutral 
initial borrowing assumption or is it a little restrictive, or what? 

MR. AXILROD. The way borrowings have been running very 
recently, that is about [consistent with] where the present federal 
funds rate is, really. It's in some sense neutral in that it's 
starting out about where we are. 

MS. TEETERS. But suppose November doesn't come in as low as 
we think it's going to. 

NR. PARTEE. Well, we don't know 



11/20/79 -40- 

MS. TEETERS. I’d rather do it Steve’s way and lower the M 2  
target--to have some flexibility for the numbers as they come in--and 
leave the target for M1 where it was on a quarterly basis. 

MR. MAYO. We basically have that flexibility, though, 
either way we do it. 

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but there‘s an awful big advantage in 
being able to say we looked at it--that we‘re part way down the road 
and we’re not going to change our objective at this point. I think 
there’s a lot of just good public relations in that. 

MR. COLDWELL. Then we ought to stay at 4-l/2 and 7-1/2 
percent instead of going to 5 and 8-1/2 percent. 

MS. TEETERS. I’m talking about just releasing quarterly 
[targets] and that’s all. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where were we before on the M2 rate for 
the quarterly period from September to December? 

MR. AXILROD. The Committee had specified 7.6 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 7.6 and it‘s way up to 8-3/4. 

MR. AXILROD. We are at 7.6 percent to date and our 
projection is that the growth in time deposits will be high relative 
to M1, so we raised it. But of course M2 growth may not come in that 
high. It has been running high relative to M1 as compared with 
expectations, so we continued [that pattern for November-December]. 

MR. WILLES. That‘s because of large CDs. 

MR. AXILROD. Ye5 

MR. BALLES. May I ask you a question, Steve? You are 
still, I assume, giving equal weight to M1 and MZ? 

MR. AXILROD. No. 

MR. BALLES. That disappeared? 

MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. The Desk is looking at the reserve 
path. 

MR.  STERNLIGHT. We’ve got reserves that are generated by 
deposits in the aggregate and [we look at] other factors that generate 
reserves. 

MR. AXILROD. If M2 is running slow, it will release some 
reserves to support M1 and vice versa. But they‘re not going to be 
[weighted] equally because of the differences in reserve 
[requirements] . 

MR. BLACK. I don’t think that’s responsive to John’s 
question, really. 



11/20/79 -41- 

MR. BALLES. What I was trying to get at is what you would 
plan on doing if M1 came in below the 4-1/2 percent we targeted on and 
M2 came in higher than the 7-1/2 percent. How would you balance those 
out in trying to construct your reserve path? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. We'd be guided by how reserves are coming 
out in relation to path, president Balles. 

MR. PARTEE. You sort of weight it in relation to the 
average reserves, as I would see it. That is, the components of M2 
have less reserve requirements so they don't get equal weight any 
more. 

MR. TIMLEN. But you start with the estimate of required 
reserves for M1 and M2. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, President Balles, when M2 was coming in 
about on track, I don't believe that the staff felt that it had to 
make a special effort to push up M1 because the Committee had decided 
that the aggregates [could grow at the target rate] or a little lower. 
Similarly, if M1 were coming in on track and M2 were running very 
high, given the stress that we interpreted the Committee to be putting 
on M1, it would have been a question as to whether we would want to 
adjust the reserve path down for something like that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Simply refresh my memory. I thought M2 
was coming in more or less on track. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then why is your projection higher than 
the track we estimated last time? 

MR. AXILROD. Because M1 is coming below. It's the 
relationship that seems to have changed. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER, M1 is coming in below but M2 is coming in 
on track. But your current projection for the quarter now is above 
the track. 

MR. AXILROD. Because we're pushing M1 up. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because you're pushing M1 up. 

MR. AXILROD. ~ 2 ,  therefore, would be running even higher. 
That's the-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 is only going to go off track in 
the second half of the quarter. 

MR. COLDWELL. Because M1 is going to be pushed up 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, as I say, banks may not get all that 
[projected increase] in time deposits. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I really think we are talking about 
narrow differences at this point. We just have to reach a consensus 
on how we phrase this. In listening to all the rest of you, there's a 



11/20/79 -42- 

slight predilection for my way of phrasing it. I'd be perfectly happy 
to phrase it the other way if that's the way people want to do it. I 
think it amounts to-- 

MR. PARTEE. Why don't you take a couple of tests on 
expressions of preferences. I think it would be very desirable, if we 
could, to have a large number of people voting for whatever [the 
decision] is. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I understand it, we have basically two 
[alternatives] on the table. And we have the Axilrod alternative, 
too, so we have three options on the table. We have one that is a 
straight compromise between "B" and "C," and $1.7 billion on initial 
borrowings. That's one way of doing it. Another way of doing it is 
to specify "B" with the understanding that we're not unhappy if it 
turns out to be "C," if November monetary growth is as low as 
projected. 

MR. TIMLEN. Does either give you a better assurance as to 
what Ml will do in December? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there's equally little assurance 
in either case. And the third alternative is staying with "B" on M1 
but lowering M2 to something like "C." That's a different compromise 
between "B" and " C .  I' 

MR. PARTEE. For path purposes. 

M R .  MAYO. But Steve's point could be accomplished, couldn't 
it, by weighting the average of "B" and "C" on M2 toward "C?" Just 
have it 8-1/2 percent, say. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's not make any more-- 

M R .  MAYO. I'm trying to simplify it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One is a straight compromise right down 
the line between "B" and " C .  

MR. MAYO. What do you mean? Is it 8-5/8 percent for M2? 

MR. COLDWELL. It's 5, 8-l/2 and [borrowing of $1.7 billion] 
and the same fed funds range. 

M R .  MAYO. 8-1/2. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8 - 5 / 8 ,  I suppose, is a straight 
compromise. 

MR. MAYO. My whole point on all of this is that 8-l/2 
percent works in the direction of Steve's suggestion. Why don't we 
make it 5 percent, 8-l/2 percent, and 1 - 1 / 2 .  

MR. COLDWELL. That's what we have. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 8-1/2 and 7-1/4 percent, I suppose. 

M R .  PARTEE. M3 is not-- 



11/20/79 -43- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And $1.7 billion on borrowing. 

MR. COLDWELL. And the fed funds range the way it is. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of these leave the fed funds range 
where it is. The alternative is alternative B with the understanding 
that [the specifications in "B"] in some sense are the maximum, within 
the limits that we can maneuver these things anyway. If November 
comes in weak, we'd probably be satisfied with "C." And we'd also 
start out with a $1.7 billion initial borrowing assumption. Let's 
just take those two at the moment. 

MS. TEETERS. I don't think Steve's alternative is well 
specified. It would be 5-1/2 percent for M1 and what would M2 be? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 I think would be 8-1/4 percent. 
That's a straight compromise. 

MR. PARTEE. No, it would be less than that, I think. It 
would be an impossible construction. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, he's not taking it literally to get 
it within the target, I take it. I'm just compromising between "B" 
and "C." I suppose one could say technically--if the staff's estimate 
is any good--that that is the most awkward one. It's not going to 
happen. But their estimate may be no good, so-- 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I could take the second. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have alternatives 1, 2, and 3. The 
borrowing level is the same in all of these for simplicity. So all 
we're talking about is these other numbers. One is an arithmetic 
compromise between "B" and "C, half way between "B" and "C" straight 
out. The other is a more flexible interpretation between "B" and "C" 
and would depend in practice presumably on what happens in November, 
which we can't control any more. 

M R .  WALLICH. That would probably protect better against 
unexpected drops in the funds rate because we can go all the way to 
the "C" specifications. 

MR. COLDWELL. Not necessarily. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes in that direction, certainly. It 
might depend, I think, on how low November came in. 

M R .  COLDWELL. And how rapidly we recognize it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then we have this--instead of saying 
bastardized version, I'll say "hybrid"--which is 5-1/2 percent for M1 
and 8-1/4 percent for M2. I myself am not sure that M2 isn't going to 
fall off. My instinct is that it may fall off and [the 7-1/21 may 
turn out to be consistent [with what we have for Ml]. Now the only 
trouble with voting on 3 alternatives is that you can't make a second 
choice, apparently. But let's see whether there is an overwhelming 
consensus for one of these. The first one, the arithmetic compromise. 
Just members, indicate if that is your preference. Eight. 



11/20/79 -44-  

MR. ROOS. You're only asking Committee members? 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The next alternative is two. Four with 
myself. And the other one is the Axilrod version, which I guess is 
not [anyone's first choice.] Well, it looks like it's 8 to 4 [in 
favor of the first one]. 

MR. PARTEE. Do you want a "can live with" indication? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I suppose the next question is can 
everybody live with one, with its arithmetic purity. IUnintelligiblel 
but nonetheless pure. Everybody can live with that? 

MR. WALLICH. Well, would you be willing to raise [the 
initial borrowing assumption]? This gives us a little more 
opportunity for fine-tuning and sharing because we've got the 
borrowing. Would you be willing to raise that a little? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you voted for it in the first 
place? 

MR. WALLICH. I wanted two. Yes, if you made [borrowing] 
$1.8 billion. 

M R .  PARTEE. But that's tougher. The choices were between 
,VB" or "C ~ I! You're trying to make it tougher and move it toward "C." 

MR. WALLICH. Yes, that's what I'm trying to do. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You people all realize that if you vote 
for this compromise, this straight arithmetic compromise, and November 
really comes in low, we're going to be much easier in December than in 
the other alternatives. 

MS. TEETERS. I think that might be appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would balance-- 

MR. MAYO. That's why we can live with it. 

M R .  WALLICH. That's what I don't like. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, have we got a consensus for the 
arithmetic purity? 

MR. mY0. Sure, let's vote. 

MR. BLACK. If I understand what it is. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's halfway between " B "  and "C." It 
couldn't be simpler. 

M R .  RICE. Mr. Chairman, how does this look when it's 
written up? Does it look like-- 

MR. BLACK. Better than it sounds. 



11120179 -45 

MR. RICE. Will it look as if we've departed [from our 
original decision1 in any meaningful way? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well. I would suggest that we write it up 
so that it doesn't. It depends upon how one interprets what we said 
before. It's slightly tighter in some sense, if you interpret it 
literally [compared with] the number that we gave before. But if you 
put it in the context that we said we weren't going to be unhappy if 
growth came in a little below, we're accepting that [lower growth] as 
we said we would accept it. 

MR. PARTEE. Do we just write it up as November, December, 
and January and then it would be 5 or 4-112-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to assume for the 
moment--we'll decide about the meeting date in a few minutes--that if 
we decide that the next meeting will be in January, obviously we carry 
this forward into January. That's the implication; it is until the 
next meeting. 

MR. AXILROD. I would assume, Mr. Chairman, that this is 
roughly the sentiment that the Committee decided before--that it has 
got a hair less M1, and a hair more M2. This to me is essentially 
what it-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what we're talking about is [the 
period] until the next meeting. 

MR. COLDWELL. Or unless things fall out of bed and you call 
a special meeting. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, we can always have a meeting 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, let's vote. We are voting for a 
straight arithmetic average between "B" and "C. 'I 

MR. BALLES. This is for November-December? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Until the next meeting, whenever that 
meeting shall be. 

MR. TIMLEN. But that would be no later than January. 

MR. MAYO. We're not going to do it for February and March. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the normal course of events I think 
that's expected. We will decide upon the meeting date in a moment. 
S O ,  it's until the next meeting. 

MR. ALTMANN. 
Chairman Volcker 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Rice 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 



11/20/79 -46 -  

Governor Schultz Yes 
Governor Teeters Yes 
First Vice President Timlen Yes 
Governor Wallich Yes 

Unanimous. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have another action to take which, if 
I understand it correctly, involves me delegating to Governor Schultz 
and in his absence Governor Coldwell the authority to answer all 
requests under the Freedom of Information Act, I guess. 

MR. ALTMANN. No, the appeals from any turned down by the 
Secretary. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Appeals [of any requests] turned down by the 
Secretary. 

MR. ALTMANN. Of which we have had none, I think, since 
1 9 7 5 .  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a motion to accept that 
delegation? Without objection, it is so delegated. 

The next meeting is the remaining item of business. What I 
would suggest is that we tentatively keep it on December 18, but that 
you clear your calendars for whatever date seems best among January 8 ,  
9, or 1 0 .  Are there preferences [with regard to those dates]? 

MR. WINN. The 10th is a [board] meeting date. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a Thursday. 

MR. WALLICH. And the 8th is the date I'll be returning from 
the BIS meeting. 

M R .  COLDWELL. You'd be gone on the 7th too 

MR. WALLICH. The 7th and 8th I'll be gone. 

M R .  ROOS. What did you say about December, M r .  Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep that on your calendars, with a 
presumption that the meeting will be held on December 18th. But I 
want the freedom to move it to--let's say the 9th of January if we can 
be that specific, which is Wednesday. The meeting might be moved 
because of various developments of an unforeseen character but 
particularly it may be convenient in terms of the new money supply 
figures and all the rest. If nothing is happening that suggests that 
we need to review things with urgency and if the [new] money supply 
figures will be in better shape and clearer with two weeks more [of 
work on them]--and we will have the advantage of knowing the OPEC 
decision and we won't have that on December 18th--then I'd be inclined 
to change it. But if something comes up [and things are1 not going 
according to Hoyle in some sense, I'd be inclined to keep it [as 
scheduled]. 



11/20/79 -41-  

M R .  ROOS. While we’re all here, could I address a question 
to Bob Black? We have a Conference of Presidents meeting scheduled in 
December. 

MR. BLACK. We could reschedule that. 

M R .  ROOS. Would we if we move [the FOMC meeting date]? 

MR. BLACK. Yes, sure. 

MR. BALLES. I might suggest, Mr. Chairman, the possibility 
of having this meeting on January 8 if that’s agreeable. If we‘re 
going to follow it with the Conference of Presidents, that takes 
another day. Is something wrong with January 8th? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only for Governor Wallich; I think that‘s 
all. 

MR. COLDWELL. How about the 4th? 

MR. PARTEE. Not the 4th; I won’t be here. 

M R .  WILLES. Could we not precede [the FOMC meeting] with 
our Conference of Presidents. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I wonder whether you could do it in 
the opposite order, with the Presidents’ conference first. 

MR. BLACK. Yes; we could shift it to January and Ernie 
could preside instead of me. 

M R .  ROOS. So if we did that, it would be the 8th and 9th. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You’d have the Presidents‘ conference 
presumably on the 8th and the FOMC meeting on the 9th instead of vice 
versa. 

MR. WILLES. Your preference at the moment is to have it in 
January. So in terms of our planning we should be thinking more of 
January than December, right? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Again that’s my preference if nothing 
goes wrong, but you know that seldom happens in this business. So I‘m 
not sure what the most likely [date] is. I guess my preference would 
be to move it later because the money supply numbers will be in better 
shape and clearly we‘d have the OPEC business behind us. But if 
things get disturbed, my preference would be the other way around. 

MR. WILLES. It would just be easier in planning if we could 
fix on one or the other as the dominant one. I’m happy to go to 
January. I think that makes a lot of sense, but I would prefer to fix 
on one date rather than two. 

MR. PARTEE. I think that’s true. Why don’t you turn it 
around? 



11/20/79 -48-  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let’s state it the other way 
around. Let‘s have a presumption that we will have it on January 9, 
but keep the other date open just in case things go wrong. 

M R .  MAYO. Sold. 

M R .  BLACK. Let me ask the subcommittee chairmen to get 
their reports in as if it were going to be in December. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That means they’ll be on time for the 9th 
anyway! All right, let’s presume it’s on January 9th, but keep 
December 18th open in case we’re hitting the federal funds [limit] or 
something is going on internationally or whatever. 

M R .  BALLES. Does that assume, Mr. Chairman, that we’ll 
still meet on February 5 ?  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. On February 5 we’ll still have to 
make the final decision on the targets. So I would expect to have a 
preliminary discussion of them on whatever date we meet before then. 
It won‘t be until February 5 that we will know the budget and some 
other things anyway, but we are going to have a preliminary discussion 
whenever we meet next. And that preliminary discussion will have some 
substance because presumably it might affect what we do in the short 
run. Do we have a motion for adjournment? 

MR. COLDWELL. So moved. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are adjourned. 

END OF MEETING 


	791120meeting
	791120staffstatements1
	791120staffstatements2



