









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

July 11, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

Staff Statements AuDended to the Transcriut 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 
M r .  Zeisel, Associate Economist 
Mr. Truman, Associate Economist 



X e e t i n g  of F e d e r a l  Open Market  C o m m i t t e e  

J u l y  1 1 ,  1979 

A m e e t i n g  of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee was 

h e l d  i n  t h e  off ic .es  of  t h e  Board of Governor s  o f  t h e  F e d e r a l  

Rese rve  System i n  Washington ,  D .  C . ,  on  Wednesday, J u l y  11, 1979,  

b e g i n n i n g  a t  9100 a . m  

PRESENT: Mr. Miller,  Chairman 
Mr. V o l c k e r ,  Vice Chairman 
Mr. B a l l e s  
blr. Black  
X r .  Coldivel l  
M r .  K i m b r e l  
M r .  Uago 
Mr. P a r t e e  
Mr. Rice 
E!rs. Teeters  
Mr. W a l l i c h  

Hessrs. Gi;ffey,  Xorr i s  , Rocs, and Kinn ~ A l t e r n a t e  
Iv:imSers of t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Csmii t tee  

Messrs. Bazghnar,, E a s t b u r n ,  acd %il:es? Fresic!ents 
of  t h t  F e d z r a i  R e s e r v e  Banks of C a l l a s ,  
Fhiladslphia, a G d  M i n n e z 2 o l i s ,  r e s > & c t i v e l g  

M r .  Al tmann,  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  B e r n a r d ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
Idr. P e t e r s e n ,  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
P I r .  Ol tman,  Deputy G e n e r a l  Counse l  
hlr. Mannion, A s s i s t a n t  G e n e r a l  Counsel  
Mr . A x i l r o d ,  Economist  

Messrs. B r a n d t ,  E t t i n ,  Henry,  K e i r ,  Keran ,  
K i c h l i n e ,  P a r t h e m o s ,  S c h e l d ,  Truman, 
and  Ze i se l ,  Associate Economis ts  

M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Deputy Manager for  Domestic 

Mr. P a r d e e ,  Deputy Manager f o r  F o r e i g n  
O p e r a t i o n s  

O p e r a t i o n s  

Mr. Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board o f  
Governor s  



7/11/79 - 2 -  

Messrs. Ka lchbrenne r  and Siegman,  A s s o c i a t e  
D i r e c t o r s ,  D i v i s i o n s  of R e s e a r c h  and  
S t a t i s t i c s  and  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  F i n a n c e ,  
r e s p e c t i v e l y ,  Board of Governors 

Mr. P r e l l  11, Associate R e s e a r c h  D i v i s i o n  
O f f i c e r ,  D i v i s i o n  o f  R e s e a r c h  and  
S t a t i s t i c s ,  Board of G o v e r n o r s  

Board of  Governor s  

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governor s  

Messrs. Ba lbach ,  Boehne,  J .  D a v i s ,  E i s e n -  

?Is. F a r a r ,  E c o n o m i s t ,  Open Market  S e c r e t a r i a t ,  

Nrs. Deck,  S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open X a r k e t  

menger ,  and  Fousek ,  S e n i o r  Vice P r e s i -  
d e n t s ,  F e d e r a l  R e s e r v e  Banks of  S t .  
L o u i s ,  P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  C i e v e l z n d ,  'doston, 
and N e w  York, r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Meysrs. h r n s ,  D a n f o r t h ,  an.5 T .  P a v i s ,  Vice  
F r e s i d e n t s ,  F e d e r a l  R e s e n e  Bazks of 
D a l l a s ,  M i n n e a p o l i s  I and Kazsas C i t y ,  
r e s n e c t i v e i y  

- 1,' 
System open m a r k e t  t r ansac t ions  and  l e f t  fo l lowing  t h e  v o t e  t o  
adop t  t h e  d o m e s t i c  policy direct ive.  

M r .  P r e l l  entered t h e  m e e t i n g  f o l l o w i n g  t h e  votes  t o  r a t i f y  



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
July 11, 1979 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I 
believe we should start right away because we have a rather difficult 
task ahead this morning--to resolve all the midcourse corrections and 
short-term directives. 

Let me start out by welcoming Emmett Rice to, I think, his 
first FOMC meeting. You'll be the swing vote, you will be happy to 
know. It's nice to have you back in the Federal Reserve fold. I 
believe you spent some years with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
when it was--1 won't say in its prime but--at a high level of 
achievement. We're delighted to have you here. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're glad to contribute some people 
to the Board. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Before we start on the agenda, I have the 
sad duty of having to call to your attention what I consider to be a 
serious and recurring matter. And that is that somehow the tradition 
and what I consider commitment to keep the deliberations of the 
Federal Open Market Committee confidential is being breached each 
month. Yesterday, we had The Wall Street Journal saying that it was 
learned from sources that at our last meeting, in May, two members of 
the Committee called for tightening the credit spigot. The article 
mentions "sources." And this is a different reporter [than last 
time]. And as I've said, my experience is that reporters don't cite 
sources unless they've talked to someone in the organization. This is 
to me a recurrence of what we talked about last time and it is very, 
very disturbing. It's spreading to [discussion of] the attitudes of 
international bankers. Henry, we've just had a report that "sources" 
tell us what the central bankers in the BIS [meetings] talk about and 
how they instruct the United States on monetary policy. I consider 
that inappropriate. I wonder if we should bring that to the attention 
of the Chairman [of the BISI. 

MR. WALLICH. I'd like to see what [the reporter] says here. 
There has been no change in the Basle procedures that [I'm aware of]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, the quote in the newspapers is that 
sources from that meeting were telling us what our monetary policy 
should be and were telling what was discussed in the [BISI meeting. 

MR. WALLICH. That's very disturbing because there's an 
understanding that that doesn't happen. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think we ought to get the clippings and 
perhaps call it to the attention of Chairman Zjlstra and see if we 
can't tighten up those procedures. I just don't think it is 
appropriate to go to the BIS and discuss in confidence our policies 
and have people go outside and start saying confidentially off the 
record--but for publication, just not for [attribution]--this is what 
we discussed. This article says that sources noted what was talked 
about and the United States was urged to do a, b, and c. I just don't 
think that's proper. This is just one; there were other articles in 
other newspapers. 



7/11/19 -2- 

I would again ask members of the FOMC to give their attention 
to this. What is wrong with our system? Why are we getting sources 
quoted in the newspaper? In this case, [the leak] could be from the 
people attending or it could be from people who have seen the 
directive or the draft of the minutes because this is actually an 
accurate statement. But it indicates that people who are reporting to 
[the press] have access to the FOMC meetings or its documents. So 
what do we do? Do we change the way we distribute the drafts [and] 
the directives? Do we have to go through some educational process? 
Do we have to restrict attendance? What do we have to do? I won’t 
ask for your answer now, but I wish you would give this serious 
consideration. This seems to be a trend and if we continue to ignore 
it, I think it will be read in the System as a new policy where 
anybody can go out and give their personal appraisal [of policy 
deliberations and decisions]. A lot of egos will be appealed to by 
the press and we will have an endless problem. 

Well, to turn to the meeting itself, we need first to approve 
the minutes of the actions taken at the last meeting on May 22. I 
think those have been circulated. Are there any corrections or 
additions? If there are none, we will record them as approved and we 
will turn to Scott Pardee for a report on foreign currency operations 
since the meeting of May 22. 

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Scott. Any questions or 
comments? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Could I ask Scott for a judgment? If we had 
used, say, a discount rate increase or a small federal funds rate 
increase in lieu of the market operations, would your guess be that we 
would have had similar results or better results or none at all? 

MR. PARDEE. I think they would have been better. It depends 
on the timing--when [an action was taken] during the course of these 
weeks. That would have helped, but we still would have had to 
intervene. There is a lot of negative sentiment, particularly with 
regard to the energy situation. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Scott, you said in your comments that this 
lays to rest the policy of the Bundesbank. Without debating that 
question, do you have a sense of the Bundesbank position? Would they 
be willing to let the dollar rate go below 180? 

MR. PARDEE. If it gets down there, I think they would. 
Their approach is not to peg the rate at any particular level. AS I 
indicated, we did have 

They have been very forceful in the last week or so and they were 
forceful this morning. But we are living in a world of floating 
exchange rates, and I myself am not sure I would advocate holding it 
at 180 if the pressures mounted that much. 

MR. WALLICH. And 185 on the up side? 



7/11/79 -3-  

MR. PARDEE. Well,-- 

MR. PARTEE. If they want the rate to be [unintelligible] and 
if the fundamentals won't support that, to try to keep them from doing 
that would seem to be a very wasteful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Scott, you mentioned "fundamentals" at the end of 
your report. Isn't the recent expansion of the aggregates, and its 
portending a less than effective determination to deal with inflation, 
very fundamental regardless of energy and these other things? Doesn't 
that come into the minds of these traders? 

MR. PARDEE. It's in the minds of some people. You talk to 
different people, you get different answers. Some people have 
mentioned that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I suppose I should call attention to John 
Balles' memo that was circulated [on] the question of to what degree 
rate differentials affect us. I guess you have all seen that. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. Scott, perhaps you've said all you can say on 
this but let me try [a different question]. What kind of money policy 
do you think would satisfy? 

MR. PARTEE. Satisfy whom? 

MR. EASTBURN. The people who are bearish on the dollar 

MR. PARDEE. Again, it differs with different people. 
Certainly we have plenty of free advice and you can guess what it is. 
These are financial people; they're interested in financial flows. 
And we do have a phenomenon going on in Europe and a ratcheting up of 
interest rates by the central banks and in the markets. It's partly 
related to the EMS in that it's very difficult now for these countries 
to make adjustments in exchange rates within the EMS; and a number of 
countries have raised their discount rates recently simply to protect 
themselves within that context. Now, the interplay of forces between 
the dollar/mark and then the mark and the other currencies leads to 
combined strains. So if the European interest rates are going up, 
then they turn and look at us. Again, I am very chary of talking too 
much about these things because at some stage, we have to turn around 
and tell the market that we're only part of the economy and the rest 
of the economy has to be considered. 

MR. MAYO. Did you answer the question? 

MR. PARDEE. Some people in the market would like higher 
interest rates and they will tell us so, and they'll tell you so. But 
you have to consider the broader picture. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Is there a perception in the market that we're 
headed for a pretty serious recession in this country and that that's 
likely to improve our fundamentals on the trade side? 



7/11/79 -4 -  

MR. PARDEE. Some will admit it. But then again, people I'm 
referring to are more interested in what's going to happen in the next 
15 minutes, the next few days, or next month than over the next 6 
months. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They are looking at their portfolios, not 
at the economy. Well, we need to ratify the transactions since the 
previous meeting. Not only have you heard Scott's report but I 
believe you have been furnished with a copy of a report on these 
transactions. Is there concurrence in the ratification? Any dissent? 
Hearing none, that's approved. 

We probably will discuss international issues more before the 
day is over but let's move on to the domestic open market operations 
and ask for the report since the last meeting from Peter Sternlight. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. Any questions or 
comments? Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Peter, as you've worked through this period 
and the seeming expectational swing of bringing rates down in the 
short area but up in the mortgage area, have you found any kind of 
fundamental thrust in this package? Or is this just sheer reaction on 
day-to-day operations? 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. Well, the downward movement was more than in 
just the short-term area. If anything it seemed to me the mortgage 
area was rather an exception in moving up a little further. We had 
rate declines in the long-term sector as well as in the short-term. I 
think it was more than just a day-to-day phenomenon. There was a 
feeling that the economy is likely to be weakening and that at some 
point the [long] rates are likely to be lower, although I would not 
say that there was an expectation of an imminent easing throughout 
[the yield curve]--just in terms of, say, the fed funds rate. 

happened to have securities to sell at a higher price. 
MR. COLDWELL. It was just a happy coincidence that they 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, some dealers had them, but for the 
most part they were keeping fairly low inventories. 
dealers made any great killing on this rally because they've been so 
cautious right along. Taking the dealers as a group they've held 
rather a lean inventory. They've stocked up when a new issue came 
along but then they've wanted to sell out their holdings quite soon. 
They've been caught too many times recently waiting for that great 
rally and have been disappointed in it. 

I don't think the 

MR. COLDWELL. Is this true of all the dealers? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. No, I was speaking of them as a group. Some 
have done reasonably well, but as a group they have not held large 
inventories at the time when prices rose substantially. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry. 



7/11/79 -5- 

MR. WALLICH. During the period since the last meeting there 
probably have been expectations of an increase in the expected rate of 
inflation. Do you see this expressed in any way in interest rates? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I have not in this recent period. I think 
that has often been a factor, particularly in the longer-term markets; 
but it almost seemed notable for its absence during the past month. 

MR. WALLICH. Would you interpret that as saying that 
interest rates in real terms actually have fallen more than the 
appearance of the nominal change implies? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, that's the implication of the 
arithmetic; yes, I think that would follow. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we also need here to ratify the 
transactions since the last meeting. You've had a report. Are there 
any questions or comments? Are there any dissents from approving 
those transactions? Hearing none, we will record the ratification of 
the domestic transactions since the previous meeting. 

Now we turn to our more delicate issue today and that's the 
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates, the new Humphrey-Hawkins 
bill. It gives us the opportunity to make mid-year corrections and to 
[unintelligible] . 

MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--see 
Appendix. 1 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Before we turn to any comments on long-run 
ranges, we might just pause for a moment to see if there are questions 
about this presentation. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I wonder, Jim, whether your estimates of future 
inflation and wage increases couldn't be considerably low. This, of 
course, has been our experience all along. Here we have 13 percent 
CPI inflation and somehow we seem to assume that that has a minimal, 
maybe 1 percent, effect on compensation. That seems to me to imply a 
very strong effect on wages from rising unemployment and really a very 
tough government fiscal and monetary policy. 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I guess there are several comments to be 
made. One, the record is clear: We have underestimated inflation. 
The record, I think, is also fairly clear that we have tended to run 
high on inflation relative to many forecasts, which says that most 
economic forecasters--not all, but most--have tended to underestimate 
inflation, certainly in the current period. Relative to the 
Administration's forecast for inflation for 1980, we are considerably 
higher; and with regard to other forecasts, I think the staff forecast 
of inflation is also relatively high. The assumptions in the 
forecast, in my view at least, do imply restraint on the part of 
monetary policy and certainly fiscal policy. The full employment 
budget surplus is moving into substantial surplus. It involves 
further tightening if you take that measure or other measures, simply 
in that we have not assumed any fiscal initiative, which has clearly 
accompanied this sort of pattern of activity in the past. S o  we have 
a tight policy here in our view. 



1/11/19 - 6 -  

In addition, I would say that there are important exogenous 
forces, as Jerry Zeisel pointed out, with regard to energy and food. 
At times I think forecasting energy and food prices is like a craps 
game, but at this point in time what we have assumed for OPEC would 
clearly suggest that 1979 is the bad year. Also, our forecast for 
1980 on inflation is much higher than we had shown to the Committee a 
month and a half ago; we have tried to take account of developments 
since then. I personally would feel rather comfortable with this 
forecast as a particular number in terms of not underestimating likely 
developments. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Jim, what weight do you give to monetary induced 
inflation, the part of inflation that is a reflection of monetary 
policy versus food and energy? Let's assume we have a deflator 
increase of 10 percent, just in broad brush. Sometimes I think we 
like to believe that we are prisoners of exogenous factors. What part 
of that 10 percent is a reflection of monetary policy and what part is 
a reflection of energy and food prices? 

M R .  KICHLINE. Well, I don't think I can answer that question 
directly. The way the staff has looked at this is to view monetary 
policy as affecting the markets and economic activity. If we had an 
"easier" monetary policy, as indexed by faster rates of growth of M1, 
it would show up in our thinking in higher rates of expansion in real 
GNP in the short run--assuming we're not at capacity--tighter markets, 
and with some lag, more inflation. Trying to sort out particularly 
how much more inflation in this forecast is difficult. I really 
haven't thought of it in that way. 

MR. ROOS. Well, let me rephrase it, if I may. Our 
economists tell me that if one were going to quantify this, that 
perhaps 70 percent of our inflation is money policy induced, or a 
direct reflection of our monetary policy, that energy at its present 
dimension may be responsible for 1 percentage point of [the deflator] 
and food 1-1/2 to 2 percentage points. That would mean, if that is a 
valid assumption. that we still are in a position to affect this in a 
very real fashion by the decisions we make today. Are these guys way 
off base, do you think? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I know some of those guys-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's perfectly all right to take the fifth! 

MR. KICHLINE. No, that's all right. I think I know some of 
the people from St. Louis in a way that transcends what I might say 
here. All I can say to that is that my view is simply that monetary 
policy has an important role to play. The difficulty in this exercise 
is looking at alternatives within what I would consider to be a 
"reasonable range," given past monetary policy responses. If, for 
example, one option were to reduce the stock of money 10 percent and 
run that way for 3 or 4 years, I would say we'd get tremendous impacts 
on the price front. We'd also have a depression, in my view. So, 
what is missing in this linkage is what happens to the real side and 
what happens to markets. It's that sort of thing that makes it 
difficult for me just to translate M1 numbers into rates of inflation. 
I certainly would not say that I believe money has no influence on 



7/11/79 -7- 

prices. That's clearly not our view. It's really a longer-term 
effect in the way that we look at money affecting activity, which 
works through markets. And it's quite clear to us that if we had 
lower rates of money growth over an extended period of time, we would 
get lower rates of inflation. We'd also have other things happening, 
such as [effects on1 unemployment and real GNP, and I would presume 
other policy responses outside the control of the Fed. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I was going to ask Governor Wallich's 
question on the other side. I note that the total price index 
excluding food and energy shows very little decline as a result of the 
recession. The chart that you have here doesn't show us what happened 
in the '74-'75 [period], but I have the impression that there was more 
reaction in those price indexes in that recession. And when I look at 
corporate profits in the Greenbook I find that they're very well 
maintained rather than dropping rather sharply, as I would have 
expected them to do. So I wonder whether there isn't a possibility 
that in fact you've overstated the price increase. 

MR. KICHLINE. There's always a possibility. I've been 
humbled over the years in performing these sorts of exercises. 

MR. PARTEE. Do you k n o w  what happened in ' 7 5 ?  W a s  there, in 
fact, a decline in the base rate of inflation? 

MR. KICHLINE. Oh yes, very much so. 

MR. PARTEE. Excluding energy and food? 

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. I think the fundamental question though, 
if you want to go back to '73, '74, '75, is what sort of forecast do 
we have overall relative to that period. It's very different. Real 
GNP declines by a very small amount relative to that which occurred in 
' 7 4 - ' 7 5 ;  I think it's about 113 the size. And that I think is very 
important. S o  we don't have sluggish markets in any way comparable to 
the '74-'75 period. I think a second factor is that the performance 
in '74 and early '75 was influenced importantly by large speculative 
demands--the build-up of inventories, the worldwide boom, a run-up of 
raw materials prices, and the big collapse as real final sales 
declined. Then we had a dumping of inventories and more price breaks 
on the down side. We don't perceive basic conditions in the economy 
to be similar to that and hence we wouldn't expect to get the same 
price response from very weak markets. Also, one of the difficulties 
is that in the current environment we have more indexation of wage 
contracts than we had 5 or 6 years ago. In my view, there has been 
much more of an attempt to cope with inflation that would give us 
stronger feedback effects of current rates of inflation on future wage 
rates and that I think is an important adverse factor. That certainly 
has influenced our forecast because for 1980 we believe the price 
performance hinges very importantly on developments this year. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not inclined to raise the 
question of whether the staff have overestimated the rate of price 
increase; I doubt that that's the case. But in looking at the general 



1/11/79 - 8 -  

scenario and listening to you, you have forecast a relatively mild 
recession, as YOU suggested, at least by comparison with the previous 
recession. But it's a very unusual recession, I think, and you can 
confirm this for me. You get practically no change in the government 
deficit and no increase in income coming out of the government in that 
sense. You have very little change in the financial ratios, very 
little improvement in liquidity or debt positions, which leads me to a 
very general question and may [involve your] repeating yourself. What 
keeps the recession so mild? And particularly what gets us out of it 
when the saving rate doesn't change much? It doesn't go up and then 
we don't have the room for it to go down. What are the mechanisms to 
reverse this process once it starts? 

MR. KICHLINE. Could I share the wealth and let Jerry answer 
that question? He presented that part of the forecast. 

MR. ZEISEL. I'm responsible for the recovery! It's true 
that the contraction is a rather sluggish one and our assumption of 
the lack of fiscal initiatives involves less stimulus from government 
activity--other than the automatic stabilizers operating, which are an 
offset in effect. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't even got much of that. 

M R .  ZEISEL. True, we don't get much of that because of the 
inflation effect, but we get some--possibly an $8 billion swing in 
that direction in 1980. But, as I pointed out earlier, we perceive 
this--other than the OPEC effects--as being a rather sluggish slide 
into a softer economy without the kind of major distortions that were 
in place in 1973, preceding that [recession]. And it seems to us that 
under those circumstances, there is the potential for not only a 
moderate decline but the beginnings of recovery as well, in business 
fixed investment for example. We get some help also from the net 
export side, as Ted Truman mentioned earlier. I might point out, 
though, as you are no doubt aware, that the recovery we are talking 
about is about as sluggish as the recession we have predicted. We are 
talking about a fairly protracted period of very little growth; in a 
sense it's what we were projecting a couple of months ago overlaid by 
the effect of the OPEC price increases pushing consumption down and 
bringing the level down to below where we had it before. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I suppose 1'11 get the same answer 
to this question, but it seems to me that the interest rate pattern 
projected is not very believable in the sense that the staff is 
suggesting under alternative B that we could maintain a 6 percent rate 
of growth in M1 with only a very modest decline in the fed funds rate 
to 9-1/2 percent at the low point. If this were to occur, it would be 
the only recession that I can recall, large or small, in which we were 
able to maintain money growth during the recession with very little 
change in the fed funds rate. And I find that a little incredible. 

MR. AXILROD. President Morris, it may or may or not occur as 
projected, of course, but there is an enormous rate of inflation built 
in and an increase in nominal GNP of substantial size even though 
there is a recession. And our evidence thus far, particularly in the 
second quarter, is that the downward shift in money demand that 



7/11/79 -9- 

appeared in the fourth and first quarters doesn't really appear in the 
second quarter to any real extent. If that has abated and we have the 
substantial increase in nominal GNP, even in the face of recession, 
we've got to finance it. So our assumption has been that money will 
be called out, so to speak, by the economy. That may not develop, as 
you point out, but I think it's not an unreasonable assumption given 
the high rate of inflation that's built into these projections. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, I guess where I really differ is in my 
expectation that the recession is going to be much more severe than 
you're projecting. 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in that instance you'd be talking about 
weaker money demand. Many times in the past we've had no growth in 
nominal GNP in the quarters in which real GNP was dropping or was in 
fact negative when we had massive inventory liquidation. And at those 
times money demand fell dramatically. But in this forecast we have 
very different nominal rates of increase, given the price picture that 
we foresee. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Paul Volcker and Frank Morris have already 
anticipated most of my questions, as a matter of fact, but maybe I can 
ask the last part of my final question, Jim. I'm also concerned about 
the possibility of this recession being deeper and longer and more 
severe than both you and my own staff are predicting. Our staff view 
is now pretty close to the one you have. I'll challenge you with the 
same question I asked them: What is there in this current situation 
and outlook that makes it different from the experience we had in 
1973-74--that leads to a fairly mild recession instead of a deep and 
severe one such as we had 5 years ago? In other words, how big are 
the risks? Another way of putting it is: What do you consider to be 
the downside risks in your present forecast? What could go wrong? 

MR. KICHLINE. There are downside risks. In terms of the 
odds we would place on our forecast, I think we would judge it to have 
a 40 to 50 percent probability of coming true. I can see a situation 
where the odds are significant that it might turn out to be better 
than that. I think it is very difficult, for example, to sort out the 
extent to which the second quarter was adversely influenced by 
gasoline lines. And if that fades, we may be talking about underlying 
demands that are stronger than most people would anticipate at this 
time. On the other hand, whenever we get into this situation of weak 
activity we tend to have cumulative effects and it's very difficult to 
judge how far that may run. It could set off adverse expectations, 
which would drive the economy down much deeper. 

I think the 1973-74 [experience] is not closely comparable to 
the current one. Clearly, from that earlier OPEC situation we can 
gain some lessons from looking at what happened at that time. But 
three very important factors [differ]. One would be the collapse of 
the worldwide boom. We have not envisaged a collapse in economic 
activity abroad. That should assist the U.S. economy. The second is 
this speculation and stockpiling--the hoarding of labor, raw 
materials, whatever--that led to the big bubble in inventories and the 
collapse. Our reading of the current data available is that we may 
have a moderate problem of involuntary inventory accumulation, but 



7/11/79 -10- 

it’s limited. Businesses have behaved very differently this time 
around than in that earlier time. And the third factor that to me is 
of a good deal of importance involves developments on the monetary 
policy and the financial side. We have not assumed conditions that 
approximate those in 1914--a crunch. We don’t have widespread 
financial difficulties. And that’s very different in terms of the 
lagged impacts of monetary policy actions over the past year or so and 
what that may portend for later this year and 1980. 

MR. BALLES. Well, thank you. That’s a good answer. I guess 
the one big imponderable I’m still concerned about is the confidence 
factor in the economy. None of us can really make a judgment on that 
but my own hunch is that, if anything, the spreading uncertainty in 
the minds of both consumers and the business community could lead to 
somewhat worse results than we see here, but I can’t prove that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. 1‘11 just close the list. We‘ll go through 
the remaining questions and then turn to Steve. You’ll all get a 
chance, of course. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. Thank you, M r .  Chairman. Jim, implicit in your 
inflation forecast on the table in the last sheet of the handout and, 
in fact, explicitly in your responses to Larry and Chuck, is a belief 
that there is a short-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. 
Can you tell me what data there are in the last decade that make you 
think that such a tradeoff even exists? 

M R .  KICHLINE. There’s very little. I know that most people 
like to believe the short-run Phillips curve is dead. The Board‘s 
model essentially has that construction and it‘s one of the few models 
that has worked very well on both prices and unemployment in the last 
year. If we as a staff had believed it, we would have been right on 
[the mark] in terms of the inflation forecast and also the strength of 
unemployment. It’s a very difficult area. Frankly, I think one has 
to look at information from a variety of sources. I do, in fact, 
believe that there is a tradeoff. At the same time, I believe that 
expectations are very important. And what will happen in 1980 hinges 
very importantly, I think, on inflationary expectations, confidence, 
and market structure. It’s difficult to model those sorts of things. 
So the tradeoff that I think is still there may be waning, frankly. 
But until there’s very strong evidence to the contrary, I would still 
believe that one has to sacrifice some real performance to get much 
improvement in prices using aggregate demand management policy. 

MR. WILLES. Well, taking a different tack than Chuck did: 
If people really believed that the policy response this time were 
going to be different than it has been in the past--that fiscal policy 
would not be tremendously stimulative and monetary policy would not be 
tremendously stimulative--how possible would it be in your mind, then, 
that we could in fact have lower inflation than you predicted without 
substantially higher [unemployment]? 

MR. KICHLINE. Let me just say that I agree that that‘s a 
possible outcome. I really don’t know that I can quantify it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 



7/11/79 -11- 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, maybe I’ll just skip [some of my 
questions in light of] the responses Jim has been giving. The one 
fundamental question I have on my mind was raised by the Board’s staff 
in the [pre-I FOMC briefing yesterday and that is: Do we fund the 
price increases of OPEC? 

MR. KICHLINE. DO YOU fund them? 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. do we provide the financing to meet them? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. [Fund] the nominal level of GNP. 

MR. KICHLINE. The monetary policy assumption that we have 
maintained in this forecast is the same as the one that has been 
running for the last several months. S o ,  with higher prices in effect 
and the same nominal rate of growth of M1, you are implicitly running 
a tighter policy and not permitting a complete validation of OPEC 
price increases. So it’s a maintenance of the same policy despite an 
exogenous change in the price outlook. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, it’s a bit difficult for me to accept 
that on face value, given the rate of change in M1 in the first 
quarter of the year versus the rate of change in M1 now and the 
changes in the OPEC and [other] price structures that have been 
developing over the first half of this year. 

MR. KICHLINE. All I can say is that the assumption built in 
for monetary policy is t.he midpoint of alternative B on average for 
1979-1980. That is, you can run below or you can run over, but for 
QIV ’78 to QIV ‘79 we have assumed 6 percent, allowing for the shift 
between ATS accounts and demand deposits. You‘re right that M1 was 
strong in QII and it was weak in QI; it all hinges on what happens 
between now and the next two quarters to determine whether or not the 
assumption we have will turn out to be correct. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We‘ll find out next year. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. Reverting to the questions asked earlier about 
the shallow saucer that you have and the sluggish recovery, Jim-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Shallow, long saucer. 

MR. EASTBURN. Yes, shallow, long saucer. It has been said 
that the way to lick inflation is to have moderate growth for some 
period of time. 3 to 5 years or something like that. Have you done 
any work or do you have any views as to how long this type of pattern 
would have to be continued to have some impact [in the sense that] 
Mark was talking about? 

MR. KICHLINE. We have run a variety of simulations Using 
different monetary policies, fiscal policies, and other options that 
have extended into 1982. And in most of those, except for policies 
that have expansive monetary and fiscal policies for an extended 
period of time, by the time we got to 1982 we were seeing substantial 
price improvement. I might note that one of the major difficulties--I 
didn’t comment on it this time--is that in 1981 the models would be 
showing much reduced rates of inflation, but there are two important 
outside factors in 1981. In January we have the largest increase 



7/11/19 -12- 

scheduled for payroll taxes and social security of the whole package; 
it’s double the effect of 1979. And in October 1981 is the largest 
slug of domestic decontrol of crude oil to the then-current world 
price. If we [take] those out of 1981, we’re showing in the forecast 
substantial price improvement. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Jim, I have a little problem with your statement 
that one of the reasons the recession may be milder this time, or that 
we won’t have a great problem this time, is that there might not be an 
identity this time of recession abroad and here. I would take some 
issue with the latter statement. Some of the tea leaves tell me--and 
it‘s more than tea leaves, I guess--that we may be forced into a 
situation again with an identity of recession throughout the free 
world, not just here. That would tend to make me a little more 
worried about the shallow saucer projections. Also, although this 
gets into the financial side, I would say that while we don’t have 
REITS this time, there is much more concern about the volume of 
foreign bank loans by American banks at this point and whether we are 
getting too close to the saturation point on handling the recycling of 
the 80 percent increase in OPEC prices. This gives me an additional 
concern that hasn’t been mentioned here yet. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Bob was our clean-up hitter on this 
round of questions. I think it might be appropriate to turn to Steve 
Axilrod to give his comments on longer-run ranges and then we’ll turn 
to the whole Committee. 

M R .  AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we are passing out a table that I 
hope will make my comments clear on this complicated problem facing 
the Committee. The decision before the FOMC on the long-run ranges is 
clearly much more difficult than usual. The impact on the ranges of 
an actual, or impending. recession has to be balanced against a higher 
rate of inflation, with the increased rate above expectations caused 
in large part by exogenous factors such as energy conditions that do 
not respond readily, if at all, to monetary policy. Additionally, the 
demand for money, given GNP, seems no more certain than usual and 
perhaps even less so as it will depend in part on Congressional and 
judicial decisions yet to come that will affect interest-bearing 
transactions accounts. 

[Moreover,] at this meeting, the Committee is asked to look 
further ahead than it ever has before, giving its first public 
indication of ranges for the monetary aggregates more than one year 
ahead. In this case, that means the ranges for 1980 as well as 1979. 
Growth rates of the money aggregates thus far in 1979, as noted in 
paragraph 9 of the Bluebook, are within the ranges adopted in February 
for the year, and near the low ends of the ranges, especially for M2 
and M3. Thus, on the face of it there would not appear to be a 
serious need for the Committee to consider adjustments in the ranges 
for 1979 to allow for any initial mis-specification of them. 

However, there probably has been a mis-specification of the 
current range for M1, as explained in the Bluebook, because the 
retarding effect of ATS accounts on M1 growth appears to have been 
overestimated. Last February we estimated this effect as 3 percentage 
points, which did in fact turn out to be the first-quarter impact. 



7/11/79 -13- 

But growth in ATS accounts has subsequently slowed. 
retarded by only 1-1/2 percentage points in the second quarter from 
this source. And we estimate that the retarding effect for the year 
1979 will average out to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percentage points. This 
technical factor would argue for an upward readjustment in the 
measured M1 range for 1979. We can expect an even smaller retarding 
effect from ATS accounts in 1980, but obviously uncertainties are vast 
because of the clouded legislative and judicial outlook. 

M1 growth was 

With regard to economic factors affecting the aggregates, the 
economy is weaker and this might argue for more stimulation. On the 
other hand, inflation is stronger, which tends to argue for more 
restraint to curb the pace of price increases. But since much of the 
greater-than-expected price increase has been due to a one-time energy 
price shock, there is also an argument for being at least partly 
accommodative by providing somewhat more money during a transition 
period. In any event, the staff expects some acceleration in growth 
of the aggregates in the second half of 1979, given the GNP 
projections, partly because of greater demand relative to income as 
the recent downward shift in money demand abates, and partly because 
of a slight easing in interest rates. 

Taking these various factors into account--and also giving 
weight to the view that the ranges for this year should be narrowed 
because the results for half of the 1979 policy period are already 
known and therefore the outcome for the year as a whole is more 
certain--1 would suggest that the Committee consider the following 
ranges for the monetary aggregates for 1979: 3 to 5-1/2 percent for 
M1; 5-1/2 to 8 percent for M2; and 6-1/2 to 9 percent for M3. These 
proposed ranges are shown in the middle column of the upper panel of 
the table before you. And they're shown in the second, third, and 
fourth lines of the upper panel. The top line, in order to make the 
economic implications clearer, shows the consistent measure of M1 
adjusted to include the amount of deposits that were transferred into 
ATS accounts. As you can see from that line, the proposal for M1 
represents a policy that is no easier after adjustment for ATS 
transfers than does the current range. That is, they're both centered 
on 6 percent, assuming of course that our estimate for the ATS effect 
is correct. For M2 and M3 the proposed ranges are 1/2 point higher on 
the bottom end than the current ones and therefore a little more 
clearly allow for the greater growth of the aggregates that is 
expected by the staff to occur in the second half of this year. 

Turning to ranges for 1980, arguments can be made both for 
lowering and for raising the ranges relative to those for 1979. On 
the one hand, the need to make progress over time in reducing the rate 
of inflation and in breaking inflationary psychology argues for 
adopting slower growth rates in 1980 than in 1979. On the other hand, 
the continuation into next year of exogenous upward price pressures 
related to the energy situation and the need to contain the apparent 
weakening in real economic activity argue for raising the ranges for 
1980 and then lowering them gradually in later years. 

On balance, taking account of these conflicting arguments, 
the following monetary ranges for 1980 might be considered--and 
they're shown in the last column of the upper panel: M1, 3 to 6 
percent; M2, 5 to 8 percent; and M3, 6 to 9 percent. The bottom line 
of that upper panel has a proposal for the bank credit range that is 



7/11/79 -14- 

simply a smooth version of the alternative B/B' projection of the 
Bluebook. The monetary ranges suggested for 1980 are wider than those 
proposed for 1919 because of the greater uncertainties in projecting 
18 months ahead. The ranges also encompass some further technical 
upward adjustment of the measured Ml range to allow for the gradual 
re-emergence of more normal demands for money following the 
introduction of ATS accounts late last year. Finally, these ranges 
retain an upper limit high enough to allow for the probability that 
the aggregates next year may in practice grow somewhat more rapidly 
than this year, given the inflation built into the economy and our 
assumption of some growth in economic activity. 

The bottom panel of the table compares midpoints of these 
proposals with the growth of the aggregates in recent years to provide 
the Committee with some perspective on the ranges. As can be seen, 
the odds are pretty good, given what has already transpired this year, 
that growth of the aggregates in 1979 will slow for the second 
consecutive year--looking at either measured M1 or M1 adjusted to 
include ATS transfers. The growth rate was at something of a recent 
peak in ' 1 7 ,  was lower in '78 and will very likely be lower in 'I9 
[than in] '78. This is true for all of the aggregates shown. Except 
for measured M1, the midpoints of the proposed ranges for 1980 would 
imply a further slowing and thus might have some beneficial 
announcement effect. However, there is some reasonable probability, 
as just noted, that actual growth would be in the upper halves of the 
proposed 1980 ranges. Even so, the proposal for 1980 implies a policy 
of restraint on money growth relative to demands and, therefore, 
rising interest rates [over] the course of the year. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Steve. A statistical question? 
All right. 

MR. COLDWELL. Steve or Jim, do you happen to have the 1973 
and 1974 figures that would [compare with] those in the bottom part of 
this table for Ml and bank credit? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. For '73 and '74? Let's all write these 
numbers down. 

MR. AXILROD. For '73 the rate of growth in Ml was 6.2 
percent and for '74 it was 5.1 percent. Bank credit growth for '73 
and '74 was 15 percent and 10.2 percent. M2 for ' 1 3  was 8.8 percent 
and for '74, 1.7 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. Are these fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter in 
all cases? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. One comment I should have made on the 
supplemental table that Jim called to your attention comparing the 
[forecasts of the] staff and the Administration: I know you realize 
all the figures here are confidential but these are particularly 
sensitive because they will not be released by the Administration 
until Friday. And the Administration would be very upset if any 
[disclosure] of these took place before that time. They are quite 
sensitive, and I just wanted you to know that. 



7/11/79 -15- 

Now, before we break, I would suggest that we try to do a go- 
around on your views. My suggestion is that you give us any thoughts 
you have on the economy if significantly different from the staff‘s. 
We don’t need detail but I’d like to get the flavor [of your 
thinking]. And then [indicate] what policy implications you see and 
also what would be your recommendation for the longer-term ranges--a 
mid-course correction for 1979 or for the 1979 ranges to be 
maintained--and what you see for 1980. I think we will have to take 
each of those up separately later but I’d at least like to get down in 
black and white how each of you sees it. 

As an opening observation, I feel that what has happened 
since earlier this year--the unexpected degree of oil price increases 
by OPEC and others has been quite a blow to our anti-inflation 
efforts. We’ve probably been set back by a year or two in the program 
to wind down inflation. And that makes our problem particularly 
difficult because what was already a need for a multi-year sustained 
effort becomes an even longer effort, and we cannot yet predict what 
policy responses the Administration will make in the energy area or 
otherwise. But whatever they [do], there’s a lag time of policy 
getting implemented into action and it seems to me that we‘re going to 
have a much longer course to go. We are going to be on trial and have 
a test in this country for a longer period of time on whether we have 
the will and the capacity to wind this [inflation] down. I rather 
think that there is a more sober sense of the urgency and the peril 
[involved]--a more sober sense that we‘re all going to have to give up 
something. There is going to have to be some loss of real income in 
the short term if we‘re ever going to get real income going up again 
in the long term. But that remains to be seen. 

My ouiji board tells me, based on what we did at the last few 
meetings, that we probably should be starting with Henry going 
clockwise this time. I think the last time we started with Roger and 
went this way and the last time [we started on] the other side. So we 
will start with Henry and go around this way. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I’m not as well prepared as I should be, 
having just come back last night from Basle. I continue to think that 
we may be underestimating inflation. For the first three months [of 
this year] we didn’t have very much OPEC input into this inflation and 
nevertheless the CPI was going up at 13 percent. Now, that was food 
[prices], which have improved. But we see the food area deteriorating 
again because of Russian import needs and I am fearful that food 
inflation will actually be higher. 

Second, I very much agree with what the Chairman said just 
now. Bringing inflation down under these deteriorating circumstances 
is not just a question of taking more time to do it but it will be 
more costly in terms of real income. And the cost of that real income 
means less growth, higher unemployment. It need not mean more social 
problems from unemployment, if that’s properly compensated, but it 
does mean less output. On the recession, I [agree] with those who 
think there are many reasons to believe it will not be deep; there are 
none of the antecedents we had in ‘73 and ‘14. There are no very 
powerful things to pull us out of it unless we make a mistake stepping 
on the gas very hard, but my concern is more that we should achieve 
some lasting effect on inflation. 



7/11/79 -16- 

Finally, as for accommodation of the exogenously imposed 
inflation, I sense a growing consensus outside this body that we 
should do much less accommodating than we did in 1973-74 when we 
accommodated in terms of money supply, in terms of financing payments, 
and in terms of trying to offset the domestic recessionary effects of 
the oil price increase. Wherever I go I sense that there is less 
willingness this time around to accommodate the OPEC shock monetarily. 

AS far as the aggregates are concerned, I have a very strong 
suspicion that we are dealing here with numbers that don't encompass 
reality. We know about RPs; we know about the Euro-market. I 
understand that the staff is on the track of some new kind of 
overnight deposit device in the Cayman Islands, which if we integrate 
it into M1 would account for a good part of the failure of M1 to grow 
for the first half of the year, although I'm not fully up on the 
latest data on this research. We have other variables such as money 
market funds. We have devices that individuals now can use outside 
money market funds to keep money outside of M1, such as Merrill Lynch- 
type cash accounts. All this suggests to me that the numbers we have 
here are simply too low and that the true money supply--if it could 
only be made to stand up--would be a great deal higher than these 
numbers show. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you have any specifications that you-- 

MR. WALLICH. Well, under those conditions, Mr. Chairman, I 
lean toward keeping the specifications that we have now. They may 
seem very low, given what-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What would you do for 1980 then, Henry? 

MR. WALLICH. I find that a real quandary. I am very 
reluctant, however, to indicate that we are going to raise the rate of 
money growth. We can still [change the 1980 ranges later]; we are not 
casting this in cement. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. NO, we will do another [review] in January. 

MR. WALLICH. But I would be very reluctant, unless convinced 
by the discussion here that we should, to raise the rates of money 
growth. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. So you would keep the same ones we now have 
for '79 and [carry them forward for] ' 8 0 ?  

MR. WALLICH. Yes 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree with much of what 
Henry said. There are a couple of outside points I would like to 
make. Much of the discussion here has been about exogenous factors, 
outside influences. I still think our fundamental policy response is 
responsible for some of this inflation and I wish we had been tighter. 
A policy response now to fund some of the OPEC move I think would be a 
mistake; I'd prefer not to fund as much. In regard to Jim's comment 
about inventory, I think what is going on is an inventory of labor-- 
not the normal [concept of] inventory, but an inventory of people. 



1/11/79 -17- 

The sense I get out of this forecast is almost a sense of 
hopelessness. There's nothing anybody can do. We have a high rate 
of inflation, a rising rate of unemployment, and a low rate of growth. 
And you tell me that you want to hold this for three to five years. I 
don't think that's politically [feasible]. I strongly doubt that this 
country is willing to stand still for five years, much less a year. 
So I guess my answer, Mr. Chairman, is that it may take some more 
difficult medicine than what we have on the horizon right now. 
Whether this body wishes to contribute its share of that castor oil or 
leave that to the political side of life, I don't know. I wish we 
knew what the President will be coming out with in his proposals; I 
think those might have an important bearing. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, you see, he cancelled his speech 
because he wanted to hear what the FOMC would do! Everyone was 
wondering what the reason was. 

MR. COLDWELL. If he wants to play the game that way then I'm 
perfectly willing to step up to the policy [plate] and say that it's 
time for us to quit--not validate these things. My preferences for 
the '79 long-term growth ranges would be 3 to 5 percent on M1 and 5 to 
7 percent on M2. I would hold bank credit down. I think it may slow 
but I don't have any confidence that it is going to slow at all. On 
1980 there is a possibility we could edge [the ranges] down and I 
would prefer to go another step further, perhaps to 2-1/2 to 5 percent 
[on Ml], leaving the possibility of a lower range of growth. I admit 
this is likely to exacerbate some of the recessionary tendencies in 
the economy [but] I'm not yet convinced that we're heading toward the 
doom and gloom that some people are portraying. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, I 
think we're facing a bigger recession than the staff has projected, 
primarily because of the consumer sector. When Jim talked about the 
other sectors that were not as vulnerable, he neglected to suggest 
that we have a major sector that is more vulnerable. And that is the 
consumer sector, where the debt burdens of the consumer are 
substantially higher than they were going into the '74 recession. The 
staff's projections show that the bulk of the consumer adjustment is 
already behind us in the second quarter and that hereafter the 
consumer is going to play a pretty much neutral role in the recession. 
That's where I would differ. I think we are going to see a rising 
saving rate. We are beginning to see it now; we've been very 
surprised to see in the last few weeks an upturn in ordinary savings 
accounts after a long period of steady decline. So I think the move 
toward a higher saving rate has already started. I believe we could 
see the unemployment rate go as high as 9 percent next year rather 
than the 8 percent the staff has projected. In my view that would be 
counterproductive to the long-run anti-inflation fight. If we have 
that big a recession, the hope of keeping some constraint on fiscal 
policy is going to be diminished, inevitably. 
postpone my comments on what we ought to do in the short term. As far 
as the long-term ranges are concerned, I would be happy with Steve's 
proposals. 

I would like to 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve's proposals for both years? 



7/11/79 -18- 

MR. MORRIS. For both years 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, [let me mention] a couple of 
elements on the economy that might be of interest. We are beginning 
now to see a little pickup in drilling activities, after a fairly long 
period of accumulating idle rigs. 

CHAIR” MILLER. Is this for oil or for gas? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. It‘s both, but with gas being the strong end 
of it. And we‘re told by a few firms that they are making plans for a 
further significant step-up in that area, even to the extent that 
firms that normally do not own or control rigs but for the most part 
use leased rigs are anticipating enough shortage of supply of rigs 
about 6 months down the pike that they are now undertaking to acquire 
control so they will be able to get good rigs at that time. The other 
thing I’d mentioned in terms of a local situation is that we are 
seeing indications of very strong retail sales in El Paso and San 
Antonio. And this is attributed to heavy buying by Mexican nationals 
who are coming back into those markets in substantial numbers at the 
present time, after a period when such buying had been fairly low. 
Those are the only two markets on which I have some data. I guess 
similar comments on other markets [unintelligible]. 

As for local labor markets, they are almost in disarray. 
There’s raiding and bidding away [of workers] and job hopping, which 
is distressing. It‘s a hard market to work in. We’ve passed the 50 
percent annual rate of turnover in the Houston area--which is not a 
big increase from where it has been--but [employers] are having 
difficulty staffing. The electronic firms in the area are having 
great difficulties staffing. One of them characterized the market to 
me recently as follows: For electronic engineers the standard offer-- 
the offer they make to engineers currently employed in other shops--is 
whatever you‘re getting now plus 20 percent, if you will come on over. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Three job changes and you’re in pretty good 
shape, aren’t you? 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. It’s even reached the point now where firms 
are considering setting up shops in residential areas so these people 
won’t have to travel more than 5 minutes to work as compared to 20 
minutes. 

As to the general economic outlook, [my views] don’t differ 
substantially from what the staff has projected. I recognize the 
possibility, of course, that their projection can be off and I would 
share the view that Jim Kichline mentioned that it could be off in 
either direction. I think there‘s a possibility that looking back 6 
to 9 months from now we’ll be talking in terms of a rolling adjustment 
as compared with just slipping into a recession. I wouldn’t give it a 
high probability, but I think it’s a possibility we should keep in the 
back of our minds. 

As to monetary policy--what it has been, what it may be now, 
and what it should be--my thought process was pretty well outlined by 
Henry Wallich. It seems to me that we have not seen the usual 



7/11/79 -19- 

indications of credit stringency and monetary tightness that we get in 
a full employment economy. And consequently, I think the numbers that 
we are looking at are not capturing what's really been happening 
[judged by1 the effect of the money stock. Bankers continue to talk 
almost universally in terms of no credit restraint. They have money 
to lend and, of course, the figures on bank credit are showing the 
results of this. It seems to me that there are two major factors in 
the picture: One, the continued prohibition of outright interest on 
demand deposits and continued low ceilings on savings deposits; and 
second the ongoing strength in inflation, which has stimulated people 
to find ways of circumventing the effects of these restraints to a 
degree we have not previously known. This leads me to [favor] on the 
[ranges] for '79 Henry Wallich's suggestion to stick with what we have 
and for 1980 to go with alternative C in the Bluebook. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. John. 

MR. BALLES. I'm reminded of sitting here in '74 and '75 
through the deepest and longest recession in the postwar period and my 
friend Mr. Baughman kept raising the question, "What recession?" 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, it's nice to live in Dallas. 

MR. BALLES. A s  a matter of fact, we didn't feel it as badly 
on the West Coast as Messrs. Willis Winn and Bob Mayo. 

MR. PARTEE. It was just a regional recession 

MR. BALLES. In any event, as far as the national outlook is 
concerned, despite my "doubting Thomas" type questions to Jim a little 
while ago, I agree that the most probable outcome is the scenario of a 
one-year long, fairly brief, and fairly mild recession. But if there 
are any risks in that, they're probably on the down side, in my view, 
although I'm not quite as pessimistic as Frank [Morris]. 

Turning to the appropriate monetary policy in view of this, 
my specifications would be very similar to those that Steve laid out, 
with two qualifications. I think I would go further than he would in 
narrowing the ranges for the rest of this year for the same reason he 
would narrow them. We have half of the year behind us and unless we 
do narrow the ranges, we would allow for the possibility of some 
pretty extreme growth numbers during the second half of the year, as 
high as 15 percent and as low as 5 percent or thereabouts. S o  I think 
there might be some merit in giving assurance to the market that we're 
not going to go off the deep end in either direction. To be quite 
specific, for the second half of 79, I would like to see the M1 range 
at, say, 3-3/4 to 5-1/4 percent and the M2 range at 5-3/4 to 7-114 
percent. I'm just carrying Steve's [suggestion] one step further. 
And as far as the rest of the specs that he set forth, while they are 
a little different than the ones I came in with, they would be 
acceptable to me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. I think Henry and Phil have put their finger on 
the basic decision we have to make and that is: Do we bite the bullet 
and really try to do something about inflation or do we get deflected 
by a host of other problems? I would like to assert, without taking 



7/11/79 - 2 0 -  

the time to prove it--because the Committee has neither the time nor 
the patience--that there is very little evidence that monetary policy 
can do anything to offset an oil price increase in terms of 
ameliorating its real effects on the economy. In our judgment, there 
is little if anything we can do systematically to offset increases in 
unemployment or to offset declines in real growth. Therefore, the one 
thing we can have a systematic impact on, and should have a systematic 
impact on, is the rate of inflation, and that should be our primary 
objective. And I think we can do that without making unemployment 
worse than it would otherwise be. That's the assertion. 

The implication of that is that I very much agree with what 
Henry said for the long-run range for 1979. I was going to argue that 
we ought to lift the bottom of that range so that we don't let money 
grow too slowly but he scared me away from that with his reference to 
whatever staff investigation is going on that has identified some 
other factors and if that's right, that would worry me. I would just 
point out that even if we keep the existing ranges and assume 1 
percent for ATS we could have money growth between now and the end of 
the year at 6-1/2 percent and still fall within the 4-1/2 percent 
ceiling range, which I think would be an appropriate rate of growth 
for the second half of the year. If we took what was alternative B in 
the Bluebook, we could have money growth--with ATS--at 10 percent 
between now and the end of the year, which I think clearly would be 
the wrong response in the face of the inflation problem that we have. 

With regard to 1980, heaven only knows. I guess without 
information of the kind that Henry was talking about, I'd be inclined 
at this point to keep ' 8 0  the same as '79 until we figure out a bit 
more about what's going on. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Mark. Perhaps I should pause to 
make a couple of comments. One is that if we make any change in the 
ranges for '79, it would be a restatement for the whole year, fourth 
quarter to fourth quarter. We are not rebasing; I think everyone 
understands that. And my intention in dealing with ' 8 0  in our report 
to the Congress--1 hope it's the staff's intention--is to do so in the 
text and not present a graph because then we would have to find a base 
point. And that we don't want to do, if you follow me. No chart, in 
other words. We'll say we are going to have this range for '79 and 
here is the chart for '79. But for 1980, then, we are going to have a 
range of so-and-so and it's just going to be in the text. We will 
not, therefore, pick the point from which we have that growth. I 
think that will give us a little less trouble when we set the ranges 
firmly in January or February when we do it for the year. Then we 
present it as our real target for the year and now we are just giving 
a preliminary indication. So I think that will be helpful. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I find Mark's assertion congenial and I-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You're not going to prove it either. 

MR. WILLES. We are prepared to prove it. 

MR. MAYO. Yes, I think it can be proved, but I will make the 
same caveat that Mark did. Although the staff forecast is a 
reasonable one, I find myself a little more pessimistic. I am 
concerned about both the likelihood of less real growth and more 



1/11/19 -21- 

inflation. I really feel at this point that if we can beat 12 percent 
this year we will be lucky on the inflation side. I think we will 
improve on that next year, but I don't hold much hope for getting 
materially under 12 percent for this year as a whole. Having said 
that, and having agreed with Mark's basic assertion, I find the 3 to 6 
percent range for M1 this year a pretty good range. I wouldn't change 
that. For next year, if we have to do something--which we do-- 
intellectually I would say that we should widen the range and make it 
2 to 7 percent. I would go the other direction from some of the 
others. But I don't think it is a practical approach. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I still have some confusion. For the M1 
measure you said 3 to 6 percent. 

MR. MAYO. Yes, 3 to 6 percent for '79 or 3 to 5-1/2 percent 
--I wouldn't quarrel with that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why not 1-1/2 to 4-l/2 percent? 
That's what it is now. 

MS. TEETERS. He's adjusting it for ATS. 

MR. MAYO. I'm adjusting it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's what I had in mind. 

MR. MAYO. I am talking about the second line in the 
material distributed--the "M1 measure," as it is called here. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. For '79, it's 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent now. 

MR. MAYO. It's 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 now and it would be 3 to 6-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. For '79. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said leave it unchanged, and then 
you said you would-- 

MR. MAYO. Well, that's [no] change. It's the way Steve has 
it down here. 

MR. AXILROD. I was interpreting such a move as unchanged 
because the midpoint remains 6 percent after [adjustment] for ATS. 

MR. MAYO. And that's the way I am looking at it--through the 
old ATS. 

MR. PARTEE. You are accepting the upward adjustment in the 
average. 

MR. MAYO. Sure. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But 3 to 6 and not 3 to 5-1/2 percent. 

MR. MAYO. I prefer the 3 to 6 percent, but I find that a 
minor point of difference. Now, since we are required to go out to 
1980, I would say that if 3 to 6 percent is okay for '79, 
intellectually the range should be something like 2 to I percent for 



7/11/79 -22-  

' 8 0  because [it seems logical to1 widen the band. But I find this 
insulting to the process that we are being asked to do. It's sort of 
a throw-away bid. So with that in mind, I would find 3 to 6 more 
congenial again--or 3 to 5-1/2--for 1980. I see no reason to try to 
encourage a lot of journalists to interpret whether a half percent 
more or less has any significance for 1980. I think that's 
foolishness. So whatever we come up with for '79, I'd leave it that 
way for our first stab at ' 8 0 .  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I think 
it's perhaps difficult to quarrel with the staff projection for the 
economy. But our independent look at the same figures they apparently 
are looking at--with some of the assumptions different, however--would 
suggest that we may have a bit less strength in the economy than in 
the staff projection, particularly starting in the 3rd quarter and 
running on into the 4th quarter. And just to throw another variable 
into it, there is a very good possibility that we will be facing an 
auto strike starting in September or sometime in early October, and 
that could further weaken retail sales and thus turn the economy down 
further than even we would project. Secondly, we would have some 
quarrel with what I believe to be the staff's assumption that there 
will be no substantial inventory reduction. We believe that there may 
be one--short-lived to be sure, but nonetheless rather sharp. 

With those very few exceptions to the staff's forecast, it 
seems to me as far as policy is concerned that monetary policy has to 
work against the inflationary aspects of our economy, much as Mark 
Willes has described essentially. On the other hand, in view of the 
weakness of the economy that I have just described, it doesn't seem to 
me that we should go overboard even through the remainder of 1979. I 
would also suggest that the chances are that we will not get the 
growth in the aggregates, particularly M1, at the midpoint 
[unintelligible]. Thus I have no reason to quarrel with Steve's 
suggestion for the ranges for 1979. And to agree with Bob Mayo, I 
don't understand the exercise for 1980. So what Steve has suggested 
is perfectly all right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Yes sir, Mr. Chairman. I find this an extremely 
interesting exercise because we are looking ahead and we are trying to 
function on a longer-term basis. I also find most interesting the 
handout from the staff on past and prospective rates of growth in the 
monetary aggregates. And I think those figures, to a great extent, 
explain what has happened. We had money growth [in] '77 and '78 
significantly in excess of 7 percent and we are reaping some of the 
inflationary consequences of that rate of money growth. We jammed on 
the [brakes]--the rate of money growth dropped significantly early 
this year--so we should not be in any way surprised by the recession 
that we are experiencing. The recent and continued upsurge in the 
rate of money growth also would signal quite clearly that probably 
this recession will be a "shallow saucer" configured recession. 

As regards what we should do, I believe very sincerely that 
what we do--in spite of what OPEC does or has done--can have a very 
real effect on future price levels. I think it can have a 70 to 75 



7 / 1 1 / 7 9  -23-  

percent effect, with energy maybe affecting this scenario somewhat-- 
maybe 10 percent on a scale of a 100. I would have to respectfully 
disagree with you, Mr. Chairman. If we really were determined to 
[clamp] down on inflation gradually, we should feel greatly frustrated 
by the OPEC action--1 think it's a contributing factor--but I think it 
would be a shame to feel ourselves inhibited in monetary policymaking 
by that occurrence. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I didn't realize I had said that. 

MR. ROOS. Well, I thought earlier that you-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I thought I said it would put us back by 
adding to inflation; we start from a higher base. 

M R .  ROOS. Well, all right. Specifically, I believe that 
inflation is still our most serious problem. If we are able to signal 
to the world that we are determined to do something about inflation, I 
think that will have a very real and salutary effect on our dollar 
exchange problem. I think it will stimulate much needed capital 
investment in this country. So, I think our number one long-term 
objective must be to wind down inflation on a gradual basis. I find 
the alternative C scenarios preferable, both in terms of the policy 
for the remainder of this year and for 1980, assuming we can--and I 
believe we can if we want to--in a very real manner affect money 
growth. I don't think we [ought] merely to respond to how money grows 
due to something that people outside of this room do. If we hold 
money growth--and perhaps this involves a widening of the fed funds 
range, which I know is heresy--close to the midpoint of the 
alternative C ranges, I think we will have struck a real blow for 
freedom. I think we can do it and that would be my preference, sir. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, several segments of the economy 
in our District are reflecting unusual strength. But I think the 
composite would come out not significantly different from that 
described in the other [Districts] and as envisioned by the staff. If 
anything, we are impressed by both bankers and businessmen in their 
escalating frustration with the regulatory environment. That seems to 
be spilling over into consumer pessimism and if anything we read that 
as somewhat more [prevalent] than the staff has reflected. At the 
same time we detect also a sense of considerably more willingness to 
accept some restraint to try to deal with our inflation difficulties. 

Against that background, I would very much prefer, for both 
international and domestic reasons, to attempt to accomplish some 
stability. And it's my feeling that the ranges suggested by Steve 
Axilrod would involve maintaining something [close to] our present 
posture and for that reason I would accept completely the numbers 
proposed by him. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. My guesses on the economy are about the same 
as the staff's. The exception is that it's my sense that the staff 
may have underestimated the fiscal stimulus that might be coming 
along. In that context, I think the statement to the Congress should 



1/11/19 -24- 

reaffirm our intention to move the monetary growth rates down in a 
consistent, gradual way. And I think the specifics that Steve has 
suggested would conform with that kind of general thrust, so I would 
agree with them. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Willis. 

MR. WINN. I haven't any quarrel with the staff's projections 
and I have only two comments on that. One is that the continuing 
inflation may force greater financial problems for some of our public 
bodies--schools, cities, and so forth--and we may get some reactions 
in that area that aren't really factored into the formula. Second, 
there is a potential that energy and some of the other problems may be 
a greater stimulus to real investment on the part of the corporate 
sector--if the growing recession talk doesn't scare them off on that 
score--so that might be a potential stimulus. 

On the aggregates, I would certainly like to echo Henry's 
comments on the meaning of these numbers and our not getting trapped 
by putting too much emphasis on these as we make our projections 
because of changes [occurring] everywhere. Maybe it's all these other 
[financial instruments] getting into those aggregates measures. I 
have trouble with drift. And I have trouble trying to explain April 
and June in spite of the [staff's] explanations. I don't find them 
very satisfactory as to what really has happened, which makes me 
uncertain as to the future. I would stay with the recommendations of 
Steve Axilrod; I would go perhaps a little lower in 1980 because of 
the uncertainties with respect to what's happening to ATS plus the 
growth and magnitudes of these other numbers. So I would be more 
cautious with the '80 number I think than he was, but I have no 
quarrel with extending the ' I 9  ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, for some months we have felt that a 
turning point was near and I think we would buy what seems to be the 
consensus forecast, or the assessment that we have passed that point. 
So far as severity is concerned, I think the developments in the 
petroleum market do strongly enhance the possibility that this could 
be a worldwide downturn. And if this is true, I think our downturn 
may well be more severe than the staff is projecting. I would also 
add to that Frank Morris's fear that the consumer will be another 
source of weakness here. So, given our inflationary problem and the 
recent emergence of the downward pressure on the dollar, we of course 
have to be very careful in trying to cope with this downturn. In 
particular, we have to avoid any conclusion on the part of the markets 
here or abroad that we have thrown in the towel on inflation. 

I would be especially concerned if the downturn did turn out 
to be an international [one]. I'm remembering back to '15 and ' I 6  
when the recovery began and Japan and Germany opted for a slower 
recovery than we did and we pumped in more money in late 'I1 and ' 7 8 ;  
I think that has exacerbated the problem we have had with the dollar. 
In a similar situation I think we can count on the Germans, the 
Japanese--maybe with a change in government--the British, and the 
Canadians too, to exert more restraint in trying to come out of the 
recession. If that scenario should develop, and if we adopt overly 



7/11/79 -25- 

vigorous anti-recession policies, we could have a very, very serious 
foreign exchange situation. 

So when we get to the long-run part of [our decision], I 
think what Steve has suggested is just about what we view as 
appropriate. We had slightly different figures in mind. We agree 
that we ought to adjust the old targets because of the revisions in 
the estimates on the ATS and NOW effect. Our original thought was 
that we would simply accept those specifications for 1979 outlined in 
alternative B. I say that but I also express the hope that we are not 
creating another form of base drift here. And if we do get enabling 
legislation, I hope that we will be just as quick in reducing those 
[adjustments] on the other side. 

The 1980 targets pose a particular problem because we don‘t 
know what the base is, but I think the main effect of those is really 
psychological at this point. So I think we ought to be very careful 
to point out as we explain the ‘79 objectives that they have been 
raised because of a mechanical problem and that we have not raised our 
targets at all. Similarly, I believe it’s important that the ‘80 
targets be somewhat lower than those we had for ’79. So our feeling 
was that it would be best just to take 1/2 percentage point off the 
alternative B specifications for 1980. But, again, we could live with 
Steve’s specifications quite well, though I might want to play around 
with that 6 percent top on the range he has on M1. People will look 
at that and not go beyond it to find the explanation of why it really 
represents a 5-1/2 percent midpoint excluding ATS transfers, as 
compared with a 6 percent midpoint in ‘79. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Emmett. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, consistent with my tenure on the 
Board, I will be brief. Generally, I agree with the projection of the 
staff: it seems to me that almost all of the data now point to a 
recession. I would expect a more serious recession than the staff 
seems to expect. I believe the effect of inflation on household 
balance sheets and liquidity will probably produce a somewhat steeper 
recession than is projected. In other words, the saucer will be 
somewhat deeper but not nearly as deep as ‘74-’75. I, too, would like 
to see a policy that is as effective as possible against inflation. I 
think we should do all we can to resist a high inflation rate but, as 
has been observed by some others, there seems to be a limit to the 
effectiveness of monetary policy as an anti-inflationary instrument 
given the kind of inflation we are facing at the present time. 
Because we are in a situation now that is turning toward recesssion 
but obviously with very strong employment figures--as a matter of fact 
employment is still rising, though not as rapidly as in April and the 
first quarter, and unemployment actually seems to be declining 
somewhat--1 would favor holding with the current ranges for 1979. 
That is, since we are some distance into 1979, since the data still 
show a great deal of strength in employment, and since the inflation 
rate is very high, I would favor for 1979 staying with the current 
ranges, which is alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Current ranges? 

MR. RICE. Yes, the current ranges. That was alternative B, 
I believe, in the Bluebook. However, for 1980, I find it hard to 



1/11/19 -26 -  

imagine that we would want to follow a more restrictive monetary 
policy in a situation of recession than we followed when we were 
resisting inflation in a booming economy. I would prefer to see us be 
prepared to follow an easier policy in such circumstances. I would, 
therefore, be inclined to follow alternative A for 1980, recognizing 
that it's very difficult to make meaningful projections or to have 
meaningful notions about what the proper ranges should be out that far 
ahead. Nevertheless, I think our posture should be one that 
contemplates some easing. I would like to emphasize that our current 
monetary policy is still a restrictive one and alternative A in 1980 
will still be a restrictive monetary policy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Well, on the long-run ranges, I don't have any 
trouble accepting the staff's projection as long as we adjust them for 
ATS. If we stick to 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent, that implies a tightening 
short-run monetary policy and I don't think we need that at all at the 
present time. So, I strongly favor adjusting the MI [range] to take 
account of our changed projection on the automatic transfer effect. I 
do have some sympathy with Emmett's point of view that we should 
probably be signaling in our long-term ranges a slightly easier policy 
next year. I'll come back to that when we talk about short-term 
policy. It seems to me that it's only a matter of time--when to give 
the signal and when to do something--and that our first move toward 
ease probably will be our most important one. We should give thought 
to the timing and how much we are going to do rather than 
[unintelligible] when and where we have the most effect. [The 
question is] whether we [signal] it more strongly with these long-term 
ranges by putting them up a nominal amount for the off year or by 
other actions in our short-term policy. So I would endorse the 
staff's ranges at this point. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we ought to hold with our current 
ranges for 1979 in a rather strict sense. And I think we ought to say 
that we are adjusting them simply for our changed ATS estimate. As I 
understand it, [that estimate] is down from about 3 percent to about 
1-l/2 percent. And I would state that in the document. I'd say that 
the assumption is now a 1-1/2 percent rate of increase rather than a 3 
percent rate of increase, and I would then adjust M1 literally to 3 to 
6 percent. That would be [the equivalent of] 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent 
or whatever it was--plus 1-1/2 on each side. I think M2 ought to 
remain at 5 to 8 percent, and I would leave the M3 range at 6 to 9 
percent. And I don't think I would change the bank credit numbers, 
although that's not very significant and that could very well be done. 

For 1980, I agree--1 think it was Bob Black who said this-- 
that it is more PR than anything else at this stage. It's very, very 
provisional. I would prefer to say that we would hope to have or we 
would expect that we could have monetary growth within about the same 
ranges in 1980 as in 1979. I'd make some very general statement like 
that. One of the reasons I think we need to be provisional about [the 
1980 ranges] is that there has been very little attention to this 
hand-out that shows our forecast against the Administration's 
forecast. And that does indeed create a considerable problem. That 
is, we have to indicate whether our policy is reasonably consistent 



7/11/79 -27 

with the Administration’s goals, and it doesn‘t look as if it is in 
1980. Therefore, I think we have to be somewhat provisional to be 
consistent with those goals. 

I also think we have to be very careful about 1980 because 
this recession that’s being projected is an unusual one for two 
reasons. The first is that, as I understand it, given a fundamental 
shift in consumption that is being predicted, I don‘t think there is 
enough accelerator principle effect--that is, the reverse accelerator 
effect on the business side. That is to say, [the downturn] may well 
turn out to be deeper. Secondly, I know of no previous instance where 
at this ‘“going in” stage--in the face of a major change in income 
distribution and loss in income as well as a significant external 
increase in the rate of inflation--there is no adjustment in either 
fiscal or monetary policy to accommodate to that. And if that in fact 
occurs--that is, if we don’t have a $20 billion tax cut to consumers 
to offset the loss [of income] from petroleum shifting to OPEC, and we 
don’t have a high rate of growth in the money supply--1 think the 
recession could be much deeper and much longer, and we may well have 
to have an adjustment later on. So, right now we ought to be 
concerned about the appearance of these ranges for the aggregates that 
we show to the public. I would think that we ought to make just that 
simple adjustment in 1979, and I wouldn’t want to alarm the market or 
anybody with talk about an easing, although it may well occur, Emmett. 

MR. RICE. You’re not talking to the market? 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, but we are going to be talking publicly 
here about our projections for 1980 and I just think it would alarm 
the market. I would rather do it in January when, in fact, we could 
see how deep the recession is likely to be. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me be very quick on the 
business side. A lot of people have talked about the risks of a 
recession, and I think they are there. There are also some risks of 
financial disturbances arising perhaps out of some nonfinancial 
companies. I think there are risks in the balance of payments and on 
the dollar side. I just mention those to say that I recognize them. 
But I believe the overwhelming purpose we should have in mind now, 
which seems to me to be shared from the comments that I have heard 
around the table, is that [our policy] should in substance and 
appearance be steady. I might say in terms of the risk of a larger 
recession, if some policy initiative became necessarily desirable, I’d 
rather see it myself on the fiscal side than on the monetary side-- 
specifically on the tax reduction side, not on the expenditure side. 
I think that could have some long-range benefits despite an adverse 
effect on the budget in the short run. But I do think in substance 
and appearance that we ought to be steady. 

What I’m disturbed about is that while the tone of many 
people’s comments seems to say that, their precise recommendations 
don’t seem to convey it. I frankly think the numbers that have been 
put before us by Mr. Axilrod would be confusing to the market. 
market would only interpret this as an easing of policy. We‘re 
raising some numbers on the bottom side of our ranges and [growth is1 
already running toward the bottom, so we must be saying that we want 

The 



1/11/79 -28- 

to get easier. The M1 number is clearly higher on the surface than at 
present in any event. I think it would convey the wrong impression. 

What are we trying to do here? As I understand it, we are 
reviewing some projections we set forth early in the year. Has 
something happened to change our minds about what we thought about 
then? It seems to me that the answer we should be trying to give is 
"no." We happen to be within the ranges. Why change them? And that 
is the message we want to give. And I would leave M1 unchanged, too. 
Now there is this technical argument about the NOW accounts and ATS-- 

MR. PARTEE. It's not a [matter of substance]; it's a 
measurement [issue]. It's [how it is] measured. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's measurement. But I have 
this feeling that this is [only] one technical factor affecting the 
measurement of M1. Meanwhile, money market funds payable by check are 
going up $3  billion a month, which nobody anticipated at the beginning 
of the year and must have had a bigger effect on M1 than ATS. Well, 
it must have had an effect, will you grant me that? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. May. 

MR. PARTEE. I think it has almost none on transactions 
balances. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you ought to talk to my wife. 
But you know, there are other factors--RPs and other things that Henry 
mentioned. And it just seems to me a mistake to react to this one 
technical factor at the risk of confusing people, when the basic 
message we want to give is: We have looked at our targets, we are 
within our targets, we are not changing policy at this point, and we 
are reiterating our figures. So I would urge that that be the 
approach we take. 

As for next year, I agree with all the comments that it is 
much more uncertain. And I am happy to rest on the same figures but 
with a more general comment of the kind that you made. We do have the 
~1 legislative uncertainty even there. If we want to widen the range 
for next year, I have no problem with that. I don't think we [should] 
make a major change; we ought to signal essentially a steady policy. 
But I do think it would be a mistake to change the ranges for this 
year; I think it's going to confuse the issue, if indeed we want to 
convey the notion that I assume [we do, which is] that we are 
basically holding steady. 

MR. ALTMA". Same [for all] three? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Same ranges as we have at present. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In ' 8 0 ?  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for '80 as well, [though] maybe 
widening M1 to recognize those [uncertainties]-- 

MR. WALLICH. In order to be consistent between M1 and M2, we 
may have to shade the M2 downward a little. I haven't really examined 
that. 



7 / 1 1 / 7 9  -29- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, today we are going to have to come up 
with some precise answers. Before we break, let me just make sure we 
have the right numbers down here. Let me read what Murray has down 
for each of you. I am going to do ' 7 9  only. For John Balles he has: 
M1, 3-3/4 to 5-114; M2, 5-3/4 to 7-1 /4 ;  and M3, 6 - 1 / 2  to 9 .  Is that 
correct? 

MR. BALLES. [For M31 6 to 9 percent, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, 6 to 9 .  That's why I want to [check] 
these. Bob Black was 3 to 6, 5 to 8, and 6 to 9 .  

MR. BLACK. That's correct. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. For Phil Coldwell I have 3 to 5 and 5 to 7 
and I didn't get M3. 

MR. COLDWELL. I didn't specify. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Bones is 3 to 5-1 /2 ,  5 -1 /2  to 
8, and 6-1/2 to 9 .  Bob Mayo is 3 to 6 on M1, and we don't have M2 OL 
M3. 

MR. MAYO. 5 to 8 and 6 to 9 .  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck is 3 to 6, 5 to 8 ,  6 to 9 .  Emmett is 
3 to 6, 5 to 8 ,  6 to 9 .  Nancy is 3 to 5 - 1 / 2 ,  5-1/2 to 8 ,  6-1 /2  to 9 .  

MS. TEETERS. Could I change that to 3 to 6 ,  5 to 8 ,  and 6 to 
9?  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure. That's why I wanted to get these 
down. So that's 3 to 6 ,  5 to 8 ,  and 6 to 9 .  

MS. TEETERS. Yes, I changed them. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Paul Volcker is 1-1 /2  to 4-1 /2 ,  5 t o  8 ,  
and 6 to 9. Henry is 1 - 1 / 2  to 4-1/2 .  5 to 8 ,  and 6 to 9. 

MR. WALLICH. Yes, I may want to shade my M2 to bring it more 
nearly in line with M1, but I have to check the numbers. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I am going to go through the others. 
Ernie, 1-1 /2  to 4-1/2 ,  5 to 8 ,  and 6 to 9 .  Dave, 3 t o  5-1 /2 ,  5-1/2 to 
8 ,  and 6-1/2 to 9 .  Roger Guffey, 3 to 5-1/2 ,  5 -1 /2  to 8 ,  and 6-1/2  to 
9 .  Frank Morris, 3 to 5-1 /2 ,  5 -1 /2  to 8 ,  and 6 - l / 2  to 9 .  That's a 
pretty good team; they are all together there. Larry, 2-1/2 to 5 - 1 / 2 ,  
4 -1 /2  to 7 - 1 / 2 ,  and 5-1/2  to 8-1/2. Correct me if I'm wrong. Mark, 
1-1/2 to 4-1/2, 5 to 8 ,  and 6 to 9 .  Willis, 3 to 5-1 /2 ,  5-1/2 to 8 ,  
and 6-1/2 to 9 .  Do I have them all right? Let's break for twenty 
minutes and come back at noon. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's pick up from what we did just before 
the break. We looked at M2 and M3 for which there are no adjustments 
because of this ATS matter. It would appear that among voting members 
there's a rather overwhelming sentiment for staying where we are for 



7/11/79 -30- 

'79. In the case of M2 only three of you indicated any variation from 
staying where we are now at 5 to 8 percent. John Balles suggested 
5-3/4 to 7-1/4, Phil Coldwell suggested 5 to 7, and Bones Kimbrel 
suggested 5-1/2 to 8, all of which are still not terribly far off from 
the 5 to 8. On M3, we had one abstention and only one person who 
indicated anything other than maintaining the 6 to 9--Bones, you 
suggested moving up the bottom to 6 - 1 / 2 .  
want to proceed on this, but just looking at it, there's an 
overwhelming [preference] to stay where we are on M2 and M3. 

I don't know how you all 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, just a point of clarification 
there. Paul Volcker's comments left an impression that we were not 
going to be staying the same if we used the numbers that Steve Axilrod 
had suggested. During the break I spoke to Steve Axilrod and I really 
would like to be reassured that indeed we are staying the same by 
[using the numbers he suggested]. So I guess I'm trying to reconcile 
[the comments of] Volcker and Axilrod. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me take a stab at reconciling them and 
see what you think. I'm coming to M1 last because, as you know, it 
has this question of an adjustment that has to do with changes in the 
estimates of the effects of ATS accounts. There again if we just go 
by the numbers, it looks as if all but two of the voting members 
indicated that they would make the technical adjustment for the change 
in ATS. Paul Volcker and Henry Wallich suggested we make no such 
adjustment; everyone else suggested we make an adjustment and there 
are two very minor variations on what that adjustment should be. My 
suggestion as to a way to handle this is as follows: The intention of 
an adjustment is not to change the course of the ranges for M1 in a 
substantive, bottom line, sense. But in these kinds of announcements 
we deal not only with the analysts who understand that, but with those 
who want to [use] every excuse to effect their own personal 
preferences and would read this kind of adjustment as some change in 
policy. And when I hear it discussed around here, I see how many 
people have a hard time coming to grips with explaining that 
adjustment even to other professionals, so I wonder how it's going to 
sound publicly. 

So, it seems to me that an alternate way to do it would be to 
stick with our present range on M1 and say in our report to the 
Congress that this range was set on the basis of a 3 percent ATS 
effect [but] it now appears that it will be less. In guiding monetary 
policy we're going to be looking at it on the same basis we were 
always looking at it, but the result is that the actual measured 
number may be high in the range or outside the range depending on how 
ATS comes out. We don't have to predict [that effect]; we don't have 
to give them a number; we can just say that with the ATS adjustment we 
are going to stay where we were in substance. 

MR. PARTEE. [We'll be] high in the range or above the range 
if ATS slows or stops. 

CHAlRMAN MILLER. But we'd come out the same on an adjusted 
basis as we would have previously. Now, that's one way to approach 
it. We've made the full disclosure but haven't got the press putting 
out new numbers with all the confusion that goes with them. I don't 
know whether that's satisfactory or not [but it's1 a possibility. 



7/11/79 -31- 

MS. TEETERS. Aren’t we just delaying the explanation? When 
we get to next January and we’re 1-l/2 percent above where we said we 
were going to be, then we’re going to have to give the same 
explanation. And in the meantime we’re going to get all the adverse 
press on having been outside the long-term ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, that could be. I don’t know. Every 
period of time has its problems and I agree with you that no time will 
be good to explain these complicated things. My second assumption is 
that, with the pending legislation and the pending redefinition of the 
aggregates, it would best at this point to say that for 1980, given 
the uncertainties, our current posture is to be within the same 
general brackets of growth [as this] year, adjusted for any changes in 
definitions or accounts. And we don’t give numbers. Then when we 
come to February, if we agree to redefine the aggregates, we would 
have a whole set of numbers that are different anyway. We wouldn’t 
have a set of numbers that changes twice. We would only have one new 
set that is based on something that we can look at then. Now we are 
liable to say that we are going to have [a certain range for] M1 next 
year and adjusted it’s going to be a little different and then we will 
redefine M1 and then we will have another set of figures. I think it 
adds to the confusion. 

Now. this is just a suggestion; I am not wedded to it. We 
are trying to think through what the risk is of this being misread. 
M2 and M3 won’t be misread if everybody seems to feel that we should 
stay pat. But if M1 is misread, what‘s the risk? I think the main 
risk is that it comes at a time when there is uncertainty and 
unsettlement in the foreign exchange markets and I think there are 
people looking for excuses to believe that the United States is 
changing its policy. 
[is] something we want to keep close to our chest, as far as allowing 
that to be used against us to create a rate for the dollar. I 
wouldn’t be very happy to have that happen right now. I don‘t know if 
any of you who deal with foreign exchange markets have any views on 
that. We haven‘t asked you, but-- 

And whether we are going to change our policy 

MR. PARDEE. It sounds sound to me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Pardon me? 

MR. PARTEE. It’s more a question of the impressions that 
people have rather than some [number of] basis points. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don‘t think foreign exchange traders are 
analysts. I don’t think they care about facts. They care if they can 
use the device to maneuver a market in order to make a profit. Ted, 
do you have any view on it? 

MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think 1 agree that the first impression 
of the market, if you didn‘t adjust [the M1 range], would be negative 
and that could lead to [unintelligible] basically because they‘re 
looking for what comes across the ticker first. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I would think that staying with the same ranges 
in the face of higher inflation is something that people will 



1/11/79 -32- 

understand. They will see that there's resistance, non-accommodation, 
[to that higher inflation]. I think it ought to have a good response. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But I would do this only on the basis that 
we follow the majority will here. And I'd indicate in our report to 
Congress that we are going to guide our policy based on the original 
viewpoint that 1-1/2 to 4 [ - 1 / 2 1  percent was 4-112 to I - 1 / 2  percent on 
an adjusted basis, and it stays that way. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. I'm just wondering if it would be consistent 
with what you suggested, which I think is a move in the right 
direction, if we indicated that what we would look at would be 
adjustments for ATS and other things that might influence the demand 
for money. The market is very concerned and some of us are very 
concerned about some of those other things. 

MR. PARTEE. We didn't cut the money growth [ranges] for the 
other things. 

MR. WILLES. But we allowed substantially lower growth in the 
first half because of those other things. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. I think these are very real concerns. The 
main concern on the other side, drawing from our experience with these 
targets in the past, is that once we get locked into a certain range 
it's very difficult to change. And the longer we go without changing, 
the more difficult it is to change. So if we go this way, I think we 
should do so with the understanding that if policy has to change, we 
will change the numbers. Let's not find ourselves locked into that 
same old situation as in the past. If we suspect at all that there's 
a danger of getting locked into that, there's some advantage in 
changing the numbers simply for technical reasons just to change the 
numbers. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, that's the other side of it. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that given the 
uncertainties--the idea that we started out with a 3 percent 
adjustment earlier this year and it's now down to 1-1/2 percent--. I 
don't know what the staff was actually forecasting-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It may be something else by the end of the 
year. That's one of the problems. 

MR. COLDWELL. Maybe. It may be back up to 5 percent. I 
don't know which way this [adjustment] could turn. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's what bothers me. We could end up 
with something we did [not expect] and be fouled up again. 

MR. COLDWELL. That's why I wonder if it isn't possible just 
to use 1-1/2 to 4-l/2 percent and then in parenthesis say "adjusted 
for ATS . " 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure, that's the kind of-- 



7/11/19 ~ 3 3 -  

MR. COLDWELL. Whatever it may be. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, but we've got to explain that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, we have to be prepared to explain it. 

MR. COLDWELL. My point is that we end up leaving the figures 
the same, but with a parenthetical adjustment. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, adjusted for deviations from the 
estimate as to the ATS effect. It's adjusted for deviations because 
we've already adjusted it tbyl 3 percent. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I ask two questions on that? 
In explaining it to the public in the report, I assume we would say 
something like: Given what has happened in the second quarter, it is 
now expected that ATS growth may be somewhat less than originally 
thought and, therefore, growth in M1 may be somewhat higher in the 
range than at the midpoint. But more importantly from the point of 
view of material presented to the Committee--in terms of a tracking 
path for M1 to judge against--would I be wrong or right in assuming 
that the tracking path would center not so much on 3 percent if we had 
evidence that the ATS effect is running at 1-1/2 percent, but would 
center more on the 4-1 /2  percent top of the range? In other words, 
the staff would have a question of what we would present to the 
Committee for it to judge how it is going to-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You're asking, Steve, for the Committee to 
show internal consistency and that's a big demand! 

MR. AXILROD. From the discussion, absent any other 
instruction, I would assume that we would track essentially on the 3 
to 6 percent measured range. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think what I'm saying is that that's true 
if we look at ATS only. But some members may want to adjust their 
policy thinking to other things that have happened. But on ATS only, 
I think you're probably right. We probably made a mistake. For 
internal purposes we probably should have put your estimate in for the 
effect of ATS every month. Pardon? 

MR. PARTEE. We can't really make out where we are. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We probably should have used--what is it, 
4-112 to 7-112 percent--from the beginning, making an adjustment each 
time . 

MR. PARTEE. Added in ATS. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, added in ATS just for internal 
purposes. Maybe we should still do it--or do it as a supplemental 
chart. Steve will say that we don't have a measured way to do that, 
but if you make an estimate that the effect is X amount, you have to 
add in a number that would do that. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as one who advocated adjustment, I 
think your plan is really better and I would go along with that. 



1/11/79 -34- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m trying to accomplish both [objectives]. 
I‘m trying to accomplish the adjustment without scaring people and 
leave us some running room so that if the adjustment turns out to be 
different than we now think, we don’t have a second go-around. 

MR. BLACK. I think that’s an important consideration, as 
Paul pointed out very clearly. It also gets to be a consideration, I 
think, when we select the range for 1 9 8 0 .  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. 

MR. BLACK. I would want that [1980 range] on the surface to 
appear to be somewhat lower; others wouldn’t, but I would for 
psychological reasons. I think it could have a very therapeutic 
effect on the market. 

MS. TEETERS. Are you proposing that we go to 1-1/2 to 4-l/2 
percent for ’ 8 0 ?  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, for ’80 I was proposing that we 
indicate that our current thinking is to continue the same ranges, 
adjusted for the impact of ATS. So it isn‘t 1-1/2 to 4-1/2. Nancy: it 
could be that 4 to I or 4-1/2 to I-1/2 on an adjusted basis. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you going to be that vague for 
next year consistent with-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I could be that vague now, but I wouldn’t 
be that vague in February. I’m sort of hedging my bets because I 
assume that by the end of the year we will have completed our project. 
We‘ll have some redefinitions and we’ll have a new series, which will 
be tracked back in time. And that series will come into-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Chairman, I’m just worried about 
M1. But if the [Humphrey-Hawkins] Act does not require that we 
specify in numbers-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, where’s the Act? Who has [the 
language I ? 

MR. AXILROD. I have a copy, M r .  Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It specifies that we are to indicate our 
ranges and I don’t think it requests that we-- 

MR. AXILROD. It says that as a part of its report on July 20 
of each year in addition to [the ranges for the current year], the 
Board of Governors shall include a statement of its objectives and 
plans with respect to the ranges of growth or diminution of the 
monetary and credit aggregates for the calendar year following the 
year in which the report is submitted. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think we can do it by saying we intend to 
stay on the same track, with an adjustment for ATS. I don’t know how 
that appeals to the Committee. If you’d like to have a discussion of 
that, I’d be happy to do it. Is there sentiment along with Bob‘s that 
this is perhaps the best way out of a box? 



1/11/79 -35- 

MR. PARTEE. I would accept it. 

MR. BALLES. I'm not quite sure, Mr. Chairman. If we try the 
tack you are suggesting to avoid specifying the numbers for '80, which 
I would approve, what I can't really make a guess on--maybe you can 
tell me--is whether the [Congressionall Committee will try to smoke it 
out of you. If they do, then you're going to have to face the problem 
of the explanation of why it's 1-1/2 to 4 - 1 / 2  percent now and 3 to 6 
or 3 - 1 / 2  to 6-1/2 percent next year. I hope you can avoid the problem 
but I'm not-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think I can because in the verbal answers 
I can say: Look, when we were putting [the objectives] down last year 
we were thinking of M1 in the old way of 4-1 /2  to I - 1 / 2  percent. And 
whatever the ATS effect turns out to be at the end of the year-- 
whether it's 3 or 1 or 7--[that] is really the adjustment 
[unintelligible]. I think I can kind of fudge that one in answering 
the Committee. One thing to avoid is to get at what the 1 - 1 / 2  to 4-  
1 / 2  would be and keep referring to the whole thing as based upon 4 - l / 2  
to I - 1 / 2  percent on the old series for M1. 

MR. BALLES. One other observation if I could, Mr. Chairman? 
For those who just look at the numbers and don't bother to read the 
explanations, as clear as they might be, if we move to 3 to 6--if what 
had originally been the majority view here prevails--[there will be] 
those who are concerned about what the Fed ought to be doing to ease 
things up during a recession. And I assume the facts of the recession 
no doubt will surface during the testimony. We'd appear to be easing 
without really doing so. There will be some advantages in terms of 
announcement effects for those who take a superficial view of what we 
are doing just as it might have a contrary adverse effect to foreign 
exchange traders who don't read the explanation. That's the other 
side of the coin. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure. I think for internal purposes we 
ought to prepare each month a chart on the old series basis so that we 
don't get confused. The world may get confused, I suppose. 

MR. BALLES. The only thing that might appear to be a little 
queer is that we'd have a stand pat hand in terms of ranges--if, let's 
say, Paul Volcker's and Henry Wallich's proposal were adopted--in the 
face of a developing recession. It might look a little odd. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. Any other coments? Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Just to [follow] on that, I don't know how you 
would intend to avoid testifying as to the numbers--that we're indeed 
looking at 3 percent for the ATS adjustment early in this year and 
perhaps only 1-1/2 in the latter half of 1979. That can be read, if 
we maintain these ranges, as a tightening of policy. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, we would adjust the ranges. 

M R .  GUFFEY. Pardon me? 

MR. PARTEE. We'd adjust the range. 



7/11/79 - 3 6 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, what we do is this: If we were 
actually shooting for the midpoint of our ranges and we had a 1-1/2 
percentage point ATS effect, then 3 percent on the current range 
equals 4-1/2 percent, and we'd be at the top. 

MR. GUFFEY. But it's going to be very difficult to explain, 
and the-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's hard to explain to ourselves! That's 
why we're going to explain if we change in the numbers. It may be 
easy. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we refer to those old rates as pure 
rates in Richmond, before we fool around and adjust them. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Pure rates. 

MR. BLACK. It's not very descriptive, but it's easy to 
recognize what we are talking about when we use that term. 

M R .  PARTEE. It seems to me you'll do a better job than the 
DOW Jones ticker does. 

MR. BLACK. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, one thing is that the written report 
will [unintelligiblel. Yes, the Dow Jones will take the written 
report and put it on the wire. What I say will be lost in the shuffle 
so that-- 

M R .  PARTEE. Well, except that you are reporting to an 
oversight committee and they may well understand what you're saying. 

MS. TEETERS. I think you ought to explain very carefully 
what we're doing because it could be very misleading. I think we've 
had a bad reputation for being misleading and not forthcoming in 
saying what we're doing. We should put all the cards on the table and 
tell the [Congressional] Committee exactly what's going on. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure. I have no disagreement with that. 
These ranges were set with the impact of ATS estimated at 3 percent. 
[The Congressional Committee] will have to take account of the fact 
that there may be a deviation from that particular estimate and that 
to the extent there is a deviation the ranges will be inappropriate. 
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, you should look at M2 as much better to 
track. 

MR. BALLES. Amen. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Then we'll go back and have another 
argument. Henry Wallich has been trying to get in a word. 

MR. WALLICH. Two things. One, to automatically add to our 
1-1/2 to 4-1/2 the difference between 3 and the current ATS [estimate] 
wasn't quite my idea. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, but you-- 



7/11/79 -37 

MR. WALLICH. I think we are getting ourselves here in the 
spirit of [believing that1 in a recession we've got to accelerate the 
aggregates. Now, that way, there will never be a reduction in 
inflation. In a recession interest rates should come down, but at 
constant rates of expansion of the aggregates: otherwise prices will 
go up indefinitely. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, the aggregates 
virtually always come down-- 

MR. WALLICH. That is what gives you assurance that you [can] 
ease; if you just keep the aggregates growing at a constant rate, you 
get very low interest rates. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What is the pleasure of the Committee? 
Let's just take a quick poll. 

MR. BLACK. Is this just for '79, M r .  Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Just for '79 to start with, and then we'll 
turn to ' 8 0 .  The proposition is to report that we have decided to 
stand pat on ' 7 9 ,  but with a clear explanation that there is an 
inaccuracy in the M1 range. That is, we will make clear that the M1 
range has been adjusted for estimates of ATS and will have to be 
adjusted to the extent that there is a deviation from that original 
calculation. What's the sentiment on that? It's my proposal and I 
guess I would go along with it. I'm not sure. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. 

MR. BALLES. Well, I had a preference for the adjusted range 
of 3 to 6 percent. I would go along with anything that makes your job 
of explanation easier, so-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's our mutual job 

MR. ALTMA". 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Rice 
Governor Teeters 
Governor Wallich 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. I think that is strong enough that 
we should just probably stick with that. 

How about 1980? What is your pleasure for that? Again, 
looking at the rundown here, it looks as if we have about the same 
lineup. Practically everybody who specified [numerical rangesl was at 
5 to 8 and 6 to 9 percent, or very close to it, for M2 and M3. And 
the same thing for M1, with a 3 to 6 percent range. My thought [with 
respect to the 1980 ranges] was to indicate that there are a number of 
uncertainties, not only in the economy--whether it may be at a turning 
point and the effects that have not worked through yet--but also with 
regard to the Administration's policies and pending legislation. So, 



7/11/79 -38 -  

at this point in time, it would appear reasonable to continue to seek 
growth of the aggregates in 1980 within the ranges that have applied 
for 1979, adjusted in the case of M1 for deviations [relating to our 
estimate of] the effects of ATS. 

MR. PARTEE. That's our present plan 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's our present plan. And I'd say that 
because of the number of uncertainties, the Committee could expect 
revisions to this when we re-present [our ranges] in February. 

MR.  BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to dissent on this and 
I wonder if you could throw a few crumbs to those of us who would like 
to see some little move toward slowing because of our oft stated 
position that we want to get growth of the aggregates down over the 
longer run. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I'm open to suggestions. Can you 
give us a-- 

MR. BLACK. Well, if we just knock a half point, say, off the 
top on each one of those [ranges], I think that would psychologically 
give us a big boost in the market. We might want to change the ranges 
later on, but I would certainly like to see something in that general 
direction. 

MR. MAYO. I would leave the figures the way they are, Mr. 
Chairman, but say in your text that we are still firm in our desire 
over the longer run to see the aggregates [slow]. 

MR. BLACK. But if we did only that, wouldn't people say why 
didn't you put the ranges a little lower? 

MR. MAYO. Because we were in a recessionary period. 

MR. BLACK. Oh, you're just saying depart from that during 
the recession. 

MR. ROOS. Well, I was going to parallel somewhat what Bob 
Black said. I think the first question you'd get--and you're much 
more experienced than I in appearing before those people [on the 
Congressional Committees] is: Mr. Chairman, you've said repeatedly 
that gradually over the years you are going to try to phase down 
inflation, so how will these figures you've just given us conform with 
that? In other words, will doing the same thing next year as we're 
doing this year really be a meaningful first step to gradually 
cranking this [inflation] down? That's what I would [expect]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I would say in response that the record 
shows that we have had two years in a row of reduction in growth of 
the aggregates. And, within the ranges that have been specified, the 
prospect for a further year of reduction would still be available if 
economic conditions make it possible. Therefore, we are able to 
pursue our long-term aim within the ranges that have been indicated by 
this Committee. That's how I would probably answer. Again, I think 
the record is more powerful than promises. The record is that two 
years in a row now we've had significant reductions in the growth 
rates of these aggregates. On M1 adjusted, we've gone from 7.9 



7/11/79 -39 

percent to 7.4 percent to an estimated 6 percent for this year and 
that's probably more impressive to the Committee than [any] promises 
we can make. 

MR. BLACK. You know, strange as it may seem, I think we've 
decelerated a bit too rapidly, and I wouldn't like to see it 
continued. I think the market is going to be watching that very 
carefully. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, M2 [has gone down] from 9.8 to 8.4 to 
probably 6-3/4 percent. 

MR. BLACK. That's pretty darn fast, really. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's fast, yes. 

MR. BLACK. It's faster than I would like. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's why we could moderate [the decline] 
a little next year and still keep it in the right-- 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I just might add a comment. 
In no way am I trying to interrupt the decisionmaking process nor am I 
claiming to be a market psychologist, but it's my impression that in 
1977 the credibility of the System was undermined more for having set 
low ranges that it didn't hit than for having set [unintelligible]. I 
think that had more of an impact than anything else in that period. 

MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't be prepared to support anything 
except an expression of hope, in much the way you did. Frankly, I 
don't think we'll be able to do it. 

MR. COLDWELL. I don't believe the figures anyway. The 
figures are going to jump around and ATS account adjustments are going 
to jump around. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But we're going to have a new definition of 
PI1 and it's going to affect this. Well, again, it's a very hard thing 
for us to do. If we get very specific, we run the risk that Steve 
just pointed out. Our credibility would be hurt [morel if we put out 
some very specific n d e r s  and can't come near them than if we put out 
some generalized statement of policy intent, which we know is about 
the best we can do at this point really. 

MR. BLACK. well, I think maybe we can improve the faulty 
procedures of the past and do a little better in hitting what we say 
we [want]. That's what really deserves criticism rather than the 
other, I think. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Certainly. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, the band is wide enough to encompass 
almost anything we can do. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It really is. If [growth] came to the low 
side of the band, we can satisfy all of one group and if it came to 
the top we can satisfy all of another group. So all of you can be 
satisfied. 



1/11/79 -40 -  

MR. COLDWELL. We'd be better off just to stay where we are. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's [going to be] a low-keyed report as I 
see it: Not "we are out there to do so and so," but we need some time 
to observe how the real economy behaves and to complete our study of 
the components of the money aggregates, how they [should be defined], 
and what their proper alignment is. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could we point out pretty clearly 
that we've had a rather rapid deceleration [in the growth of the 
aggregates] and that, as you indicated before, maybe we can pause a 
little for now? But we still have that goal. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve, it seems to me that what we were 
planning--we haven't seen that chapter [of the report1 yet, but I 
think you and I talked about this--was to have a long-range chart on 
each aggregate to show what we have done to bring each one down as 
well as a shorter-term focus. We need to focus on the year because it 
gets lost. But in a long-term chart we are intending to show that we 
have been winding this [monetary growth] down as promised. 

MR. BLACK. If we can show that clearly, I can live with what 
you are suggesting, but-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think we ought to cover the whole decade. 
Isn't that what we're going to do on these? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, at least back to the early ' 7 0 s  so it can 
be-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, yes. We want to go back so we catch 
the earlier cycle too and show how the money growth came up and then 
we have been bending it downward. And the ranges that we're 
suggesting, if we say we are going to continue the same ranges, allow 
us to continue that trend. I don't want to get locked into promising 
that. I think Chuck's right. I don't want to get locked into 
promising anything. I just want to say that all things equal, and 
with our ambition to fight inflation being what it is, we can live 
within those ranges to accomplish what's appropriate. What is your 
pleasure? 

MR. COLDWELL. Verbalize steadying the boat. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do we need a vote on [the ranges for 19801? 
Perhaps yes. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steadying the boat with a hope that 
in time we will get [money growth] down. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. 

MR. ALTMA". 
Chairman Miller Yes 
Vice Chairman Volcker Yes 
President Balles Yes 
President Black Yes 
Governor Coldwell Yes 
President Kimbrell Yes 



1/11/79 -41- 

President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Rice 
Governor Teeters 
Governor Wallich 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Y e s  
Yes 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. May we consider those votes now? Henry. 
would you like to go unanimous with the first [vote on the 1919 
ranges]? There's always a chance. 

MR. WALLICH. I'd like to stick with that because I disagreed 
on that one the last time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of a 
little mind and everyone knows that you're a big mind! 

MR. BLACK. You should say, therefore, that it isn't foolish 
inconsistency. 

MR. AXILROD. I was going to ask, M r .  Chairman, whether you 
wanted to worry about the wording of this matter now that the vote is 
settled. Or should we settle that with you later? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think we can do the wording [later]. And 
if we feel we should circulate it to the Committee, we can do that. I 
don't think we should take the time now to do it. We need to turn 
now, I think, to the next issue. Perhaps it would be worthwhile to 
circulate the wording early, even before we put out the whole-- 

MR. ALTMANN. Normally we would be sending this directive to 
the New York bank today. But I suppose we could leave that portion 
out: it's not operational for the short run. 

CHAIF" MILLER. It's not operational until it goes into the 
report next week. 

MR. ALTMA". What I'm saying is that normally this directive 
is transmitted today. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But this [part of the1 directive is 
concerned with the long-term ranges: it has no operational effect. So 
we could have time to consult with the Committee. On the short-term 
directive [regarding operations] until the next meeting, yes, it must 
be precise. 

NOW let's turn to the next item on the agenda, which is the 
question of short-term ranges. And I believe the first thing is to 
turn to the staff's recommendations. Steve. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, to be very brief it seems 
to me that alternative I1 on page 10 in the Bluebook would be quite 
consistent with the long-run decision the Committee just made. The 
federal funds rate range we show there is the one currently in place, 
9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. But of course the operating funds rate level 
has been 10-1/4 percent, so it's an asymmetrical midpoint so to speak. 
That's what I would recommend to the Committee, given its decision 
just now. 



7/11/79 -42- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, why don't we just go around the table 
the same way quickly and get your individual recommendations. We will 
start again with Henry on this. 

MR. WALLICH. [I'd prefer that you] don't start out with me, 
Mr. Chairman; I haven't had the benefit of education around the table. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You want us to skip you and come back to 
you at the end? 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think I lean more to alternative 111, 
although modifying the funds rate there downward. My thought is this: 
If we have a crisis in the exchange market, we should be free to move. 
I don't think it's worth a great deal getting the funds rate up in the 
absence of such overriding necessity, but I think we may very well 
face that over the next month. What I would really like is something 
that gives that kind of instruction. That would mean beefing up the 
language of the directive--not just saying that we take account of 
foreign exchange markets--but I have not found a good way of wording 
it. I would enhance that, as I said, and give high priority to the 
program for supporting the foreign exchange value of the dollar and 
due regard to developing conditions in domestic financing markets. 
That's not an optimal [way of saying it] but it's a distinction that I 
am trying to draw. 

MR. PARTEE. You could have "giving due regard to the 
domestic side" overriding attention. 

MR. WALLICH. If we have a major boil-up, there is no way of 
putting together a package this time, as was done last time. And we 
can't do it with intervention; I don't think we should do it with 
intervention. So we then just have to face a possibly substantive 
decline in our currency, adding to inflation and adding to the 
problems of the world. That's how I would like to shape this: Stay 
at the present funds rate level, give more room on the up side--in 
other words, 10 to 10-3/4 percent--with some proviso that would give 
us a chance to move up readily to a higher rate if the exchange market 
should boil up, but otherwise not go up on the funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Henry said a good share of what I was going to 
say, so I won't pursue it. I wouldn't put the words quite the way he 
did, in an "overriding" sense, although I think the dollar 
depreciation risk is a high one in any policy that portrays any 
picture of ease. Curiously enough, we came out precisely the same on 
the fed funds range, 10 to 10-3/4 percent. We're at 10-1/4 percent 
now, so it would be asymmetrical on the bottom side. I really don't 
see much need for [a range]. As far as I am concerned, it's 10-1/4 
percent unless something overriding develops either to force it on the 
up side or on the low side. I'd almost just as soon say 10-1/4 
percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me just put out a thought. It seems to 
me that an international disturbance is a serious [concern]. It could 
require that we take some action. I don't know what that action would 
be. To try to [address that] in the short-term directive is almost 
impossible. It seems to me that we should get on the phone and we 



1/11/79 -43- 

should make a decision in a meeting. So maybe we ought not be trying 
to shape this directive to deal with an international crisis but have 
a commitment to ourselves that if there is such a crisis, we will call 
a meeting promptly and deal with it. To anticipate what it will be, 
why it occurred, what will start it, what the response should be, and 
what else is going on, is very, very hard. Anyway, that's just a 
thought. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, this Committee has 
traditionally overstayed policy both in the direction of ease and of 
restraint and I would like to see us violate this tradition once. It 
seems to me, with the economy clearly in a recession, that we ought to 
start moving to try to mitigate the amplitude of the recession--to try 
to take out some insurance that the recession will not be bigger than 
the staff has projected. So with that in mind, I would propose that 
the funds range ought to be 9-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent with instructions 
to the Manager to move to 10 percent immediately. I think history 
gives us assurance that the aggregates are not going to run away from 
us in a recession, even with an aggressive interest rate policy. Now. 
I recognize that this is going to be disturbing to the foreign 
exchange markets in the short run. But once the markets understand 
that our economy is turning down while the rest of the world is still 
moving up, I think it will turn out to be a short-run phenomenon. And 
we can use our open market operations in the foreign exchange area to 
mitigate the shock. But I believe we have a conflict between our 
domestic and our foreign objectives. I think we have to sacrifice 
one, and I would sacrifice the exchange market at the moment. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, alternative I1 seems acceptable 
to me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. John. 

MR. BALLES. Well, even though I dissented in May because I 
wanted the funds rate down to 10 percent, I find myself in a position 
now where I think the rate ought to be up to 10-1/4 percent. That's 
more or less fortuitous and it's because of the recent surge in the 
aggregates. The level of M2 is now near the midpoint and is forecast 
to grow, as you know, at 8-1/2 percent over the July-August period. 
That should put it slightly above the midpoint. And the M1 level in 
June was below the midpoint but is projected to grow 4.2 and 4.9 
percent in July and August, which if it happens--and I hope it does, 
Steve--will bring it right to the midpoint by August. I think that's 
good; we need [growth] to get back up to those midpoints and that's in 
part what tends to offset the fact that we have a recession going on 
now. 

From that point on and within the ranges that we have 
specified, I would argue two points very strongly. [One is1 that we 
ought to aim for those midpoints, in terms of having a moderate and 
stable policy, steering a middle course between the dangers to the 
dollar in foreign exchange markets on one hand versus the sagging 
economy on the other hand. And I would argue secondly, picking up on 
a point I was glad to hear you make earlier, Mr. Chairman, that we 
ought to be paying more attention to M2. With all of the 
uncertainties that we know have plagued M1, I guess I'm distressed by 



7/11/79 -44- 

the fact that in the formal directive we are still calling for about 
equal weight to be given to M1 and M2. At least two years ago, we 
circulated a paper calling for greater emphasis on M2 and I would like 
to see that as a formal proposal at this time. So, I‘m going to make 
it: I think we should start giving closer to two-thirds weight to M2 
rather than the present 5 0 / 5 0  [to M1 and M21. Having said all of 
that, the specifications of alternative I1 would be satisfactory, but 
qualified by what I have just said. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, John. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. I would find alternative I1 acceptable. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Bob. 

MR. MAYO. Alternative I1 is fine with me. I don’t share the 
position that we should try to adjust the ranges to reflect the 
possibilities of an international crisis of any kind, basically for 
the reasons that you have outlined. It seems to me that to try to do 
it just by jiggling up the upper [limit of the funds rate] by a 114 
percentage point wouldn’t solve anything really. We should have it 
much higher than that if we were going to assume that we will have no 
telephone communication over the next four weeks. I’m not willing to 
make that assumption, so I would go with alternative I1 the way it is, 
with a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Alternative 11, Mr. Chairman. Just a comment 
with regard to the international situation: If I heard Scott Pardee 
correctly this morning, he suggested that any move by the Federal 
Reserve, whether in the discount area or an upward movement in the 
funds rate, would have some salutary effect [in countering1 any 
weakness in the dollar that might develop. Again, I would like to 
propose that serious consideration be given to a discount rate 
increase if that develops rather than moving to an upper limit of 
10-1/4 percent [on] the fed funds range. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry? 

MR. ROOS. I’d just like to suggest that we broaden the fed 
funds range symbolically to 1 point, and I would be perfectly happy 
with alternative I1 and 9-3/4 to 10-3/4 percent. But if we are going 
to signal a substantial and real interest in controlling the 
aggregates in any way, somewhere along the line we will have to move 
toward a broadening of the fed funds range. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. Bones? 

MR. KIMBREL. The activity in the foreign exchange markets 
continues to disturb me, Mr. Chairman, but I believe the suggestion 
that you made deals with that directly and forthrightly. Meantime, 
alternative 11 just as it is shown [in the Bluebook] is acceptable to 
me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Dave? 

MR. EASTBURN. Alternative I1 



7/11/79 -45- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Willis has alternative 11, also. Bob 

MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, I guess my preference is based more 
on intuition than anything else. My inclination is to hold the funds 
rate where it is and hope that the aggregates do slow from the 
excessive pace that they recorded in June. But more than most people 
around here, I think our [actions] ought to be guided by the behavior 
of the aggregates; that ought to be what triggers our operations on 
the funds rate. In that connection I think we ought to recognize that 
the aggregates are well within their ranges. However, it’s not 
entirely the points at which the aggregates rest, but rather in part 
the slope of the aggregates. And for the last four months there have 
been some pretty steep positive slopes. If that continues, which I 
don‘t really anticipate, I think we ought to be prepared to move on up 
[on the funds rate]. So, in short, I would buy alternative I1 with 
the money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, alternative I1 with money market. 
Emmett. 

MR.  RICE. Alternative 11. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. iw. Chairman, if it were not for the 
international markets, I would be recommending alternative I. What I 
am worried about is that we are never going to get to a point that we 
start easing that the money markets are not going to get upset. It‘s 
just a matter of picking our time, and- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. When we want to upset them. 

MS. TEETERS. When we want to upset the foreign exchange 
markets and how much of an upset is going to occur, even if we keep 
with a constant policy at the present time. And as I said earlier, I 
think our first move is going to have the most impact. When we start 
moving [rates] down, subsequent moves aren’t really going to have the 
announcement effect. I guess I’m not quite ready yet to make the move 
in the international markets. But [the time] is going to come and we 
are not going to avoid that upset in the international markets. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, we don‘t have to take the week in which 
the Bundesbank is going to raise their discount rate. 

MS. TEETERS. well, you’ll always find someone who’s moving 
up. If it‘s not the Bundesbank it’ll be England or something. I 
would go with alternative 11. It is not my preference; my preference 
is alternative I. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Nancy. But in deference to 
the international situarion, I would postpone the reduction in the 
funds rate until next week. [But] the fact of the matter is it’s 
going to get worse and worse and worse. And if those people are going 
to follow a policy of deliberate appreciation in their currencies, 
which is what the British are doing certainly, and I think the Germans 
are also-- 



1 / 1 1 / 7 9  -46- 

MR. WALLICH. Very, very reluctantly, they are doing it 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don’t think we ought to get dragged 
along with them into a worldwide depression. And I think we ought to 
stop it. So I agree, but what I would do is take the aggregates 
specifications--. Well, I would take all of the specifications. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In which [alternative]? 

MR. PARTEE. Those of alternative 11, but I‘d call for an 
immediate reduction in the funds rate to 10 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. 

M R .  PARTEE. A reduction in the funds rate next week 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now we got it. Next week--in one week or I 
days. You want the President to get a speech off first. 

MR. PARTEE. We have had one of the sharpest declines [in 
retail sales], as far as I can recall, over 4 or 5 months. It‘s 
really staggering when you consider the size of that component in GNP, 
to have a 6 - l / 2  or 7 - 1 / 2  percent decline over a 5-month period. 

MR. WALLICH. Think of what people are going to be buying 
once they get gasoline again. 

MS. TEETERS. They can’t afford anything else 

MR. PARTEE. At $1.25 a gallon. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that‘s really the explanation for 
the declining retail sales--and there must be something to it--I don’t 
think the remedy is monetary policy but rather fiscal policy. My main 
concern here would be that we not move right away on the funds rate 
without some considerable provocation. I think we have to keep in 
mind the international situation but always against the perspective of 
accelerating inflation. It may yet require some action in raising the 
fed funds rate, but that leaves me happy with a 10 to 1 0 - 1 / 2  percent 
range--that will do--and I’d do nothing at the moment. Probably I‘d 
have the money market directive. I am bothered by the ranges under 
alternative I1 simply because this month our own staff’s projections 
for aggregate growth are much lower than the Board staff’s. They are 
outside the ranges proposed here already on the low side, which will 
be contrary to the idea of not changing the fed funds rate if those 
[projections] came out to be right. I don’t think one can put much 
weight on either of these projections; this just indicates that the 
money supply unfortunately is pretty much a random number for the 
month. So I would stick with the money market directive, and I would 
prefer a wider range on [the aggregates]. I would really prefer 0 to 
6 or 6-1 /2  percent or 1 / 2  to 6 - 1 / 2  or something like that [on M 1 1  and 
5 to 9 percent on M2. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, thank you. Phil did we get your 
specifications on M1 and MZ? 



7/11/79 -47- 

MR. COLDWELL. I took all of alternative 111, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Alternative 111, okay. Let’s get those in 
there. Now, let me ask two questions first. [Unintelligible] even 
with the specifications of leaving the funds rate at 10-1/4 percent. 
One is that we didn’t get a complete indication--though I believe we 
covered everyone--of preferences for a money market or an aggregates 
directive. Is it critical to the ranges that we resolve that first? 
John. 

~fl. BALLES. 1 forgot to mention, Mr. Chairman, a monetary 
aggregates directive [is my preference]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Aggregates. Okay. Bob Black, you said a 
money market directive, I believe. 

MR. BLACK. I tend to think we ought to have different ranges 
when we have a money market directive than when we have an aggregates 
one because the trigger points are different. Others apparently don‘t 
see that distinction, which I see. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It is supposed to be that way. We haven’t 
operated that way much, recently. Phil, you wanted which one? 

MR. COLDWELL. Money market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Money market. And Bones you wanted an 
aggregates? 

MR. KIMBREL. I have a slight preference for a money [market 
directive]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m sorry, we just got it down wrong. See, 
that’s why we need to check these. Bob Mayo is for money market. 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess I‘ll take money market this time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Emmett. 

MR. RICE. Money market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Money market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Paul said money market. Henry 

MR. WALLlCH. Money market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, that’s very interesting. So it looks 
like everybody is for a money market directive except John Balles--or 
me, and I haven’t said what I’m for. 

MR. BALLES. It’s clear I‘m out-voted. 



7/11/79 -48 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don't know that I'll add too much to this 
conversation. I do think that one of the things that will affect our 
actual short-term policy, as distinguished from what we direct today, 
is the outcome of the President's announced program. If it is a 
powerful program that causes a positive reaction in markets, it may 
give us more running room to look at this differently. On the other 
hand, if it's a weak program and perceived to be so, we may have 
enormous pressures on us in another direction. I think we are likely 
to be in consultation next week one way or the other. My preference 
would be for all of us to bear in mind that we shouldn't get too 
locked into what we say until we hear what comes out of that and then 
we should probably re-assess our thinking because we just can't 
predict what we will think. 

Having said that, [according to my count] a lot of you are 
for alternative I1 with a few variations. There doesn't seem to be 
much disagreement on maintaining the present level of the fed funds 
rate at 10-1/4 percent. Of the voting members, Chuck, I think you are 
the only one who suggested--Frank did as a nonvoting member--a near- 
term move down on the [funds rate]. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I take it on the fact that we don't know 
what the President is going to say on the oil crisis. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, then that gives us everybody standing 
still here. There's an overwhelming preference for a money market 
directive. This gives us on M1 a preponderance of preference for the 
2-1/2 to 6-l/2 percent range. On M2 there is a preponderance of 6-1/2 
to 10-1/2 percent and on the range for fed funds a preponderance of-- 
it really looks like alternative I1 is it. 

Before we vote on that, I would like to take seriously John 
Balles' suggestion that in the directive we give more weight to M2. 
And I would like an expression of sentiment from the voting members on 
whether you would be so inclined or whether you would prefer to 
continue with the equal weight. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, before the Committee Votes on 
that, I ought to bring to their attention special factors in this 
area. The most obvious is that what will affect M2 particularly is 
whether the 6-month bill rate happens to be just below 9 percent or 
above 9 percent. That has turned out to have a very pronounced 
effect. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Increased M2 

MR. AXILROD. That's right 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now it's back to where there is no rate 
advantage. 

MR. AXILROD. If it goes below 9 percent, then the S&Ls will 
have a greater advantage which can take funds away [from banks]. If 
it goes above 9 percent, the banks have an advantage. There's 
considerable uncertainty in our projections in that area. I just 
wanted to explain that. 



7/11/79 -49- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nevertheless, with that caveat and all the 
other things [involved], what is your preference? Let’s just go down 
[the list]. Paul, would you want to change the weight? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think not. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We heard from John. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. No, in view of Regulation Q. If that were 
removed, I think I would. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. I think not. It might be difficult. I‘d 
rather have no change at the moment. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I’d have no change. We are going to redefine the 
aggregates in January or sometime soon, anyway, and I think this would 
just be confusing. But John’s point is basically correct. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. I think that’s right. I wouldn’t do it now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Emmett. 

MR. RICE. No change. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy 

MS. TEETERS. No change. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I’d like to see it examined because the idea 
has merit but I wouldn‘t do it now because I can’t [assessl the 
implications. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, it looks as if the preference is to 
stay with equal weight. Now having done that, let us see what our 
vote would be on alternative I1 as is with the fed funds rate at 
10-1/4 percent and a money market directive. 

MR. MAYO. With the same range [for fed funds1 of 9-3/4 to 
10-1/2 percent? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, the range we 
now have. Correct. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is this a formal vote? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, a straw vote. Let’s get things going. 



7/11/79 - 5 0 -  

MR. ALTMANN. All right. Vice Chairman Volcker 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I find it very difficult with those 
ranges that high especially. It depends on how permanently fixed that 
10-114 percent rate is or how much provocation it takes to move it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You would like to lower the bottom side of 
that? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think so. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. John. 

MR. BALLES. I'll gulp and say yes. 

MR. ALTMA". 
President Black Yes 
Governor Coldwell I have some reservations, but 

President Kimbrel Yes 
President May0 Yes 
Governor Part.ee 

I'll go with it 

M R .  PARTEE. Well, I'm right on the edge. I can vote for it; 
it's lower ranges that I'd have to vote against. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's on account of Paul. 

MR. ALTMA". 
Governor Teeters Yes 
Governor Wallich 

MR. WALLICH. Are we going to stick by your suggestion, M r .  
Chairman, that if the exchange markets destabilize, we will have a 
meeting? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We will have a meeting, yes. 

MR. WALLICH. ~ l l  right. If we will have a meeting, then I 
will go along. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, that means at the moment we have 
everybody voting for this except Paul, who could gulp and 
[unintelligible] you can do it without a gulp. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can gulp and vote with it, if you 
gulp several times before changing the funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You've noticed how we have gulped all year 
long. If Paul will go with it, I will go with it. That will make a 
demand on us. I think that's pretty good. That's fantastic. I knew 
we would be unanimous this month! Remember, 1 told you that on the 
phone. Now do you believe me? Please don't change your votes now. 

There is one other issue and that is the recommendation with 
respect to foreign currency operations. Do we have [any renewals]? 

MR. PARDEE. No, the swap drawings that we have outstanding 
are simply from this last month, so there's nothing-- 



7/11/19 -51- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We don't have any renewals. We have the 
Mexican swap line situation on which you received a memo. We have 
made no promises except to get [the Committee's] sentiment. If you've 
read the memo, the consideration is do we signal to the Mexican 
central bank that we'd be willing to expand the swap line to $700 
million from the present $350 million and then work out the details? 
That's on the basis that this seems to be something they would like-- 
to improve their general relations with the United States. They claim 
they don't need the swap line and don't intend to use it, but they 
would like to signal a cooperative spirit and the capacity to be 
prepared in the future if they should need it. Again, I don't have 
any particularly strong sentiment. There is some thought on our staff 
that usually the swap lines are changed at the time of their renewals 
in December. The memo indicates that that hasn't been the record. 
The record seems to show dates in August and various other [times]. 
So I'm not sure that we can base our decision on whether the right 
time to do it is at year-end. 

MR. WALLICH. I have great doubts about it, Mr. Chairman, 
because it is a political move. If we do this, I fear we will find 
ourselves approached by the State Department and maybe the Treasury on 
behalf of other countries. That has already been the case at a very 
low level of planning. One person from the State Department has 
raised questions on whether some other countries could be included in 
the swap network. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Could it be foreign policy that-- 

MR. WALLICH. [Unintelligible] foreign policy and 
developmental and so forth, I think, if we do what is probably 
sensible to improve relations with And I 
think we ought to resist this. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The request to us did not come from the 
State Department. 

M R .  WALLICH. No, this came from the Mexicans. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Directly from the-- 

MR. WALLICH. But if we do it for a reason that the State 
Department plainly understands to have a political element, I think 
they will want to have some say in future swap changes. Now, unless 
you've indicated to the Mexicans a great degree of good will and 
intention, I would suggest that we say we'll raise the swap line if 
appropriate, if and when they want to draw on it, but not give a 
bigger credit line in a vacuum, as it were. On top of that, there's 
my own uncertainty as to what the Mexicans really are up to. They're 
borrowing enormously. They need to because they're financing the 
construction of the oil infrastructure. Whether or not this borrowing 
is going well or not, I don't know.  I have the impression that it is 
going well. I have no contrary indication. But they may be uncertain 
and they may want this as a backstop. And they may want it as a means 
of improving their own borrowing posture in the market. I would 
hesitate to be drawn into that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 



7 / 1 1 / 7 9  -52- 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I have some of the reservations Henry 
does. I see it not costing us anything to add more onto their swap 
line. And if this were a crucial position of the State Department and 
foreign policy--that we add to the Mexican swap line--1 guess I'd 
swallow and do it just because it doesn't cost me anything at the 
moment. But I think there is a politicizing of this swap line 
arrangement that we have fought, especially with such countries as 

wanted a swap line because they wanted 
to be a part of the club. Mexico now wants to be a part of a bigger 
club. So I guess I'd have to say that if we are going to do this, we 
do it only as a political reason. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other sentiments? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My conclusion happens to be the same 
as Governor Coldwell's. I think I would do it if it serves some sort 
of positive purpose. I don't know about just doing it without getting 
some confirmation that it is some kind of useful signal. I suspect 
they have some real purposes in mind, along the lines that Governor 
Wallich suggested. They want an additional backstop during a period 
in which they are borrowing very heavily. I would not refuse to give 
it to them if it serves some positive purpose from the standpoint of 
U . S .  policy. 

MR. MAYO. I agree with Paul's statement. 

MR. RICE. I agree, too, but I think the purpose that it 
serves from our point of view is perfectly obvious. And I think it 
would help us at the present time to seem to be willing to be 
forthcoming to the Mexicans. Because I would be willing at this time 
to be forthcoming, that does not mean that I would be willing to see 
it politicized with respect to 
that does not have the oil potential that Mexico does. I don't see 
that as politicizing. I see that as economic. 

MR. COLDWELL. We've had a Venezuelan request too, as I 
recall. 

MR. RICE. Well, that depends again on whether it costs us 
anything and whether it would be helpful in future relations. 

countries that have convertible currencies so that those we mentioned 
here, including ones I myself mentioned, aren't really eligible. My 
concern is that once we get into the political game of doing this to 
pursue a U.S. political advantage we won't be able to hold to that 
line. 

MR. WALLICH. Technically, these things are limited to 

MR. COLDWELL. Is there a possibility, Mr. Chairman, of 
saying to the Mexicans that we will consider this at the year-end 
renewal of these lines and in the meantime do some checking around in 
this government to find out if this is an important element-- 

CHAIIUmN MILLER. Ted? 

MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, in preparation for the meeting, I 
checked with the Treasury Department on two points. One was whether 



7 / 1 1 \ 7 9  -53- 

they had been approached to increase their swap line. They have not 
been approached, 

in a conversation 
down there. Their reaction on the question of whether there is 
political interest--and I only checked with Treasury--was that there 
probably would be some political interest on this side but it’s not 
clear at the moment whether this is the right time to put it in the 
pot. So their advice was to hold off, to indicate that even if there 
was positive sentiment on the Committee we might not make a final 
decision today. 

MR. COLDWELL. You triggered one other thing I meant to ask, 
Ted. What is the Treasury line now? 

M R .  TRUMAN. It’s $ 3 0 0  million though only half of it is 
drawable [under normal circumstances]. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe Treasury ought to-- 

MR. COLDWELL. It might be logical for both of us [to act1 or 
for Treasury by itself-- 

MR. TRUMAN. The Treasury was not pushing us. I asked the 
political questions since they’re a little closer to those. I did not 
check with the State Department on this case. 

MR. COLDWELL. The reason I‘m pushing a bit on this, Mr 
Chairman, is that we had a discussion with 

We sent him over to the Treasury 
Department saying that it‘s their job if they want to make loans for 
political purposes. He was pleading his [case] on the basis that we 
had led him and his poor country into a democratic election and that 
was upsetting all of the financial-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We, the Federal Reserve had? 

MR. COLDWELL. we, the United States government. 

MR. PARTEE. I feel closest to the same reasoning Henry 
[cited] unless somebody says there‘s a strong advantage to it. 

MR. COLDWELL. A n  overriding political reason. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I’m not understanding. Phil, you have 
confused me. You said you didn’t see a reason not to do it becaue it 
didn’t cost us anything. And now you’re saying you are opposed to it. 

M R .  COLDWELL. No. What I said, Mr. Chairman, was that I 
agree it doesn’t cost us anything. But I think it has to be 
demonstrated that there’s an overriding political gain to be achieved 
by this. I would oppose it otherwise. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Scott, did you have anything that you 
wanted to ask? 

MR. PARDEE. No. I’m just wondering [howl we would come out 
on it and what somebody will say to the Mexicans that will-- 



7/11/79 -54-  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We haven't come out yet. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I'd use the word 
"overriding" but I certainly agree that there's no point in making a 
gesture unless somebody knows we are making a gesture. 

MR. PARTEE. Use the word "advantage." 

MR. PARDEE. MY problem on this is that there may be an 
advantage in our relations directly with the Bank of Mexico. There's 
a concern that they have and that we have on the financial side. 
There are a lot of political deals being struck on oil, on emigration, 
and so forth. [Say] all of a sudden the State Department on our side 
and whoever it is on the Mexican side come to some agreement and then 
the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Mexico [are given] some sort of 
order: Okay, you fellows, to finish whatever discussion has been 
going on, here's your part of it. If we separate this discussion on 
the swap increase to some degree--and it is costless if they're not 
going to draw--then we've got a better line of communication directly 
with the Bank of Mexico. Again, if we let them down gently, like 
saying at the end of the year or at some appropriate time we select we 
will talk about increasing the line, at least we have the good 
communications with the Bank of Mexico--and with the least cost, if 
you want to consider it that way. It's a hard one to handle. 

MR. COLDWELL. The bottom line, M r .  Chairman, is that I think 
I'd insist on the Treasury joining us. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. I assume it's irrelevant, Mr. Chairman, that 
they have recently been [picking] up a fair amount of [large 
denomination] bills from the El Paso branch. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, if we are going to go for letting 
them down easy or if we put conditions on it by working for the 
Treasury's participation, I think we lose whatever advantage might be 
gained in doing it. So I think we either do it in a way that seems 
obviously forthcoming and cooperative or we don't do it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Maybe I misunderstood or maybe it has been 
misstated. I did not view this as a political issue. I viewed this 
as [a means of] improving relations with the United States on the 
initiative of the [Mexican central] bank. I have never heard from the 
State Department or anyone else on the subject. [Bank of Mexico 
officials] approached me directly. They came in to see me and said we 
need to build our relations with your country and make them stronger. 
We are a central bank, we'd like to [request an increase in our swap 
line]. That was the proposition. And the advantage was not that they 
wanted to use the money, but they wanted to demonstrate that we are 
working closely together. I don't know. As I say, I don't have any 
particularly strong feelings on this. 

MR. ROOS. Let's have our December meeting in Acapulco! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Pardon me? Oh, you want to go down and 
negotiate in Acapulco you say? Oh, shucks. Well, I'll take this 
under advisement. They don't need to know immediately. Maybe if I 
get any thoughts from the counsel you have given, we'll come back with 



7/11/79 -55- 

a particular suggestion--either that we have a timetable or a 
different approach or something. 

Now we must do something very important, which is to confirm 
that we are going to meet again on August 14 here and by phone in the 
interim should the need arise. Is there any other business? Thank 
you very much. Lunch w i l l  be served. 

END OF MEETING 


	790711meeting
	790711staffstatements
	790711chartshow



