









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDEFAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

September 18, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation '"unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

Staff Statements AwDended to the TranSCriDt 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 



Meeting of F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee 

September 18 ,  1979 

A meeting of t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee was 

h e l d  i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors of t he  F e d e r a l  

Reserve System i n  Washington, D .  C . ,  on Tuesday, September 18, 

1979, beginning a t  9:30 a . m .  

PRESENT: M r .  Volcker ,  Chairman 
M r .  Balles 
M r .  Black 
M r .  Coldwell  
M r .  Kimbrel  
M r .  Mayo 
M r .  Partee 
M r .  Rice 
M r .  S c h u l t z  
X r s .  Teeters 
M r .  Wallich 

Messrs. Guffey ,  Mor r i s ,  Roos, Timlen,  and Winn, 
A l t e r n a t e  Members of t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Xarbet 
Committee 

X d e s s r s .  Baughman and Eas tbu rn ,  P r e s i 2 e n t s  of 
t h e  F e d e r a l  Reserve Banks of Dallas a n d  
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

?$r. Altmacn, S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  Bernard ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  P e t e r s e n ,  General  Counsel 
MI-. O l t m a n ,  Deputy General Counsel 
M r .  Axilrod, Economist 
M r .  Holmes, Adviser  f o r  Market Opera t ions  

Messrs. F t t i n ,  Henry, Keir, Keran, K i c h l i n e ,  
Par themos,  Scheld,  Truman, and Z e i s e l ,  
A s s o c i a t e  Economists 

N r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Manager f o r  Domestic 
O p e r a t i o n s ,  System Open Market Account 

M r .  Pa rdee ,  Manager f o r  Fore ign  O p e r a t i o n s ,  
System Open Market Account 



9/18/79 - 2 -  

Mr. Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of  

Messrs. G e m m i l l  and Kalchbrenner ,  Assoc ia t e  
Governors 

Directors,  D i v i s i o n  of I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
Finance and D i v i s i o n  of Research  and 
S t a t i s t i c s ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y , B o a r d  of Governors 

M r .  P r e l l ,  A s s o c i a t e  Research D i v i s i o n  
O f f i c e r ,  D i v i s i o n  of  Research and 
S t a t i s t i c s ,  Board of Governors  

M s .  F a r a r ,  Economist,  Open Market Secre-  
t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

M r s .  Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market 
Secretar ia t ,  Board of Governors 

Messrs. F o r r e s t a l ,  Gainor and M o r i a r t y ,  
F i r s t  V i c e  P r e s i d e n t s ,  F e d e r a l  
Reserve Banks of A t l a n t a ,  Minneapol i s ,  
and S t .  Louis, r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Messrs. Balbach, Boehne, Burns,  T. Davis ,  
Eisenmenger,  and Fousek, S e n i o r  Sice 
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Federal Reserve Banks of 
S t .  Lou i s ,  P k i l a d e l p h i a ,  gallzs, Sansas  
C i t y ,  Bos ton ,  and, 5e-w Pork ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Messrs. Cor r igan  and Danfo r th ,  V i c e  P r e s i d e n t s ,  
F e d e r a l  Reserve Banks of New York and 
Minneapol i s ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

:ds- L o v e t t ,  Securit ies Trading  Of f i ce r ,  
F e d e r a l  Xeserve BaDk of Kew York 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
September 18, 1979 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We‘ll come to order, if I can find my copy 
of the agenda! I might tell you before we start that we will have a 
small alteration in procedure after the meeting. Instead of traipsing 
over to the dining room for lunch, I thought we would expedite things 
by bringing you a few sandwiches over here. So, we’ll give you a 
break after the meeting and then we will proceed [with discussions] 
around this table while we’re being fed--adequately, I hope. We will 
experiment with this procedure and see how it goes. But that does not 
mean that we should not conclude our work before the usual lunch hour. 

MR. WALLICH. It probably will have that effect. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it has that effect, we’ll have another 
change of procedure at the next meeting! [I need to] get approval of 
the minutes [of the August meeting]. Without objection, they are 
approved. Mr. Pardee. 

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Would you explain briefly for me how the 
foreign exchange swap conducted by the Bundesbank sops up domestic 
liquidity? 

MR. PARDEE. We’re in the process of preparing a paper on 
that, which I hope we will be able to circulate to the Committee. 
They have dollars in their portfolio. They sell those dollars spot to 
the market in exchange for marks. Since what they are effectively 
doing now is simply selling a participation in their holdings of 
Treasury bills, there are no dollars rattling around in the exchange 
market. It‘s simply that the Geman banks come in with marks on a 
spot basis and they will be getting them back in 1 month or 2 months, 
depending on the maturity of [the bills]. So the operation is 
absorbing marks coming in from the banking system. One of the 
problems that the Bundesbank has with this operation is that they may 
be taking liquidity away from the German banks by this process, but 
they are not mopping up really the [other] side--the effect on the 
monetary aggregates of the demand for deposits with German banks. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Thank you. 

MR. ROOS. Scott, you alluded to the fact that as the energy 
induced segment of inflation improves--or recedes--it may bring some 
improvement into the picture. Don‘t most of the foreign exchange 
market partipants really look at the monetary induced part of the 
inflation picture, which of course reflects money growth? Don’t they 
look at that? Don’t they recognize that if total inflation were to be 
reduced from 10 to 8 percent, we’d still have the basic underlying 
money induced part of the inflation? Won‘t that still be their 
primary concern in terms of the market? 

MR. PARDEE. Well, the market is concerned about inflation 
however it is induced. There are some monetarists in the market who 



9/18/79 -2- 

do follow closely the aggregates, but they are just one segment. 
There are others who worry about other things. There are even some 
chartists out there who couldn't care less about any of these broader 
numbers that we work with. But they are concerned about inflation, 
however it is induced. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I don't know what credence we 
ought to put in the rumors, and maybe we shouldn't even bring them to 
this table. One of my directors called up very excited yesterday 
about a rumor that the dollar was going to be devalued, mind you, 
sometime in October. I suspect, but I don't really know, that this is 
a pretty distorted view of what comes out of the press reports about a 
possible realignment of European currencies from the meeting scheduled 
this coming weekend. Is there anything that we ought to know about 
that or are you in a position to tell us? 

MR. PARDEE. People in the market have a lot of questions as 
to what happened over the weekend--there was no communique--and I 
really don't know anything further. As for a devaluation of the 
dollar at this stage, there's no mechanism to do it since we are on a 
floating rate basis. As I Said, we have been looking at this 180 
[German mark] rate that the market has, but we're not wedded to that 
rate any more than we were to other rates. It's just that we are 
caught in this box. The moment we back away or seem to be somehow 
weak in any sense, all of a sudden the speculators--and these include 
people on the I M M  and some of the banks--jump on it. And even more we 
have corporate treasurers and foreign central banks outside the G-10, 
who as I say may be sitting on their hands at this moment. But if the 
dollar should suddenly start [falling], then they will sell. It's a 
very highly unstable equilibrium condition we're in now, where as soon 
as the dollar begins to weaken, then we have selling pressure rather 
than sort of an equilibrating inflow of demand for dollars. So as 
long as the environment remains this highly charged, with so many 
silly things going on--1 had one fellow tell me that the dollar was 
going down because it always goes down in September and that's why he 
was selling dollars. We have the IMF meeting, we have all these other 
meetings, and obviously the dollar, for one reason or other, isn't 
going to come out of this period strong. Yet these people are willing 
to admit that they see around the corner an improvement in the 
underlying conditions because of the data that have come in over the 
past month and other recent months. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCRER. Mr. Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. To say a word in favor of devaluation, it 
strikes me, Scott, that we're not the only ones by far having trouble 
maintaining our currency against the mark. I notice, for example, 
that last week the Swiss were buying their own currency in quantity 
and selling dollars in order to finance it at the same time we were 
selling marks and buying dollars; the two institutions were working at 
cross purposes. 
to keep their rate from rising either. I notice, for example, that 
the figures you've cited and that we've looked at don't show the 
German intervention as being very substantial over this period. Well, 
if everybody is having difficulty maintaining [their currencies] 
against the mark and if the Germans don't much care and aren't doing 

And the Germans don't seem to be doing terribly much 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -3-  

anything about it. why is it that we persist in throwing great amounts 
of money into maintaining this pegged rate of 180 or 181 whatever it 
is? That's the difficulty with going away from the idea of 
intervening [only] in disorderly markets. This is not a disorderly 
market definition. but we intervened in quantity in order to maintain 
a pegged rate. I do believe the term "devaluation" has some 
significance when countries operate as if there is a fixed exchange 
rate. 

MR. PARDEE. I don't think we're operating as if we have a 
fixed exchange rate. 

MR. PARTEE. It's been quite a while that we've been trying 
to keep the rate at 180 or 181. 

MR. PARDEE. The Swiss also have bought dollars once the 
market psychology tipped in the other direction. So their earlier 
sales were in conjunction with a policy of aligning their rate with 
the mark and, as I said, that did trigger some sentiment that the 
Bundesbank was hitting on the exchange rate. But once the franc began 
to rise, they bought dollars just as vigorously as they'd been selling 
dollars before and they are still prepared to do so. They're 
interested in stability. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A couple of comments. I don't think it's 
right to say we're in an interest rate war or anything of that sort, 
as some of the circus newspaper commentary suggests. As near as I can 
see, what the Bundesbank has been doing generally is well justified by 
their internal situation and normal criteria that they would use. 
Their inflation rate has been going up, and they unquestionably don't 
like that, and their economy has been doing pretty well. And they 
seem to be--ebullient may be too strong a word--quite confident about 
the immediate outlook there. By immediate I'm talking 6 to 9 months, 
which is rather encouraging from our standpoint and I think from the 
world's standpoint if it's true. They seem to have a good deal of 
confidence in it. That does not say that they would mind particularly 
if the mark appreciated, and that notion is fairly well imbedded in 
market thinking. On the other hand, I don't think the other Europeans 
want the mark to appreciate because of the opposite side of that coin 
from their standpoint and their own inflationary problems. So they 
are at kind of an impasse within Europe. I think our concern, given 
the psychological situation and the real situation that Scott 
outlined, is whether we can have a moderate decline in the dollar 
against the mark. It's true that the dollar has been appreciating 
against most other currencies. But if the market gets in its head 
that the dollar is really going down, would we be able to stop it 
without spending a lot more money than we're already spending? That 
is the question. And let me say that it would make me very nervous to 
try to control a depreciation at this point, given the underlying 
malaise. 

MR. PARTEE. But what do we do if the rate really does need 
to be 170 instead of 180? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [you say] "does need to be." I 
don't know what that implies. 



9/18/79 -4- 

MR. PARTEE. In terms of purchasing power parity, rates of 
inflation-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What can you say about that? In terms of 
purchasing power parity, you can argue that if 180 was right six 
months ago, something less than 180 ought to be right now. But that 
assumes that 180 was right some months ago, which nobody knows. In 
fact, I get the impression that many people here and abroad [thought 
that 180 was really too low six months ago. And I think you have to 
argue that; otherwise the logic would follow pretty precisely. But 
there is this question of how to prevent the [decline] from getting 
out of hand if it happens. Just in case any of you are wondering, 
this was not a great decision-making meeting in Paris last weekend. 
lot of it was devoted to [issues] on the IMF agenda, which are not 
particularly relevant to current exchange market or economic policy 

A 

developments. But there was an exchange of views about the business 
outlook and about policy without any attempt to arrive at any specific 
operating conclusion. These meetings are a chance to exchange views 
about the outlook and about policy postures, but [the issue] was not 
pressed very far, certainly not in an opertional mode. Have you got 
any recommendations, Mr. Pardee? 

MR. PARDEE. Well, if you want to cover them now, yes. Over 
the next month we will be going through the first cycle of renewal of 
the swaps that we incurred in the operations in late June and in late 
July. These involve some 17 swaps, totaling $1,797,000,000. It's the 
first renewal; I'm just reporting it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a proposal to provide for the 
first renewals if and when necessary, I take it, and I assume they 
will be necessary. Any discussion? Without objection, I think that 
is done. Now we have to ratify the transactions, too. I guess I 
skipped over that. Would someone like to so move? Without objection 
they will be ratified. Mr. Sternlight. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, on the last point, I think it's 
ridiculous. Can't we at least get some action [by] the responsible 
part of Congress to quit this nonsense? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to volunteer, Mr. Coldwell? 
I think we can duly note that that's the unanimous view. 

MR. MAYO. Doesn't the new bill give us some promise, though, 
that they're going to try to put in a system where the [increase in 
the debt ceiling] would be sort of automatic without all the testimony 
and hocus pocus? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how automatic it will be; I 
know very little about it. I know they're trying to hoist it off on 
the budget committee and I don't know whether that's going to 
[happen] . 

MR. STERNLIGHT. They're trying to tie the debt ceiling to 
the budget resolution, but whether that will-- 



9/18/79 -5- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There obviously is logic in that, but 
whether it's just going to make the budget resolution that much more 
difficult, [I don't know]. Mrs. Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. The problem of putting it in the budget 
resolution is that the resolution is not signed by the President. 
They have to make some sort of alteration in their resolution in order 
to have it signed by the President. 

MR. WALLICH. I would remind you that this is an opportunity 
to talk about the budget deficit and, therefore, not to be completely 
despised even though it is rather illogical to first vote [in favor 
of1 the deficit and then refuse to allow it to be financed. But it 
gives the defeated party a chance to come back a second time and 
criticize. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the theory. It seldom happens in 
any very orderly way. 

MR. MAYO. Well, it's such a waste of time. The Secretary of 
the Treasury and the staff have to spend untold hours getting ready 
for something that really involves just spinning wheels. 

M R .  PARTEE. It seems like it comes around a couple of times 
a year now. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Among other things, [they] have escalated 
[the] social security [issue]. It's fully escalated because it was 
attached to a debt ceiling goal once when we sat there and wondered 
whether it should be vetoed or not. 

We have to ratify the [domestic] transactions, if there are 
no further questions. 

MR. MAYO. So moved. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that is done. Mr. 
Kichline. 

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder if we can confine our comments 
now to rather pointed questions. Mr. Coldwell. 

MR. WALLICH. Jim, in the change of your output [forecast]-- 
and I don't mean to be critical because you've obviously got to change 
it as things [evolve]--there seems to be a shift, by a rather sizable 
amount, between the third and fourth quarters on real GNP. You've 
increased the third quarter by 2-1/2 percentage points and decreased 
the fourth quarter by 1.1 percentage points. I hear what you're 
saying in terms of consumption being a cause of the third-quarter 
increase as opposed to prior expectations. I gather that inventories 
went up a bit faster than you had anticipated, which may be the cause 
of most of the shift. The fourth quarter, though, I read you as 
saying GNP declines in conjunction with [reduced] housing starts and 
maybe capital spending. Am I reading you right? Are those the 
principal reasons for this shift? 



9/18/79 - 6 -  

MR. KICHLINE. Those don't account for most of the revisions. 
We have anticipated them for some time. The bulk of the difference 
between Q3 and Q4--that is, getting a deeper negative in Q4--is the 
inventory side. Other than that, we have had most of the changes 
built in for some time. The biggest changes really were in Q3 and 
represent past data. As a matter of fact, in real terms we raised 
final sales in the third quarter by about $6 billion and $4-1/4 
billion of that is consumption. A lot of that is autos. So I would 
say that for the third quarter final sales are stronger, and the 
fourth quarter mainly involves adjusting downward the drag of 
inventories. 

MR. COLDWELL. For the fourth quarter you're saying 
consumption is reasonably stable? 

MR. KICHLINE. It's declining slightly in real terms; it's 
down 1 percent in real terms and we had it down a half percent in real 
terms last month. 

MR. COLDWELL. S o  your swing in these two quarters is 
principally an inventory swing. Is that what you're saying? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's [a swing of] $16 billion dollars 
from the third quarter to the fourth quarter, and that would translate 
into roughly 2-112 to 3 percentage points at an annual rate. 

MR. COLDWELL. Which is about the difference-- 

MS. TEETERS. One question, Jim: Is this the first time 
you've shown an actual liquidation of inventories? 

MR. KICHLINE. I think we had the courage of forecasting a 
minus 0.1 a couple of months ago, but it was very small. 

MS. TEETERS. And you haven't shifted the timing of that 
liquidation? 

MR. KICHLINE. No, but the size of it has become different; 
that is, the second- and third-quarter accumulation has been larger 
than we had anticipated earlier and we now have a larger correction in 
the fourth quarter. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a pretty good decline in goods 
consumption in that quarter. Mr. Timlen. 

M R .  TIMLEN. Jim, my question relates to the development of 
last Friday, the apparent settlement of the General Motors 
negotiations. I was wondering if you had any hard information as to 
the terms of that contract as signed and what implications it may have 
for prices and as a precedent for other contracts or a possible 
reopening of contracts in 1980. 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we don't have detailed information. We 
checked late last night and found that the Council on Wage and Price 
Stability didn't have the contract yet, so I didn't get so discouraged 
about not knowing the details. We do know that the wage increase was 
pretty much in line with past contracts; on our estimate we would 
assume that it might amount to about a 28 percent wage increase over 3 



9/18/79 -1- 

years. Pension benefits for current retirees were also raised but we 
don't know how that would be valued and we don't have the details. 
Our general expectation right now is that it probably is in the 33 to 
35 percent range for a 3-year period. I don't know how that will be 
priced out by the Council on Wage and Price Stability. It may well 
fit within the guidelines. But in any event-- 

MR. PARTEE. That's about the area of the teamsters 
[settlement], isn't it? 

MR. KICHLINE. That's right, it's not really out of line with 
what we had expected earlier but it is a sizable increase. S o  the 
publicity associated with that I think would have a negative effect in 
terms of holding wages down. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have much better information but 
what I have conforms with what Mr. Kichline just said. Mr. Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Jim, you have a rather strange looking pattern 
in the quarterly trend in the GNP deflator, if I've got the right 
numbers here. For this year it's 9.3 percent in the first quarter, 
9.2 in the second, 8.1 in the third, and then it suddenly jumps to 
10.3 in the fourth quarter. There's probably an answer for that, but 
what is it? 

MR. KICHLINE. The federal government pay raise. 

MR. BALLES. Could that be the entire [reason] as far as you 
see it? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's a large part of it. The pay 
raise will be a I percent increase, and I don't think the seasonals 
take proper account of that. It's a shift in mix. The fixed weight 
[measure] is actually declining 0.2  percent from the third to the 
fourth quarter. There may be other factors at work, I'm not sure. 
But the fourth quarter usually is one to look at for a pay raise at 
the federal level. 

MR. BALLES. I realize that that's a factor. I'm just 
surprised at the magnitude--that it could swing the whole GNP deflator 
by a point and a half. I'm not questioning the figure; I'm just 
expressing my surprise. 

MR. KICHLINE. I don't know, something else may be at work. 
I just can't answer your question other than that the federal pay 
raise is one influence and I would think it would be the major factor. 

MR. TRUMAN. We also have [for] the third quarter an increase 
in the import prices--because of the oil price increase--which has a 
depressing effect on the measured GNP deflator in the third quarter. 
so some of the third quarter "lowness," if I might put it that way, is 
in the deflator itself; we don't see so much in the fixed weight, PCE 
measure. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN. I think we ought to look at the wage behavior of 
this year with a sense of encouragement, not discouragement. With 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -8-  

inflation running what it is, I think it's surprising that the 
settlements in the electrical area and even in the automobile area for 
current employees have been remarkably restrained. Maybe they've done 
a better job than we have here in terms of inflation problems. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say even "in the automobile area." I 
take it you-- 

MR. WINN. Well, in this case, for current employees it looks 
as if the total cost might come out to 11 percent--that's my estimate 
--on an annual basis. [The total is] 33 to 35 percent and part of 
that is for the retirees, not for the current employees. So if you 
adjust that back down, given double digit inflation behavior, I think 
that's remarkable restraint, really, in the labor area. 

MR. TIMLEN. But does the 33 and 34 percent include the extra 
time off, extra vacations? 

MR. KICHLINE. It does not. 

MR. WINN. But the electrical settlement really wasn't that-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what you say has some 
validity looking backwards. I don't know where to put the automobile 
agreement; I have a little doubt about that. That's a question we 
have: Looking forward, will that rather favorable record, considering 
what has been happening in prices, be sustained? I think this is one 
of the major issues we have here. 

MR. WINN. I understand that this is not making our problem 
any easier, but I think we ought to recognize that there has been some 
restraint this year. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say in terms of these guidelines 
that I don't feel up-to-date on that and I don't know the details. I 
understand the argument has been whether to have a guideline at all, 
with the alternative being this tripartite labor/management/public 
commission to look at wage settlements and pricing behavior. It gets 
posed in those [unintelligible] terms because I take it that labor has 
said that they will not participate in a tripartite arrangement with 
any numerical guideline. The Administration likes the idea of the 
tripartite commission but has not been willing, so far anyway, to go 
along with the idea of giving [the commission] absolutely no guidance 
in terms of numerical guidelines. That's where the impasse is. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think they'd be well advised to drop the 
guidelines. To raise the guideline going into a recession doesn't 
seem to me to be a great contribution toward stability. And all these 
inequities and distortions are building as we go along. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a tempting course except when 
you look at what I think Willis, by implication, was referring to. 
Wages have been fairly well restrained given this price behavior and 
given the pressure for a catch-up. S o ,  is it really wise to drop [the 
guidelines] right now? That's basically the issue they're struggling 
with--the fear that everybody will say they want a very sizable catch- 
up. I was startled the other day when the FAC was here. At a dinner 



9/18/79 -9- 

--I think most of the Board members were there--the bankers were 
arguing for some catch-up and some understanding. They were arguing 
in general terms until one banker kind of let the cat out of the bag 
and said we want, for instance, 11 percent this year. That is quite a 
bit; he's talking about a nonunionized work force that presumably was 
[getting] 7 percent. Well, if you suddenly jump from 7 to 11, even 
nominally--I don't know how typical that is but this is the way one 
fellow was thinking--where does that leave you? That's what they're 
worried about. They say that's just a catch-up and it's only for one 
year, but if you build it into your [whole] labor force what happens? 
It's not an easy issue. I was tempted by the position that you took 
and the more I thought about it, it seemed awfully risky. The 
recession hasn't gone far enough to have any restraining influence. 
Any other questions on [the staff's presentation]? 

MR. WINN. I'd just like to make one more comment, Paul. It 
seems to me that we're in an environment in which we have the most 
advertised recession in history, with talking our way into it perhaps 
contributing more because I think we're going to get an uptick in this 
third quarter, too. I don't know how that's going to be manipulated 
from a press [standpoint]. When you talk to business people they all 
tell you that their business is still very strong. But then they will 
"bad mouth" because everybody else is bad mouthing and that's what 
they read. I think psychologically we may have built ourselves into a 
box. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A strange phenomenon, I confess, is that 
everybody has assumed we are in a recession and we are getting an 
increase in the gross national product. I don't know. That's still a 
forecast, of course. 

MR. PARTEE. The businessmen always say that, Willis. 

M R .  WINN. I know, but they read it in the press. 

MR. PARTEE. Their business is off 1 percent from the very 
highest level it ever reached: that's a very good rate of operation. 
It's the inflection, and I thought the Redbook started to point out 
quite a few areas of inflection. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just add one question, Mr. 
Kichline: How do you get an increase in output per hour in the fourth 
quarter while the gross national product is declining significantly? 

M R .  KICHLINE. We have a substantial employment adjustment 
built into this forecast, so it's coming out of labor input. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be unusual at that early 
stage--wouldn't it--of a decline [in activity]? Can that adjustment 
move that fast? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's part of what would be a fairly 
smooth and rapid adjustment, which is built into our forecast on the 
inventory side. My view would be that I have been surprised that we 
haven't had more in the way of reduction of labor input to date. And 
in light of new information on inventories and final sales, it becomes 
clear. But I don't think it's unusual. The August reading was one 
that seems to me to point in that direction and once that has begun, 



9/18/79 -10- 

if you look back at prior recessions, it has gone on quite quickly for 
several months in a row. So I would think we're on reasonably safe 
ground in expecting labor input to drop off in the fourth quarter. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have unemployment getting to where by 
the end of the year? 

MR. KICHLINE. Averaging about 6.9  percent for the fourth 
quarter, so it would be close to a 7 percent or 7 . 2  percent rate [in 
December]. 

MR. WINN. I don't want to monopolize this, but I'd like to 
raise one more question about your inventory calculation for the 
fourth quarter. We're going to have a big crop harvest in corn and 
soy beans and with the price changes being what they were I wonder if 
that may not throw the inventory calculation off again in that period 
[unintelligible] storage space. 

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. I'd say the price side is a 
very tricky part of this. We have in the third quarter an inventory 
valuation adjustment of slightly over $40 billion, and once it gets 
into those huge ranges, it becomes very difficult. In the fourth 
quarter, we expect something smaller but still large to prevail. On 
the crop side, I would only say that exports have been coming along 
very well; it may not show up in nonfarm or farm inventories here. In 
addition we have built into the forecast some taking up of those crops 
by the Federal government in terms of the Commodity Credit 
Corporation, so it may not appear in private sector inventories. 

MR. MAYO. One of the main problems on the crop issue is the 
inability to move the crops. Rail capacity is very low. With the 
Rock Island strike and so forth, the Iowa farmers are really going to 
[unintelligible]; they just can't move anything. They still have a 
large share of last year's crop sitting there. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, do you want to give us a 
perspective on financial relationships? 

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a couple of questions. You 
went over three reasons why the money supply increased more rapidly 
over the late spring and summer. It struck me last night that there 
may be an additional reason. I'll just comment on it. You do all 
these equations and everything else to get something called gross 
national product, which is the gross domestic product. And you have a 
price rise in there, whatever it is, of less than 10 percent or around 
10 percent. In fact, we've had a big increase in the oil bill as 
well, which doesn't enter into the gross national product. It leads 
to a considerable discrepancy on other price indices from the gross 
national product deflator. [What] if we said in some sense that the 
additional money supply was financing the additional oil imports? 

MR. AXILROD. It's quite possible; these equations may very 
well not be picking up the true transactions needs if they don't have 
the full price effects of the imported prices in them. And they 
don't. The GNP is measuring domestic output prices. So that's quite 
possible, in which case we would not really be supplying more money 



-11- 

than historical relationships would suggest but about the same amount. 
In either event, [money growth] would be rapid but we‘d have a 
somewhat different explanation of what we might expect in the future. 
It would tend to argue less, I would think, for a slowdown in the 
future [stemming from people1 just deciding to invest their excess 
cash but would depend more critically on a real slowing in the 
economy. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or one would hope to get a leveling in the 
import prices. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was confused last night when I looked 
hastily at these flow-of-funds projections. Maybe there is an obvious 
explanation but we talk about short-term credit demands and commercial 
bank demands being very heavy these days. When we look at these 
figures for the half year--we only have them on the half-year basis-- 
they show a decline in total credit demands. There’s a decline in the 
first half of the year and then a further decline in the second half. 
If I look at bank credit it slows from the first half to the second 
half and the decline is a little steeper in business loans. If I look 
at demands for nonfinancial corporate businesses, they are declining; 
the rate of growth in short-term debt declines significantly. And I 
look at the household [sector] and they have a rapid increase in 
deposits and a decline in direct purchases of credit market 
instruments. I don’t know where money market funds are in there. Are 
they under credit market instruments? 

MR. PRELL. They’ve been shifted, I think, this month. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that helps explain it. Even so, 
[their growth] was fast in the first half of the year, too. But this 
column of figures seems a little inconsistent with what we talk about 
happening in the market in the short run. Is that because we got a 
drastic change in the fourth quarter or what? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, there is a considerable drop in what we 
projected in bank loans and commercial paper raised in the fourth 
quarter. A l s o ,  we were talking mainly about business credit demands 
but there has been a slackening currently in consumer credit demands. 
S o  we have a little tapering off in the current quarter relative to 
the second quarter and essentially we are in a downward trend in terms 
of credit demands and credit funds raised in the second half of the 
year beginning about now--just as we‘re supposed to be getting a lower 
growth in money beginning about now. These are in our projections. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven’t looked at the quarterly figures, 
but one reading of this is that it does [suggest that] we’re on the 
verge of a rather steep decline in the fourth quarter. Do you have 
quarterly figures? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, we have total funds raised coming down in 
the third quarter relative to the second, but the second quarter was 
an unusual peak. 
though well below the second and then it goes down further in the 
fourth quarter. But again, the fourth quarter remains above the first 
quarter. 

And the third quarter is above the first quarter, 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -12- 

MR. KICHLINE. I might note that in the third quarter the 
evidence we now have--or at least it is our current projection on the 
consumer side--suggests that household funds borrowed will drop $14 
billion at an annual rate from the second-quarter level. And going 
into the fourth quarter, that's down another $1 billion. So in the 
household sector, we think [a slowdown in borrowing] is under way in 
the third quarter. With regard to nonfinancial businesses, we 
currently project total funds raised to be down about $8 billion in 
the current quarter and down an additional $18 billion in the fourth 
quarter. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the third quarter will show a big 
increase in bank loans and-- 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, it's not all that unusual to have a 
burst in bank credit as the economy moves into recession. The cash 
flow of business is-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My question is why it didn't show up in 
these figures. 

MR. KICHLINE. We have business loans projected to be 
increasing slightly less than the terrifically high second-quarter 
pace. So in the current quarter it is down $6 or $1 billion at an 
annual rate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is down. 

MR. KICHLINE. And it drops $14 to $15 billion in the fourth 
quarter. 

MR. AXILROD. However, I would add, Mr. Chairman, that that's 
partly offset in the short-term markets by an increase in borrowing in 
the commercial paper market. We have a projection for September which 
has lower business loans than we had in July and August. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a quarterly figure here now, which 
shows a very sharp drop in the fourth quarter in the short-term debt 
of nonfinancial corporations. It's very sharp. Mr. Roos. 

MR. ROOS. Yes sir, Mr. Chairman. In listening to Steve, I 
found myself very much confused or disturbed by an underlying question 
that maybe he or someone else can answer. In Steve's analysis of 
what's happening in M1, he decribed three possible or at least two 
exogenous factors. One is the public's desire to draw down cash 
balances and the possibility that somewhere along the line the public 
added to cash balances. Steve did allude to the possibility that we 
contributed to the explosion of M1 by trying to stabilize the fed 
funds rate at a time of strong credit demands. I think you, Mr. 
Chairman, mentioned the possibility of the oil situation contributing 
to this. I get the feeling that we sort of feel that these exogenous 
factors that are beyond our control are really what leads to an 
unexpected explosion in the rate of M1 growth. Then when Steve gets 
to his suggested alternatives, he essentially concentrates, if I heard 
him correctly, on what we ought to do on the fed funds rate--either 
stand pat or let it tick [up] or let it recede. My question, and I 
ask this really as a noneconomist, is: Can't we through our open 
market operations control the rate of M1 growth in spite of these 



9/18/79 -13- 

exogenous factors? I get the feeling that we continue to react to 
some [developments1 out there that we can’t control. Couldn’t we in 
this room this morning, if we decided that we really wanted to, set a 
target for M1 growth and mechanically through open market operations 
over a long period of time achieve that target? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod 

MR. PARTEE. The answer is yes. 

MR. AXILROD. I’ll be very elliptical, Mr. Chairman, in the 
interest of saving time. I was of course couching my own discussion 
in the terms in which the Committee has been framing its policies. If 
the Committee had been framing its policies in terms of the monetary 
base or reserves or something like that as an operating device, I 
would have couched the discussion in those terms. It’s perfectly true 
that the monetary base or reserves have expanded much more rapidly in 
the past two or three months than they had in the previous two or 
three months. In part that‘s because of efforts to hold the funds 
rate down; in part it’s because currency, which has a bigger weight in 
the base, has increased more rapidly. And in part it’s because banks 
have begun adding to holdings of CDs and absorbing more reserves that 
way, whereas in the two or three previous months when M1 had been 
growing CDs had been dropping, releasing reserves available to support 
money. So reserve growth didn’t have to be as rapid in order to 
support the same amount of money. I add those latter factors in order 
to indicate how complicated it is to have a relationship between 
reserves and money that is stable because the deposit mix and thus the 
need for reserves is constantly shifting, and preferences for currency 
versus deposits are constantly shifting. So it’s very hard to come 
before the Committee and say: If you set the monetary base or 
reserves to grow this much, I can guarantee this much money. And it 
would be even more difficult to tell the Committee what federal funds 
rate or what interest rates are likely to emerge from that--questions 
the Committee obviously would want to and need to know. 

S o  I’m not saying it’s impossible and I‘m not even really 
indicating my preferences in the matter. But it’s not going to be any 
less difficult, in a practical way, to control money with reserves 
than it is to control it with the federal funds rate because it will 
always involve the Committee in two decisions. [First], what should 
be its fundamental target. Is the money target that it is setting 
right or wrong and should it [change] in light of changing 
circumstances? And [second], what is it going to do about interest 
rates? Does the Committee in fact want them to go up or down in the 
way that they would be going if we adhere fairly ridgidly to a preset 
reserve target. I hasten to add that I don’t mean to say that I don‘t 
think it would be useful to have a reserve or a base target. 
Personally, I happen to think it would be useful. 

M R .  ROOS. Well, Paul, the reason I asked the question--and I 
ask it purely in a constructive way, not to just reopen the classical 
argument--is because of the problems that we’ve had in controlling 
money growth. [Given] your statements, which I think are great, that 
we’re never going to accomplish our ultimate goal until we achieve 
some discipline in terms of monetary growth, couldn‘t we discuss these 
issues again? Maybe I am out of order to raise this now, but couldn’t 
there be a discussion again of whether or not our traditional policy 



9/18/79 -14- 

of targeting on interest rates, in spite of the possible adverse 
consequences in terms of money growth, [is appropriate]? Shouldn’t 
this be given another look in view of everything you‘ve said and in 
view of the less than happy experience that the FOMC has had over the 
past years in achieving its goals of stability in terms of the 
inflation problem? Shouldn‘t we take a look at this in some way? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My feeling would be that you’re not out of 
order in raising that question, Mr. Roos. We would be out of order in 
having an extended discussion of it today, because I don’t think we’re 
going to resolve it. I presume that today, for better or worse, we 
have to couch our policy in what has become the traditional framework. 
But I think it is a very relevant question, which has come up from 
time to time, and I think we should be exploring it again in the 
relatively near future. And I would plan to do so. 

MR. MORRIS. Do we still have the Committee on the Directive? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we do, and we‘ll consult with that 
Committee. Are there any other questions specifically directed toward 
Steve‘s report before we open [the discussion1 up more generally? 

MR. BALLES. Steve, I’d just like to deal with the first of 
the three possible explanations that you gave. If I heard the words 
right, I interpreted you as saying that there has been some revival in 
money demand. 

MR. AXILROD. In the first one, I was trying to say that to 
some extent people may have reduced their demand deposits and savings 
deposits earlier because of ATS accounts and the high interest rates 
and found that they just couldn‘t run with such small deposits so 
they’ve put some back in. [I would] just sort of forget that 
addition; it‘s an offset. 

MR. BALLES. I realize that‘s a possibility. I must say I’m 
skeptical, though, as I look at the sharp rise we‘ve had in short-term 
interest rates in that same period when the growth of the Ms has taken 
place. I would have thought that would have encouraged further the 
use of RPs and money market instruments, and we know from the facts 
that that did occur. So I find it difficult to believe that that’s a 
plausible explanation or a very solid one. 

MR. AXILROD. Of the three explanations, I would put the 
lowest probability myself on that one. 

MR. BALLES. I would, too. 

MR. AXILROD. It’s relatively low, but in the absence of 
evidence I was reluctant even to weigh them. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if there are no other questions-- 

MR. PARTEE. Well, on that point though, John, we were 
getting an increase in velocity of 9 . 8  percent in the fourth quarter 
and 12.3 percent in the first quarter. That just couldn’t continue. 
It may have gone too far the other way: it was negative in the second 
and third quarters--or slightly negative. Certainly something was 



9/18/79 -15- 

going on there in the way of a shift. It was a rate that just 
couldn't continue. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm still confused somewhat by these 
figures when 1 look at the quarterly flow of funds. We have had 
higher interest rates recently, which are normally accompanied by an 
increase in individual purchases of credit market instruments, if I 
remember these flow-of-funds ambulations correctly, and a decline in 
deposits. Instead, we had an enormous increase in deposit holdings by 
individuals and a very big decline in the rate of growth of credit 
market instrument holdings during the third quarter when interest 
rates were rising. We'd normally expect the reverse to happen. 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's in part the definition of money 
market mutual funds, the problem in the switch from-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You just [reclassified them] between those 
two quarters without telling anybody. 

MR. KICHLINE. No, but money market funds grew very rapidly 
[and] the structure was changed. Between the second and third 
quarters money market funds are expected to have grown very rapidly at 
an annual rate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they're in deposits. 

MR. KICHLINE. And they're in deposits, not in credit market 
instruments. So if you look at past history, it's quite a distorted 
picture. 

M S .  TEETERS. Didn't you correct the history? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we didn't have any money market mutual 
funds pre-1974, so if you look at-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't reclassify them between the 
second and third quarters; it's just that they've grown more rapidly. 

MR. PRELL. The second quarter was also changed. The numbers 
are consistent. What you have in the first half of the year in effect 
was that households purchased a lot of Treasury securities at a time 
when foreign central banks were selling off Treasury securities. In 
terms of the overall pattern of flows-- 

MR. KICHLINE. Excuse me, relative to 1966, 1969, and 1970, 
given our treatment of these securities today, we're finding a money 
market type instrument being classified as a deposit. It's really the 
same [phenomenon] as in 1966, 1969, and 1970 when funds moved out of 
banks into other higher yielding instruments. 

MR. AXILROD. There is one other factor, Chairman Volcker. 
Beginning in that period in the second half where we had that sharp 
swing back to savings deposits, which I have been interpreting as part 
of this precautionary mood [response], they had been declining rather 
sharply. Then they've been increasing in very recent months and that 
swing would also affect these numbers. It may not be the major factor 
but it's another element different from previous cycles that may be 
affecting these numbers. 



9/18/79 -16- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's proceed with general comments 
on the business outlook and policy prejudices--or policy orientation 
anyway. Mr. Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, first let me make just a comment 
on retail sales. We are probably the only District that has 
maintained that questionable old series on department store sales, but 
in the four weeks ending on September 8, such sales showed a very 
strong increase relative to the year-ago period. All in all, that 
average was up 10 percent whereas cumulatively through [September 81 
from the beginning of the year it's up 7 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was up how much? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. It was up 10 percent from a year ago in the 
four weeks ending September 8; and from the beginning of the year 
through those four weeks it's up 7 percent. So there was a definite 
step-up, compared to what had preceded that 4-week period, which 
occurred pretty generally across the metropolitan areas in the 
District. Those [whose sales] I had reported earlier as being very 
strong attributed it to an apparent increase in purchasing by people 
coming from Mexico. They continued strong but they did not show the 
surge that other centers did in that last 4-week period. That's just 
by way of suggesting that in our part of the country, at least, there 
seems to have been something happening to nonautomotive retail sales 
because these were department store sales. 

With respect to the financial sector, as I was listening to 
Steve's comments, they seemed almost exactly to replay some 
conversations we had in the District last Wednesday evening, at which 
Governor Teeters was present. [Those comments were] to the effect 
that in a prior period with 13 percent interest rates, bankers were 
working very hard to discourage borrowers. At the present time they 
are still out searching for loans. Apparently they find it profitable 
to add to loans now, whereas in the earlier period they did not. They 
say that they feel no credit restraint and they do not see a 
reluctance on the part of their customers to borrow. There was a 
comment, for example, that 13 plus 3 percent for real estate loans-- 
these were bankers talking so the loans were not primarily residential 
mortgage loans--just doesn't seem to deter people. They go ahead and 
sign up and don't even ask a question as to whether they couldn't do 
it for less. 

With respect to labor markets, the thrust of the conversation 
in our part of the world is tight labor, high turnover, and losses of 
efficiency as a result of high turnover. I don't know whether we have 
that sort of situation in labor markets elsewhere or not. But it 
seems to me--and I am inclined to disagree a little with the view 
Willis winn was expressing that we are lucky not to have more than an 
11 percent annual rate of increase contracted for 3 years in the 
automobile industry--that building that sort of [wage increase] into 
the economy almost guarantees that we are not going to make any 
significant progress fighting inflation for 3 years. That's 
particularly so in an industry where the indications are that it's 
moving to supply a diminishing proportion of the domestic market. So 
we have a market structure that is permitting wages and prices to be 
pushed up in that industry. And we're really exporting jobs from the 
industry and importing increasing amounts of automobiles produced 



9/18/79 -17- 

abroad. That Seems to me to be inconsistent with moving toward the 
objectives we presumably have in mind. 

I don't see any answer to this problem in our conventional 
use of monetary and fiscal tools except a very, very long, drawn out 
and very painful one. So it seems to me that we should be trying to 
encourage the government to think of ways to break into some of these 
wage and price processes in the interest of trying to move more 
rapidly to moderate inflation without going through the necessity of 
creating horrendous amounts of unemployment for a long period of time. 
That's all I have, M r .  Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I have been listening here for 
some time, trying to cipher out what I think this economy is going to 
do. I think Steve's comment that it is uncertain is probably a good 
portrayal of my position. I have doubts that the staff's switch 
between the third and fourth quarter is going to come out as perfectly 
as they show it here. I doubt that they would defend the precision of 
the 0.7 [forecast] or anything like that anyway. It seems to me that 
we still have some strength left in this economy. And the portrayal 
of credit demands still reflects, I think, the basic attitude that 
inflation will continue. If there is anything certain in this world 
right now it seems to be that inflation will continue, whether at the 
current 10 percent rate in the fixed weighted index or at 9 percent 
plus. I am bothered about this forecast showing even through the end 
of 1980 more than 9 percent inflation in terms of the average from Q4 
'79 to Q4 '80. The prospects we have had detailed for us by the staff 
have shown weakening, tied primarily as I understand it to an 
inventory position and personal income assumption. Housing is 
expected to decline, but barring a change in attitudes--unless the 
ceiling rates in state usury laws become more binding--it still 
appears to me a pretty speculative area of inflation. Oil [prices], 
of course, are something that seem to move ahead; and with a minimum 
of 10 percent inflation for this year, I suspect we are going to get 
another shock in oil prices next year, unless somebody can find some 
way to dampen the demand severely. 

S o ,  as I look over what is coming up, with high aggregates 
growth with which we are financing these [activities], with rates not 
dampening the strong credit demands--that is, the financial side of 
the economy still indicating strength--the recession seems uncertain 
and the inflation certain. I still think that the policy position of 
this Committee ought to be to do what it can to dampen inflationary 
expectations. That doesn't mean that we have to charge into major 
changes in either the federal funds rate or anything else. I suspect 
the answer I would come out with is that we have to get the money 
supply figures under better control, which means putting some rather 
severe limits on what we would accept as a peak rate of money supply 
growth over the coming 2-month period. And if we exceed that, then we 
take another tightening step and so be it. If the money supply growth 
does subside, as the staff seems to think it will eventually anyway, 
then we can afford to be a little more relaxed and perhaps even turn 
[rates around], following the market down. But for the coming period, 
Mr. Chairman, I would counsel the Committee to continue the path it 
has been on, slowly moving up its [funds rate] targets to force a 
curtailment in money supply growth. 



9/18/79 -18- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject, if I may, to the 
presidents in particular: We have a lot of discount rate proposals 
in, and anybody who wants to comment on what has been proposed as your 
turn comes up, [please do sol. Let us know what course [you favor] or 
what rationale you want to present or whether you disagree with your 
directors. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, do you want us to do that now or 
when we get to the specifications? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think in a general way you could do it 
now, but you may want to return to it more precisely when we get to 
the specifications. Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we face 
basically a question of timing. If the economy goes into recession, 
as it may already have done--interrupted temporarily maybe, but 
perhaps a more prolonged one than we originally thought--at some point 
we have to ease. But at the present time it seems to me the signs are 
still on the other side. The aggregates have been very strong; in a 
sense that’s been an easing rather than a tightening even though 
interest rates have risen. Inflation shows itself to be more 
persistent than before and we have the old picture where we tend to 
underestimate inflation. That also means that real interest rates are 
less than one thinks, at least the upper end. We are now getting to 
the point where we are getting positive real interest rates. I guess 
Chase with its move [of the prime] to 13 percent made us honest. But 
that is only before taxes. And as we look down the road, it seems to 
make people increasingly accepting [continued] high inflation and 
thereby perceiving a lower long-term real interest rate. 

Now. the economy itself seems to me very spotty. What we 
have in good part is an automobile recession. This is reflected in 
the Redbook. Many parts of the country are still very strong and if 
we were to ease at this time those strong areas would of course bump 
against their ceilings increasingly and produce more demand pressure 
and inflation there. I would add that there are other things that 
might give us concern about high nominal interest rates. Most have 
not yet materialized. The suspicion that there might be some sort of 
crunch ahead seems not to be valid based on what we hear. There are 
no real supply constraints on credit. We think of how we’ve shielded 
the housing sector through the money market certificate. That just 
means that we need more restraint across the board in all sectors-- 
that is, in lower aggregates or higher interest rates. I would remind 
you again that what’s going on in the Euro-markets means that the 
relevant monetary aggregates that we ought to focus on, if we had the 
data, are growing faster than what we see. 

Finally, as to the immediate situation, it seems that the 
market interprets the behavior of the aggregates and of the economy as 
something that will cause us to tighten. So while we should not 
slavishly follow what the market seems to expect, nevertheless we have 
to recognize that we disappoint the market at a cost--at a cost in 
credibility--and I see no reason for that at this time. I would 
therefore argue in favor of a mild increase in the funds rate in order 
to slow the aggregates. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn. 



9/18/79 -19- 

MR. EASTBURN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to take 
a little different position than has been taken up to this point. I 
believe one thing that is very good in the discussion that we have 
been having is that we are talking about longer-run strategy--a kind 
of cyclical strategy, I think. Everything that has been said up to 
now is in that vein, and that’s good because I think one of the 
problems we have in these meetings is that we tend to operate month- 
to-month and get short-sighted. My strategy is somewhat different 
than Phil’s or Henry’s. I happen to think we are in a mild recession 
and that the recovery will be a protracted one. In that situation I 
also think that in our strategy we need to avoid mistakes that we have 
made in past cycles. One mistake that we have made is overstaying 
restraint and the other mistake is overstimulating when the economy 
weakens. I think Phil is entirely correct that we need to take an 
action that [makes] a dent on expectations; it’s just that my course 
would differ somewhat from his because I feel we need to take 
increasing care to avoid precipitating a serious recession. That 
would have bad effects on expectations that would ultimately confirm 
inflationary expectations because it would precipitate action that 
would be designed to stimulate the economy and would in the longer run 
have negative effects on expectations. 

That means that in the current situation I would be willing-- 
not happy, but willing--to see somewhat higher growth rates in money 
for a time than I would ordinarily like to see. But that‘s in the 
expectation that we will be getting slower growth in the months ahead. 
I think it also means that we will have to exercise care against 
overstimulating as the economy proceeds to weaken, and that means 
resisting somewhat declines in interest rates that might otherwise 
occur and having somewhat slower money growth than we would have had 
in similar periods in the past. In other words, [I’m suggesting] a 
strategy of kind of leveling off the peak and filling in the valley. 

There are risks in that, many risks. First of all is the 
assumption that the economy will behave the way I am assuming. Second 
is that the money supply in fact will start to slow down in coming 
months. But for the moment I would take that risk and stand pat; I‘d 
stay where we are and live with somewhat higher growth rates than I 
ordinarily would like to see. If that proves to be wrong and money 
growth continues exceptionally strong--that is, above the ranges--then 
I think we have to move the federal funds rate up. But [for now] I 
would stay essentially where we are. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I have increasing difficulty in 
trying to define how tight credit is. We see the ambivalence, if one 
can use that term, in our own area with farm credit, small business 
credit, credit for builders and so forth very tight. Banks are very 
tight and it doesn’t filter down like it’s supposed to in a fluid 
system from the big banks. We don’t have the moral suasion problem 
that we had five years ago--or if we do, we really haven‘t recognized 
it--where many of us made real efforts to contact individual banks 
about their overextension of acquisition credit and REIT credit and so 
forth. So I guess this leads to a question to Steve or anyone else on 
the staff who wants to volunteer: What is your interpretation of the 
extent of the insulation of the large banks from our attempts at 
credit tightening because of the availability of funds from abroad? 



9/18/19 -20 -  

That makes it extremely difficult for us to define how far we can go, 
much less [how to1 implement whatever definition we arrive at. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, perhaps not in complete answer but in 
partial answer, President Mayo, I would think that the availability of 
Euro-dollar funds abroad has made it necessary to have interest rates 
a little higher in this market than we would otherwise because large 
firms can simply borrow a little cheaper abroad than they can here. 
On the general point you are raising, what I tried to say earlier was 
that my instinct was that the 13 percent prime rate was producing some 
real restraint. In simple terms, if people expect the rate of price 
inflation to be less than 13 percent, it's immediately a very 
restrictive rate. Now, we will have [firms] perhaps expecting that 
their sales are going to weaken, in which case that adds to the 
restrictiveness. So the rate is the main factor at present, and the 
need for higher rates domestically is greater because of this lower 
rate in Euro-dollar markets. 

MR. MAYO. So you think we can offset the availability 
through the rate? 

MR. AXILROD. If we can't, I think we probably have to throw 
out the history of economics. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you suggesting, Mr. Mayo, that we 
ought to think about some kind of moral suasion? 

MR. MAYO. I'm raising the issue, Paul. I haven't made up my 
own mind on it. It's an issue that we have not discussed around this 
table in this cycle and we certainly did five years ago. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any concluding comment you 
would like to make? 

MR. MAYO. No, I'm throwing this up for grabs at this point. 
I don't know how to attack the moral suasion issue this time, Paul, 
because of the availability of such a flood of funds in the 
international markets. We are not talking about what was an attempt 
in a mild way at "credit allocation"--if I may use the naughty tern-- 
five years ago when we were trying to get [banks] to stay away from 
purely acquisition credit and trying to keep the REIT situation stable 
yet not expanding. This time what I have in mind in bringing this up 
certainly doesn't relate to our banks and foreign loans; it isn't that 
aspect of it. And I don't know to what extent moral suasion could do 
us much good here. It's a much broader question to go out and say to 
the big money market banks that we would prefer that you not borrow 
from abroad. That's a very hard thing to say. What do we do about 
it? I don't know, but I think it's a worthwhile question to kick 
around a bit. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some of this borrowing from abroad, I 
think, is just borrowing back money that Americans put abroad in the 
first place. 

MR. MAYO. That's true 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure how much, net, there is. 



9/18/19 -21- 

MR. MAYO. Well, to the extent oil money or OPEC money is 
involved and that's sloshing around, that somehow gets to the big 
banks and insulates them from monetary policy. I hope that Steve's 
answer on [rates] is an accurate statement. I certainly do. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, if anybody else wants to 
comment on this question, I would be delighted to have the comments. 
My own feeling has been that it's probably pretty late in the day to 
begin talking about moral suasion. I don't know whom we would morally 
persuade. 

MR. MAYO. That's the real problem. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may do more damage, unless we see 
particular speculative problems and takeovers or whatever. I'm not 
sure [how we can succeed in3 that process. 

MR. WINN. On this issue, Paul, I hear more comment in the 
market about credit controls of various types as the way of doing it 
to avoid Reg-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My response would be a fortiori applied to 
credit controls. I don't know what we want to control at this 
particular point in the cycle, but--. Mr. Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, from our vantage point we are 
seeing some contrasting developments early on. The farmers are very 
excited; generally expectations are for one of the best farm years 
ever. Business people are still reading the papers and saying " I  read 
that but I don't feel it in my business." Developments in residential 
sales and construction in the area are harking back to the early '70s. 
It's incredible some of the stories we are hearing about sales and 
possibilities in certain areas of the District. We add to that, of 
course, the visit of an unwanted gentleman hurricane in the Mobile 
area and that confuses things. The banks were not open yesterday, and 
we are not sure that they are going to be open today. And 10,000 
people are still without power. So, we don't know what the total 
impact of that is going to be. 

Business loans in the District have not followed the national 
pattern. They are somewhat weak, but consumer attitudes are also 
discouraged and uncertain. Add to that [what we said in] our earlier 
discussion of the growth in the aggregates and the apparent lack of 
restraint on [such growth] in recent months. [Nevertheless,] at the 
directors meeting last Friday the feeling was I think unanimous that 
there is not going to be a credit crunch but that inflation is going 
to be about as strong [as it has been] for at least the rest of the 
year. Add to that the uncertainty of foreign exchange markets, and I 
have to associate myself with the expectation that maybe [the 
slowdown] has gotten somewhat deeper during the last month since I 
have been involved with the Desk and I think there is really some 
urgency that we ought to be directing more attention to restraining 
money growth. I don't detect in the markets any great concern that if 
we do that, they are going to fall out. So I would hope that we would 
at least maintain our present posture with possibly some leaning 
against any new growth--as much as anything else to try to preserve 
our credibility. I recognize that we have been hoping for slower 
[monetary] growth for some months; but it hasn't come and I am not 



9 /18 /79  -22- 

persuaded that it's imminent. I guess that pretty well suggests that 
I would have no difficulty agreeing with our directors' recommendation 
to increase the discount rate a full 1/2 percentage point. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. 

MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, I don't have any serious quarrel 
with the staff's projections on the economy. But I think they are 
probably on the optimistic side, if they've missed, because it seems 
to me that this trouble we have is more in the nature of a worldwide 
problem with the petroleum shortage, inflation, and turmoil in the 
foreign exchange market. So I would not see nearly the improvement in 
the foreign trade sector that the staff has projected. I think all 
these problems are going to intensify the domestic problem. In 
dealing with the recession that we are in, I think we have a unique 
set of problems here that we really haven't [encountered] in the 
postwar period, as Dave Eastburn indicated. I don't think the past 
action in earlier recessions gives us much of a guide as to how we 
ought to proceed in this one. There was an excellent article by Paul 
McCracken in The Wall Street Journal yesterday that spelled out the 
sort of procedures I think we ought to follow. What I believe we have 
to do, since I think inflation is the main problem, is to address that 
problem almost entirely. More troubles are going to build up and we 
also are going have more serious problems on all fronts, including the 
unemployment front down the road. And to me dealing with inflation 
means getting a hand on the aggregates. 

As we set our targets today and as we approach the end of the 
year--when we are going to be judged as to whether we have hit our 
long-run targets or we haven't--we ought to bear in mind that there is 
a good deal of confusion among the public and probably on the part of 
some members of Congress. I find it confusing myself [as to] what our 
M1 targets really are for the fourth quarter of last year to the 
fourth quarter of this year. You will remember that in July we 
decided we would not change them; we left the M1 range at 1-1/2 to 
4-1/2 percent but the consensus around the table as I read it was that 
for internal purposes we would think of that as being 3-1/2 to 6 
percent since we revised downward our estimate of the ATS/New York NOW 
account effect from 3 to 1-l/2 percentage points. Now, this spurt in 
the aggregates that we had in August and September is going to make it 
very difficult for us to get a good fourth-quarter rate. And under 
all three alternatives in the staff's projections they are talking 
about a rate from the fourth quarter of last year to the fourth 
quarter of this year of 5.3 percent. If we add to that the 1-1/2 
percent ATS/New York NOW account [effect], that comes out to 6 . 8  
percent, which I find is sufficient evidence to indicate that we have 
been too easy. Although I sympathize with Bob Mayo's position--it's 
hard to judge these things sometimes--when I see bankers out fighting 
for loans as they are now and I see a lot them adding to their 
investments, I have to conclude that credit conditions may not be as 
tight as they appear [on the basis of] interest rates alone. 

Looking back in the history of economic thought, when we 
didn't have all the statistics we now have there was considerable 
feeling on the part of economists at the time that you could look at 
the behavior of the foreign exchange rate and the price of gold and 
that would tell you whether you had too much money or not. [Those 
indicators] clearly say to me that we are much too easy. But I view 



9/18/79 -23-  

these long-run targets that we established in July as calling for a 
midpoint of 6 percent pre-ATS and 4 - 1 / 2  percent post-ATS, and I think 
we ought to endeavor to come as close as possible to these midpoints. 
I think this use of homeopathic doses of federal funds rate increases 
in the past has pretty well ruled out any hope we have of achieving 
this if indeed we can control the aggregates by manipulating the 
federal funds rate. I have some doubts about that and some sympathy 
for Larry Roos's approach, but I do think we want to offset as much of 
the second and third quarter overshoots as possible, and I would-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what target you are 
talking about, Bob. Maybe you can-- 

MR. BLACK. This is M1, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say a 6 percent midpoint on our 
range? 

M R .  BLACK. That's what it would be pre-ATS 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pre any ATS. 

MR. BLACK. That's right, without any ATS. I believe that's 
what we were thinking about. Then you remember we went to 1-1/2 to 
4 - l / 2  percent, which gave u s  a 3 percent midpoint when we thought the 
ATS effects were-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are talking about a concept that isn't 
portrayed on our nice little charts at all. 

MR. BLACK. That's right. 

MR. PARTEE. He's adding the ATS back in 

M R .  BLACK. That's right. I think that's the way we have to 
judge it. At least we have to clear up that confusion ourselves. 
Lord help you when you have to explain this to the Congress and to the 
public because I get confused every time I think about it! When we 
get down to the specifics, I would like to propose that we take some 
actions to try to get close to these targets, although I don't think 
we can achieve them [fully] because of past misses. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. I think you have overlooked that [Ml growth in] 
August came in at 6 . 8  percent. We haven't had a continuous 10 percent 
rate of growth; at the end of August the rate of growth of the money 
supply dropped. And if you look closely, it's in currency. The rate 
of increase in demand deposits has been coming down a l l  summer. Can 
someone explain to me why we have a sudden increase in demand for 
currency? I don't know the explanation for that. I would point out 
to you that we have raised interest rates 100 basis points [very 
recently]. That's a big increase in basis points. We have a prime 
rate of 13 percent, and nobody pays prime--it's prime plus. So we are 
talking about interest rates in the market that are 15 to 18 percent, 
and it's not just on consumer loans. We have really gone very far, 
very fast in the past 6 to 8 weeks. I think it's time that we slow 
down and see what we are doing because the major impact [of our 



9/18/79 -24- 

tightening actions1 is going to be in the fourth quarter of this year 
and the first quarter of next year. 

I’m a little puzzled about this availability argument. The 
lack of availability previously has always been in one [sector]; it 
has always been in the mortgage market. I suspect that in other areas 
of the market there was really enough money available, except maybe in 
the summer of ‘74. Now that we have said that we don’t want to put 
all of the restraint on one industry, the word goes around that there 
is plenty of available money and nobody is being hurt by this. People 
have got to be squeezed out of the markets at this point. It may not 
be the big banks or big corporations, and it may mean [the restraint] 
is going to be focused again on certain areas of the country. The 
Sunbelt seems to be almost imune to any sort of restraint. And as we 
move [rates] around, it make it harder for New England and for the 
upper middle West, along with other areas of the country. I’m 
extremely reluctant to raise either the discount rate or the federal 
funds rate at this point. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m not sure it is a fact that everybody‘s 
paying more than the prime rate. There are still some reports around 
that quite a few people are paying less than prime. 

MR. MAYO. And the compensating balances. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t know why that should be-- 

M R .  BALLES. Well, the competition of the European banks is a 
major factor. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, it‘s very short-term money 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m not sure it’s all short term. I think 
it’s probably bigger-- 

MR. PARTEE. I think Nancy’s point is that most borrowers pay 
something more [than prime] and a 20 percent compensating balance. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are reports that some banks are 
still making fixed rate loans at something less than prime. 

MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, there was actually an announcement 
by the Bank of America that it was going to make automobile loans at 
12 percent--a lower rate just to help out the automobile dealers as a 
sales mechanism. It would be an unusual situation, but it certainly 
doesn‘t indicate much tightening. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. 

MR. MORRIS. I sort of lean [in the same direction as] Dave 
Eastburn and Nancy Teeters at this juncture. The evidence seems to me 
to indicate that recession momentum is gathering force very rapidly 
and that the recession is likely to be more severe than the staff 
forecasts. I had hoped, since it was the best forecast recession 
ever, that we would get some restraint on inventory accumulation. But 
the whopping increase in inventories in July plus the big demand for 
business loans at banks in the last 4 or 5 weeks suggest to me, even 
though oil inventories may be down some recently, that we’re still 



9/18/79 - 2 5 -  

getting very big inventory accumulation in August and early September. 
This, of course, suggests that when we start turning that corner, 
we’re likely to have a pretty big inventory swing, probably bigger 
than is in the projection. I also agree with Nancy on the point that 
in the past [several] weeks we‘ve moved short-term rates almost 150 
basis points; long-term rates in some cases [have risen] almost 50 
basis points. I can‘t ever remember a month in which we‘ve moved 
rates more than that. We’ve gotten a lot of bang for the buck in 
terms of the relationship of the relatively small move in the funds 
rate to the very big moves in the rest of the market. I think we have 
yet to see the effects on economic activity of the actions we have 
taken. So, I would come out the same place Dave did; I think we ought 
to behave a little differently going into a recession than we would 
behave in a continuing boom environment. 

All history teaches us that when the inventory accumulation 
starts to abate we will get a slackening in the aggregates. And I 
think the long-run track of the aggregates up to now has not been bad. 
Over the past 12 months [we’ve had growth of] a little less than 5 
percent on M1 and a little less than 8 percent on M2, and I think 
that’s about what we would have wanted to come out with a year ago. 
So it seems to me that we ought to stand pat for the next month. As 
far as the discount rate is concerned, it seems to me that we ought to 
hold that in reserve in case we need to use it. In the event that we 
get a run on the dollar, it would be nice to have a symbolic gesture 
in the closet that would permit us to announce another 1 percentage 
point increase in the discount rate, which would attract a lot of 
attention in Europe and so on. So I would rather save that weapon for 
future use. As far as moral suasion is concerned, we might have had 
that as a part of the package last November 1, but I think it’s much 
too late now. I think the recession will substitute for moral 
suasion. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen. 

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, you expressed some interest in the 
discount rate actions at the Reserve Banks. Two weeks ago the 
directors of the [unintelligible] New York Bank voted a 114 percent 
increase in the discount rate. When the officers came in that 
morning, they were very troubled as to what our recommendation should 
be on the rate. There was some feeling to do nothing, some feeling to 
do a 114 point, and some feeling to do a 112 point. I think on 
balance the strongest sentiment was to take a small, but not 
insignificant step and therefore to recommend a 1/4 point. Well, 
later in the morning we heard that the projections on the monetary 
aggregates were reduced somewhat, so the officers decided on balance 
to propose that we wait a couple of weeks. Having made the 
recommendation to the directors that we do nothing [on the discount 
rate], the directors expressed some sentiment that it would be well to 
coordinate the action of the Bank with [developments] in the open 
market that were identified with the new Chairman, so that on their 
own initiative our directors moved and voted a 114 percentage point 
increase in the discount rate. [Our board] will be meeting on 
Thursday of this week and I would suspect with further market 
developments and administered rates, there might be some sentiment for 
something more than the action taken two weeks ago. As an aside, I 
might say that there’s a good deal of talk in the markets in New York 
about the possibility of an impending credit crunch. As we look at 



9/18/79 -26- 

the situation in the individual major banks, however, we can't find a 
commercial bank that may be faced with a credit crunch. 

In terms of the general situation, my views are very close to 
Governor Coldwell's. I don't think the situation is particularly 
dissimilar from the one we faced last month. Inflation is still for 
me a matter of major concern. The monetary aggregates still are on 
the high side, and the dollar--which I don't think Phil mentioned-- 
continues to be under recurring pressures in the foreign exchange 
markets. I must admit that we cannot overlook signs of weakness in 
the economy. Unemployment is edging up and there is the question of 
inventory accumulation. [It's unclear] whether there has been a 
correction in the automobile industry but that is a possibility. I 
think it's important that we not have the problem of a General Motors 
strike. We do have a problem that the settlement was expensive. I 
think it's important that the Federal Reserve not indicate that it is 
weakening in any respect in its resolve to fight inflation or restrain 
growth in the aggregates, so I would favor some further tightening at 
this time. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I've been gone for a couple of a weeks and 
I feel a little out of it. A significant recession is not a certainty 
but it's a high probability. One could read this as an automobile-led 
correction and a shift in real income from consumers to producers and 
distributors of oil, both of which have had a marked effect on retail 
demand. But I guess I'd go along with Frank that the indicators all 
point to mounting tendencies toward weakness in the economy. And it 
seems unlikely that we'll get a smooth and easy inventory correction 
as the staff is projecting. S o  if in fact these pressures continue to 
mount, we'll probably have a deeper recession than is forecast by the 
staff. 

I've been concerned over the last 4 to 6 weeks, as Nancy has, 
about the possibility of overshooting. I think it's important, very 
important, that we try to keep the aggregates within the ranges that 
we specify. And I think it was very appropriate that we moved 
interest rates up significantly over the summer because of the bulge 
in the aggregates in the spring and summer, which was to a 
considerable degree unexpected. But we have to remember that those 
changes in rates affect money growth with a lag. We've had the 
increase in rates and we have another lagged response yet [to come]. 
We also have to remember, as Nancy said, that if we look at M1 there 
has been a significant slowing in demand deposit growth. It was [at 
anannual rate of] 17 percent in June, 10 percent in July, and is 
forecast at 3-1/2 percent in August. That has been masked by an 
explosion in currency. We don't really know [why that has occurred]. 
It seems most likely to be some kind of aberration; we don't really 
think it will be sustained. Feeling that we have moved rates quite a 
bit in the last month or two and that the aggregates are in a lagged 
way likely to be reflecting that, I also agree with Nancy. I think 
the best thing to do, as the Committee often has done over the last 
decade or so, is to pause for a while and see what develops. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles. 



9/18/79 -27- 

MR. BALLES. I was going to ask Nancy if that explosion in 
currency is a part of the underground economy that she testified on. 

MR. PARTEE. It‘s the Susan B. Anthony dollar. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much of that is the Susan B. dollar? 
There were $300 million of those going out beginning in July? 

M R .  BALLES. Well, in addition to the Sunbelt, the area west 
of the Rockies is not feeling very much if any recession yet. 
Aerospace, electronics, and agriculture in general are all quite 
strong. One indication is that the [volume of] help wanted ads in the 
Los Ancreles Times is almost unreal. The latest count that I heard 
from someone was 98 pages [of such ads1 in a recent Sunday edition. 
So a lot of jobs are going begging. We have had, of course, as is 
true around the nation, some decline in auto sales and in housing 
starts but considerably less percentage-wise than the country as a 
whole. 

AS far as the national outlook, we don’t have any huge 
quarrel with the Board‘s staff view. We still expect the economy to 
bottom in the first half of 1980 and quite possibly in the first 
quarter. There‘s always the risk that things could get worse than our 
staff is now forecasting, but I’m reserving judgment on that until we 
get some evidence that that’s a likelihood. 

In addition to the input that we bring to these meetings and 
the usual sources of our own research staff and directors, last Friday 
when Vice Chairman Schultz visited us in San Francisco we called in a 
special small group of bankers, businessmen, and academicians for a 
very frank exchange of views. We sounded them out about their 
feelings on the economy and on Fed policy, and I must say, Fred, that 
I thought the reactions were quite candid and somewhat humiliating in 
a way. The bankers generally expressed the view that as yet there’s 
very little evidence that the high level of interest rates is having 
any significant total effect on cutting off credit demand. Now, one 
has to add to that the expressions we got from them in our usual go- 
around with bankers and bank directors that these high rates are 
having a cutting effect on the so-called middle market for business 
borrowers--the smaller firms--and for mortgage loans and some small 
farmers. That’s where the incidence of the high interest rate effect 
has been felt thus far in our part of the country. But as a general 
matter, even if the businessmen present were mostly from big concerns, 
they simply indicated that the higher rates per se are not having any 
effect at all on their capital projects. If a project is worthwhile, 
it‘s not going to get cut off by a one or two percentage point 
increase in the cost of funds. A minority expressed the view that 
this is leading to some greater caution on inventory policy, which is 
already being viewed as quite cautious. One major real estate 
developer present indicated that the higher rates are just built into 
their projects and aren’t having any dampening effect at all. 

It was by the economists that we really got blasted. They 
came from Stanford, Berkeley, the University of California at Davis, 
and from a number of major banks in town. Quite frankly, they were 
highly critical of what they called pro-cyclical Fed policy and the 
extreme swings in the growth rates of money and credit that they‘ve 
witnessed over the past year--the very low rate from, say, October to 



9/18/79 -28-  

March and the very high rate on balance from April to September. The 
clear majority view in that group--and the bank economists were quite 
similar to the academic economists--was that it's vital that we give 
more attention to that now than to what would be a more conventional 
counter-cyclical policy. My own view is that [we should make] an 
attempt at the gradualism that we announced several years ago. I 
remember your predecessor twice removed I guess, meaning Chairman 
Burns, [said] that the System's strategy would be to gradually lower 
the rate of monetary growth as a long-run strategy for getting 
inflation under control. What happened, I'm afraid, is that while the 
ranges have been brought down a little in the last several years, 
we've seen a great deal of evidence of the actual rates of monetary 
growth accelerating. I continue to feel, as I expressed last month, 
that we're going to get some automatic cushioning effect to this 
recession from fiscal policy, perhaps supplemented--there seems to be 
more and more talk about it [though I don't know] whether anything 
will happen or not--by discretionary tax cuts. So I lean toward the 
view that we may have to use monetary policy as the principal weapon 
to break inflationary expectations and to get some deceleration in the 
actual rate of inflation. 

Our directors clearly voted to increase the discount rate to 
reinforce what they thought should be a further snugging up in our 
efforts to get the rate of growth in the aggregates down somewhat. 
Almost fortuitously we've had a counter-cyclical policy since spring. 
If in fact the first quarter proves to have been the peak of the 
previous cycle, then in the second and third quarters we've had a 
counter-cyclical policy of considerable magnitude given the rate of 
monetary expansion that has taken place. And perhaps it's a bit too 
much to also get on top of the inflation problem. Bottom line I come 
out pretty much as Phil Coldwell, Henry Wallich, and Bob Black did. I 
think we should lean toward a little higher funds rate and a little 
better control in linking our short-term targets with our long-term 
targets if there's to be any success on the inflation front. I think 
it was last April, Steve--at just about the wrong time--that I raised 
with you in front of God and everybody here the fact that you had been 
overforecasting the rate of monetary growth. You sure got that fixed! 
Correct me if I'm wrong--1 don't have the exact figures with me--but I 
think month by month the Bluebook forecasts have in fact understated, 
and perhaps by a significant margin, the subsequent [monetary] growth 
we've experienced. I may again be raising that issue at the wrong 
time, but the recession will take care of that. 

MR. PARTEE. It's a good leading indicator, John! 

MR. BALLES. Until I see it, I guess I'm not going to believe 
it. I am concerned on balance that it may not have been bad that we 
had a real surge in monetary and credit expansion because of this 
recession. But I think we may have overdone that in view of the 
continued problem of getting inflation under control. So I would vote 
for a little snugging up. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M r .  Rice. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, probably not surprisingly, I would 
associate myself with the remarks made by Dave Eastburn, Nancy 
Teeters, Frank Morris, and Chuck Partee. I can therefore be very 
brief. I think it's time to give more weight to what is happening in 



9/18/79 -29- 

the real economy. The economy is clearly weakening; the staff 
analysis is very clear on this. It's really very hard to see where 
the strength in the economy is that some people are worrying about. 
Most of the indicators seem to me to point toward weakness and further 
weakening in the economy. Retail sales in real terms have been 
declining since last May. Industrial production has turned down. GNP 
is projected to decline further after the current quarter, which is 
close to an end. It seems to me that, as Governor Wallich pointed 
out, we are faced with a problem of timing. And I would say that at 
this time it would be inappropriate to take any monetary action that 
would have the effect of further weakening an already weakening 
economy. In response to the concern about inflation, which I share, I 
would have to say that in my judgment any action that we might take 
today is unlikely to have any effect on the inflation rate within the 
next 6 to 9 months. So whatever tightening of policy might be adopted 
today would be largely symbolic. Also, I would note that even at the 
current federal funds rate--even with the current degree of tightness 
--the monetary aggregates, M1, M2, and M3, would probably fall within 
the long-run ranges of growth that have been set for the period from 
the fourth quarter of '78 to the fourth quarter of '79. Given the 
outlook, there's a strong prospect that the growth in the monetary 
aggregates will indeed decline. Therefore, in the current 
circumstances I would not favor any increase in the federal funds rate 
nor would I favor an increase in the discount rate. I would want to 
stand pat. I would not argue at this time for an easing of policy, 
but I would certainly argue that any further tightening would be a 
dangerous step to take. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN. I guess we're going to have to rearrange the 
seating here a little; we're kind of [taking] sides and I'm out of 
place here in terms of my approach! I think we're dealing with 
expectations in a variety of ways, and when we [focus on1 our cyclical 
analysis we forget the changes in price behavior that we're faced 
with. [Prices] are not going to behave in the traditional way in the 
future, but they're still one of the canker sores we have to deal 
with. With the publicity we've had recently [regarding] our behavior 
we have a real problem of expectations and a growing cynicism in the 
markets. The markets don't believe that the System has the resolve to 
cope with these problems; [they think] that we tend to shift our 
targets and keep our interest rates stable so that if we miss our 
target we just push it up and say we're going to catch up later on. 
They're getting rather pat in the way they view our activities. I 
feel that we need to change their expectations about us in terms of 
our behavior, as I argued last time. 

Consequently, I'd be in favor of widening the federal funds 
rate spread and I'd let the rate behave on the basis of what actually 
happens marketwise. Secondly, I'd use this opportunity to change the 
discount rate because it doesn't really change market [rate] levels: 
it would change expectations because there isn't an immediate foreign 
exchange pressure that forces us into doing some of these things. We 
can use it to have an announcement effect without actually changing 
the level of rates marketwise, reinforcing a resolve to do things a 
little differently and, therefore, changing expectations. I'm not in 
favor of really hiking the rate level at this stage unless the 
aggregates do continue their rapid growth. 



9/18/79 - 3 0 -  

I'd point out to those who mentioned the decline in demand 
deposits that this represents part of the continual shifting and 
changing in the nature of the money concept, as people take advantage 
of opportunities to keep their funds at work with RPs and other 
things. Consequently, I am still concerned about our overshoot in 
this area. With all of our comments and people pointing to us as 
being concerned about this development, I'd like us to show by some 
action that we are concerned without necessarily changing the rates 
significantly. In terms of expectations, I have one that is 
different from those of the group: I'm not sure we're going to get a 
mild [recession] next spring. I think we're going to get an uptick 
this quarter. That is going to change expectations for the final 
quarter and we may get a stronger final quarter than projected. I 
think the basic forces of decline are with us. What I can't see is 
the bail-out after we get into a substantial decline. I don't see the 
forces there to provide the uplift. So I think it can degenerate into 
a somewhat larger decline than has been projected, with the fiscal 
implications and the consequent problems with respect to continued 
price inflation. And I'm worried on that score. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey. 

M R .  GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to 
economic conditions in the Tenth District, we are enjoying--as others 
have said regarding the agricultural area--probably the finest crop in 
history. And it's a reality; most of it is already [harvested] or is 
ready to come into the bins. The problem has been more real in the 
sense that Bob Mayo mentioned; [producers] cannot move that crop, 
particularly to the port facilities for export, because of the 
shortage of rail cars as well as the Rock Island strike. It is 
putting some pressure upon the financial community to continue to 
finance inventories that had built up a year or two years before. But 
it also is fairly clear that some weakness is developing, particularly 
in retail sales--as affected by the auto situation--but also in 
residential sales. To my knowledge--and I have inquired around the 
region--1 can find no area within our District where any speculative 
houses are being built at the moment. Everything is being built on 
contract. If there is no contract, there is no building. 

Turning to my own view of the staff's expectations for the 
national economy, it seems to me that they are quite reasonable, 
though maybe a bit bullish. I would expect to have a bit deeper and 
more prolonged recession from the actions that have already been 
taken. Traditionally, when consumer expectations turn, they turn and 
don't come back very quickly. 

With regard to growth in the aggregates, as has been 
mentioned, to be sure over the year [Ell looks very reasonable at 
about 5.3 percent without ATS. I believe that is the figure. But 
equally important, it seems to me, both last month and again this 
month we've been looking at accelerating rates of growth in the 
aggregates. If you focus on M1, the staff projection is almost 10 
percent for September. But I would like to point out that most of 
that has already occurred in the first two weeks of September. And 
two events have taken place, both the Social Security payment as well 
as the anticipation of the September 15 tax payment date. From here 
on out the staff projections are essentially flat. It would seem to 
me that if the seasonals play any part in the first two weeks of 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -31- 

September--about which there seems to be some doubt--we may not be 
getting the aggregates growth now that we tried to react to in August. 

Lastly, I would join with others who have said that we have 
moved very rapidly. So it seems to me time to pause now to see [the 
effects of] what we've done. We talk about the 13 percent not 
cutting, but it hasn't been in place very long. People either had 
been committed before and haven't backed off or they haven't made 
judgments as to whether they're going to continue to borrow in the 
future. I would say that in the financial area of the Tenth District, 
the 13 percent rate has already taken a toll; several correspondent 
bankers have told me that at a 13+ percent rate they are withdrawing 
from requests to finance additional cattle operations simply because 
the economics don't pan out. As a result we could quite likely see in 
the future a withdrawal of the inventory levels of cattle that would 
have been coming on stream in the period ahead. 

In talking to staff and others and seeking advice, I would 
note that one person characterized the situation we're looking at 
right now as a situation akin to preparing a chicken for the table. 
That is, the chicken's activity increases substantially right after 
you cut off his head. If you react to that increased activity by 
striking with the ax again, that greatly increases the risk of 
damaging the meat. That may be exactly where we are now. So with 
that, I would propose that we stand pat at the moment with respect to 
the federal funds rate but use the discount rate for an announcement 
effect. As Willis pointed out, the discount rate has no real effect 
on market interest rate levels and the alignment issue is beginning to 
be a problem in our District. Thus, I would propose that the discount 
rate be raised at least 1/4 point, or perhaps 1/2 point. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we've had some barnyard 
reasoning! Mr. Roos, would you like to make a few comments? 

MR. ROOS. First of all, being from the other end of the same 
rural state, I would have to disagree with Roger's analogy. When one 
prepares a chicken for serving, one usually has the best results if 
the dish is served up without any guts, whereas I think monetary 
policy--well, I'll stop at that. 

I'd like to take up very briefly some of the things that have 
been said. First of all, I'd invite your attention to page 10 [of the 
Bluebook], the upper graph showing the growth of M1 during this year. 
[Some would] conclude that [policy has been appropriate] because the 
average of M1 for the year appears to fall between our targets. I 
would point out that the roller coaster effect that we've experienced 
is really very damaging to stability. If you remember your friend's 
button that I wore to one meeting--and was nearly fired as a result--I 
implied that that dip early in the year would result in recession. 
The dip occurred and we are experiencing a recession. I don't think 
the up and down movement is a good thing. I also am concerned-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you projecting a boom now for the next 
6 months, Mr. ROOS? 

MR. ROOS. Yes. I hear some of my friends say that we have 
moved interest rates up 100 basis points. I don't think we moved 
those rates; I think strong credit demand and inflationary 



9/18/79 - 3 2 -  

expectations moved those rates up. If anything, we have leaned 
against what the [increase in rates1 would have been had we not 
expanded the money supply. Furthermore, for those who feel that a 
further rise in interest rates would have the effect of lengthening 
and deepening the recession, I would point out that if--in order to 
maintain the fed funds rate at its present level--we permit [such] 
growth of the aggregates to continue, the public perception [will be 
one1 of excessive aggregates growth. And I think the result will be 
interest rates that are even higher than they are now, in spite of our 
attempt to keep rates where they are or to stand pat. 

Specifically, I think we have no choice but to do whatever we 
can to bring M1 growth back under control. I would urge two steps. 
One, our board was unanimous in its recommendation that the discount 
rate be moved up 1/2 point. [Second], whatever the range for M1, I 
think the upper limit of the M1 range for the period ahead should not 
exceed 5 percent exclusive of ATS or 6-1/2 percent with ATS. I think 
the best thing we have going for us is [the public’s] belief--in 
reaction to the excellent statements by our Chairman--that we are 
determined to maintain monetary discipline. If we do anything that 
can be interpreted as a move toward ease, I think our last thread of 
credibility will be lost. And a very important new policy that has 
been enunciated by Chairman Volcker will be less than truly effective 
if we do that. S o ,  that‘s my thinking. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you any brief wisdom from the upper 
Midwest, Mr. Gainor? 

M R .  GAINOR. I will be brief, Mr. Chairman. We feel a bit 
behind the times in the Ninth District. We hear in the national press 
that the recession is half over and it hasn’t even hit us yet. 
Unemployment is very low in our District, less than 3 percent, and 
labor markets are tight. Industrial production is strong. The only 
questionable areas have been tourism, which was affected earlier in 
the summer by the gasoline shortage, and [agriculture where] we have a 
problem with the transportation of grain, as was alluded to earlier. 

With respect to the national perspective, we continue to be 
concerned about inflation and about the international position of the 
dollar. We believe the Committee should try to get the numbers under 
control while it‘s still politically feasible to do so. Our directors 
have recommended an increase in the discount rate change of 1/2 
percentage point, which we suggested. And we would favor further 
limiting growth of the aggregates. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz. 

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I’ve only been on this [Committee] for 
six weeks and we’re having a little barnyard humor, so I’ll just say 
that unfortunately I feel like the little boy who dropped his bubble 
gum in the barnyard! It’s a very difficult time to be here. I think 
we have a Hobson‘s choice. It seems to me that the likelihood is that 
the economy is going to weaken and we‘re going to get accused of 
overkill, overstaying [a restrictive policy]. The problem is, if we 
look at it on the other side, that’s conjectural; the facts are that 
the aggregates continue to grow. And it’s hard to find where monetary 
policy is biting very much. We see a little in real estate, and a few 
banks talk about their consumer credit [lending] at a fixed [interest] 



9/18/79 -33 -  

rate so they‘re beginning to slow down. But by and large it’s hard to 
find very much bite any place. I call around the country and I don’t 
find very many people screaming very hard. There just isnrt very much 
pain out there. I‘d love to believe these numbers but the problem is 
I don’t know what inflation is doing to them. I don‘t know what 
people are really doing in response to that and what kind of variances 
we have. So I‘m afraid I just have to go with what I can see and what 
I know to be the facts. And those are that the economy still looks 
pretty strong and the aggregates continue to rise. 

So I come down on the side of some further tightening. I 
would go with an increase in the discount rate and some moderate 
tightening in the federal funds rate, though probably not very much. 
I would like to see the range widened to at least 100 points and at 
some point in time deal with the stimulative problem that President 
Eastburn talked about when we start coming out [of recession]. I’d 
like to see us go to an aggregates directive but now probably is not 
the time, with all the volatility. But my feeling is that we need to 
take another [tightening step]. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have failed in one of my objectives, 
which was to get us out to the coffee break early. Perhaps reflecting 
my long experience in this particular chair, Mr. Schultz, the 
decisions don‘t get any easier from meeting to meeting. If we have a 
geometric progression, I’ll really be in trouble at the next meeting! 

Let me just make a couple of comments before we go out for 
coffee. There is a very strong possibility of recession on the one 
side. We’ve had that possibility for almost six months now and we 
still have the unemployment rate at a level that some consider to be 
the natural rate. I don’t know whether it is or it isn‘t, but we had 
a lot of discussion earlier, which may be reflected in some of the 
comments about labor markets still being fairly tight. And, 
obviously, we have inflation as strong as ever. We have a difficult 
timing problem. Difficult or not we have a timing problem if the 
business outlook develops more or less as projected, in that we don’t 
have a lot of flexibility--at least flexibility in a tightening 
direction--in terms of what we can do in the midst of a real downturn. 

As I read the recent business news, which is always 
difficult, I feel a bit reassured by the most recent trends. There’s 
a little more stability in retail sales in real terms and some decline 
in production. What we [believe] is happening in inventories is 
probably consistent with the type of outlook the staff has projected 
of a rather mild recession. I think the major risks are still on the 
lower side, but what we see now is not inconsistent with that kind of 
situation evolving. In looking at the business outlook, it does seem 
to me that the main problem lies in the area of income and 
consumption. I noticed on one of the [Greenbook] tables that you have 
indicated an effective tax rate and it shows [a rise that] in one 
sense looks rather gradual. But in an historical perspective I 
suspect there’s a rather sharp increase in effective tax rates, which 
has been draining off income. And of course we have the higher oil 
prices draining off real income. That does seem to me to be the heart 
of the business problem we have. 

We‘ve had some questions raised about what monetary policy 
can do about inflation. I understand those questions, but there‘s the 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -34- 

other question about what monetary policy can do about this particular 
conjuncture of adverse business developments--if they are adverse. 
The heart of the problem really lies in consumption and income. That 
suggests to me that perhaps the appropriate cyclical action when we 
get to it lies mainly in a tax policy rather than in the financial 
markets easing and the money supply growing. In terms of what we can 
do with monetary policy, we do have this question of what happens to 
wages in the short run. I don’t think we have a situation that some 
of my friends in the Bundesbank think they deal with--that when the 
monetary authorities say something, the labor unions jump. I don’t 
think that is quite the situation we face here! But we are in a 
rather crucial period in terns of how much the probably deteriorating 
inflationary expectations now get built into the wage structure. In a 
general way that has something to do with what we do. It‘s awfully 
hard to evaluate the significance of the gold price speculation, but I 
can’t imagine that it’s very good in terms of confidence in either 
inflation or the financial structure. 

Exchange markets remain in a very tender position, even 
though--and this came out quite clearly at the meeting last weekend-- 
the expectation is very strong that if we wait a while, and we have to 
wait some months, the current accounts are moving quite nicely 
[toward] what is called equilibrium. I don’t know whether one can 
quite call it equilibrium if it’s achieved at the expense of a 
recession. The German and Japanese current accounts are both 
deteriorating quite a lot, partly under the impact of oil. Ours has 
gotten better. We expect it to get quite a lot better by next year, 
although not in coming months. And I feel reasonably encouraged that 
growth is pretty strong abroad. There are worries there about the 
impact of the oil situation but that is not very visible yet. It does 
seem to have some momentum, at least in Japan and Germany, which I 
think is a favorable background. We don’t yet clearly face a 
situation where the United States going into a recession tips the 
whole world into a recession. There are some areas of support there 
that I think are quite important. 

Well, I don’t know where that leaves us precisely. I share 
the view that has been widely expressed that this isn’t the time for 
any easing, in the visible sense, of interest rates. I would hope 
that that’s an ingredient of whatever we decide. I also share the 
view that has been quite widely expressed that we have to show some 
resistence to the growth in money. I would note that that remains a 
source of political support for us. It’s not every day that we get a 
letter from the leader of the Black Caucus [in the House] exhorting us 
to show more restraint on the money supply side. So I‘m going to 
carry that letter close to my heart, whatever we decide today. And 
[he was] speaking on behalf of the whole subcommittee, at least, of 
the House Committee on Banking and Currency--the Subcommittee on 
Domestic Monetary Policy. So, I do think that those two ingredients 
at least ought to be in whatever policy we decide here. With that, 
why don’t we break briefly and come back and be prepared to decide 
what we will do. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don‘t think this gavel has ever been 
used before in these meetings. It’s not very tight. Mr. Altmann, 
will you please take care of repairing the gavel? 



9/18/79 -35- 

Well, let me just try to get something on the table that 
seems to approach most closely a concensus in numerical terms and you 
can take whatever shots at it you would like. A s  I listened, among 
the voting members of the Committee at least, I think there was a 
majority desire--but clearly not unanimous--to make a little move on 
the federal funds rate. So I would propose 11-1/2 percent on that at 
this point. I am not particularly eager to make a major move now or 
in the foreseeable future, so I would suggest that we put a band 
around that of 11-114 to 11-3/4 percent, which ought to [result in a] 
reconsideration before a very major step on the funds rate. There is 
a desire by most people to constrain the aggregates and that may 
require going [with ranges1 below any of these alternatives we have 
[in the Bluebook]. Consistent with the notion that we‘re not looking 
for any easing in the immediately foreseeable future, it may make some 
[sense] to broaden the MS aggregate [range] on the down side. Let me 
suggest 3 to 8 percent for M1. And in the interest of symmetry, I 
think that means about 6 to 10 percent on M2. 

MR. PARTEE. You shouldn‘t cut a point and a half off the top 
of M2 for that M1 change. M1 is about half the [M21 total. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you saying that is consistent? 

MR. PARTEE. No. it is not consistent. 

MR. MAYO. 6-1/2 to 10-1/2. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that might be pretty close. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The current projection for M2 is what? 

MR. ALTMANN. 9-1/2 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 9-1/2. All right, let me modify my 
suggestion for M2 to 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. Who wants to shoot? 

MR. KIMBREL. Please state them again, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For M2, with Mr. Partee’s modification, 
6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent; 3 to 8 percent on M1; 11-1/4 to 11-3/4 
percent on the funds rate, meaning we would go to 11-1/2 percent. And 
I would interpret this to mean that we wouldn’t go above 11-1/2 
percent unless the aggregates got to or above the upper ends of the 
ranges that we‘re talking about. 

MR. WALLICH. This is a money market directive? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that probably implies a money 
market directive but in a sense, if we give full weight to the 
projections we now have, we’re starting out in the upper part of the 
ranges. 

MS. TEETERS. We’re above the range [for Ml]. Isn’t 
September projected at 10 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was talking about the two-month 
projection. 



9/18/79 - 3 6 -  

MS. TEETERS. What is the projection? 

M R .  AXILROD. 7 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 7 percent, so we're within the range 
but in the upper part of it. In effect by moving to 11-1/2 percent 
[on the funds rate], if we adopt this philosophy, we wouldn't move 
further unless growth actually got to or above the upper ends of these 
specified ranges. I'm just putting this on the table. Let's hear 
what comments you have. 

MR. KIMBREL. I'm very much in tune with that, Mr. Chairman. 
That's almost my prescription. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Larry Roos. 

MR. ROOS. I believe our range last month for M1 was 4 to 8 
and you would adjust it to 3 to 8 percent. The 8 percent bothers me, 
Mr. Chairman, because that 8--when we add 1-1/2 for ATS--means we 
really would tolerate a 9-1/2 percent growth in M1 if we let M1 go to 
the top of these specifications. That's a heck of a growth rate if 
we're trying to correct the overshoot that we probably already have. 
That's my only reaction. I repeat that I really don't think [we 
should have] anything over 6-1/2 percent as the upper limit; the upper 
limit is much more important than the lower limit under the present 
circumstances. 

MR. COLDWELL. Except that the lower limit does keep us from 
moving [the funds rate] down. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, we're already there if September comes in 
as expected at 10 percent; that is 5 percent for the two months. So 
it would take 6 percent [growth] to move up. That's not a great deal 
and yet it is a very high rate if, as Larry says, [we tolerate1 8 
percent plus 1-1/2 for ATS. On the down side, the 3 percent, we'd 
have to get minus 4 percent for the second month, which strikes me as 
pretty extreme. It's a useful precaution but I would prefer to 
achieve the same objective by having a skewed [funds rate] range of 
11-1/4 to 12 percent or so and go to 11-1/2 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're assuming in these calculations that 
we know the second half of September, which we don't really know. 

MR. AXILROD. May I say, Mr. Chairman, technically the ATS 
effects recently have been running only 1/2 percent, not 1-1/2 
percent. 

MR. BLACK. May I ask a question about the ATS effects? Is 
that for the whole year, Steve, or were you talking about recent 
months? 

MR. AXILROD. I was referring to the recent months. 

MS. TEETERS. I'm sorry, Henry, I didn't understand your 
recommendation. 

MR. WALLICH. I think that 8 percent is high, and I think the 
3 percent, while it accomplishes my purpose of avoiding a decline [in 



9/18/79 -37 -  

the funds rate1 is almost unrealistic because it means, assuming 
September comes in as projected, that we have to have minus 4 percent 
[Ml growth] in October. And that doesn't seem very likely. so just 
in the interest of plausibility, I would prefer to modify this M1 
range, but I don't feel strongly. If that's the best way of 
qualifying the funds rate movements, it can be done that way. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I observe these figures from week to 
week, there is nothing one can assume about the last two weeks of 
September. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have just a slight 
reservation on this on the 8 percent side. I guess I'd rather have 
11-1/4 to 12 percent [on the funds] range, using 11-1/2 as the 
"midpoint" but also using 11-3/4 as a possibility if those 
[aggregates] start moving up strongly toward the top of the range. 
I'm a little bothered about just nailing the rate at 11-1/2 percent 
and saying that's what it's going to be and we're going to reassemble 
if anything happens on either side of it. If that's the way we're 
going to work the game, then why don't we just say it? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite saying that. If the 
aggregates were strong enough, I think we could use this whole range 
here. 

MR. COLDWELL. If the aggregates were strong enough? You 
would say that [Ml growth] would have to get up to the full 8 percent 
in order to move even to the 11-3/4 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not so far from that on the 
current projection. It's just a matter of judgment. At this 
particular phase in the business cycle, should we be moving more than 
that without at least having a telephone call? I don't think there is 
any question about that. 

MR. COLDWELL. I have no objections to having a telephone 
call. I'm a little bothered about saying that [Ml growth] has to be 
at 8 percent [before we confer] because I think 8 is too high. If it 
means that we've got to go up to 11-3/4 percent, then I'd rather take 
the decision now that we're going to go to 11-3/4 percent if [Ml 
growth] is up in that area. 

MR. BLACK. Phil, what would your preference be on ranges? 

MR. COLDWELL. If I had a preference straight out, the range 
would be 3 to 7 percent, but I'm persuaded that with the present 
projection 8 percent growth is a possibility. All I'm saying is that 
I'd much prefer to make sure that we do use some of the [funds] range 
if we're approaching that [upper limit]. I just think 8 is too high. 
If it got up in the 7 percent range, I'd like to see us nibbling 
toward usage [of the upper part of the funds range]. 

MR. TIMLEN. If I had my preference, I'd have the same ranges 
suggested by the two governors: [a funds range] of 11-1/4 to 12 
percent with an M1 range of 3 to 7 perent--I think the 8 percent looks 
very high--and an M2 range of 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. I don't feel 
that this is strongly different from the numbers you put down. And I 
agree with Phil that if the numbers are coming in pretty high, I would 



9/18/79 -38- 

[want to1 feel that we could go to 11-3/4 percent and not be blocked 
by the 11-1/2 percent. 

MR. COLDWELL. I wouldn't mind the 11-3/4 percent top on it, 
Tom. if we were going to use that top as [Ml growth] moved up toward 
the 8 percent. But I wouldn't require it to get to 8 percent before 
we use [the top of the funds range]. 

MR. BLACK. Use an aggregates directive and it becomes much 
more acceptable to me with those ranges. 

MR. PARTEE. If I had my preference, I would put 9 percent as 
the top because I think we will have a large [number in] September. 
[Ml growth1 will be probably on the order of 10 percent; it could be 
12 or it could be 8 or something like that. Why, when October [Ml 
growth] is moving down, would we raise the funds rate? There's an 
inconsistency about the whole thing. Also, I might point out that a 9 
percent increase in money with the rate of inflation that we have and 
cannot stop--it will be there in fuel and in food prices over this 
period--is not a terribly high increase in the money supply. 

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I think setting this 11-1/4 to 12 
percent [funds rangel and a 7 percent top on [the M1 rangel just 
automatically assures that we're going to start raising the interest 
rates again. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not what I proposed. 

MS. TEETERS. I would go with 3 percent [as the lower limit] 
and I would put 9 percent [as the top]. I think your proposal is being 
pretty [forceful] in putting it so low. I have noticed that the 
aggregates only work on the up side. During the long period of time 
the money supply was declining, we ignored the bottom level of [the M1 
range] for six solid months--for [apparently] good reasons. I didn't 
think it was the right thing to do at that time. But we only seem to 
get excited when M1 growth goes over the top of its range rather than 
when it goes to the floor. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have had a little more experience going 
over the top. 

MS. TEETERS. Not in my-- 

MR. WALLICH. Like disorder in the exchange market, it only 
occurs on the down side. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I didn't elaborate on my own position earlier but 
I find I am much more comfortable with Alternative B as presented [in 
the Bluebook]. I would not object to going to the 11-1/2 percent 
midpoint with the 11-1/4 to 11-3/4 percent range. I don't think I 
would widen the range right now though, to 11 to 12 percent, say. I 
don't find the 9 percent [for the M1 range] too high either; I think 5 
to 9 and I-1/2 to 11-1/2 are all right. Once I decide that I want the 
midpoint [of the funds range] at 11-1/2 percent, I think [the 
question] is about the tightening that I want to see done. And, like 
Mr. Guffey and Mr. Winn, I would rely on a little psychology here and 



9/18/79 -39- 

move up the discount rate a half percentage point and have that be our 
announcement effect rather than have any tightening other than what I 
might say is more of an accommodation to the market. If the market 
tightens, I wouldn’t have any problem going to 11-1/2 percent but I 
wouldn’t do any more than that. I think we have to keep the pressure 
on; I don’t want to see any sign of easing whatsoever. And I think we 
can do it with that prescription. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Well, I guess I could live with the ranges that 
you proposed, Mr. Chairman, if we had an aggregates directive. When I 
keep in mind that part of the proposal was a money market directive 
that does bother me. [I say that] simply in the sense that at some 
point if we have any intent at all of coming within even the upper end 
of the ranges we’ve specified--and I think we’ve got to do that if 
we‘re going to make any progress gradually on inflation--we’re going 
to have to do something to keep from moving farther and farther away 
from both the midpoints and the upper end. So I’d like to throw out 
the possibility, while we‘re still in the discussion phase here, of an 
aggregates directive to accompany these ranges that we’ve talked 
about. On the federal funds rate specifically, I would join those who 
think we ought to set the range a little higher, at 11-1/4 to 12 
percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, that‘s a real difference. I’m not 
sure the other difference as stated is particularly significant as I 
read it. If we‘re starting off at 11-1/2 with a I percent current 
projection, we haven’t got much room anyway whether we have an 
aggregates or a money market directive. I suspect they‘re the same on 
the up side; they might be different on the down side. Because we 
haven‘t got any room in there anyway, you‘ve in effect taken the move. 

M R .  BLACK. I think, Mr. Chairman, we could move [the funds 
rate] to 11-1/2 percent and then wait a week and take another look at 
the projections. Chuck mentioned a while ago that October is going to 
come in very low but I‘m not at all sure that is true. I know that’s 
what the projections say. So, that‘s what I would do. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if that‘s the case, we’d have to 
move up under either [form of the directive]. 

MR. BLACK. Well, if we move it to 11-1/2 percent, I think 
we’ve done it for the time being and we can wait until the projections 
come in and move further. I would align myself exactly with John on 
his specifications, with an aggregates directive. I have the same 
problem with a money market directive. That takes us further off 
target than we now are. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we‘re in the area of religion 
rather than substance. 

MR. BLACK. Well, I don’t think it’s that, Mr. Chairman. I 
think it’s a question of how serious we are about the aggregates. And 
as I guess everybody knows, I’m right serious about them. 

MR. MAYO. Well, I am too, Bob, but I have trouble paying too 
much attention to the two-month figures. 



9/18/79 -40 -  

MR. BLACK. I do too, Bob, but we have had year after year of 
excessive growth and at some point we have to act in the short run if 
the long run is going to come out right. And I don't think we have, 
though recently we've done pretty well. 

MR. MAYO. That's what I'm arguing for, Bob. I think we've 
got a position in place now where we have the pressure on. Sure, we 
ought to be ready to reverse but I think we ought to be very careful 
not to tighten unnecessarily more than the 118 point we're talking 
about. 

MR. BLACK. I hope you're right, Bob, because I don't want to 
see interest rates go up. But I'm afraid they'll have to if we're to 
avoid [even] higher rates, a more serious recession, and more 
unemployment further down the road. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who else would like to get into this? 

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to join Bob Mayo with 
respect to the "B" ranges and standing pat at the moment. I would 
like to suggest--this is not a substantive issue--that if we have an 
aggregates directive with a 9 percent top [on the M1 range1 that's 
really about the same thing as if we have a money market directive 
with the ranges that you have already suggested. Either one of those 
is acceptable to me. 

MR. COLDWELL. I think there's a possibility, Mr. Chairman, 
of some compromise here. To take off on Bob Black's suggestion-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's hear from the others first. 
Governor Wallich, you didn't give ranges, or at least Mr. Altmann 
didn't record them. 

MR. WALLICH. I would go with 3 to 8 and 6-112 or 6 to 10; 
that would be my preference. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice. 

MR. RICE. I would go with Alternative B. 

MR. WALLICH. I should have added that I would prefer a money 
market directive because of the sensitivity of any interest rate 
movement now. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, first I think the Board should 
approve the half percentage point increase in the discount rate for 
those Reserve Banks that have in a request for that. Secondly, along 
with those who would like to see more emphasis on the aggregates, I 
think it would be desirable to go to an aggregates directive. In 
terms of the ranges, I could accept either those you have specified or 
those in Alternative C. Yours are a little more restrictive than 
those in "C," but with an aggregates directive hitched to Alternative 
C they would not be greatly different. And along the lines of Willis 
Winn's suggestion--and also consistent with the argument for more 
attention to the aggregates instead of a very narrow funds range--1 



9/18/79 -41- 

would allow a little more [flexibility] on the funds rate with a range 
such as 11-1/4 to 12-1/4 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn. 

MR. EASTBURN. I would support Alternative B, but I do think 
the arguments for a discount rate increase are good and I’d be 
prepared to recommend that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. 

MR. MORRIS. I would certainly subscribe to your 
recommendation, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN. I’d just spread the [range on the funds] rate, M r .  
Chairman, but I wouldn’t quarrel too much [with your proposal]. I’d 
go with 11 to 12 percent and an aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor. 

MR. GAINOR. We prefer an aggregates directive, Mr. Chairman, 
and we could go with the ranges you prescribed. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz. 

MR. SCHULTZ. I‘m happy. At some point in time I’d like to 
see us go with a wider [federal funds] range and the aggregates 
directive but right now, considering the volatility problem, I’d be 
happy with your proposal. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there‘s no question that on the 
aggregates 3 to 8 percent is the [best compromise for M11. It hits 
both the majority and the midpoint of all the concerns; there are some 
higher and some lower, but there is a majority for that. It’s the 
same for M2 at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent. The difference of opinion 
lies more on where to put the upper point of the [funds range]. There 
was some dissent perhaps, but the great majority wanted to or are 
willing to go to 11-1/2 percent now. There is some difference of 
opinion on the upper point of the range; there is one who disagreed on 
the lower end of the range. I count 5 who would like to go higher on 
the upper end. And there is obviously a disagreement on the 
[selection of an] aggregates or money market directive. 

I would just make two comments, both of which have already 
been made. One is [that it‘s hard to] go much lower on the aggregates 
ranges if we’ve got two high weeks in September already. Even if the 
rest of September comes out on the low side, it’s got to get pretty 
damn low. And if we go down very far on that aggregate, we would be 
raising rates. There’s quite clearly a possibility of raising rates 
in the midst of a pronounced decline in the growth of the aggregates 
from week to week. I question whether we want to do that. 

The other comment is on the aggregates against the money 
market directive. There may be a difference; I find it hard to see 
what the difference is on the up side. I see some difference on the 
down side. With an aggregates directive we might [move the funds 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -42- 

rate] down more rapidly and sharply if the [aggregates] came in weak. 
But if we had 8 percent on the up side and we’re at 7 percent to start 
with, then the difference [of opinion] may be, if it stays at I 
percent, [whether] we go up still further. I think that is the only 
substantive difference and it is a substantive difference. I guess I 
contemplated in my proposal that 11-1/2 percent is in fact above the 
midpoint, so we would already have gone above the midpoint and we 
would not move any further if the projection remained unchanged. It 
would take a further increase in the aggregates projection to raise 
the federal funds rate all other things equal, including the exchange 
market and everything else that might influence what we do. That‘s 
what the argument is about, as I see it, apart from the difference on 
the down side. Do you want to go above the 11-1/2 without the current 
aggregates projection for the two-month period changing? If it went 
up as much as a percentage point, we might go up under either 
formulation [of the directive]. If it stayed the same, on my original 
formulation we presumably wouldn‘t move. If the people who favor an 
aggregates directive mean that we should move under that circumstance, 
you ought to say so. I think that’s what they would be voting for. I 
don’t think this difference is enormous. 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. We‘d also appreciate some guidance as to the 
Committee’s feeling if [the projection] went up something less than 
that full percentage point. I know these are fine lines to draw, but 
we have to make those decisions. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It‘s a very fine line as far as I’m 
concerned. 

MS. TEETERS. Well, with the lower limit of 3 percent we 
wouldn’t move. The possibility of coming in at 3 percent is just 
about zero, as far as I can see. 

MR. PARTEE. It’s not zero, but it‘s very low. 

MS. TEETERS. It’s probably a negative probability! 
[Laughter] You‘ve got this stacked in one direction. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does it make a big difference, 
Nancy, whether we make it 3 to 8 or 4 to 8 ?  

MS. TEETERS. Not much. 

MR. PARTEE. Not much. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t think it does. A range of 3 to 8 
says we really don’t want to move [the funds rate] down unless 
something important happens. Well, let‘s leave the money 
market/aggregates issue open for the moment. I guess I’m left 
thinking--I’m reluctant to say this because it’s what I said before-- 
that the nearest thing to a consensus is 3 to 8 percent for M1, 6-1/2 
to 10-1/2 percent for M2, go to 11-1/2 percent now on the funds rate 
and make the range 11-1/4 to 11-3/4 percent. Any discussion? I don’t 
know whether these are all absolute preferences, but there seems to be 
a majority for that. The major difference among those three 
specifications is whether [the funds rate range] should be 12 percent 
on the upper side. 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -43- 

MR. WALLICH. I could live with that. we would have a 
conversation if [Ml growth1 strikes at the up side and go to 11-3/4 
percent. We’d have a second conversation to go beyond that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My basic feeling is that I think we ought 
to have a conversation at this stage of the game if we want to put the 
funds rate up that high. We shouldn‘t just put it on automatic pilot 
at this point. 

MR. COLDWELL. Even to 11-3/4 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could think of a marginal circumstance 
in which we might want to have a conversation but I could think of 
nomarginal circumstances where if that is the directive, we would go 
ahead. I think you’ll just have to leave that up to me. That kind of 
decision also depends some on the economic news we get and to some 
extent certainly [on developments in] the foreign exchange market--the 
typical reservations we always put on these things. Maybe we ought to 
have a renewed expression of views; not everybody expressed 
themselves. Let’s assume those were the specifications. How many of 
the voting members would want an aggregates directive? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
How many would want a money market directive? We’ll see how many 
don’t vote! 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. There is somebody besides myself who 
didn’t vote. 

MR. RICE. Me. I didn‘t vote. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don’t like either one. 

MR. RICE. That‘s right. Well, I would prefer a money market 
directive. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the whole thing is [beyond] your pale. 
I would feel somewhat more comfortable with the money market 
[formulation] under existing conditions. I think we are very much 
probing the outer limits of what we should do at the moment in terms 
of the basic economic situation. So I guess we’ll just put the vote 
that way: 3 to 8 percent, 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent, 11-1/4 to 11-3/4 
with an 11-1/2 percent midpoint, and a money market directive. 

MR. MAYO. A very technical point Paul: 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 
percent is a smaller range for M2 than we have for M1. Does that make 
sense? Should it be 5-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent? It’s the least 
important [number] we‘re talking about. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t have a strong opinion on that one. 
Does anybody else want to comment? 

MR. MAYO. Or at least have the same [width] range. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would judge that we may already have 
stretched some people‘s tolerance in making the M1 range 3 to 8 
percent, Bob. So maybe we ought to leave it at that. 

MR. MAYO. It’s a question of consistency. 

MR. PARTEE. I’m concerned about that M2 number because I do 
believe we’re getting considerable shifts [of funds1 from the S&Ls to 



9/18/79 -44-  

the commercial banks. But that, of course, would tend to result in a 
higher number rather than a lower one. It wouldn’t go the other way 
unless market rates were quite a bit lower, which isn’t in prospect. 

MR. MAYO. It just seems, if we’re going to have a 5-point 
range on M1, that we should have no less than a 5-point range on M2 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is there a strong preference for the 
5-point range? 

MR. BLACK. Just to show my flexibility, Mr. Chairman, I‘ll 
say that I would go along with that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let’s just have a quick expression of 
preference on that. Do most people want to join Mr. Mayo on making 
this amendment? 

MR. BALLES. I‘m sorry, would you repeat the numbers? 

MR. MAYO. I‘m suggesting 5-1/2 instead of 6-1/2 percent on 
the lower end of the M2 range. 

MR. WALLICH. Just as a general principle. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t notice any upswelling of support. 

MR. MAYO. I don’t either, but I don’t [hear] any objection. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn’t have any great objection myself 
but let‘s stick with where we were. I guess we are ready for the 
vote. 

MR. ALTMA”. 
Chairman Volcker Yes 
President Balles NO 
President Black No 
Governor Coldwell No 
President Kimbrel Yes 
President Mayo Yes 
Governor Partee Yes 
Governor Rice No 
Governor Schultz Yes 
Governor Teeters Yes 
First Vice President Timlen Yes 
Governor Wallich Yes 

The vote is 8 for, 4 against. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have one other item on the agenda, as I 
recall. We can cover it quickly, I think. You have a memo, which I 
assume you have all read, which concludes that we should continue the 
practice of lending securities to government security dealers in case 
they need them to make up for failures. We would charge them roughly 
three times as much as the market rate. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it’s either double or three times. 



9 / 1 8 / 7 9  -45- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Charging three times the market rate is a 
practice we have been following for some years, and I take it we 
review that practice periodically. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. It has been on about a 6-month review. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any questions of Mr. Sternlight 
or Mr. Peterson? 

MR. PARTEE. A very well argued brief there! 

MR. MAYO. Splendid. 

MR. WINN. Paul, marketwise, is there any way we could make 
this shift [in the funds rate] today rather than tomorrow, to throw 
the markets a little off balance in their shooting duck attitude 
toward us? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the way the funds market has gone this 
week, the funds rate has been averaging, through yesterday, 11.39 
percent. But actually, the funds rate on the day yesterday was about 
11-1/2 percent and today it was starting out on the firm side. We 
went in early because the funds rate had moved to 11-5/8 percent, so 
we were trying to hold down the funds rate at-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sounds like an easy transition. I take it 
there is no objection to the lending of securities. The meeting is 
adjourned, and it’s one minute before one o’clock. 

END OF MEETING 


	790918meeting
	790918staffstatements



