









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

October 6, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 



Xeeting of Fede ra l  Open Market Committee 

October 6 ,  1979 

A meeting of t h e  Federa l  Open Market Committee w a s  

he ld  i.3 t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors of t h e  Federal  

Reserve System i n  Washington, D .  C . ,  on Sa turday ,  October 6 ,  

1979, beginning a t  10:lO a .n .  

?RESEXT: M r .  Volcker ,  Chairman 
M r .  B a l l e s  
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. K i m b r e l  
N r .  Mayo 
Mr. P a r t e e  
N r .  Rice 
Mr. S c h u l t z  
Mrs. Teeters 
Mr. Wallich 

3essrs. Guffey,  Ksrris, Soos, T i ~ l e z ,  and Winn, 
A l t e r n a t e  Members of t h e  Fede ra l  Opeil Market 
Cornlit tee 

Msjsrs. Saughinan 2.3d Eastburn ,  P r e s i d e n r s  of 
t h e  Fede ra l  Reserve Banks of D a l l r t s  anci 
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Mr . A l t m a c r . ,  S e c r e t a r y  
Xr. B e r n a r d .  A s s i s t a n t  S e c ~ r e t a r y  
Xr. P e t e r s e n ,  General  Counsel 
I&. Axi l rod ,  Economist 
M r .  H o l m e s ,  Adviser for Market Operat ions 

Messrs.  E t t i n ,  Xichl ine ,and  Truman, Assoc ia te  
Economists 

M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Manager for Domestic 
Opera t ions ,  System Open Market Account 

Nr. Pardee ,  Manager f o r  Foreign Operat ions,  
System Open Market Account 

M r .  A l l i s o n ,  S e c r e t a r y  of t h e  Board of 
Governors 



- 2 -  

Mr. Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of 
Governors 

M r .  Beck, Senior  Economist,  Banking 
Sec t ion ,  D iv i s ion  of Research and 
S t a t i s t i c s ,  Board of Governors 

M s .  F a r a r ,  Economist, Open Market Secre- 
t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

Mr. Corrigan,  Vice P r e s i d e n t ,  Fede ra l  
Reserve  Bank of N e w  York 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
October 6, 1979 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen, I think we might as well 
start. I hate to start without Emmett but he seems to have been 
incommunicado for 40 minutes now, so let’s begin. Maybe we should 
take a minute to hear Mr. Kichline go over the latest business news. 
I realize you did that yesterday, Jim, but not everybody had the 
benefit of your comments yesterday. So, why don’t you do that. 

MR. KICHLINE. All right. I’ll try to be brief. Economic 
activity in the third quarter appears to have expanded a little faster 
than we had anticipated earlier. We now believe that real GNP 
probably grew at an annual rate of around 1-1/2 percent, maybe a shade 
higher. Employment, production, and sales all seem to have been 
somewhat higher. The most recent news, of course, was on the 
employment situation in September. Total employment grew 
substantially and the unemployment rate dropped 0.2 percentage point 
to 5.8 percent. Industrial production now appears to have grown about 
1/2 percent in September on the basis of the most recent labor market 
report and some physical product data on auto sales and steel 
production. As you know, housing starts were unchanged in August at 
1.8 million. We have some additional information that suggests 
capital goods shipments in August were rather stronger than we had 
anticipated as well. On the inventory side, inventory still seemed to 
have been accumulated at a substantial pace in August, at least at the 
manufacturing level. And this is an area of growing concern given 
what we perceive to be substantial imbalances developing unless we get 
sustained growth in final sales or further downward adjustments in 
production. 

While the recent data clearly suggest more strength than the 
staff had anticipated at the last meeting of the Committee, the 
fundamentals still seem to be running against sustained growth in 
coming quarters. Namely, I would point to declining real income, 
which we have now had since December of last year. At the present 
time we think that real growth in the fourth quarter is likely to 
decline at about a 3-1/2 percent annual rate, which is a bit bigger 
decline than we had estimated earlier. But over the whole projection 
period through 1980 we don’t anticipate any significant change in the 
forecast we presented to the Committee in September. On the price 
side, the most recent information relates to production. The producer 
price index, as you how, increased at a 1.4 percent annual rate. It 
was particularly discouraging. There were widespread increases, with 
food and energy prices continuing to rise very rapidly. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might take just a minute to see if any 
of the Presidents in particular have comments they would like to make 
on the business scene from [a regional] perspective that would add to 
the statistical information that we‘ve had on prices, production, or 
other fronts. Let’s hear quickly. 

M R .  MORRIS. Well, I think we’re seeing an amazing replay of 
1974-75. We have declining final demand, with the economy cushioned 
by very large inventory accumulation that produces big demand for bank 
credit, resulting in growth in the aggregates. And we‘ve been leaning 
against that growth by pushing up the federal funds rate. I gave a 



10/6/79 -2 -  

talk to my directors on Tuesday in which I overlaid the 1974-75 period 
on the current period. I assumed March '79 was the peak in this 
period and compared that to the November '73 peak. The behavior, 
including the tracking of the federal funds rate, is amazingly 
similar. It seems to me that we have a very big inventory 
accumulation; and when the inventory accumulation does stop, I think 
the recession is likely to be bigger than we are projecting. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Did you see evidence of a credit crunch in 
that earlier period? 

MR. MORRIS. Well, I don't have a measure of credit crunch 
but I do have measures of the funds rate and the rate of growth in the 
money supply, and the behavior of those is quite similar. 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. My recollection is that we had a very 
different situation with respect to credit availability but I was told 
just recently that a bank from Chicago was working diligently in an 
eastern area to round up business loans. We wouldn't have had that, I 
think, in 1975. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the money center banks are still 
very aggressively looking for loans. But if you go outside the money 
centers, the banks are very tight. At least they are in New England. 

MR. PARTEE. Of course, the real estate situation is entirely 
different, with 1.8 million housing starts. That compares with what 
we had, say, in the summer of '74 when starts were down to a 1.1 
million annual rate or thereabouts and there just wasn't any mortgage 
money. 

MR. MORRIS. But the state and local sector is much weaker 
than it was in 1974-75. 

MR. PARTEE. That's true. 

MR. WALLICH. That is hardly speculative although it's a 
little speculative. In '74 it was virulent. 

M R .  COLDWELL. In '74 we had a constraint in terms of 
capacity that we haven't faced to a big degree. 

M R .  BALLES. To follow up on what Ernie said, I've had 
conversations in some depth with various directors over the last week 
and whether they're businessmen or bankers they report essentially the 
same story--that the present level of interest rates, in contrast to 
the situation generally in '74, is just not deterring borrowing in any 
way that they can see. 
country; small businesses and farmers are in a big cash flow bind. 
But medium- and larger-size companies, according to the companies 
themselves as well as their bankers, just don't blink at this level of 
interest rates. They just go ahead and borrow anyway. I don't think 
we're approaching the credit crunch type of situation that we had in 
'74. I think that's one of the big differences. 

I'm sure that's not true for everybody in the 

MR. MAYO. We have plenty of tightness at 90 percent of our 
banks but they probably don't account for more than half of the 
business. And the other 10 percent can get money whenever they want. 



10/6/19 -3 -  

MR. MORRIS. But bank credit was expanding pretty rapidly in 
the first half of ‘74. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other quick comments? 

MR. EASTBURN. Yes, Paul. A quick and informal [survey] of 
some people in our area confirms a bit what I think Frank [Morris] was 
saying. There’s increasing concern about the inventory situation and 
the likelihood that the recession is going to be more severe than they 
had thought. This is on the part of retailers and of bankers who have 
some feeling that the strength in business loans is inventory-based 
and that it is going to collapse. 

MR. TIMLEN. We had a businessmen’s meeting in our Bank about 
a week ago and we had three or four industrialists as part of the 
group. Of the three or four, all were predicting a rather good year 
in 1980 with the exception of one that is a supplier to the automotive 
industry. It’s generally the same kind of [story] we’ve been hearing 
for a long time. The industrialists were all vigorously defending 
their accomplishments in the area of productivity. They were saying 
that their own companies were doing very well in that regard and they 
thought the national statistics really related to the services field 
and government regulations. One of the people there was a mutual 
savings banker who was not very happy about the prospect for deposits 
in New York for the next quarter. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments--. Bones 
did you want to comment? 

MR. KIMEREL. I’d simply echo [Tom Timlenl. In the last week 
we had a series of business leaders in from Jacksonville, Atlanta, and 
New Orleans. They [exhibited] an enthusiastic lack of confidence in 
so many areas. But for their own individual businesses the only 
expression of any concern was from a convenience store operator with 
about 1500 outlets who suggested that one [sign] of a possible 
recession was the fact that they were having many more thefts--more 
stealing [of merchandise] as well as robberies. That was the only 
[indication] of recession they could see. 

MR. MAYO. Sales at Sears Roebuck were ahead of last year for 
the first time in twelve months. 

MR. PARTEE. Was a year ago bad, do you recall? 

MR. MAYO. Well, Sears has gone through particular problems. 

M R .  PARTEE. It seems to me that they were in bad shape about 
a year ago. 

M R .  MAYO. It shouldn‘t be used as an example for the whole 
country. 

MR. PARTEE. Wards had a very small change over a year ago. 

MR. MAYO. Yes, but Penneys and Kmart are still doing fine. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me say where I think we are even 
though Emmett is still absent. I appreciate your all standing by so 



10/6/79 -4-  

patiently over the past few days, but we’ve had a few complications 
putting this together, with some people out of town and so forth. 
Just in terms of the schedule for today, I think we have to assume 
that the Board of Governors is going to have to meet after we get 
finished. And depending upon what we decide, the presidents may want 
to meet. too, to discuss any reserve requirement changes and what 
kinds of problems that will create in the short run. [Unintelligible] 
and we may need to talk about straightening out mechanical problems 
that may arise [when we implement] any decisions we make. So we can 
play that by ear as we go along. 

I don’t know how long we’re going to have to be here today. 
We will be here until we arrive at a consensus and proceed [from 
there]. I’m not sure when we would announce any decision that we 
make--whether we’d do it late today or Monday morning. Those seem to 
be the two practical alternatives with the Pope here rather blanketing 
the area [news] tomorrow and creating a little difficulty [for us1 in 
terms of an orderly announcement. 

Let me say that I think there are several dimensions to the 
current situation. We wouldn‘t be here today if we didn’t have a 
problem with the state of the markets, whether international or 
domestic. They were pretty feverish last week--or beginning in the 
previous week, really. Beginning about 2 weeks ago and carrying over 
into the early part of what is still this week, the foreign exchange 
market was in a situation that was clearly not amenable for very long 
to such techniques as intervention. The markets have turned around 
some in the past few days, as you know. I think that is almost 
entirely explicable by the fact that at about the time I returned from 
Belgrade Treasury officials and others were making some statements 
that left hanging the possibility of some kind of a package, so the 
foreign exchange dealers have retreated to the sidelines. 

MR. WALLICH. The reporters left the room when [Secretary] 
Miller said that Paul had gone home. They just rushed to the phones. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That typically is the case these days. I 
arrived at the airport and there was a reporter accompanying me on the 
plane. I don‘t know when he got to a telephone; he couldn’t until we 
got to London. I have thought that one way of managing the markets 
might be to ascend in an airplane and just circle, with a refueling 
[plane] and no known destination! [Laughter] 

I don’t think we can count on that [state of relative calm1 
for very long. In fact, as you know, while the markets have been 
standing still or even declining, the gold market has not exactly been 
in a calm situation. And the phone calls have begun to escalate, 
reflecting a kind of extreme nervousness in all directions. I think 
the rumors that were floating around in the market yesterday--first 
that I had resigned and then that I had died and then that I was mad 
at Governor Schultz--are symptomatic of the state of the market. 
[Market participants] are living with fragile expectations and 
inspired rumor and all the rest from day to day. I do think that the 
psychology in that sense is ready to crack open, depending upon what 
decisions they see coming out of here or elsewhere in a very short- 
term time horizon. 



10/6/79 -5- 

Now I turn to the economy and you know generally the 
situation there. We have had at least an Indian Summer, which 1 
suppose raises some questions in peoples’ minds as to whether the 
recession is all that imminent after all. There is an inventory 
problem potentially or actually without any question. I myself feel a 
little less--concerned isn‘t quite the right word. I think the risks 
of the economy dropping off--. [Secretary’s note: Mr. Rice arrived 
at the meeting.] There you are! I‘m sorry that somehow somebody 
didn‘t get the accurate word to you on the timing here. We really 
just started. I have described the state of the markets as in some 
sense as nervous as I have ever seen them. 

In terms of the economy, I was about to say that my own 
concerns about the risks of the economy falling off the table, though 
they have not evaporated, have diminished a bit. The possibility of 
that occurring appears to be somewhat delayed at the least. My own 
judgment of this may change, but I think the risks certainly are a 
little less than they were before. That’s a judgment that may not 
mean much if I don‘t tell you what I thought the risks were earlier. 
I thought they were significant. But [the possibility of a downturn] 
seems to me at least postponed. 

On the price front, expectations have certainly gotten worse 
rather than better. Even though the price news is bad, it does not in 
my judgment as yet reflect a spreading of the whole inflationary force 
into areas outside of energy. We had a fluctuation in food [prices] 
last month, but that [component of the price index1 goes up and down. 
If we look at the wage trend, so far as we know--with the exception of 
the General Motors settlement--we haven’t had a real breakout yet. 
But we’re dealing with a situation where that’s an imminent danger on 
the one side as is the possibility of a recession on the other side. 
Mr. Schultz had an apt description the other day of where we are--and 
I certainly share the feeling--in saying that Scylla and Charybdis 
have now come together. There is clearly no risk-free course for us 
here; there are risks on both sides. The idea that we can absolutely 
thread the needle between the risks is probably a nice hope but it may 
be an illusion. At this stage you’ve got to place your bets one way 
or the other and move. 

I certainly conclude from all of this that we can’t walk away 
today without a program that is strong in fact and perceived as strong 
in terms of dealing with the situation. I would put that case into 
context. Ignoring some of the more feverish psychology for the 
moment, we are in an interim period of sorts where if some of what I 
think are quite reasonable--but never absolutely certain--projections 
develop in a favorable way we’re not going to see that in fact in the 
statistics. The statistics are not going to be convincing to anybody 
for a period of some months. 
price front where, if the present trends continue and we don‘t have an 
excessive oil price increase from OPEC in December, energy prices 
shouldn‘t level off in any absolute terms but should come down from 
the enormous rates of increase recorded in recent months. And if 
other prices are held more or less in check, there is a chance that 
inflation will at least come down toward the single digit level--and 
if you want to get hopeful, within the single digit level--by the end 
of the year or early next year. 

I’m thinking there particularly on the 



10/6/79 - 6 -  

If one looks at the balance of payments side, I think most 
projections, given foreign growth and given the outlook for the 
domestic economy, suggest that both the trade position and the current 
account should look considerably better going into 1980. That‘s 
simply because, ex-oil, [the external sector] has been doing pretty 
well and should continue to do pretty well under these conditions. As 
we get into 1980 the burden of the increased price of oil imports in 
the price indices should be [diminishing]. So, we could get a 
substantially stronger looking picture then, but we’re not going to 
know that until probably well into the first quarter. And, of course, 
current account figures for the whole first quarter aren’t going to be 
out until the Spring. The trade figures come out on a monthly basis 
and they should reflect [the improvement] to some extent, although 
part of the projected strength is in non-trade areas of the balance of 
payments. The point is that there is a bridging or an interim period 
here before the best news one can [reasonably anticipate] is going to 
come about. And in the present mood of the markets, I think it’s 
going to take some time before they’re convinced. So we have to fit 
our programs into that interim period. 

The other element, of course, is that we are not dealing with 
a stable psychological or stable expectational situation by any means. 
And on the inflation front we‘re probably losing ground. In an 
expectational sense, I think we certainly are, and that is being 
reflected in extremely volatile financial markets. 

Let me give you a little background in terms of foreign 
components or elements of the package of anything that we might do 
here. I want to make a couple of comments that I really consider off 
the record. I don‘t know if we want to keep the recorder going or 
not. I’d prefer not to. Let me just say a few words about the 
attitudes of foreign countries as I’ve experienced them first hand. 
This is not particularly new, although the depths of the feelings . . .  
[Secretary’s note: The recorder was turned off while the Chairman 
gave his assessment--based on discussions at recent international 
meetings--of the views of foreign officials regarding a coordinated 
package. I 

That does not reflect entirely a feeling that a package is 
impossible, despite all I have said. I think it’s clear that an 
international package is impossible without strong action by the 
Federal Reserve. But when you look at the components of a traditional 
package of that kind, there is a question of how impressive it is 
going to be psychologically. We could perhaps build up something like 
a $10 billion further availability of marks through fairly obvious 
techniques--increasing the swap lines, selling the Germans some S D R s ,  
and drawina on the IMF. - 

I think, but I’m 
not saying it‘s absolutely impossible--in a bind, I should say--if 
people really thought it would be effective in terms of market 
Dsvcholocrv. But after a lot of discussion, bv aeneral consensus the - >  ~~~~ ~ -- 
feeling was that that kind of a package isn‘t-going to add all that 
much to an announcement at this point, as compared to the other 
possibility of indicating that resources are not really the problem, 
which I think is true in the technical sense. If the Germans wanted 
intervention, they’d provide the resources. And there may be some 
merit in keeping some of these possibilities dangling over the market 
for a period of time and perhaps announcing some of them as the period 



10/6/79 -7 

evolves. 
them all up in a package that may not be very impressive at the moment 
anyway. 

That probably would be more effective than trying to wrap 

The Treasury undoubtedly will be announcing a bond issue in 
the German market, I suspect in a matter of days. They have 
flexibility in the timing and they will do it when they think they 
will get some advantage from it. That's not a big deal in the sense 
that it has been amply leaked in Belgrade already both by the Germans 
and the Americans. But that will be coming along; I think we can just 
assume that that is [a given]. There are no specific swaps, SDRs, or 
IMF drawings [under consideration] for the reasons I suggested. There 
was no desire to solidify any of that at this point. 

The possibility of gold sales has been canvassed up and down. 
That this is not a great question of philosophy is, I suppose, the way 
I would word it. This is a very practical question of what seems 
useful and what doesn't seem useful. The question has been debated up 
and down and I think it is essentially unsettled. There is a 
possibility Iof gold sales], particularly if the gold market acts up 
again, but there has been no firm consensus reached on that point 
simply because in our mutual discussions some concern was expressed 
about whether they are effective or not effective over a period of 
time. They might be effective immediately. But if the gold sales 
have a nice effect immediately and we test it a little while later and 
the gold price goes up again, the question arises: Is it confidence 
inspiring or is it not? Or is it really better over a period of time 
just to leave the [gold] market alone? I think that question has to 
be left on that basis for the time being. It is indeed an open 
question and something that I think will depend upon the performance 
of the markets over a period of time--not just of the gold market, but 
of all markets. So, that is essentially the background we are dealing 
with in that area. 

We will have cooperation, I think, from our foreign partners 
either on gold or on intervention to the degree that they feel that we 
have done something here; that is an essential part of setting the 
stage. We will get that kind of cooperation, I suppose, with the 
limitations of enthusiasm that are inherent in my earlier comments. I 
don't mean to suggest that that type of activity is "out" if we 
mutually think it is advantageous. On the contrary, it is '"in" over a 
period of time with an appropriate background. But it is not "in" in 
the sense of announcing an international package of that type this 
weekend. 

Now, when it comes to our action here, I think there are 
broadly two possibilities. One is taking measures of what might be 
thought of as the traditional type. That would include a discount 
rate move on the one side and so far as this Committee is concerned a 
significant increase in the federal funds rate--putting those moves 
together. The Board will be considering some reserve requirement 
changes later today. Let's assume that the package would include 
that. Also, we would go forward with whatever changes in the federal 
funds rate we thought appropriate, which would be evident in the 
market. Or maybe we would say something about that in the 
announcement of the discount rate change and the reserve requirement 
change. I think we ought to look at that possibility. 



10/6/79 - 8 -  

The other possibility is a change in the emphasis of our 
operations as outlined in the memorandum that was distributed, which I 
hope you've all had a chance to read. That involves managing Desk 
operations from week to week essentially, with a greater effort to 
bring about a reserve path that will in turn achieve a money supply 
target--which we have to discuss--recognizing that that would require 
a wider range for the federal funds rate and would involve a more 
active management of the discount rate. And of course the question of 
reserve requirements and the discount rate change at this point are 
relevant in that context too. 

As I look at these two approaches there are advantages and 
disadvantages, obviously, to both of them. I must say that the 
thought of changing our method of operations germinated--in my mind at 
least--before the market psychology or nervousness reached the extreme 
stage it reached over the past week or so. My feeling was that by 
putting even more emphasis on meeting the money supply targets and 
changing operating techniques [in order to do sol and thereby changing 
psychology a bit, we might actually get more bang for the buck. By 
that I mean our having a more favorable impact on psychology and 
perhaps a more favorable impact on banks by introducing a little 
uncertainty per basis point of rise in money market rates than would 
be possible through the traditional method. I overstate it, but the 
traditional method of making small moves has in some sense, though not 
completely, run out of psychological gas. Every time the interest 
rate goes up by a small amount [bankers] say okay, we'll raise the 
prime rate. Whatever you do is inadequate--you, the Federal Reserve-- 
and we'll go along. We have access to liquidity at a fairly fixed 
federal funds rate--the rate isn't going to change all that abruptly-- 
and you're not having much impact on market thinking or on market 
confidence in your ability to keep the money supply under control. I 
am not saying that that reasoning is correct but I think it is the 
reasoning in the market psychologically. 

So we run a risk, almost whatever we do, that [in response] 
to next week's changes they will say: "It's not quite enough; the 
interest rates should be a little higher. The Fed undershot again." 
And we won't get the psychological impact we are looking for. So 
there may be something to [be gained in] a change in the psychological 
atmosphere that in some sense will give us more bang for the buck, as 
I put it. It's possible. It's an easier political sale, and we are 
obviously moving into an area that is sensitive, to say the least. We 
do have a background of some Congressional thinking that puts great 
emphasis on the money supply targets. So, to the extent that we 
accept that emphasis one might argue that we will get more support. I 
think that it is a factor to be weighed, but there are those who would 
say: "The hell with all this theorizing about where the targets are; 
when Congress sees the interest rate effects, that won't make any 
difference." So it is not a black or white situation by any means but 
I think it is something we can take into account. 

If we're lucky, this change [in our operating technique] will 
improve our chances of reaching our money supply targets on the one 
side. On the other side, it has some built-in pressure to move 
interest rates downward more promptly if the money supply begins 
running low. If the money supply were running low because the economy 
was falling off more rapidly, triggering a faster response on the down 
side clearly might be considered an advantage--and maybe an important 



10/6/79 -9- 

advantage. A context where the decline in interest rates is being 
related to weakness in the money supply should offer us some 
psychological and real protection in terms of financial market 
appraisals of why the interest rates are going down. 

Now, there are disadvantages as well, and they are important. 
To take one that flows immediately out of the advantage that I just 
cited, some people may consider it a disadvantage that we get too 
locked into [responding to] fluctuations in the money supply. [That 
might lead to] a prompt decline in interest rates at a time, let’s 
say, that would be unsettling internationally or might be 
misinterpreted domestically. So there is clearly an opposite side to 
that advantage. There is a feeling that we can get stuck. We are 
going to have to constrain the [funds] range whatever we do; it should 
be much wider under this approach but we certainly can constrain the 
fluctuation in an uncertain world. There is a danger that we could 
get stuck at the top of the range if the money supply turns out to be 
fairly strong; we‘d be back basically to the kind of operation we are 
in now, bumping against [the upper limit of] a federal funds target, 
which at that point would be at a higher level than we otherwise 
really would have wanted. I suppose there are two dangers out of 
that. We may get a little more restraint than we bargained for; that 
is one possibility. Another is that we will defeat the psychological 
purpose if this puts us back into that kind of constraint. 

There is a feeling that by responding to the particular 
situation we have now with a change in technique, we may get locked 
into a technique that isn’t very suitable over the longer run, 
including into 1980. The technique might have implications for 
interest rates or other things that we wouldn’t be happy about in 
other situations, yet it would be hard to reverse our ground. I think 
we also have to consider [the risk] of putting a lot more emphasis now 
on the money supply targets, knowing that there is no technique that‘s 
going to assure that we are going to [achieve] the money supply 
targets--either because of the inherent lags in the situation, the 
uncertainties of the money demand function and all the rest, or 
because we would resist any absolutely extreme movement in interest 
rates that might be necessary to keep [the money supply1 within the 
target ranges. We could well end up exceeding the targets for the 
year, after making a hullabaloo about this change in technique. And 
we could run into a reaction that at that point would be adverse. So 
there are advantages, disadvantages, and risks on all sides of this 
equation. 

I should report to you that obviously I discussed the whole 
problem on the international side and inevitably on the domestic side 
with the Administration. I think I can say flatly that they are ready 
for a strong program; they would have no disagreement with that 
conclusion at all. They shy away very strongly or have an uneasy 
feeling about a shift in technique at this point because of the 
uncertainties of the situation. There‘s a rather strong feeling, I 
think I should report, that that is the more risky course for a 
variety of reasons that I’ve touched upon: concern that the interest 
rate may move in a contrary way at some point in terms of the 
international situation; considerable concern about locking ourselves 
into a technique beyond this year that might not be suitable in light 
of all the circumstances; and concern that an immediate rise in the 
rate might be excessive depending, of course, upon where the federal 



10/6/79 -10- 

funds rate ceiling is put. But there’s a fear on the other hand that 
if it is put too low we‘re in a box where we would be bumping against 
the ceiling all the time. 

Finally a feeling that I think we have to consider too, if we 
do make this change, is that there is no apparent encore for the 
Federal Reserve; we will have in effect shot our bolt. Now, I don’t 
think that’s necessarily a minus, but it’s another factor we might 
want to take into account. It has been clear all along but it’s 
particularly clear at this point that we cannot by brute strength of 
monetary policy alone correct all the ills in the economy and in 
economic policy generally. I don’t mean to infer that I think 
economic policy is bad. I think fiscal policy has given us all the 
support we could ask for right now and, in terms of general business 
analysis, one might even argue more support than would be absolutely 
desirable. I don’t think we can [count on] the possibility of 
changing fiscal policy in this psychological situation. I don’t 
believe it should be changed for that reason. But if we change 
techniques, I think in a broad way we have gone to the limits of what 
monetary policy can really expect to accomplish and we can’t come back 
with something entirely different a month from now and another 
[change] two months from now or whenever. 

Now, I can go with either of these broad approaches because I 
think, with regard to our immediate situation, that we can develop an 
[alternative] package of measures that is basically equivalent in 
terms of market impact or psychological impact or whatever we want to 
achieve immediately. I have told you what the instincts are 
elsewhere; I have also told you that [the Administration] is ready for 
a strong program. I think it’s clear that the decision is one that is 
within our province and we have to make it today. We need a program 
that‘s as convincing as we can make it. In my view it’s also very 
important that we have the widest possible consensus among us in this 
kind of situation where there is no good answer. I think we all do 
recognize that there is no good answer, but there is strength in 
diversity here, if you will. So, to the extent that we have a 
consensus, that in itself will help carry the program and help achieve 
what we want to achieve. I am prepared, within the broad parameters, 
to go with whichever way the consensus wants to go so long as the 
program is strong, and if we adopt a new approach so long as we are 
not locked into it indefinitely. If we adopt a new approach, I’d 
consider it something that we adopted that seems particularly suitable 
to the situation at this time. We’d obviously gain some experience 
either pro or con by adopting the new approach. And I would say that 
early next year or late this year in connection with considering the 
new [money and credit growth1 targets for the next year we would have 
a thoroughgoing ground up decision as to whether we wanted to maintain 
this kind of approach, modify it, return to more traditional 
practices, or whatever. That should be a completely open decision. I 
was intending to have that discussion in any event at that time and I 
just don’t want to prejudge the issue by whatever we consider suitable 
at the moment. 

And finally I would say that I don’t think we can adopt a 
mechanical approach on the reserve side. While there would be a clear 
change in emphasis if we decide upon [this new approach], inherent in 
it is that we simply are going to have to leave a lot of discretion in 
the actual operations to the Desk, to my benevolent oversight, and to 



10/6/79 -11 

ex post review [by the Committee] with whatever frequency you would 
like, looking ahead on an interim basis. But I am not prepared to 
recommend or to accept a mechanical device that says nonborrowed 
reserves or the reserve base or total reserves or whatever, are going 
to meet x figure on a week-to-week basis come hell or high water 
regardless of what judgments are about the outlook or regardless of 
whether the interest rate is 17 percent or 6 percent. We are just not 
going to carry it to that extreme. But if we go in that direction, 
there is a real change in emphasis involved that would need to be 
reviewed carefully as we move along. 

That is my analysis of the situation. If you have any 
reactions at a very general level now, let's have them. And then I 
think we ought to get into more detailed questions about the new 
approach. The traditional approach is obviously much more clear-cut. 
It is a quantitative question of where you want to go. Many of the 
questions overlap. The differences are not night and day, but I think 
we need the time for a little more exposition on what the new approach 
would entail. 

MR. MAYO. Paul, in your review you made no mention of 
controls. I hear more rumors about those than you can shake a stick 
at these days. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bank credit controls or any kind of 
controls? 

M R .  MAYO. Various types. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just say a word on that. In 
this situation we get more talk about that, and there are certainly 
market rumors. I don't know that I hear such strong rumors that 
controls are a great possibility right now but there is a very large 
segment of market opinion that says if not now we are going to be 
driven to [impose them] later because the situation is out of control. 
My reaction--which on the basis of some earlier discussions I think is 
shared by some other Board members and by people in the Administration 
who at the very least would have to trigger the control mechanism when 
we're talking about domestic credit controls--is that of all the 
options one could think of theoretically, that is probably the most 
dangerous in terms of the business situation. That's because a 
control program that really bites at all might lead to [undesirable] 
reactions. For instance, grave questions might be raised about 
whether financing was available for some of the inventory that one 
would like to see financed. And all the anticipatory effects, with 
people trying to protect themselves, would [put the economy on] a very 
dangerous course at this particular juncture in the business cycle. 
The feeling is that there is some danger, on which people will put 
different [probabilities], of the economy having a most severe 
inventory reaction and indeed [that controls might1 even inhibit 
planning for capital spending that we wouldn't want to inhibit. 

Controls in the international dimension have not been 
discussed at all. I personally cannot conceive of controls in the 
international area. Forgetting about philosophy or long-term effects 
or anything else, I can't imagine--1 speak for myself--how one would 
design them so they'd be effective. They would have so many leaks 
around them because the major types of flows that involve foreign held 



l0/6/79 -12- 

dollars [have] leads and lags or what could be disguised as leads or 
lags. Such controls just don’t have any prospect of effectiveness 
that would make them within the range of possibilities. 

MR. COLDWELL. Paul, it seems to me that the situation we are 
faced with is pretty much as you outlined here. Maybe I could 
streamline this for my own thinking. I see our objectives as perhaps 
four-fold--centered around dampening [inflation] expectations, 
achieving some credit restraint that might flow from that, hopefully 
strengthening the dollar exchange rate, and--depending upon how one 
views this--a somewhat self-serving target of meeting our longer-range 
objectives and bringing growth in the monetary aggregates down. If 
those are our objectives and I lay heavy stress on the dampening of 
expectations, then it seems to me that the program has to be strong 
enough to impress the market. I have my doubts that the foreign 
market is going to be impressed for three reasons: (A) I don’t think 
they are going to believe it: (B) I don’t think they’ll understand it 
in terms of our change [of technique]: and (C) I think they are so 
skeptical that they‘d just say it’s too little and, without some 
effort on the part of the Treasury or somebody else, there would be no 
direct impact on the gold price. 

So it seems to me that we are designing something here to a 
considerable extent [for] our [domestic] situation, hoping there is a 
fallout internationally. The risks are large, of course, and 
[primarily] on the side that whatever recessionary tendencies are 
already there might be compounded, creating a [greater] decline. I 
suspect that risk involves 1980, not 1979. I think the risks are 
equally strong on the other side in that if we don’t put out something 
fully credible, we face a potential blow-up [vial a speculative move 
in the metals commodities that spreads out from there--in effect a 
flight from dollars. So I’m prepared to move ahead on this because I 
think the latter risks are too high. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m glad you mentioned the commodities 
issue. I don‘t know whether all the Presidents have caught up with 
this, though I presume they have. Beginning a little more than a week 
ago, late in the previous week when the gold market was gyrating, 
there was some very clear evidence that this psychology was getting 
into the metals markets in particular in a very forceful way and maybe 
in the grains market very temporarily. There were very sharp price 
increases in some metals markets which continued into Monday or 
Tuesday. They have relapsed along with the gold market and the 
exchange market fervor for the same reason and I’m sure they were 
related psychologically. But it’s worth mentioning that we have this 
evidence of extreme sensitivity. And the price increase was what--20 
percent in the copper market in 2 days or something like that? 

MR. PARTEE. Lead went up 20 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Lead went up 20 percent, too. It was 
frankly a bit of scary psychology to say the least. That has also in 
some sense relapsed for the moment in this [general] atmosphere of 
nervous anticipation. 

MR. PARTEE. I might make a general comment, Paul. I 
approach the situation a little differently than Phil does. And I 
don‘t pay as much attention to foreign and international aspects as 



10/6/79 -13 

you do. The thought I would like to emphasize or underline is 
uncertainty. I think the staff forecast--which I believe is not that 
much different from the forecast of the Council [of Economic Advisers] 
or from those one sees in standard private market services--is quite 
plausible. We certainly do have a lack of final demand right now. We 
certainly do have a decline in real income and we are going to 
continue to have a decline in real income. And today, at least in 
Washington, the winter heating season is beginning. The drain on 
purchasing power from that is going to be much greater on a seasonally 
unadjusted basis over the coming six months or so. There will be less 
money available for everything. So it's fairly reasonable to think 
that there is going to be a recession trend rather promptly, one that 
develops and continues over the winter and into the spring. If that's 
so, why of course we are going to want to try to keep the monetary 
aggregates growing. And we will have a sudden shift in our problem, 
which will be overly slow growth rather than overly rapid growth in 
the aggregates. That's one scenario. 

On the other hand, I was extremely bothered by the market 
developments of the last two weeks. I think the spreading of the gold 
[market psychology] into the more remote metals is very bothersome. 
Silver we understand and platinum we understand, but the spreading to 
copper, zinc, and lead is very bothersome. And not only grains but a 
number of other futures prices were moving [up], with no real 
justification for those moves. It leaves one with the thought that 
because of a run from currency--a desire to get into goods and out of 
money--we might have now a new development in our economic experience 
that would lead to a "last gasp" round of demand for goods, probably 
most intensively for inventory. That might last 2 or 3 months or it 
might last 4 or 5 months. It's very limited but it could last for a 
while. And then when the recession occurs, it will be much deeper 
because in addition to having to adjust to the lower level of final 
demand, people will have to liquidate inventory. They will move from 
inventory accumulation to decumulation and we will have a recession 
that is more like 1975 or perhaps worse than that. If that's the 
case, for the next few months or during the period in which there's 
this anxiety and concern about possibly moving from money into goods, 
it is very important to restrain the growth in the aggregates, and we 
could be talking about significantly higher interest rates. 

With that uncertainty, it seems to me that our traditional 
method, which is to estimate the short-term market rates that will 
adjust the demand functions for various kinds of money on a lag 
structure, has [inherent in] it the danger that we are going to miss. 
[Either] we will miss an intensification in the demand for money and 
be behind the gun, as we have tended to be here over the last six 
months, or we will miss a decline in the demand for money and overstay 
and be behind the gun, as we traditionally have done [going] into 
recessions. It's an extremely dangerous, risky proposition to change 
our operating mode. We have tried it a couple of times. We had RPDs 
back in the early '70s and we had that experiment a few years ago. 
For one reason or another--and we know the reasons--they didn't work. 
But even though it is extremely risky, I think it's the less risky 
course than to stay with our traditional system. So my emphasis is on 
uncertainty and the need to be aware of the fact that we no longer can 
specify interest rates given this uncertainty, rather than our need to 
tighten up or anything like that at this time. 



10/6/79 -14 

MR. MORRIS. I agree with Chuck. His analysis fit my views 
very closely. Despite my view that the recession is going to be 
sharp, I think we are in a situation where we have to be willing to do 
something dramatic today. It’s not clear to me that a change in 
operating procedures is going to gain us much yardage on the foreign 
exchange market because many will not understand what we are doing. 

MR. PARTEE. Unless they think it’s more of a commitment. 

M R .  MORRIS. That means that we also have to have some 
traditional measures to go along with it that they will understand 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No question. 

MR. MORRIS. I think the Committee has to understand that we 
are talking about something that will give the Manager discretion; 
[I’d] give him at least 2 percentage points on the up side in the next 
few weeks. We have never done that--that’s a dramatic change in our 
behavior--but that’s what we are talking about. And I think our 
credibility will really suffer if we announce a change in procedure 
and then fail to have the guts to go through with it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interject, Frank, I agree 
with what you are saying and I think [the issue] has to be approached 
in that light. But presumably the guts will have a number on it--the 
degree of our guts on the up side. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, that’s right. But it’s got to be a pretty 
big number. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. 

MR. MORRIS. The other thing is that we are going to need to 
educate the market very soon on this. So, if we go ahead with this 
change to a new procedure, I think you ought to have a press 
conference today. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we have a new procedure, I will 
have a press conference. Whether I have it today or Monday is an open 
quest ion. 

M R .  MORRIS. [If you have it today], the markets will have 
the weekend to absorb this. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don’t know. We have a holiday on 
Monday and we may do the press conference Monday morning. You can 
assume that I will have a press conference if we go through [with this 
change]. 

MR. MORRIS. Are the bond markets closed? Okay. 

MR. PARTEE. The stock market is open, but that’s it. 

MR. EASTBURN. Could I add one other point? I follow along 
with Frank on this. However, I think there is one [aspect of making a 
change] that is a disadvantage. I don’t think this can be a short-run 
change in technique because it is going to require a certain amount of 
time for it to work out. I understand the point that you made about 



10/6/79 -15- 

meeting the special situation we have, but this is a basic change in 
technique. And we’ve learned before that it really does take time to 
know whether la new technique] works or not. There’s a credibility 
problem if we launch this and stop and go with it. So I really think 
we are committed to this if we go [forward]. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don’t want to accept that. I 
don’t think we can make that decision now. If we [change our 
operating technique], I do accept the fact that to some degree we have 
prejudiced the discussion we will have at the end of the year. We 
will have to have a reason then to move back to the traditional 
method. But I don’t think we can really make that decision now, nor 
should we. Nor do I think this commits us that fully, though it 
prejudices to some degree what we would do next year. 

MR. PARTEE. We’d run it for several months in any event. 

CWlIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes. I think we are committed for 
several months. 

MR. EASTBURN. I‘m thinking partly in terms of the public 
impact that this will have. If the impression is conveyed that this 
is something we are just trying, I really don’t think it will have the 
impact on credibility that we need to have. 

CIiAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we lose some, but in this particular 
situation I don’t think we lose the whole [impact] or anywhere near 
that. We may lose 10 to 20 percent of it. 

Let me comment on a point that has come up a couple of times. 
I don’t think we are talking about a program here just to support the 
dollar. I know [different] people place different emphases on that. 
The dollar is part of the total situation, but I think this is really 
all one ball of wax at this point. The psychology in the foreign 
markets is the same as the psychology at home; it is reflected in the 
metals markets. It is the inflationary psychology or whatever. So I 
don’t think of this as a program specifically directed to the foreign 
side. If anything, it’s specifically directed toward the domestic 
side, but it will have foreign repercussions. One oE the interesting 
questions--it’s very hard to express and I don’t know the answer--is 
whether the new approach will carry a message of its own even in the 
international markets. I would be a little more optimistic [on that 
score] than some of the comments I just heard. There has been a great 
deal of discussion about the money supply and the feeling that so much 
of this psychology is related to the fact that the money supply is out 
of control. That’s the comment we hear all the time. The virtue of a 
new approach, if it has one, is that we are accepting--with all its 
risks and dangers--more of a focus on the money supply. I think that 
is understandable at that kind of gross level. 

I have a list here [of people who have indicated a desire to 
comment], so maybe I will [proceed] in an orderly way. John. 

MR. BALLES. I think there would be considerable agreement 
that the kinds of steps that were taken last November were viewed as 
bridging actions. They were effective but, of course, they can only 
be effective as long as some fundamental changes are being made that 
get around to solving the problem. One aspect of that, from the 



10/6/79 -16- 

standpoint of the Federal Reserve, is to do what is necessary to slow 
the growth of the aggregates and to begin to bring inflation under 
control. Other elements, as I look back on it--and I‘m sorry that we 
[as a nation1 haven’t made more progress--would have been to do 
something more effective on the energy front and so on. I think there 
is a wide perception from the standpoint of the Fed’s responsibilities 
and functions that there has simply been such excessive monetary 
growth in the last six months that we aren‘t making any progress on 
the inflation front. Fred’s comment about Scylla and Charybdis coming 
together is a very apt analogy, I’m afraid. We’ve all been struggling 
with this problem in that if we know a recession is probably in 
prospect, we normally would want to ease [policy] somewhat. Some of 
us felt so strongly about that last spring that we dissented; the 
record will show that we thought [policy] ought to be easing. Since 
that time inflationary developments and inflation expectations have 
become even more dangerous. 

One definite advantage that I see in moving to this new 
operating target of reserves is that it’s likely to result in greater 
credibility in the marketplace [on the part of] a great many observers 
here and abroad that we will do something more effective than we‘ve 
done, say, in the past 6 months in slowing down the rate of monetary 
growth. That [growth] in a way has been good in that it [may be] 
counter-cyclical but I think it has seriously damaged our ability to 
control inflation. 

One thing that hasn’t been said yet--perhaps it‘s so widely 
understood that it doesn‘t need to be said--is that the possibility of 
using the kinds of reserve targets that are set forth in this memo has 
been studied at great depth over a considerable number of years. We 
are not moving into this as if it were untested and unstudied; there‘s 
an enormous body of research, including staff papers and very good 
analytical delineations of the problems and so forth. So I don‘t 
think we are taking on something that’s new and experimental in the 
sense that it hasn’t been very thoroughly examined. When this subject 
came up four years ago under a predecessor subcommittee of the current 
subcommittee on the directive--and I served on that predecessor 
subcommittee--I was in favor of moving to a nonborrrowed reserves 
target then. And that was not in a crisis atmosphere such as we have 
today. If anything, I think the argument for adding a reserves 
target, with a considerably wider range of possible movements in the 
federal funds rate to make it effective, is stronger now than it was 
then, particularly in view of the explosive inflationary psychology 
that we have today. 

So, on balance, I would feel very comfortable in moving to 
the sort of approach that was set forth in the Axilrod-Sternlight 
paper. I fully agree with you that we shouldn’t go by a strict 
mechanical formula. I agree completely that we’re going to need to 
give you and the Desk a lot of discretion if we get into this. I, for 
one, think we would make a real impact on market expectations by 
announcing this new technique. Obviously, we’d have to follow through 
with some results, but I would strongly support the proposal for 
moving toward the sort of approach outlined in the paper by Steve and 
Peter. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bob Mayo. I’ll get back on course. 



10/6/79 -11- 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enthusiastically 
support the change in emphasis in our operations. I have felt for a 
long time that we were doing the best that we could, but I've changed 
my position on that under these circumstances of the most sensitive 
monetary situation that I can remember at any time in our history. It 
seems to me that we are dealing with an essentially psychological 
situation, both abroad and here at home. I'm not going to suggest 
that we do something dramatic just to do something dramatic. I share 
John Balles's feelings that this isn't something that is so unknown to 
us that we should register fear and trepidation and do it blindly. I 
think the RPD experiment, looking back over the history of it, failed 
because we were too timid on the federal funds ranges that we 
associated with it, and it killed itself. 

So, I think now is the time for us to take the plunge, so to 
speak. I would do it for international reasons, too. I don't think 
it is just a question of fallout from what is good for domestic 
reasons. I have talked over recent years with a number of people 
throughout the world in their home offices about the role of money 
targets and so forth. And I've come to realize that for better or for 
worse these [targets] are there; there is an acceptance of the idea of 
a more monetarist approach than we have taken. It seems to me that 
this is the time to do something a little more [dramatic]. If I may 
be so crude, the patient has been constipated for a long time and 
Ex-lax will no longer work. I'm suggesting an enema or, if you want 
the full prescription, an enema plus some change in diet. Dr. Mayo is 
speaking, though I'm not one of the Mayo brothers, thank you. 

Anyway, at this point I think we can capitalize 
psychologically on monetarist support throughout Europe in particular, 
as well as in the Congress of the United States and much of the 
journalistic fraternity today. That doesn't mean that I, Bob Mayo, 
agree with all the arguments of the monetarists, but I recognize that 
they are there and they are important. They can give us support in 
what is essentially a psychological situation. I would not worry 
about whether, in going with the new emphasis, we are taking a risk 
that we cannot reverse [our decision] if we have to go to something 
else later. This is not black and white. We could decide--to use an 
extreme example--that we don't want to say anything about a federal 
funds range in the directive today, but keep to ourselves the idea 
that the Desk should have plenty of leeway. If the market dictates-- 
in the way it responds to what we're doing--that the federal funds 
rate should go temporarily to 15 percent, we'd let it go. I wouldn't 
worry about that. If sometime after 90 days--or it may take even 
longer--we find that this [new operating technique] has served its 
purpose, we can go back to including a federal funds range that is 
broad but nevertheless there, if we wish to. I think we have these 
options as we move along. A decision today to go to the technique 
described in Steve's and Peter's memo is not a decision for all time, 
either on the technique or obviously on the policy. We may wish to 
reverse it before we get locked in [at] too high [a rate], as Paul has 
said. If we believe in targets at all and believe that we have a 
responsibility to meet our targets, I think our best bet--not our 
riskiest--at this point is to take the bull by the horns and change 
our emphasis of operations. 

I'm probably getting ahead of myself or ahead of the group, 
but I would combine this with some increase in reserve requirements, 



10/6/79 -18- 

particularly aimed at the larger banks where the tightness is not 
apparent. Our agricultural banks are tight as a drum. It's not 
needed there bur: it is needed for the bigger banks. And I would think 
that any discussion of the discount rate today would probably be 
premature; that would follow along with whatever the market is 
showing. But we should keep on the alert on a day-by-day basis to the 
way the market is responding to our shift in emphasis. And I would 
give considerable publicity to the change in emphasis. In my view 
this can be very important psychologically at home as well as abroad. 

CHAIR" VOLCKER. Roger Guffey 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe almost 
everybody who has spoken up until now has said that they would endorse 
the change in operating procedures. I'd just like to raise a voice, 
not necessarily in opposition to it but at least to question it. 
First of all, let me say that I agree that there's a need for 
something to be done today and that it has to be rather dramatic. 
Hopefully, it would include the Treasury, but if that's not in the 
works then we have to move ahead. But if I understand what is being 
proposed--the change in operating technique--it seems to me a very 
high risk venture, particularly in view of the fact that it has never 
been tried. To be sure, it has been studied to death. Moreover, I 
happen to be somewhat sympathetic to this kind of operating technique. 
But we are in a time of crisis. For us to move to a new technique 
that has never been tried will be viewed by the markets, it seems to 
me, as our grasping at the last straw, so to speak. And if indeed it 
doesn't work to get the aggregates in better position by the end of 
this year I think we would have shot our last round and missed. I 
think that's putting the Federal Reserve as a system in a very, very 
precarious position. 

Lastly, if I understand what is being proposed, I would say 
that the very same thing can be accomplished by using our present 
operating procedures simply by broadening the federal funds range and 
narrowing the aggregates ranges. We would have as much chance--or 
perhaps more chance because we have experience with it--of hitting the 
targets we're shooting at instead of starting to swim in new and 
untried waters. If we can get the public reaction that we're trying 
to get by operating with our present procedures, I would prefer to go 
that route rather than go into something that we know very little 
about. I happen to believe that we may be on the verge of moving into 
a recession but it isn't clear. And I think we do need some dramatic 
action. I would rather see a press announcement by you framed in the 
context of having a wider range for the federal funds rate, which 
certainly will be understood by the market though maybe not by the 
public. And it will probably be better understood by the market than 
our moving into a new operating procedure. That coupled together with 
a rather dramatic increase in the discount rate--and letting the fed 
funds rate move up to a fairly high level--would be a preferable 
action to me. However, I do recognize, as you mentioned earlier, that 
it's absolutely essential that we have a broad consensus [on whatever 
action we take today]. Accordingly, I will [not object1 if a 
consensus forms on the other side. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen. 



10/6/79 -19- 

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, it is clear to me that 
expectations of Some strong action by this group this weekend are at a 
high level. I'm not sure that the Committee should always respond to 
expectations, but in the circumstances today the proposal of combining 
something new and different with strong traditional steps has real 
appeal to me. For some time we've been hearing complaints that the 
United States is not dealing with the fundamentals. And in my mind, 
the rapid growth in the aggregates that we've been seeing is thought 
of as one of those important fundamentals. I'd say it is very 
important that the announcement connect this new technique with an 
effort to control the rapid growth in the money supply. The total 
package must not be perceived, as some have been in the past, as a 
flash in the pan. I'm not sure how well this will be understood. As 
a result, I would endorse those people who have strongly recommended 
that we have an in-depth explanation of this technique and its 
relationship to coping with the aggregates growth. I also agree with 
the remarks that Roger just made on the importance of a strong 
consensus coming out of this meeting. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. I think the main argument in favor of the 
reserve strategy is that it allows us to take stronger action than we 
probably could by the other technique. 
in the other technique by the appearance of very high interest rates. 
In the new strategy interest rates become almost a by-product of a 
more forceful pursuit of the aggregates. I think we need stronger 
action because of the resurgence in inflation and the behavior of the 
aggregates and the dollar. I realize that this may involve a higher 
cost in terms of the length and depth of a recession. But I try to 
look beyond that and ask myself where we would be late in 1980 if very 
little inflation has been wrung out of the system and we resume an 
upward price trend from a much higher base. 

We are much more constrained 

Now, I wouldn't say that the proposed new technique is 
superior if the same strength of action could be taken by the existing 
methods. That's because the existing methods have the advantage that 
we know the interest rate and we don't run the risk of the rate going 
in the wrong direction and creating dollar problems. But I think the 
issue is really how strong an action we can take. And it seems clear 
that an action via the reserve strategy is capable of greater power. 
I've leaned toward that strategy for a long time, but I must confess 
increasingly less as I saw the interest rate becoming more important 
from the point of view of the dollar. There is that risk of interest 
rate uncertainty involved in the new strategy. We would have to guard 
against interest rates going in the wrong direction. 

MR. PARTEE. Which is what direction--up or down? 

MR. WALLICH. it is quite clearly down. Upward we can 
control [through] money supply. We're aiming at a tight money supply, 
and that raises interest rates--or that is what we [are talking 
about]. But downward has a totally different implication. It 
involves a signal that we've switched policy and the markets are going 
to respond accordingly. Obviously, as we go into a recession there 
will be a time when interest rates will have to come down. They will 
probably come down by themselves if the time is right. And if it is 
feasible in terms of the exchange markets, then we should 



10/6/79 -20 

Iaccommodatel that and the more the better. But we need to watch this 
strategy in terms of what it produces for interest rates and for the 
exchange market so that we don’t get surprised by interest rate 
movements when they could be harmful. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. 
I‘m not sure it’s self-evident that in interest rate terms the new 
technique is stronger. It may or may not be, depending upon what 
happens to the money supply. I think that is inherent in the new 
techniqde. It also depends upon a judgment on how much traditional- 
type action we would take and I don’t think at this stage of the 
discussion we know the answer to those [questions]. We’ll never know 
the answer, no matter how long we talk, to what the money supply 
actually will do in coming months. And until we get further along in 
our conversation, we don’t know how strong our traditional-type 
actions will be. 

MR. MAYO. Paul, at some point I think we need to hear from 
your associates in New York as to how they would operate under this 
technique if we adopt it. I think that is part of-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We’ll get into that. I’m just getting 
general reactions now--and I think they should be rather general--of 
the type that we have had so far. 

Let me just say, too, that on the issue of interest rates 
coming down there probably are going to be differences of opinion; 
there always are. But I don’t think we can sit here today and say it 
would be a terrible thing if interest rates went up to 14 or 15 
percent on the new technique, just taking some numbers that are used 
[in the staff paper]. if they come down off that peak to the 
neighborhood of where they are now, that may be inherent in the new 
technique if it’s successful under present projections of the money 
supply. And I’m not sure it’s terribly alarming--to me anyway--in the 
exchange market sense. It’s a matter of judgment. But I don‘t think 
we can get ourselves into a position where no matter how high rates go 
at some point with the new technique, any decline from a new peak is 
in itself a disaster. it might be great. It might actually encourage 
the feeling that we’re over the peak. I don’t think we’re in a 
situation where the interest rate differential vis a vis German 
interest rates--whether it is 5 percent or 7 percent--is an important 
market consideration. That implies a little more stable psychological 
atmosphere. Let me say it is overwhelmed by the psychology of the 
situation. Who is next here on the list? Ernie Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. M r .  Chairman, i picked up on your earlier 
observation that we can get there either way--with some modification 
of our present technique or by shifting emphasis to reserves to a 
greater degree. I’m somewhat inclined to think that if we do announce 
that we have made a rather basic change in our mode of operation--in 
our intermediate if not ultimate operational target--that unless it 
obviously is a disaster fairly soon, it is something we are stuck with 
for some period of time. I don’t have any strong feeling as to which 
way we try to get where it seems we want to go at the moment. We can 
do it through the route of a monetary aggregates directive under our 
present format, with a broad range for the federal funds rate, lifted, 
and with a continued focus on targets set in terms of monetary 
aggregates. Or we can go the route that is suggested in the wire of 



10/6/79 -21- 

putting greater emphasis essentially on intermediate targets or 
reserves. [Secretary's note: The memo entitled "Proposal for Reserve 
Aggregates as Guide to Open Market Operations," dated October 4, 1979 
was wired to Reserve Bank Presidents.] But it seems to me that 
there's a good possibility that if we adopt that [latter approach] we 
will be read as de-emphasizing rather than additionally emphasizing 
the monetary aggregates as targets or objectives of policy. 

MR. PARTEE. Those are the objectives. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so, but that will come out 
in a later discussion, I think. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. We will be read as accepting some reserve 
measure as the objective--a kind of M target in the financial sector 
before we get over to the real sector. As I say, I agree with your 
suggestion that we can get where we want to go by either route. It 
would seem to me that it might be appropriate to take [action] in two 
steps. The first step would be an announcement that we are 
substantially broadening the operating range as far as the federal 
funds rate is concerned and that we are committing ourselves to more 
effective control of the monetary aggregates by that process. It 
seems to me that that would get the necessary attention in the market, 
and operationally I don't really see that it's much different. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn. 

MR. WINN. Paul, during this past period, the rumors were 
everywhere. One of the ones that bothers me the worst is the feeling 
of an explosion on the wage front. For example, we see banks 
violating the guidelines pretty generally. 
knowledgeable friends seem to be predicting 20 percent increases next 
year and that really frightens me. They all had solutions with 
respect to what we ought to be doing. But they never have as a 
solution that we should do nothing. So I've tried to [assess] what 
the risks and implications are of doing nothing in this area and that 
was rather frightening. Being s-ympathetic to what you're proposing, I 
wonder if we really have tried to look at the risks inherent in this. 
We've talked about the price on the international side and so forth, 
but what are some of the risks here? While we say we don't emphasize 
interest rates, the implication of this [proposal] is considerably 
higher rates. And if we think about that, what does that mean at 
least in the short run in terms of money flows? What does that mean 
in terms of those with prime plus 3 percent embedded in their costs? 
What does it mean to those institutions with short-term funding? What 
does it mean in terms of the commitments and lines of bank credit that 
will be accelerated? In other words, what are the risks on this side 
that we have to grapple with as well as the risks that we've talked 
about on the other side? 

Some of my most 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think some of those will come out later 
in a more detailed discussion. Mr. Rice. 

M R .  RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor moving to the new operating 
technique--the change of emphasis--at this time. I believe our 
current approach has not been working and we need to change our style. 
But in changing our style in this case we probably also are changing 
our strategy at the same time. I believe it's more than just a matter 



1 0 / 6 / 7 9  -22-  

of operating technique, though I could be wrong. First of all, the 
psychological impact of a change in operating technique will be 
strong. I think it will be strong not only in domestic markets but 
also in foreign markets. In my view the foreign markets will read 
such an announcement as an expression of our determination to control 
the money supply, and that will have salutary effects. 

It seems to me that up to now what we’ve been doing is 
pushing up interest rates, largely in response to market expectations, 
and we‘ve been assuming in effect that we know what the appropriate 
level of interest rates should be. And when the market wants high 
interest rates, we end up supplying more reserves and the money supply 
increases. I think that if we moved to a technique where we decide 
what the money supply should be--and we operate directly on the 
reserve base to get as close to the level of aggregates that we want-- 
we would stand a better chance of producing the kinds of results we 
would like to see. The good thing about moving to this operating 
technique is that, contrary to some of the views that have been 
expressed, we introduce new uncertainty into the market. I think 
that’s a good thing. The new uncertainty will have the effect of 
cooling some of the speculative activity and perhaps have an impact on 
those demands for credit that are based purely on inflationary 
expectations and on the assumption that money will always be available 
at any level of interest rates that the Fed tries to establish. 
Probably the first reaction will be a sharp rise in short-term 
interest rates. But I do believe that the rise will probably be 
short-lived and that the period over which interest rates will remain 
high is much likely to be shorter than would be the case if we 
continue to follow our present approach of gradually ratcheting up 
interest rates in response to market pulls. 

Obviously, there are high risks involved; these risks have 
been outlined. But in the current circumstances I think these risks 
are acceptable. And in any case the risks are less than we would be 
accepting if we continued to follow our present approach. I would, 
however, like to have it understood that the money supply targets--the 
aggregates targets that we set--are important here. They are very 
important for the success of the program. I would also like to have 
it understood that interest rates should be flexible downward as well 
as upward. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. 

M R .  BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Governor Rice has made many of the 
points that I wanted to make, but I’d just like to say that I feel 
better about what I‘ve heard around this table than I’ve ever felt at 
any time since I’ve been attending these meetings. I think we are now 
on the road to formulating better monetary policy. I often think of 
our position as being analogous to that of a monopolist in the sense 
that we control the money supply. A monopolist has a choice of 
controlling either price or quantity but he can never control both. I 
believe we’ve been trying to control the quantity of money by setting 
the price and we have misjudged. We’ve jiggled the price, in terms of 
the federal funds rate, one way or the other, and we‘ve usually met 
with less than complete success in judging what quantity of money will 
be forthcoming from that. So, I think this gives us a much closer 
handle on the aggregates than we would have under any of these other 
approaches, although conceptually we certainly could do it by the old 



10/6/79 -23- 

method if we had a wide enough band on the federal funds rate. But I 
don’t think we would know what federal funds rate we would have to 
choose in order to get the desired rate of growth in the aggregates. 

Now, I do think there are some broad considerations--and 
we’ll touch on some of these later--that we ought to address before we 
close today. The first is that the discount rate is going to play a 
very important role under this operating technique. If we have 
greater or less fluctuation in the level of borrowing, that’s going to 
make it more or less difficult to hit our total reserve target. So I 
think we‘re going to have to be very careful in choosing the 
appropriate discount rate. It will not necessarily be what we thought 
was appropriate in the past. 

My second point is that I think in your press conference you 
ought to state, among other things, that we would expect the federal 
funds rate, at least initially, to fluctuate more than it has in the 
past. You should also stress that there are various slippages in this 
mechanism; it is not a precise tool. I think you should also say why 
we have taken the action we have taken on the discount rate, because 
it will be important to explain why we’ve put it where we have. 

Another point I would emphasize, as the staff did, is that we 
are going to need a pretty wide range on the federal funds rate: it 
may mean that we have to let it move up sharply--or we may not--in the 
beginning. I agree with Henry Wallich that we need to watch it, at 
least initially, on the down side. I’d be inclined to put a floor on 
the down side until we know what the market perception is on this 
[approach]. That‘s because falling interest rates very early in the 
game, even though we appear to be controlling the aggregates. might be 
counter-productive. But I would want to see that floor removed as 
soon as the aggregates come under control. If I’ve seemed hawkish to 
some of you in advocating that we push up the federal funds rate to 
bring the aggregates under control when I thought they were growing 
too rapidly I think you‘ll view me as very dovish if I see them 
growing less rapidly than I believe they should. We have to be 
prepared to let the funds rate go down. 

Another point I would stress, which is in the material that 
was handed out by the staff, is that we have a problem in specifying 
the width of this band--whether it’s for a day, a week, or a weekly 
average and whether we take into consideration the settlement date and 
that sort of thing. My guess is that Emmett Rice has diagnosed 
correctly what will happen to interest rates; they will go up 
initially as people rush to obtain funds because they perceive that 
the supply will not be as readily available. But I think also that 
rates are going to move back down, partly because of the elimination 
of some inflation expectations and also because I believe we are 
indeed slipping into recession, which would naturally cause them to 
drop. 

Finally, as we get into the long run, there are a couple of 
items that we are going to have to think about. An example would be 
structural changes that we ought to consider making to improve our 
control mechanism. One such change might be lengthening the reserve 
period to maybe a month or we might want to drop the lag part, 
although I’m not persuaded on that. Certainly we would want to get 
rid of the graduated reserve requirements to the extent we could. 



10/6/79 -24 

And, if we lose the Merrill case, I think we’re going to be forced 
into this kind of targeting technique anyway. If we were to announce 
on the day of the meeting what in fact the federal funds band was, I 
think we could have some very disquieting effects in the market, 
whereas the announcement of a change in our money supply target would 
not really tell the market a great deal. Only the most sophisticated 
or lucky would be able to figure out the interest rate implications of 
that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. 

MR. ROOS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I assume that my credibility 
with you and my colleagues would be severely jeopardized if I came out 
flatly in opposition to this proposal! [Laughter] I also was told by 
my father to keep my mouth shut when things are going well. So all 
I’ll say is briefly: God bless you for doing this! [Laughter] 

MR. GUFFEY. I would say that when Bob Black and Emmett Rice 
agree, I would expect everybody else to be able to agree! 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are one or two things that I didn’t 
agree with here but that’s okay. Do you want to take a little coffee 
break or not? 

SEVERAL. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. we will return to a more detailed 
exposition unless somebody wants to say something at this point. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Coldwell is developing a computer for 
forecasting the money supply, converting it into the reserve base, 
nonborrowed reserves, borrowings, and the federal funds rate! 
[Secretary’s note: A s  the meeting was in the process of reconvening, 
Mr. Coldwell was demonstrating an electronic device of some kind.] 

Let me try to describe the so-called new system, as I 
understand it, in an unprejudicial way. Out of this discussion will 
emerge some of the risks and dangers that have been referred to. To 
the extent possible, let’s avoid detailed technical exegesis that will 
[keep] us here until Monday morning and not resolve the issues. I 
think there are unresolved issues that we are going to have to play by 
ear. The basic theory of this procedure is that the Committee would 
decide--in this case only through the end of the year--on some money 
supply targets. There are two extremes, I think, that are practical, 
though one of them may not be practical. On page 3 of this memorandum 
it says that if we met the midpoint of the present target we would 
have [September-to-December] movements of 1.3, 1.5, or 5.3 percent, 
depending upon which [aggregate] we are looking at. If we aimed 
basically for the top side of the targets or a bit inside them, we‘d 
end up with [growth rates for M1, M2, and M3 for the fourth quarter 
of] 4.6, 7 . 5 ,  and 7.3 percent. The 7.5 percent number leaves M2 at 
exactly the top of its range for the year. 

Those happen to be, I say with all deference, the present 
projections of our projectors. I have about as much confidence in 
those projections as any projections, with all due respect to the 



10/6/79 -25- 

projectors. I don’t have a great deal of confidence in them. But 
they happen to be the rates we have to achieve to come within the 
targets. That doesn’t allow any significant leeway if indeed we are 
going to get within the target ranges, and that is one of the problems 
we’re dealing with here. We have practically no leeway to go wrong if 
indeed we are going to be within the yearly targets we adopted 
[unintelligible] . 

Now, our concept of the process is that those money supply 
figures that were chosen would be converted into a reserve base 
number. The reserves for currency would be projected and that would 
be subtracted from the reserve base, leaving us with reserves against 
a deposit component of the money supply--and reserves against a few 
other things, too, which is one of the complications. Allowance would 
be made for the growth in the non-money supply components; allowance 
would be made for whatever we know about shifts of deposits among 
banks and all the rest; and we would trace out a reserve path 
presumably consistent with those money supply figures. 
compare that with what we thought was going to happen. 

We would 

Suppose we happen to put a lot of weight on the current 
projection of the money supply and pick figures that would closely 
coincide with that. We would then provide, making some assumption on 
the level of borrowing that seemed to be consistent with the level of 
interest rates that presumably laid behind the projection of the money 
supply in the first place--we can‘t avoid interest rate assumptions 
the way these things are done--nonborrowed reserves along that path. 
If the money supply actually grew faster, borrowings would go up and 
presumably interest rates would go up; if the reverse happened, 
borrowings would go down and interest rates would go down. 

We live in an uncertain world. And in view of fluctuating 
projections regarding the trend in the money supply, our first point 
of judgment would arise--let’s say particularly in the present 
circumstance--because we might get some ease in the money market 
immediately if we did nothing but follow the path week by week. If we 
thought we were going to have trouble later because the projection 
[has money growth] going above [our targets], we would under-supply 
reserves in the current week to provide some assurance that we’re 
going to cope with the fluctuation later and not have borrowings 
running ahead of what we had assumed. That would mean that total 
reserves were running ahead of what we had assumed and the money 
supply would be running ahead of what we‘d assumed. Or in looking 
ahead, if we were expecting some great decline in the money supply, we 
might apply judgment and do the operation in the opposite direction. 
In view of the outlook, we might permit some easing prematurely from 
the mechanical application of the [amount of reserves called for in 
the path]. That is, we’d let borrowings drop sooner because we 
thought the money supply subsequently was going to come in below path. 
That’s one area of judgment we get into right away. 

AS the borrowings fluctuate, they would themselves be 
reflected in interest rates. But rates also would be affected further 
by our subsequent decisions on the discount rate, in terms of whether 
to follow the trend of borrowings in either direction. In other 
words, if the borrowings rose, we could increase the discount rate to 
bring further pressure on reducing the money supply, the increase in 
borrowings itself being a sign that money growth was running above 



10/6/79 - 2 6 -  

where we wanted it to run. If it began running the other way, 
presumably borrowings would decline; then we‘d have to make that 
additional judgment as to whether to reduce the discount rate in order 
to accelerate or facilitate a decline in interest rates. The rates at 
that time would also be reflecting the fact that the money supply was 
running low compared to where we wanted it to be. 

It is firmly set, in my mind at least, that in this process 
the federal funds rate is going to be constrained but constrained over 
a substantially wider range than has been our practice. Now we have a 
range of about 1/2 or 1 percentage point in our directive, though 
typically we do not actually operate on that wide a range. We operate 
on a day-to-day basis with almost no range at all. Well, we let it 
fluctuate on unusual days, but basically we are operating in an 
environment where everybody in the market is looking out to see 
whether Peter Sternlight intervenes at 1/16th of a point or 1/8th of a 
point higher or lower than before. In practice, the kind of range we 
have is 1/8th percentage point, roughly. And the market is sensitive 
to changes in interest rates of that magnitude--at least when we are 
in the market and not on a Wednesday or something like that. 
Obviously, with this technique we are going to ignore changes of that 
magnitude: and we are going to ignore changes of some great multiple 
of those 1/8ths we‘ve been concerned about in the past. Whether we 
ignore them when they reach 2 or 3 percentage points or let them go to 
whatever ceiling is put on the funds range is a matter of judgment, I 
guess. But we certainly are not talking about the type of operation 
in which we’ve engaged in the past where the market is sensitive in an 
extremely narrow range to where we operate. 

When I talk about putting a constraint on the [funds rate 
range] on the top or the bottom, I’m not talking about a constraint 
that applies every hour of every day. The typical Wednesday situation 
would presumably run its course; we might get an exceedingly high rate 
of interest on a Wednesday or it might fall out of bed on a Wednesday, 
as it sometimes does. I think we’d let those kinds of fluctuations go 
outside of the kind of range we’re talking about. I think we would 
attempt, probably not very successfully, to avoid telling the market 
if we hit the [constraint] in more normal circumstances or precisely 
what the range is. But they‘re going to be smelling around for it 
just as they do now and I don‘t know how successful we would be in 
avoiding that entirely. A l l  I’m saying is that perhaps we can try to 
disguise the operations by doing them at a quarter point less or 
letting the rate go a quarter point or a half point above [the 
constraint] for a day or so. But the market is going to be feeling 
for where the top or the bottom of that range is if [the rate] goes 
persistently in one direction or another. And if it does, we can get 
in a situation, as I said earlier, where it’s just going to lock 
itself against the upper level or the lower level and stay there. 

We are working with a two-week lagged reserve requirement. 
Somebody mentioned that that probably isn’t the most desirable 
[arrangement] in the world if we are operating on this kind of system. 
I think I would agree with that. But we have it, and that’s not 
something we can change overnight. What it means in practice is that 
we’re going to have lags with this system in affecting the money 
supply, as we have lags with the present system. We always know 
analytically that we’re going to have lags; presumably with the new 
system we’ve shortened them somewhat. But we have a mechanical lag of 



10/6/79 -27-  

two weeks and on top of that a lag in the reaction of the banking 
system because we don’t control borrowings from week to week. How 
much more pronounced effect on the money supply we will have in the 
type of period we are talking about here is one of the risks or 
dangers, I suppose. We should have more control, I think, when we 
look through the entire 3-month period. By December we ought to have 
a good deal more assurance that we‘re going to hit whatever December 
figure we have in mind. But we are talking about a quarterly figure 
and we are already into the quarter, so whatever we do now isn‘t going 
to have much effect on the October figure. Fortunately, the current 
projection for October, for what it’s worth, is pretty moderate anyway 
but the month is basically gone, whatever technique we apply. We will 
probably have somewhat more effect on the November number with this 
technique and I would think significantly more in December. But there 
is no assurance that we’re going to meet our target by using this 
technique--given the inevitable lags and given what I at least 
visualize as some constraint on [allowing fluctuations in] the funds 
rate--though maybe more than with the present technique. You know 
what the errors have been in the present technique. So we would not 
be adopting a technique here that provides us with certainty--more 
assurance but not certainty--that we are going to be able to sit here 
at the end of the year and say proudly that we aimed for a 
[particular] M1 number from September to December and we came out 
[there]. There is nothing in this technique that I see that permits 
that kind of precision, even though it should have somewhat more 
precision than what we now have. 

I just want to emphasize that because of the comments that 
some people made about all the publicity we should give to this change 
in technique. There‘s an immediate advantage in the publicity; there 
is a disadvantage not very far down the road if people read this as a 
commitment and in fact we are not going to be able to live up to that 
commitment. That’s without even injecting into the equation that we 
indeed might change our minds next month or the following month. We 
might say look, this technique is fine, but it may give us a 16 
percent interest rate and we just don’t want a 16 percent interest 
rate. Or the reverse. I think that’s a policy judgment we cannot 
avoid during this period. So I feel there are limitations as to how 
much we can promise from this technique. I don’t think that 
eliminates, but it diminishes, the sense of psychological satisfaction 
that one can provide. 

I don’t know what the current New York projections are for 
this period and I don’t think it’s important specifically. I know 
some other people in town have a much higher projection for money 
supply growth over the remainder of this year, given current interest 
rates. All I’m doing is emphasizing [the uncertainties] again. 
Nobody really knows what the money demand function will be over a 
period as short as this, which reflects upon the risks in the 
proposition. 

ought to turn to the mechanics and try to clarify that as much as we 
can. Steve can say whatever he wants to say. When one thinks about 
being committed to this kind of process over a longer period of time, 
just put yourself back in the first half of last year. I don’t know 
how many people feel in retrospect that we should have been very 
substantially easier in the first half of last year in terms of 

Let me say just [one more thing] before I stop and then we 



10/6/79 - 2 8 -  

interest rates. I personally think that would have been a disaster in 
retrospect and I thought so at the time. And we were not. But 
looking backwards I don’t see how our present situation would be 
improved in any way by having followed religiously a money supply 
target during a period in which none of the money demand equations 
were working right. There was vast institutional change going on at 
the time, with money market funds, ATS, NOW accounts, a big surge in 
RPs, and all the rest. That’s the [reason] I’m not willing to make a 
judgment at this point as to the long-term desirability of this 
technique through thick and thin and in all possible circumstances. 

So, I would remind you that because of the particular 
circumstances I am thinking of using this technique for the [coming] 
3- or 4-month period. This is a time when it may be particularly 
important to our credibility and to the economy and to psychology and 
everything else that we provide ourselves with greater assurance that 
we will get a handle on the money supply. I think it prejudices the 
discussion that we will have at the end of the year but it doesn‘t 
lock us in with respect to that discussion. There is a basic 
instability in the demand function for money in the kind of period 
that we are talking about. There is an instability in the 
relationship between reserves and deposits that is inherent in this 
system. And in a sense those kinds of risks get translated into the 
concerns [about interest rates that different members] have in varying 
degrees. I’m sure that interest rates will either go up too far or go 
down too far, depending upon one’s preoccupation at particular periods 
of time. We can control that, to some degree, by setting these limits 
around [the funds rate], which I think are essential despite the fact 
that they have some disadvantages. 

I would conclude in the end that this is not a black and 
white situation. We are not--at least I am not--proposing that we go 
to a purely mechanical reserve targeting approach. There are elements 
of judgment which I have described to some extent; there are 
uncertainties in the estimates that we are taking into account. We 
are not adopting an approach that says: Well, currency may be going 
twice as high as we projected during this period but in the long term 
that will wash out, so we will ignore it. We are proposing an 
approach where somebody--some human being--will sit down and say: For 
the period ahead I’m making a new estimate of currency and allowing an 
adjustment for its impact on the total reserve base and, therefore, on 
the nonborrowed reserves that are the immediate operating target. 
Somebody will be looking at CDs and if they are going up or down twice 
as fast as projected, he will be making a new projection of the 
nonborrowed reserve base to allow for the fact that CDs have moved 
contrary to our expectations in the original projections. We are 
allowing some human being to sit there and [judge] that the multiplier 
between reserves and deposits [used for the projections] is off and to 
make some adjustment for that in conducting operations in the next few 
weeks. There are all these elements of judgment that enter into the 
process. That, combined with the constraint on the federal funds 
rate, brings us to something of a hybrid. Inevitably, we are merely 
talking about where we are on the spectrum between a mechanical 
reserve targeting approach and what we have been doing. 

MR. ROOS. Recognizing that, M r .  Chairman, rather than try to 
plug in numbers today and agree on detailed procedures--if, as I 
assume, we have a consensus on a change of approach--wouldn’t it be 



10/6/79 -29- 

wise to ask the staff to work on that? Perhaps we could ask the 
Board staff as well as selected or interested staff representatives 
from some of the Reserve Banks to wrestle with the details of how to 
do this as well as the details of the specifications. That could be 
done between now and the time we would normally come here for our 
meeting in a couple of weeks. That might make sense rather than 
trying to work with these figures that we have seen for a very short 
time and that our research staffs, in most instances, have not even 
had an opportunity to react to. If you made this announcement on 
Monday and if there were a 10-day period for staff to try to put 
together more [precise] specifications and procedures, those could be 
circulated and we could discuss them at our regular FOMC meeting. 
Would that be more productive? Some of us are not professional 
economists and to sign off on specific numbers and specific details 
today - - 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will make two comments, Mr. Roos. I 
don’t think it would be more productive because I hope the Committee 
as a whole, at this particular meeting at least, will not get into 
that detail. We will be in an absolute morass if we attempt to arrive 
at some judgment as to whether the staff has made all these 
translations correctly and on precisely how we should proceed. If we 
decide to go on this approach, I believe we are going to have to go on 
it with the Committee indicating only broad guidelines. There is 
enough judgment involved that we can get a good sense of how the 
Committee wants this process to operate in a very uncertain world. 
And even in a two-week perspective, I don’t think we can attempt to 
have a technical resolution of all these detailed issues. There will 
be plenty of opportunity for that kind of [analysis] in the next few 
months and it would be relevant in terms of any further decision at 
the end of the year on whether or not to stay with this procedure. 

But inherent in the situation today, and I‘ll just put it 
very simply, the Committee has to have faith that it can give some 
general guidance and that we--basically the staff here at the Board 
under Mr. Axilrod’s direction--will translate that as best they can, 
within these general parameters, into operational numbers. And then, 
it has to have faith that Mr. Sternlight will use his best judgment in 
taking the figures that are produced here [in Washington] and deciding 
on precisely which day he will provide how many reserves to the 
market. 

MR. ROOS. Well, I thought we were going to get into the 
numbers. I was off base there. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, any way we go we have to get into 
the money supply number. If we’re going to go this way, the Committee 
is going to have to make a decision on the federal funds constraint 
and what biases--if I can put it that way--we want to introduce into 
the operations, particularly in the next couple of weeks. A number of 
people have referred to a point on which I fully agree: After going 
through this hullabaloo, if we have made some miscalculation here and 
the federal funds rate drops by a percentage point, say, next week, we 
are in a hell of a fix. So, I assume we would want to bias it on the 
up side. However these calculations come out, we want to have some 
sense of what the Committee wants to do in that respect. 



10/6/79 -30  

MR. ROOS. Couldn't your announcement say that over a 
mandatory period of a couple of weeks we are going to do this in an 
orderly, gradual, manner? Do we have to do it right from the 
beginning? 

M R .  COLDWELL. Yes 

MR. MAYO. No way. 

MR. MORRIS. We are going to have to go through a learning 
procedure anyway. Even if we were to postpone it for a couple of 
weeks, we have a lot to learn and we might as well start learning now. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally don't think that the nature 
of the problems we have are susceptible to sitting down around the 
table and saying: "Do we use this figure or do we not use this 
figure?" We can argue about that kind of thing if we are willing to 
adopt this experiment in a fairly rigid way for a period of a year. 
I, frankly, am not willing to take the risks of [operating totally on 
the basis of] some long-term equation or mechanical relationship that 
we know can be way off in a period of a month or in any particular 
week--or even in a 3-month period. 

MS. TEETERS. But we don't want to keep the funds rate biased 
upward too long. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Well, inherent in this technique, the 
Committee can keep it biased however it wants to keep it biased. We 
have to discuss that. But in the mechanics of the process that I 
described, let's say we biased it for the first two or three weeks, 
quite deliberately, and we were wrong. It turns out that in fact we 
didn't have to bias it to keep the money supply under control. But we 
biased it in that direction because we wanted to make extra sure that 
[the money supply] didn't rise. The result would be a slower growth 
in the money supply four, five, or six weeks down the pike than we 
otherwise would have gotten. Then, out of the mechanics of the 
system, unless we made a quite deliberate decision to bias it in the 
other direction, we'd have the expense of biasing it tight in the 
first place and biasing it easy down the road. Now, the Committee 
obviously can make a new decision at that point. The biasing is, I 
suppose, where the Committee thinks the major risks lie. Take [the 
current] money supply figure. It's already in the top of the range, 
so we'd be much more sensitive to missing it on the up side than to a 
little miss on the low side. Particularly initially, we would bias it 
in that direction, apart from the interest rate implications. 

MR. ROOS. In your announcement Monday, will you announce any 
figures? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. We would announce that we want to be 
within the targets for the year. 

MR. ROOS. Right, but not any more precise figures. What I'm 
worried about, for example--and I'm not trying to get specific--is the 
8 percent monetary base figure referred to in this document. Our 
research staff said that if the people who watch this saw an 8 percent 
figure for monetary base growth, that would immediately destroy the 
credibility of the whole effort. 



1 0 / 6 / 7 9  -31- 

MR. WALLICH. I think that’s purely an [incidental] number. 

MR. PARTEE. They will, of course, be able to make a 
calculation if we say we’re determined to be within the targets for 
the year. They will see how much more room there is for the remainder 
of the year for growth in the aggregates that we have been using as 
[our target] variables. 

MR. BLACK. If we give them the adjusted figure for M1-- 
remember we cited the 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent-- 

MR. PARTEE. We might have to underline that. 

MR. BLACK. We are going to have to clarify that one, I 
think. 

MR. COLDWELL. MI. Chairman, I wonder if we shouldn’t at 
least make the initial decision if you are ready to go that far. Or 
if you want to discuss the specifications, which M r .  Axilrod can 
[expound on], we can go that route. 

ought to discuss specifications. But in my mind, at this point we’ve 
made no decision to go in this direction. I think that’s a decision 
we should make at the end oE the road, and citing some specifications 
may put some concreteness on this discussion in terms of whether we 
want to tolerate the risk. I just want to come back at the end to the 
question that M r .  Guffey put very well in stating the other case. 
There is a danger of a too high [funds] rate and there is a question 
of all this publicity and then falling short. There are these 
analytic difficulties: the instability in the demand function for 
money and the [multiplier] relationships that we work with. There is 
the problem that we may run into a situation where, in effect, our 
collective judgment tells us to do something different than what the 
aggregates are telling us to do. Do we want to get locked into a 
procedure that prejudices us so far toward worrying about the 
aggregates? Those are the questions that should be in our minds, 
questions we want to return to before making a final decision here. 
[We need to weigh that] against the knowledge that we can do something 
very comparable, to the best of our wisdom, by devising a package 
using the traditional technique--or the traditional technique as 
modified somewhat to accomplish the same immediate purpose. So that’s 
the final question. But let’s [proceed]. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can go that route. Maybe we 

MR. COLDWELL. I was merely raising the question of whether 
you wanted to get the specifications of the traditional as well as the 
new procedure. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don’t we [discuss the specifications], 
unless somebody wants to ask more about the mechanics. That will come 
out to some degree in the discussion anyway. 

MR. WALLICH. I‘d like to understand a little better the role 
of the discount window and the discount rate in this procedure. If we 
bias the reserve path in one direction or another, that will influence 
the volume of borrowing. That will then influence interest rates, 
which in turn will affect borrowing by virtue of the spread between 
the discount rate and the funds rate. We could leave it to that 



10/6/79 - 3 2 -  

mechanism to control borrowing, we could leave it to the 
administration of the discount window to control it, or we could move 
the discount rate. It's not clear to me which way might be the best. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we adopt this approach, that is 
one of the issues I had in mind when I suggested that the Reserve Bank 
Presidents might want to meet for further discussion this afternoon. 
One of the problems with this approach, it seems to me, is that the 
administration of the discount window is very confused at the moment. 
Inherent in the way we have been operating--to put it bluntly--there 
is no legitimate reason to borrow. Banks borrow because of the rate 
spread, but that's not really a legitimate reason. Now, that ignores 
computer breakdowns and that kind of thing. Except for accidental 
circumstances or late on a Wednesday--and here I'm talking about the 
larger banks--under our present guidelines there really isn't a 
legitimate reason for banks to borrow from the discount window, as I 
understand it. 

I know I have had the experience in New York where the 
discount officer happily comes in to tell me that he called up bank x, 
which borrowed for the first time in six months, a few hundred million 
dollars. He asked them why they were borrowing. And the bank 
official cautiously says: "What the hell, I hadn't borrowed in a 
while and your rate looked pretty low." And the discount officer 
replies: "Well, you can't borrow for that reason." Now, if a Reserve 
Bank really enforces that kind of discipline, it doesn't get many 
borrowings. But it's obviously not enforced evenly. And I suspect 
there are no additional guidelines we can give the discount officers 
at the moment. We have to let events take their course. We have been 
doing it for years, and I suppose we can do it for a few more months. 
It will raise this question in the bankers' minds. I think we will 
have to develop a more coherent policy in a few months and it might be 
useful for the Presidents to think about these implications. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I might add a point. If the 
Committee goes this route, I was planning to have a conference call 
with the discount window officers. My intent would not be to say 
anything about their administrative procedures but to explain that 
they might expect more volatile movements in borrowing than under 
existing procedures. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever they are. 

MR. AXILROD. I wanted the discount officers to be aware that 
they shouldn't be shocked if one bank is in and another one is out, 
because the funds rate might exhibit more volatility. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I visualize happening--but it may not 
if we move the discount rate frequently enough--is that with the 
volatility in the funds rate, more and more banks will be tempted to 
borrow despite the presumed guideline against it. So the discipline 
that now exists will break down, and the same level of borrowings will 
mean something quite different than it means now. But it's very hard 
to measure that. How do we prevent that from happening? 

MR. BLACK. They might arbitrage out some of the fluctuations 
we would otherwise have in the federal funds rate, too. 



10/6/79 -33 -  

CmIRMAN VOLCKER. No question that the federal funds rate 
will be influenced by the discount rate. It is now, but it will be 
more so. 

MR. BLACK. It seems to me that the main [objective] ought to 
be to set the discount rate at a level--if we can figure out what that 
is--that would reduce the volatility of borrowing, which would enable 
us to get at total reserves more precisely. I think that would mean 
that we should try to keep the discount rate at a penalty rate most of 
the time. That, of course, has implications for our-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is the implication of this 
technique in the long run but not in the short run. 

MR. EASTBURN. There is a question here of how the Reserve 
Banks should report all this to their boards of directors. I think 
some of the sharper directors will raise questions about what the role 
of the discount rate is and what their role is with respect to this 
new mechanism. We are going to need to consider this. My guess would 
be that we’d view this as a special program for a special period and 
that we’d probably want to handle it more through the administration 
of the window than to develop a whole new procedure to make the 
discount rate a flexible one. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I haven’t thought about it a lot, 
but I presume that the discount rate would be more flexible but not so 
much more flexible [as to preclude1 a variety of requests from various 
Banks in a timely fashion. So there wouldn’t be any special problem. 
I think we are going to have a lot more requests for discount rate 
changes. But we’ll need them to provide a menu of choices in the 
short run as to where we set the discount rate. 

MR. MORRIS. You may remember, Paul, back in 1974 we were 
operating the discount window with a 4 percent spread between the 
funds rate and the discount rate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can do that, too. 

MR. COLDWELL. Sure, we can do that. 

MR. MORRIS. Administration of the window can control-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it can ultimately control it if we 
make that decision. Did you want to say something, Phil? 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, M r .  Chairman, it seems to me that there 
are at least four major decisions the Committee needs to make if we 
are going to move to a reserve targeting procedure. I‘m not saying 
that is the [decision]; as you said, you want to come back to that. 

The first decision is what target we should aim at. That’s 
[addressed in the memo in the footnote] at the bottom of page 3 .  My 
preference would be in between the two alternatives shown there. I 
don’t like the idea of aiming at the upper half [because of] the 
potential for a miss and I question whether we can get as far down as 
the midpoint of the target. So I would suggest to the Committee that 
we might aim for 5 percent growth in M1 for the full year, which would 



10/6/79 -34- 

connote something around 3 percent for September to December and a 
quarterly average, if I calculated this right, at about 4-1/2 percent. 

the borrowing is the key there. If we're going to bias it on the 
basis of the present borrowings it would be $1.2 billion. I would 
allow a little more leeway, say, up to $1.5 billion. 

The second decision is how much bias to put in, and I think 

The next decision, as I read this paper, is what to do if CDs 
stray off path badly. That, I think we would have to play somewhat by 
ear but if they really take off, then I would adjust the nonborrowed 
path. 

Finally, it seems to me, we have a fundamental question of 
where to constrain the federal funds rate. I would suggest to the 
Committee the possibility of a range of 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me comment. Let's take what you said 
about CDs as given without objection and reduce the variables by one. 
You suggested one particular way of biasing this and I would just note 
that in some sense it depends upon what you mean by bias. If you fill 
in a money supply figure of 3 percent from September through December 
against the projection of 4.6 percent, in concept you have already 
biased it toward higher interest rates. Then to specify borrowing 
above the current level in the context of this operating procedure 
would imply a double biasing, I suppose. Aiming for 3 percent would 
be biasing it in favor of higher interest rates and then you would 
take out a little more insurance by raising the borrowing level. I 
think mechanically that's the way it comes out. 

MR. COLDWELL. And I am speaking in terms of the next 2 to 3 
weeks with this sort of biased arrangement. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in the money supply sense you [can] 
call that a bias. That would be [a bias] for the quarter. I guess 
it's only a 2- to 3-week bias in the sense of higher interest rates. 

M R .  PARTEE. But if we put in 3 percent for the money supply 
for September to December, Phil, given the fact that we can't affect 
October--assume it comes in at 4-1/2 percent--that means we are 
putting in a November-December growth of about 2 percent. The demand 
function is still there and we can affect the supply, but it would 
mean that we would be moving toward a negative number for December. 
That's really a very tight bias. 

MR. MORRIS. Well, if we follow Phil's formula, we do have a 
little room to miss on the up side. If we shoot for the-- 

MR. PARTEE. Well, the 4.6 percent [growth in M1 for 
September to December] is not at the very top. That gives us 5.3 
percent for the year and the top of the M1 range is 6 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth reaches the top for M2. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, the M2 is a little [above] and M3 is 
below. There has been a shift from the thrift institutions into the 
banks and that accounts for some of that. 



l0/6/79 -35- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these numbers are illustrative 

MS. TEETERS. What is the projection for October, Steve? 

MR. AXILROD. For Ml? 

MS. TEETERS. Yes. 

MR. AXILROD. 4.8 

MR. PARTEE. We already have to have a November-December 
averaging below October. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether this facilitates the 
discussions or not. Let's for the moment concentrate only on the 
money supply and the federal funds constraint. Those are enough 
variables to consider. And we'll consider any further bias later. 

MR. B A U G W .  I find Governor Coldwell's suggestion fairly 
reasonable, all things considered. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would like to see a wider range on 
the federal funds rate. 

MR. COLDWELL. Wider, Emmett? 

MR. RICE. Yes, wider on both the low and the high sides. I 
would like to see something like 9 percent on the low side and 15 to 
16 percent on the high side. 

MR. WALLICH. What we would do if it went to 9 percent-- 
intervene in the [exchange] market in very large amounts to offset the 
effects? 

MR. RICE. Yes. 

MR. WALLICH. And probably be defeated. 

M R .  RICE. Why would we probably be defeated? 

M R .  WALLICH. Because it's not the effect of the interest 
rate as such. That doesn't play a big role in the short run. The 
exchange market would be the symbol but all over the world they would 
be saying the new procedure really is a form of easing. 

MR. RICE. I really don't see how they could say that. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I don't think we need to set this for 
all time. It seems to me that a fed funds rate constraint of 11-1/2 
to 14-1/2 percent for 2 or 3 weeks-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come back to the question of 
scheduling the next meeting. My own instinct at this point is to 
delay what would have been the regular meeting for a week just to 
provide another week's experience. 
back. We'd be coming back in less than 2 weeks. 

MR. ALTMANN. Yes, a week from Tuesday. 

It seems awfully quick to come 



10/6/79 - 3 6 -  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own thought is why not delay it a week 
so we would have another week. 

MR. TIMLEN. We have another event associated with the next 
meeting--the annual meeting of the retirement committee. That meeting 
is about the Federal Reserve’s retirement system and it brings all the 
Presidents here. Then they would have to come back again the next 
week for the FOMC meeting. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we can even change that. 

MR. TIMLEN. We’d just need to know in order to change our 
schedules. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, it wouldn’t be too bad just to have an 
informal discussion at the time of the next scheduled meeting, even if 
you decided you didn’t want to have a regular FOMC meeting. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may not even be having a regular 
meeting then. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Is it presumed, Mr. Chairman, that we would 
release to the public the same items of information as we do now? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean in terms of the actual 
directive? I see two things that would be in the directive. One is 
the money supply target, however expressed, from now to the end of the 
year. And the other is the federal funds constraint. 

M R .  MAYO. But with the usual lag. This would not be in your 
press release Monday or today. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. NO 

MR. COLDWELL. We do get caught with that, don’t we? That’s 
because we would have to release this-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let’s worry about that later. I don’t see 
that we have to release it before 30 days, but we will decide that 
subsequently. 

MS. TEETERS. I think Phil’s target [proposal] is too strict. 
In a sense, he’s choking [the money supply]. And that seems to me 
ridiculous, given the underlying state of the economy as we see it. I 
think if we aimed to be within the upper part of the range [for the 
year]--aimed for 4.6 percent [for September to December]--we’d tend to 
offset the dangers of putting this economy into an actual tailspin. 
It’s all right to control the money supply, but we don‘t have to cut 
it off completely, Phil, which is what your proposal would do for the 
last two months of the year. 

MR. PARTEE. I must say that I agree with Nancy. If this is 
the nature of the detail, then I can‘t agree to it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the thing to do at the moment is 
just to concentrate on the money supply. 



10/6/79 -31 -  

MR. PARTEE. Well, if you want to go around the table, I 
would view the figures in the right-hand column [at the bottom of page 
31 as quite appropriate objectives. I would be prepared to bias the 
initial funds rate range. Oh I forgot, you don‘t want [us to address] 
the funds rate yet. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to sometime; let’s discuss 
the whole bias issue. We can [talk about] both the funds rate range 
and the money supply. 

MR. PARTEE. I would leave the money supply [range unchanged] 
and bias it with the funds rate range in the initial go-around. Then 
we can review the funds rate range depending on progress. I would 
point out that with that projection for the first month [of the 
quarter] being above the 4.6 percent--and September deposits have 
determined reserves for the first 2 weeks of October--we already have 
a bias in the money supply €or the initial two weeks of operation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’ll let that go. I won’t get into 
that technical point of whether we bias the operation--since the 
reserves of the forthcoming week are already in the bag--during that 
week. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, sure we do. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think the answer is that we [start 
with higher] borrowings that first week. We start, even though we 
know we can’t affect the level of reserves that week. 

M R .  BLACK. We can affect deposits in that week, even though 
we are addressing the reserve needs of two weeks hence. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We might affect deposits in that week. 

M R .  BLACK. And that‘s really what we are after, so I don‘t 
really think [money supply growth] is in the bag for October, Chuck. 

M R .  COLDWELL. I don’t either. 

MR. PARTEE. I don’t think we are going to affect it much. 

MR. BLACK. I agree that this is not going to affect it a 
lot, but conceptually it isn’t in the bag yet. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it’s a matter of degree. We have 
two proposals: one for 3 percent M1 growth and one for 4.6 percent. 

M R .  MAYO. I would like to throw a third one on the table. 
I’d make it 4 percent. I think we need to shade it, but I don’t want 
to shade it as much as Phil suggested. 

M R .  BLACK. I’m getting confused here. Are you talking about 
the September-- 

MR. MAYO. [Growth for] September to December. 

MR. BLACK. Okay. 



10/6/79 -38 

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, could I ask a technical question 
of the staff regarding the right-hand part of the table on page 3? 
You say, Steve, that the right-hand panel shows the fourth-quarter 
growth rate consistent with a yearly increase in the upper half of the 
long-term range. I didn’t have a chance to do the arithmetic on this. 
Do you mean right at the upper end of the range or somewhere within 
the upper half of the range? 

MR. AXILROD. The growth rate shown there produces a rate 
[for M11 for the year of 5.3 percent. The range for the year, 
suitably adjusted, is 3 to 6 percent. So, that 5.3 percent is about 
halfway between the 4.5 percent middle of the range and the 6 percent 
upper end of it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just compare the third from the right 
column on the bottom table with the column at the left on the top 
table. The target ranges are given at the top of page 3 and the 
growth for the year is given at the bottom of page 3. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, those of us who have the 
Axilrod-Sternlight memo in wire form have a different pagination. 

MR. COLDWELL. It’s on a different page. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a target range for M1, M2, 
and M3. Just write them down along side the growth for the year in 
the upper half of the target ranges. They are: 3 to 6 percent for M1; 
5 to 8 percent for M2; and 6 to 9 percent for M3. So [growth for the 
year] is right at the top of the range for M2 and somewhat below the 
top, but in the upper half, of the ranges for M1 and M3. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, do you want the growth rates [we 
prefer] stated in terms of the growth for the year or not? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From September through December. 

MR. COLDWELL. September to December. 

MR. PARTEE. That’s going to be the operational period. 

MS. TEETERS. I would support the 4.6 percent 

MR. AXILROD. There‘s going to be variability. It’s possible 
to get different September-to-December growth rates for the same 
quarterly average, as I’m sure the Committee realizes, depending on 
when in the quarter the growth occurs and all that. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The operational one is September to 
December, even though that doesn’t assure precisely that quarterly 
average. 

MR. AXILROD. Or you could use the quarterly average and have 
varying growth rates for September to December, whichever you want. 

MR. MAYO. Steve, 4 percent for September to December would 
give us a 5 percent growth rate for the year, right? 



10/6/79 -39- 

MR. AXILROD. I would have to translate it into the quarterly 
average. 

MR. BLACK. The quarterly average would hold it to around 
that, I think. 

MR. AXILROD. The Committee’s target is for Q4 1978 to Q4 
1979. If we had a quarterly average rate of 5.9 percent [for the 
fourth quarter] the rate [for the targeted period] would be 5.3 
percent. To the degree that you lower the [rate desired for the 
remaining] months to what you were suggesting--and depending on when 
exactly in the quarter that slower growth occurred--it would affect 
that quarterly average. If it occurred early in the quarter, the 
quarterly average would go down more than if it occurred all in 
December, say. 

MR. MAYO. Well, that’s why you are emphasizing September to 
December because that would at least bypass a variable. 

MR. AXILROD. This shows the slowing that’s going to occur. 
The slowing is in process, but the effect on the quarterly average is 
delayed because we are going into the quarter with such a high rate. 

MR. COLDWELL. And we already have 5 percent for the first 
three quarters. Am I right? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL. So with 5.3 percent, M1 growth would actually 
be going up in the fourth quarter? 

MR. AXILROD. We are coming off a 9-1/2 percent rate in the 
third quarter. 

CIiAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are starting the fourth quarter high, 
so it’s very hard to get that down. 

MR. BLACK. It seems to me that we can target better on what 
we want the growth for the year to be than on September to December. 

MR. MAYO. Well, that’s true. 

MS. TEETERS. Oh, I don’t agree. 

MR. BLACK. Well, I know it has to be translated into [the 
rate for the September-to-December period] for purposes of the 
operating technique, but it’s hard--unless you know what the pattern 
is apt to be between September and December-- 

MS. TEETERS. That‘s what we are doing. We would be 
determining a pattern. 

MR. MAYO. Well, I agree with Bob. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the only number we can concentrate 
on operationally is the one for September through December, given the 



10/6/79 - 4 0 -  

figures that have been shown here in the memo. We can make a precise 
arithmetic computation at lunch if we want to, I’m sure. Obviously, 
the lower that figure is, the more it takes a little off the annual 
growth rate. 

MR. BLACK. My point, Mr. Chairman is that the staff started 
with the numbers on the left-hand side, 4-1/2, 6-1/2, and 7-1/2 
percent, or 5.3, 8, and 8 percent. And then they went back and 
produced a September-to-December figure. It’s very difficult for us 
to produce the figures here that would be compatible with what we 
might want for this. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just interpolate 

MR. MAYO. It seems to me we are better off, Mr. Chairman, to 
aim for a growth rate for the year and let the staff work it out. 

MR. BLACK. That‘s essentially what I am saying. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t think that’s right because a very 
small change in the growth rate for the year has a very big effect on 
the growth rate for the September-to-December period. And it’s that 
latter period that we are dealing with here. 

MS. TEETERS. Really, we have only 2 months that we can 
influence. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You just have to interpolate. If you went 
all the way down to 1.3 percent [for September to December] you would 
be at 4.5 percent [for the year]. So if you want to aim half way 
between [the two figures shown], the annual growth is going to be 
exactly half way between 4 . 5  and 5.3 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. But [the choice] has tremendous interest rate 
implications. 

MS TEETERS. Yes. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would support 4.6 percent. 

MR. MORRIS. I would propose 4 percent for M1 and 7 percent 
for M2 in order to give us a little margin for error. 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. BALLES. That’s fine with me 

MS. TEETERS. We have some margin [with the 4.6 percent] 

MR. COLDWELL. We haven’t got much margin. 

MS. TEETERS. It‘s 0.7 on the yearly average. 

MR. WALLICH. We need to do two things, in my judgment. One 
is to set a money supply target that causes the funds rate to rise but 
not excessively. The other is to set a range that won’t allow the 
funds rate to fall excessively. And to me it looks as if something 
like 4 percent on the money supply would probably do that. 



10/6/79 -41- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me note that we have other instruments 
for biasing at the start, including the discount rate that the Board 
is going to have to decide upon here. If we raise the discount rate 
substantially, we are going to get an upward movement in the funds 
rate in the short run. 

MR. COLDWELL. And the impact of the reserve requirement 
change can do the same thing. 

MR. SCWLTZ. I‘m going to vote for the 4.6 percent 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given a moment of hesitancy here let me 
make a suggestion, at least tentatively. Nothing is solid. I just 
want to move on. Let’s assume 4.6 percent for the moment, or 4.5 if 
you want a round number. There i s  obviously a good deal of concern 
that that is too high and a good deal of concern about what will 
happen in the short run. We can accept that. But in the interest of 
getting [the full] picture, if tentatively we say 4.6 percent, there 
is a lot of interest both in biasing [the outome in] the short run and 
in biasing the possible errors in the direction of not exceeding 4.6 
percent because that indeed is getting pretty close to the upper end 
of the annual target. So let’s proceed on that basis for a moment and 
go to the federal funds range. 

MS. TEETERS. Well, what are you going to do with the 
discount rate, take it to 12 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that’s obvious 

MS. TEETERS. If we take it to 12 percent and we want the 
federal funds rate around the discount rate, that means the funds rate 
should be approximately 12 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn’t want to get into that question. 
I would assume that if we take the discount rate to 12 percent--unless 
we have a reverse bias in terms of the borrowings--that the federal 
funds rate is going to go up in the neighborhood of 1 percentage point 
under normal relationships. 

MR. PARTEE. That’s 13 percent 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, whether any relationship is normal in 
this period, who knows? But I think that’s the best guess one could 
make and that would introduce the bias in the short run. 

MS. TEETERS. But to talk about a funds rate range, it seems 
to me we have to have in mind where we are going to put the discount 
rate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree. These things are very hard to 
[separate]. 

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, do we have to move on the discount 
rate immediately? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to discuss that. Obviously, 
all these things have to be decided. But for myself, when I look at 
this potential package, I think there is enough risk of confusion in 



10/6/79 -42- 

the announcement that an increase in the discount rate of 1 percentage 
point would be highly salutary in terms of our immediate objective. 
Intellectually, though, you can argue the other point. I just don't 
know whether we want to take the risk in the initial announcement of a 
possible interpretation that we don't really mean it. That's the 
problem that I see. 

MR. MORRIS. The increase has to be at least one percentage 
point. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's easier if we [discuss] 
all the [aspects]. Let me tell you what the Board has been discussing 
on reserve requirements. What I would presume the Board members will 
agree upon is a packaging together of all managed liabilities, with 
all its difficulties. That would include CDs, federal funds for non- 
members, repurchase agreements, Eurodollar takings--this is all very 
difficult technical business. One proposal is to make a basket of all 
those liabilities, establish a base date in September, and then 
[impose] a marginal reserve requirement of some size--some size 
meaning in a range of 5 to 10 percent--on any increase in the basket. 
We've discussed also [imposing a reserve requirement] on total 
outstanding managed liabilities. 

For purposes of discussion, and to get the whole picture out, 
assume a target of 4.5 or 4.6 percent for the money supply number. 
Assume the increase in the discount rate, which itself biases this 
initially and has the announcement effect as well. Also assume Phil 
Coldwell's initial federal funds constraint and a moderate assumption 
on the borrowings for 2 or 3 weeks of the nature he suggested, which 
involves very little change from the current level of borrowings. 

MR. PARTEE. Was his suggestion $1 billion? 

MR. COLDWELL. I said $1.5 billion; it's $1.2 billion now 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's say $1.2 billion to $1.5 billion. I 
would feel quite differently, frankly, about that borrowing level 
without a discount rate change. I think we would probably lose too 
much without the discount rate change. Without the discount rate 
change I'd put in a much bigger bias on the borrowing side initially, 
in effect, to force the discount rate change very quickly. But the 
more I think about it, the other way of doing it--announcing a 
discount rate change with the package--seems much safer. With that 
kind of initial discount rate change, I think we can be relatively 
moderate in biasing on the borrowing. It wouldn't immediately force 
another discount rate change. So, that's somewhat of a "family" [of 
potential actions]. 

MR. TIMLEN. You are staying with the suggestion of an 11-1/2 
to 14-1/2 percent funds rate range, right? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for purposes of discussion. 

MR. MAYO. If we have a discount rate change to 12 percent, 
why would we want an 11-1/2 percent lower constraint on the federal 
funds rate? 



10/6/79 -43- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in those circumstances, I think the 
probability of going to 11-1/2 percent is negligible. 

M R .  MAYO. Sure. 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. 

MS. TEETERS. But I think we want a fairly wide range. 

MR. MAYO. HOW symmetrical do we want to make it at this 
point? I grant that 12 is close to 11, closer to 11-1/2-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Phil probably figured it out. The 11-1/2 
to 14-1/2 would probably make the range symmetrical around the best 
guess of where the actual funds rate might go in the short run. 

M R .  COLDWELL. It‘s a 13 percent midpoint. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say again that if we adopt this 
technique, I don’t think we can be at all sure where the fed funds 
rate will go in the very short run. 

MR. WALLICH. It doesn’t matter all that much. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it doesn’t matter all that much. 

M R .  WALLICH. It would disavow us. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. 

MS. TEETERS. It matters to you, Henry, if it goes down 

MR. WALLICH. Yes. 

MS. TEETERS. It doesn’t matter to me if it goes down. 

MR. WALLICH. It doesn’t matter very much within a range that 
is set like this one here. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that‘s an important point--not so 
much for a decision today, but looking toward the future. 

MR. SCWLTZ. Well, looking to the future, I may want to let 
[the funds rate] be more responsive, because in my mind that’s one of 
the advantages of this system. The technique fits the times; our 
situation is more volatile. So, that’s one of the reasons I like 
this. I would vote yes, for the time being, on the package that you 
presented. 

MR. WALLICH. The rates that really would matter would be the 
other short-term rates; the funds rate matters much less. The other 
short-term rates, I think, would move up in relation to the discount 
rate and the money supply constraint. If the funds rate stays at the 
lower end of the band for a long time, then that would pull the other 
rates down. 

MR. PARTEE. My only concern is whether that [range] is too 
constraining on the funds rate. 



1 0 1 6 1 7 9  -44-  

MR. BALLES. I agree. 

MR. MAYO. I agree, too. 

MR. PARTEE. I can see a real possibility that it will hit 
14-1/2 percent and if we seem to lock on it, it will then establish 
that as the rate. 

MR. MORRIS. If we are in that situation, the Chairman can 
have a telephone conference and we can discuss whether we want to stay 
locked in or not. 

M R .  BALLES. The staff paper did recommend a range of 3 to 5 
points didn’t it, Steve? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. I don’t know about Peter--he can speak 
for himself--but I feel very strongly that if we are in any way going 
to be held responsible for this operating technique working out, a 
very wide federal funds rate range is necessary. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a real conflict here in 
terms of the way we want to place our risks. I must say that pretty 
consistently in my own thinking I come down on the side of not wanting 
to let this federal funds rate go out of sight by accident in the 
initial stages. Now, that’s a matter of judgment. And the general 
tenor of the plan, of course, is to take whatever punishment--if 
that’s what it is--quickly and get it over with so rates can come down 
and that’s an offset. For once let’s get ahead of the market 
expectation in a sense and get in a position to [move rates] down, 
which is the other side of the coin. But we are going into unknown 
territory and there is a limit as to where my own sangfroid gives out 
here. 

MS. TEETERS. May I suggest a 4 percentage point spread of 
11-1/2 to 15-112 percent with consultation if it goes over 14-1/2? 

MR. BALLES. I’d support that. That’s good. 

MR. BLACK. I ‘d  rather see it wider. 

M R .  COLDWELL. I think we ought to have some sensitivity to a 
16 percent federal funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Understand that even with this kind of 
constraint, on an individual day it might well be [outside the range]. 

SEVERAL. Oh, sure 

MR. COLDWELL. We are talking about a weekly average. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question. Are we very 
closely in the ball park here? 

SEVERAL. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why not stop for lunch? 

MR. ROOS. I second that! 



10/6/79 -45- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mean wander away for lunch. Let's 
take 10 minutes and come back to the table. 

SPEAKER(?). Where is lunch? 

SPEAKER(?). Next door. 

[Lunch recess] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's try to reach some consensus on what 
the proposal should be like if we do it [under the old method]. And 
if we have a consensus on both of those, we could just vote up or down 
on which approach we like better, with as many people feeling 
comfortable about [our decision] as humanly possible. I think you can 
assume there will be a discount rate of 12 percent I should say. 

MR. SCHULTZ. 12 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A 1 percentage point increase. Under 
those circumstances, let me modify my proposal slightly. We work with 
a 4 . 6  or 4.5 percent target for M1, recognizing that people would 
rather see M1 growth come in somewhat lower, certainly, than higher. 
But that to us is a satisfactory target. In an uncertain world, all 
other things equal, the money market nice and equitable, expectations 
changing nicely, things settling down, it's possible we would feel 
better if it came in below than if we were embarrassed by it being too 
high. We have a discount rate of 12 percent. We have the reserve 
requirement change, which I think will be 8 percent, on a basket of 
managed liabilities. That is about equivalent to an added cost of 1 
percent on those [liabilities]. That's the effect that has, 
mechanically. I don't know what that does to the prime rate, but [the 
added cost to banks] is just marginal. If the banks want to be mean-- 
I've got to speak to the MA--they raise the prime rate and say that's 
our marginal cost of funds. If they want to be reasonable, they don't 
because that cost is only going to apply to a very small amount at the 
margin. I would be inclined to tell them at the ABA that they 
shouldn't reach forever on the interest rate. That sounds like a good 
idea. 

In and of itself, I think [all] that means some increase in 
the federal funds rate. How much of an increase? Although this 
scenario only puts the discount rate at about or slightly above the 
current federal funds rate, it nonetheless, all other things equal, 
puts some upward pressure on the federal funds rate. In terms of the 
range, Phil suggested 11-1/2 to 14-1/2 percent. As I told you, it 
makes me nervous to think of [the rate] going up and getting locked in 
at a higher level. But if you want to put the upper end higher, I 
reserve the right to consult if the funds rate were to begin getting 
up that high. We could have that understanding. I am not talking 
about for a day; I think it would be fine if it went there for a day 
or a bit beyond. 

MR. BALLES. Excuse me, Paul, are you talking about 11-1/2 to 
15-1/2 percent? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That's what would appear in the 
formal record, whether or not we consulted later. Then in starting 
off, I would suggest a mild further bias. I think the discount rate 



10/6/79 -46- 

in a sense is a bias to start with, at least to get the federal funds 
rate up. And there’s a bias in the sense that these projections, if 
they mean anything, are based upon a lower level of interest rates. 
So by getting the interest rate up we’ve biased it some already. I 
would suggest a mild further bias--for about 2 weeks maybe--and I 
could express that in one of two ways. We just take the operating 
flexibility depending upon how things develop. 
as a slightly higher level of borrowings, as we discussed before. But 
even that I don’t think is necessarily essential, if as things 
developed it appeared that the federal funds rate in fact was settling 
down around 13 percent plus or minus. In other words, I’m saying 
let’s bias it enough, if we have to, to get that kind of federal funds 
rate originally if it doesn’t go up there by itself. Or, if it goes 
beyond that by itself, we probably don’t need any bias in the 
borrowing component. Now, that’s just going to be a matter of 
judgment in this early period. Peter is looking quizzical and 
wondering how he can make all these judgments every day. And he might 
miss. Inherent in this operating procedure is the possibility that 
the rate might be much higher or lower. 

It could be expressed 

MR. PARTEE. The borrowing is a starting point, I think. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be biased toward a slightly 
higher level of borrowing unless we found the funds rate going to 14, 
15 percent. If that appeared to be happening, we just wouldn’t bias 
it at that point. That should be consistent with all these 
relationships, though it would never work out in practice on a weekly 
basis. Doing nothing else should bring the federal funds rate to 
around 13 percent, but who knows what will happen in this jumpy 
market. 

MR. AXILROD. M r .  Chairman, if I may [ask a question]. I 
assume that means, in giving Peter some estimate of the nonborrowed 
[reserve objective], he might start with a level of borrowing that is 
somewhat higher than the $1.1 to $1.3 billion it has been running on 
average in the past 3 or 4 weeks. So initially in constructing the 
path for nonborrowed reserves that seems consistent with the money 
growth path the Committee sets, we would reduce the total by having a 
level of borrowing that is somewhat higher [than it has been 
recently]. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that would be the initial 
assumption. But if the funds rate goes up well beyond the 13 percent 
area, and if we still had time in the week, I think you would reverse 
the bias. 

MR. MAYO. Just to pin it down, are you thinking of $1.5 
billion? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, in a way I’m a little puzzled because our 
knowledge of the relationships comes through a whole span of rates. 
As we get to very high rates, it may be that banks‘ willingness to 
borrow becomes stronger. If their willingness to borrow is about the 
way it has been, I would be thinking about $1.5 billion. But the 
banks may become more willing to borrow and we may have to think of a 
higher level of borrowing for the same federal funds rate. 



10/6/79 -47-  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't forget, there is estimating in this 
procedure. We don't know from day to day what the level of borrowing 
is going to be for the week, particularly when there's so much of it 
on the last day. So what we are looking at is some guess of what the 
borrowing is going to be for the week. Peter might be sitting there 
without all that much borrowing initially in the week with the federal 
funds rate very high but his projection could show that there are 
going to be huge excess reserves accumulated by Wednesday and that the 
federal funds rate should come way down on Wednesday. What I'm saying 
is that if he's in that situation, even though we don't have much 
reported borrowing at that stage, if the fed funds rate is way high in 
the range we don't bias it so much. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. My guess, for what it's worth at this point, 
is that pushing borrowing to a billion and a half dollars might tend 
to push the funds rate higher, but that's just my feeling. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Higher than 13 percent? 

MR. COLDWELL. There is a possibility it might go the other 
way, though. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it might go the other way, in which 
case we would retain the bias. None of this is going to be cleared up 
until the end of the statement week; that's the nature of it. I think 
you ought to have a better estimate than usual of what the borrowings 
will be this week because you know what the total reserves are going 
to be, given that they are based on deposits two weeks earlier. But 
you still [don't know] the distribution of reserves in the banking 
system or what excess reserves are going to be. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, we know what the borrowings are going to 
be. We can tell that. It's a question of what rates are going to 
fall out of those borrowings. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you can't even tell what the 
borrowings are going to be because you don't know what excess reserves 
are going to be. 

MR. AXILROD. That's right; we know what free reserves are 
going to be. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Another tricky little thing, if we are going 
to start something [different] as of right now, is that we are within 
a statement week. The statement week has just two days left as well 
as a partial holiday, which is usually associated with lousing up the 
estimates. So there may not be very much of-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't know what we do in these two 
days. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Play it by ear. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Play it by ear the first two days. And 
one of those two days is a Wednesday, so-- 

MR. MAYO. Would you expect to get action from us and our 
boards of directors on Monday? 



10/6/79 -48 -  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a request for a [discount 
rate] increase of 1 percentage point, so the Board can act. And I 
still don’t know whether we are going to be making this announcement 
this afternoon or not. If we are, I don’t know what you can do [about 
contacting your directors] on Saturday, anyway. If we are not going 
to announce until Monday, I still don‘t know what you can do because I 
don’t know whether we want to-- 

SPEAKER(?). We can get them on Sunday 

M F t .  MAYO. We could probably get some of them, but with it 
being a long weekend in Chicago-- 

MR. COLDWELL. It‘s not a good idea if you are going to wait 
until Monday. 

MR. PARTEE. Since you’ve already got the [request on the 
discount] rate. 

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, may I make a strong plea that you 
allow the rest of us to get in on this [discount rate action]? Some 
of our directors in San Francisco were [pushing] strongly for [an 
increase such as1 this in our last telephone meeting a week ago. I 
asked them to hold off until we could--1 did not say it in these words 
but it’s what I really had in mind--get a coordinated package. Is 
there any reason that you see as compelling to announce it Monday 
morning rather than in just a few hours? We can get our directors 
together on Monday morning and I think it would look better if all the 
Reserve Banks did [the discount rate increase] at the same time. 

MR. PARTEE. The foreign exchange markets are open. 

M F t .  MORRIS. We can’t wait. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let’s come back to that at the end; let’s 
finish this meeting. Is that broadly agreeable as an alternative 
package? 

MR. EASTBURN. Paul, I missed the aggregates figures that you 
proposed. Are they the same as you had before? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The aggregates are the ones on the right- 
hand side of page 3, recognizing that we’d rather miss on the low side 
than the high side. 

MR. PARTEE. A little on the low side. 

MR. COLDWELL. No, I don’t agree with you. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The alternative, it seems to me--though we 
could fiddle around with the percentages--would be basically the same. 
We‘d do the same reserve requirement change. We’d do the same with 
the discount rate. And then we‘d move the federal funds rate 
basically to 13 percent, and put a 12-1/2 to 13-1/2 percent range on 
it, say. We could operate a bit more flexibly than we have before to 
the extent that that’s possible, borrowing a little from what we’re 
talking about in the new technique. But we’d have a much tighter 



10/6/79 - 4 9 -  

constraint [on the funds rate1 relative to what we just talked about 
on the new technique. 

MR. COLDWELL. Reserve requirements? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the reserve requirement [change would 
be the same]. I think that’s essentially it. I don’t think I left 
anything out here [relating to the provision of] reserves. 

MR. COLDWELL. Targets? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the same. We’ve got to have a 
money supply target, which I presume would be the same. However, any 
of those [targets] could be altered. 

MR. ALTMA”. Are they the same as under the existing 
directive? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the same as in package number 1. So 
it‘s a longer time horizon [for the money supply target] than we would 
ordinarily have. And if that objective is stated another way, it 
would have to be interpreted that if [money growth] were running ahead 
of this track, we would use the upper part of the 12-1/2 to 13-/12 
percent range we are talking about. And if it’s running below, we’d 
use the lower part of the range. I say again that I think the 
difference largely comes down to the constraint we are putting on the 
fed funds rate. That course of action would be very much preferred by 
our friends elsewhere in the city, in terms of the general framework. 
I don’t think it makes a lot of difference, actually, as we modified 
the other approach. I don’t want to make a federal case out of this, 
but it’s nevertheless true. I’ve just tried to state here what I 
think is more or less the equivalent in immediate market impact. I 
suppose you could say that we should be a little tougher in the 
conventional package to [equalize] the psychological effects that we’d 
get from the talk about the reserve target. 

MR. BLACK. I think that‘s clearly true. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Remember that one of the dangers of the 
approach we have been talking about is that we may miss the target 
anyway, and we are a little less vulnerable to that with the 
conventional approach. The problem wouldn‘t disappear if we missed 
the targets either way. But without going through the rigmarole of a 
new dedication to [achieving] them we are a little less vulnerable. 
Maybe I ought to put that federal funds rate that I talked about a 
little higher to make the [two alternatives] fully equivalent, say, 
1/2 point or 1/4 point higher. We could talk about that. 

These are basically the two propositions we have before us. 
What I want to know is if there is a strong preference--it doesn‘t 
have to be unanimous--for one of them. Let’s first take our famous 
preference [poll]. Let me say the second one would be a little 
tighter on the federal funds rate than I suggested earlier--[by moving 
it] at least to 13 percent or a little over 13 percent to make the 
psychological impact equivalent. How many would prefer the 
traditional approach? This is a matter of preference. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Voting members or all of us? 



10/6/79 - 5 0 -  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will take everyone now. Raise 
your hand if you prefer the present method. Does everybody else 
prefer the other or--? 

MR. EASTBURN. HOW many was it? 

MR. ALTMA". Three or four--I'm not sure 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hold up your hands a little higher, even 
if you don't feel strongly. 

MR. ROOS. These are those who feel we should continue as 
with everything we said this morning? 

MR. COLDWELL. It's just continue the regular procedure. 

MR. ALTMA". It's five. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. HOW many would prefer the 
other alternative? Is that everybody else? 

MR. ALTMA". Twelve. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is quite clearly a great majority 
who want the new technique. Now let me ask the question slightly 
differently. How many feel strongly about this? I doubt that anybody 
thinks it's a matter of life or death but I just want to see how 
strong the sentiment is. 

SPEAKER(?). I think it's big. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who has a strong preference for moving in 
the new direction? 

MR. ALTMA". 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 .  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in that camp, Nancy? 

MS. TEETERS. I feel queasy about it. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, some preference. 

M R .  MAYO. Your feeling is semi-strong, Nancy. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, let's look at the voting members 
Who has a strong preference? 

MR. ALTMA". Seven, again not counting you. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you count Nancy in or out? 

MR. ALTMA". No. I didn't count Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I'm in. 

MR. ALTMA". Eight. 

SPEAKER(?). Out of 11 



10/6/79 -51- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess that's strong enough that we 
ought to go with it. 

MR. PARTEE. I don't know how much difference it will really 
come down to. I think we have a better intellectual agreement. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just give you my interpretation of 
a non-mechanical [application], as I put it from the beginning, of the 
new technique. The difference isn't all that dramatic. There will be 
more emphasis on [the new technique] in the press announcement because 
it will be, in effect, a warning that the federal funds rate is going 
to be permitted to fluctuate over a wider range. Of course, we can 
say that in either announcement, but it will be said a little more 
strongly [with the announcement of the new operating method]. 

MR. SCHULTZ. I think we are going to get a bigger 
psychological impact than you think we're going to get. 

MR. BLACK. I do, too 

M R .  MAYO. Paul, one of the problems with the alternative is 
that we either adopt a wide range or start with a funds rate that's 
already above where it is now. In other words, if it's at a little 
less than 12 percent now, and we put our range at 12-1/2 to 14 percent 
or whatever you suggested, that raises another difficulty. Maybe it's 
mechanical. But from a realistic standpoint we almost have to widen 
the range on the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I said we would have to widen the 
ranges on the alternative [technique]. 

MR. MAYO. Almost to the full 4 points, if we are going to 
sell it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me, for my [information], put it the 
other way. I just want to get a sense of this. Suppose we used the 
conventional approach; the range might be stated formally as 1 
percentage point in width. But suppose I also said that in practice 
right now, as we usually say, we are going to aim for 13-1/4 percent 
and we are not going to move that from day to day or week to week 
unless there's a strong indication from the aggregates. I mean 
literally it's what we do now. How many people would find that 
acceptable or would prefer that? Maybe nobody, but I just want to get 
a feel of that. 

M R .  WALLICH. You mean announce that rate? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, do it just the way we do now. The 
market would be looking at Peter's actions over the next 3 days to 
find out that he was intervening at 13-3/8 percent on the up side and 
13 percent on the down side. 

M R .  MAYO. Ugh! We lose any--1 hate to use the word--drama. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's interesting. Is everybody saying 
that they don't like that? 

MR. WALLICH. I still think it's the safer thing to do. 



10/6/79 -52- 

MS. TEETERS. I don’t, Henry, because all we’d be doing is 
tightening with no possibilities of [the rate] coming down again. 

MR. MAYO. It would look as if we are just chug, chugging, 
more [of the same]. It lacks the announcement effect of the other 
approach. 

MR. COLDWELL. You get your announcement effect out of the 
reserve requirement [change] . 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a tentative directive written, 
which is quite general as you can imagine. [That is being distributed 
to you now.] We can vote on the directive. 

MR. BLACK. Is this just in favor of the approach or does it 
have the specifications tied to-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Specifications, too. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I‘m not going to dissent against what 
the Board and Federal Open Market Committee think they ought to do if 
the majority is clearly in favor of package 1. I must admit that I 
think the M1 target is too high. 

MR. BLACK. I concur, Mr. Chairman. I certainly would like 
to see it shaved down a bit because I think it is very important that 
we come within the ranges. And remember, we just announced 1-1/2 to 
4-1/2 percent as the target on Ml and we are going to have to tell 
people that it‘s really 3 to 6 percent. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The announcement will say that 

MR. WALLICH. I share that view. I would like 4 percent 
rather than 4.5 percent. 

M R .  BALLES. I would, too. 

MR. MAYO. I would, too. 

MS. TEETERS. I wouldn’t. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, why don’t we take a vote on the 4 
against the 4-1/2? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I’d be reluctant to fine-tune too 
much here. That is why I suggest 4-1/2 percent, recognizing that if 
market developments permit and if there are opportunities to get [Ml 
growth] somewhat below that without pressing the limits of our funds 
ranges, we ought to take them. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I could save the Committee some 
trouble in reading [this draft directive] by pointing out that page 1 
is a repeat of the existing long-run target [directive language]. 
Page 2 is the new operational paragraph that is proposed. 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, would it be too much of a straddle 
to say that we were going to aim for a 4 to 4-1/2 percent range [for 
Ml] for September-December? 



10/6/79 -53- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest this. Why don't we 
put in the directive at this point that we now estimate the ATS and 
NOW account effect at about 1-112 percent, which would make the 
equivalent range for M1 3 to 6 percent. I'm going to have to say that 
in the press conference, anyway. 

MR. MAYO. Well, my point isn't just to straddle more, but to 
cite an intention within a half point range. It seems to me that 
we've been range conscious on all of our aggregates so there's no harm 
in saying we are aiming in a range of 4 to 4-112 percent for September 
to December. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could do that. Whatever way, this is 
not specifically in the directive is it? 

MR. MAYO. No 

MR. COLDWELL. It will be in the minutes. 

CHAI- VOLCKER. It will be in the minutes. 

MR. BLACK. You mean the statement of policy actions? 

MR. ALTMA". The policy record. 

MR. COLDWELL. Policy record. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the release that comes out about a 
month [after the meeting]? 

MR. ALTMA". That's right. 

MR. KIMBREL. I hate to keep asking, but is the funds range 
11-112 to 15-1/2 percent, as Nancy suggested? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 as Nancy suggested, 
with a clear warning to you that you may get a call for a consultation 
if the rate gets up there. 

MR. COLDWELL. The way she stated it was that a consultation 
clearly would be called at 34-112 percent, wasn't it? 

M R .  MAYO. That's right. 

MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to point out that this last 
paragraph I think has a little range implied for Ml--and for the other 
aggregates--and the range is centered around 4-1/2. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why? Oh, because of the "around" 4-1/2? 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, if we are going to center a range, then 
I certainly would rather center it around 4 rather than 4-112 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. But this is the exact statement of what Paul 
suggested. It seems to me that at the press conference what he'd be 
saying is that we are determined to hold these aggregates within the 
targets previously announced. My point simply is that if we happen 
to come out at 5 percent for September-December we wouldn't be outside 



10/6/79 -54- 

the target range. I think 4-1/2 percent does imply a [bit of a] 
range. Now for safety, we'd rather be on the lower side of 4-1/2 
percent. 

MR. BLACK. There isn't any safety on M2, Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Again, it seems to me that you can trade that M2 
off against M3. 

MR. BLACK. It may well come in less than that anyway with 
disintermediation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are dancing on a pin a little 
bit here. 

MR. MAYO. Yes, I accept Chuck's point. I think it's well 
taken. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes. We're going to have an awfully hard time-- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to be awfully delighted if we 
come in any place within these ranges. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, is this communication, this 
[directive], going to be kept within this group as far as publicity--? 

MR. PARTEE. Except for the press conference 

MR. ROOS. There are aspects that I think could cause some 
trouble with the analysis. I'm talking about the wire and the 
[decision]. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By all means, that is kept strictly 
confidential. 

M E .  KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we seem to be getting close 
together and I sure would hate to have my friend Mr. Roos cast my vote 
[as my alternate] but I have to leave and I just want to vote. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are ready to vote. We are 
voting specifically on this directive. Those blanks are to be filled 
in with 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 and I think we write in the sentence there 
about consultation when the funds rate is "in the upper part of the 
range" or something vague like "toward the top. *' 

MR. PARTEE. Toward the top. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Toward the top. And I think what we mean 
by that is something like 14-1/2 percent. We are talking about 4-1/2 
percent "permitted," if you will. Obvious we'd rather have less, if 
things develop so that we can do it without putting untoward pressure 
on market rates. And what we are saying clearly is that if this money 
demand function collapses we'd be delighted to come in below 4-1/2 
percent. It is not going to collapse before we meet again. 

MR. MORRIS. For security reasons you'd prefer not to get the 
other Reserve Banks in on the discount rate? 



10/6/79 -55- 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's just get this vote over with. 
I believe you understand this slight bias in the way we play that. We 
are thinking of a federal funds rate ideally in the 13 percent plus 
range, initially. That would be a highly satisfactory response, but 
we don't have any close control over it--it could be more or less--and 
that would affect our biasing decisions. I think we are ready for a 
vote. 

MR. ALTMANN. All right. 
Chairman Volcker 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Rice 
Governor Schultz 
Governor Teeters 
First Vice President Timlen 
Governor Wallich 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I very much appreciate this 
discussion. I think it was important. We do have a press release 
prepared by Joe Coyne. I would like to insert in the press release-- 
and I just want to ask your advice on it--that the Committee voted 
unanimously on this. 

M R .  MAYO. I think you should. 

END OF MEETING 


	791006meeting



