









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

April 17, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

Staff Statements Auuended to the Transcriut 

Mr. Holmes, Manager of the System Open Market Account 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Axilrod. Economist 



Meet ing  of F e d e r a l  Open Market - Committee 

A p r i l  1 7 ,  1979 

A m e e t i n g  of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Commit tee  was 

h e l d  i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors  o f  t h e  F e d e r a l  

Rese rve  System i n  Washington,  D .  C . ,  on Tuesday ,  A p r i l  17,  

1 9 7 9 ,  b e g i n n i n g  a t  9:30 a . m .  

PRESENT: M r .  Miller, Chairman 
Mr . Volcke r  , Vice Chairman 
M r .  E a l l e s  
Mr. Black  
M r .  Co ldwe l l  
M r .  K i m b r e l  
Mr. Jlayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mrs. T e e t e r s  
Mr. W d l i c h  

illessrs. Guf fey ,  Roos. and Winn, A l t e r n a t e  
Members of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Oper, S!arl;ei 
C o m m i t t e e  

h l e s s r s .  Baughman aad Willes, P r e s i d e n t s  of t h e  
F e d e r a l  Rese rve  Banks of D a l l a s  a n d  
X i n n e a p o l i s ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

M r .  Altmann, S e c r e t a r y  
Mr. B e r n a r d ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
Mr. P e t e r s e n ,  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
M r .  Ol tman,  Deputy Genera l  Counse l  
M r .  Mannion, A s s i s t a n t  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
Mr. A x i l r o d ,  Economist 

Messrs. B r a n d t ,  R .  D a v i s ,  E t t i n ,  Z e n r y ,  
K e i r ,  Keran ,  K i c h l i n e ,  P a r t h e m o s ,  
S c h e l d ,  Truman, and Z e i s e l ,  Associate 
Economis ts  

Mr. Holmes, IJanager System Open Market  

Id r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Deputy Manager f o r  
Account 

Domest ic  O p e r a t i o n s  



4/17/79 - 2 -  

Mr. Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of 

M r .  Kalchbrenner ,  Assoc ia t e  D i r e c t o r ,  
Governors 

Div is ion  of Research and S t a t i s t i c s ,  
Board of Governors 

Div is ion  of I n t e r n a t i o n a l  F inance ,  
Board of Governors 

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of  Governors 

Mr. G e m m i l l ,  Assoc ia te  D i r e c t o r ,  

M s .  F a r a r ,  Economist, Open Market 

Mrs. Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market 

Messrs. McIntosh and Smoot, F i r s t  Vice 
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Fede ra l  Reserve Banks 
of Boston and P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  
r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Messrs. Balbach,  Boehne, J .  Davis ,  
and Eisenmenger, Senior  Vice 
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Fede ra l  Eeserve 
Banks of St, Loui s .  P h i l e d e l p h i a ,  
Cleveland,  and Boston, r e spec t ive11  

Messrs.  Burns,  Danfor th ,  and T. Davi s ,  
V i c e  P r e s i d e n t s ,  Fede ra l  Reserve 
Banks  of D a l l a s ,  Minneapol is ,  and 
Kansas C i t y ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Mr . Levin,  Manager, S e c u r i t i e s  Departmen', , 
Federa l  R e s e r v e  Bank of N e w  York 

M r .  John Morton, Economist,  D iv i s ion  of 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  F inance ,  Board of 
Governors 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
April 17, 1979 

CHAIFXAN MILLER. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for posing 
[for the group picture]. It’s nice to be here with all you 
celebrities. And I hope by the time the pictures are published the 
same members will still be on the Committee! I would point out that 
Frank Morris and Dave Eastburn are not with us this morning and 
[representing their Banks1 we have Jim McIntosh and Dick Smoot. We 
are delighted to have you, and we assume that you will be independent 
of your Presidents and give us some really good advice to help us out! 
I want to remind you about the structure of the meeting; I think the 
procedure we have been using recently has been very helpful. 
again, I would suggest that although I am personally impressed with 
the eloquence of your statements, I would be even more impressed with 
crispness and brevity in making your very powerful points to which 
through our mental process we’ll be able to add the eloquence. 

Once 

MR. PARTEE. Silence is golden! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. At least promptness is worth something. 
Accordingly, we will proceed with the agenda. The first item of 
business is to approve the minutes of the last meeting. I believe 
they have been circulated. Are there any corrections or comments? 
Hearing none, we will report those as approved. Turning to foreign 
currency operations, Scott has been taken suddenly ill and Alan, 
therefore, will report on the foreign currency operations. 

M R .  HOLMES. I’m sorry Scott can’t be here to make this 
report because it’s very near and dear to his heart. It’s rather 
historic. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Alan. Questions or 
comments? Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Alan, had there not been all this intervention, 
do you believe that the dollar would have been substantially higher? 

MR. HOLMES. Substantially higher, yes indeed 

MR. PARTEE. That is, it wasn’t supply bringing forth its own 
demand? 

MR. HOLMES. The fact that we were there and willing to 
[intervene] probably increased the flow. But I think we would have 
had a substantially different exchange rate effect if we had not been 
intervening at all and if the Europeans had not been intervening at 
all. 

MR. PARTEE. So speculators against the dollar might have 
been squeezed in the absence of this intervention, I suppose. 

MR. HOLMES. Yes, they might have been squeezed more if we 
had not intervened. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry. 



4 / 1 7 / 7 9  - 2 -  

MR. WALLICH. Alan, in terms of the possible magnitudes of 
these movements, you remember what happened to the United Kingdom a 
couple of years ago: There was a tremendous inflow into sterling and 
they held the rate [for a time]; eventually, after taking in $10 or 
$15 billion in reserves, they had to let the rate go. Do you see any 
possible parallel for the United States? 

MR. HOLMES. Well, there's always a possible parallel. If we 
try to put a complete lid on the rate, one or two things will happen: 
Either we will have to acquire a lot of currencies or we will so 
convince the market that there is no upside risk in the dollar that 
the flows will stop. I'm not quite clear which would happen; it could 
well be a combination of the two. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. Alan, what do you think the reaction would be in 
exchange markets if the aggregates should come in weak and we nudged 
the federal funds rate down a little? 

MR. HOLMES. I think the market has been quite favorably 
impressed by the fact that, despite weak aggregates, the System has 
stayed steady in the boat as far as the funds rate is concerned. I 
think a change in that pattern would have a negative effect on the 
exchange market. How big it would be I really don't know. 

MR. BLACK. You think they would pay more attention to the 
federal funds rate, though, than the behavior of the aggregates? 

MR. HOLMES. I think they would. The market is more geared 
to interest rates than it is to aggregates because interest rates have 
a real meaning for currency flows. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Alan, what theory of intervention are you 
working under now? Do you just buy back enough to pay off [foreign 
currency debt], peg the rate, or bend with market forces? What sort 
of strategy are you working under? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me tell you what strategy Alan is 
working under. It has been a consistent one from November 1 [of last 
year], which is that we would move in depth in both directions to 
avoid disorderliness in the market. 
consistently, despite people who pressure us from time to time to do 
something else. 

That's what we have been doing 

MR. PARTEE. Would you say that there would have been 
disorderly strength in the dollar? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. 

MR. HOLMES. Yes, I think it would have been a disorderly 
market on the up side, which is clearly possible. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, it's a breakthrough then. 



4/11/79 -3-  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, indeed. Notice what happened when the 
Bank of Japan raised its discount rate. The yen weakened against the 
powerful dollar. I'm sorry to interrupt but I wouldn't want Alan to 
have to defend his own posture because it's one that he has been 
working under in coordination with us. And this is what we have been 
trying to accomplish. Other questions or comments? 

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Where do you think the dollar is going now? Do 
you expect it to stabilize or do you expect the upward pressures to 
continue? 

MR. HOLMES. Well, in the last week or so the flows slowed. 
There has been no new impetus to it. Part of the reason was the fact 
that the market got the perception that the Germans didn't want to see 
the dollar appreciate any more against the mark. That may be 
overcome, depending on what happens, and we may again get a 
reoccurrence of very large flows back into the dollar. But it has 
slowed down in the last week. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. We now need to ratify 
the transactions since the last meeting. I believe you all have the 
reports. Are there any comments or questions or objections? Hearing 
none, we will record the ratification of those transactions. 

Now we will turn to domestic operations. Of course, we have 
had great drama in this area since the last meeting. We've come as 
close as the nation could come to defaulting on its debt. So Peter 
undoubtedly will likewise have an exciting report. 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. I don't know if I will live up to the 
excitement of that billing, Mr. Chairman, although the delay in 
[raising] the debt ceiling certainly did have an impact on operations 
and on Treasury financing during the month. [Statement--see 
Appendix. 1 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. Questions or comments? 
Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. With the new wider distribution of Treasury 
bills, do you feel that the dangers of inadequate collateral for RPs 
are substantially reduced? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. At the moment there is certainly ample 
collateral around, but some of those bills will be maturing later this 
week and next week, so we could get back into a situation of scarce 
collateral. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy 

MS. TEETERS. was the heavy sell-off of foreign holdings for 
the swap operations or was it also to provide funds for that market? 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. Both were going on. There were swap 
repayments, but also foreign countries were undertaking intervention 



4/17/19 -4-  

and, as I understand it, they had to liquidate holdings of Treasury 
bills to raise the dollars they needed. 

MS. TEETERS. Most of the $5-1/2 billion was for the 
intervention? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. The greater part of it was for intervention, 
yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Peter, after these fluctuations over the last 
six weeks or so, how would you characterize the short-term markets-- 
the short-term government market and the short-term private market--in 
relationship to the funds rate? That is, do you think the 
relationship is about normal or are rates high or low relative to the 
funds rate? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. At the moment there’s a temporary bulge in 
dealers’ holdings of very short-term issues, particularly of Treasury 
bills, so I think the day-to-day financing costs are toward the high 
end of some range of variation. But I expect that to be transitory; 
those rates will probably come down in the next couple of weeks. 

MR. PARTEE. So the government rates may be a little high 
relative to the funds rate, but the private rates--those on commercial 
paper and CDs and so forth--are low, aren’t they? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. CDs have been under some special influence 
because banks have been willing to pay off CDs, and they have obtained 
more of their financing recently from Eurodollar takedowns. The 
commercial paper rate seems to me to be about in a normal relationship 
to the funds rate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you all. Again we need a vote to 
ratify the transactions. The reports have been circulated. Are there 
questions, comments, or reservations? Hearing none, we will record 
those as approved. We will turn now to the staff report on the 
economic situation. Jim Kichline. 

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. Let’s take a few moments 
to see if there are any questions about this before we turn to Steve. 
Yes, Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. In the forecast of federal and state 
expenditures, Jim, would you give me a little more explanation than I 
have seen on the negatives and positives in the first and second 
quarters? Are there some offsetting jumps of sizable magnitude? 

MR. KICHLINE. We think the developments in the state and 
local area reflect largely a weather effect related to a slowdown in 
construction expenditures and capital outlays. Employment in the 
state and local sector declined, or was very weak at least, in the 
first two months and picked up in March. So I think what is happening 
here is a transitory factor that will shift activity out of the first 
quarter and into the second. On the federal side, I must say I think 



4/17/19 -5- 

we‘re talking about these miserable CCC payments, which tend to 
accelerate federal purchases in one quarter and disappear in the next 
and get revised away. S o ,  we are not talking about anything that is a 
major factor; it’s largely the sort of thing where we have higher 
expenditures in the first quarter and then a sharp drop in the second 
quarter, which is a paydown of CCC loans. 

MR. COLDWELL. Just looking at your pattern, you have a 
positive on federal expenditures in the first quarter and a heavy 
negative on state and local [spending] and the reverse of that in the 
second quarter, with a heavy negative on the federal side and a pretty 
heavy positive on [state and local]. They just happen to cancel out. 

MR. KICHLINE. State and local is weather-related and federal 
reflects CCC payments. 

MR. ZEISEL. There was a big CCC payout in the fourth 
quarter--I’m sorry. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, go ahead Jerry 

MR. ZEISEL. This kind of sawtooth pattern drives us insane, 
but it is very common. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. Thank you. I just wanted to ask how you treated 
the impact of decontrol of oil prices and how that fed through to the 
forecast for inflation. Was it any different than you would have 
treated it if the same amount of increase came simply as a result of 
an OPEC [price] increase? Is my question clear? 

MR. KICHLINE. We did not treat it differently in terms of 
the price impact. On the real side, there are important differences. 
I believe I know what you are getting at. I think the question is 
what the percentage passthrough is and whether or not we are simply 
talking about shifting profits from refiners to crude oil producers, 
or how much do prices actually go up. And that’s a major area of 
conflict. I might say we have treated it roughly the same; the 
Administration has treated it somewhat differently and assumed that 
only two-thirds of the costs get passed through. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We show more inflation impact than the 
Administration does? 

M R .  KICHLINE. That’s right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I have used 0.5, which is what you’ve used. 
They have used much less, I believe. 

MR. KICHLINE. [They have used] 0 . 3 .  

MR. WILLES. Well, in addition to that, there is another 
factor and I don’t pretend to know exactly how to [take it into 
account]. When OPEC increases its prices, it does so without an 
increase in supply. In the case of decontrol there‘s at least a hope 
that it is going to have a supply-side effect. When one works that 



4 /17 / I 9  

through the system, it's not clear whether in general--though clearly 
energy prices will go up--the inflation rate will go up. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, because of the lag effect. 

MR. KICHLINE. One of the issues involved, which is very 
important, particularly as we get into the ' ~ O S ,  is that we have 
assumed some lag in the supply-side effects. We are talking about 
partial decontrol in 1979--it's very limited--and it's bigger in 1980. 
But by the end of 1980, decontrol in domestic prices is only about 55 
percent completed. So I think the longer-run effects on the supply 
side are quite important. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Willis. 

MR. WINN. Jim, in the last three weeks we've been getting a 
little more evidence that disintermediation is starting to take place. 
We see it in terms of traffic in the Bank--direct purchases of 
[Treasury] securities--and we see it in looking at some of the 
institutional outflows. Parallel to that is the fact that long-term 
rates are starting to increase, particularly for the financing of 
office buildings and other such things. I get a reading that across 
the country for the first time [builders] are really starting to look 
very hard at costs and that a number of projects have suddenly been 
pulled back in April. Are we starting to see the bite of the policies 
that have been in train for some time? If that's true, then one gets 
a little different outlook than you projected for some of these 
things. 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, on the thrift institution side, for 
mutual savings banks the numbers available through early April 
indicate a substantial decline in rates of inflow. For S&Ls, the 
March data show inflows up a little. 

MR. WINN. That's right, but the April data-- 

MR. KICHLINE. We have scattered reports for April and we 
have been picking up the same sort of thing. Our own forecast, 
however, is not for a sharp deceleration of inflows but rather a 
gradual slowing. We don't have any massive change there. I might 
note, though, that in the mortgage market on the financing side we 
have been picking up increasing reports of stringency in various parts 
of the country. So if one looks at the mortgage picture, it has been 
much tighter both in price and nonprice lending terms. On the 
construction side, I don't have any reliable information that I could 
point to regarding recent changes that may be under way. 

MR. PARTEE. Willis, I might just say that it took a little 
while for this money market certificate change to take hold. There 
were various cut-off dates. The credit unions didn't [get] cut off 
until the end of the month. In one city in Alabama we let every 
[institution] go to the end of the month. It took a while to get all 
that adjusted out, but the intention--and the expectation--is to do 
away with that differential, which will shift some flows from the 
thrifts to the banks. 

MR. WINN. I wonder if the flows are going to go into market 
investments? 



4/11/19 -7 

MR. PARTEE. They might because, after all, the compounding 
effect was cut back, so there is also a greater disadvantage compared 
with the market than there was. 

MR. WINN. I think we are going to see more. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'll just go [unintelligible]. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I have is the GNP deflator in 
your forecast, which I think is 9.4 percent this year. What would 
that be in terms of consumer prices? 

MR. KICHLINE. We don't forecast the CPI directly; we do 
forecast [the deflator for1 personal consumption expenditures, which 
is a close approximation for the CPI. For 1979 we have them virtually 
the same--about 9-1/4  percent for personal consumption expenditures 
and the deflator. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have to have a pretty 
low rate of price increase in the second half of the year to make 
9-1/4 percent, given this first quarter. 

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, by the time we get into the summer, say 
July or August, if we don't begin to see substantially slower rates of 
increase in the CPI, then this inflation forecast is clearly at risk 
of being too low. 

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Steve. Yes, Larry, we'll have a 
time for questions. 

MR. ROOS. I'd like to ask one clarifying question and also a 
question after that. Early in your statement I believe I heard you 
say, Steve, that the slower growth of the monetary aggregates reflects 
slower demand for goods and services. Then further on I understood 
you to say, if I understood correctly, that in an inflationary economy 
such as we have people tend to increase their demands or purchases of 
goods and services. Is there a conflict in--? 

MR. AXILROD. There's a slight conflict, you're quite right. 
I said early on that the slower growth [in the monetary aggregates] 
we're now having is consistent with our staff projections of a slowing 
later on in economic activity. But then I went on to say that the 
slow [monetary] growth we're having was sufficient to finance this 
rapid expansion in nominal activity. And the rapid expansion in 
nominal activity mainly reflects, of course, the rate of inflation and 
only to a minor extent expansion in real output. Real output was low 
in the first quarter; it increased at only a 1-1/2 percent rate and 
the rate of inflation was up close to 10 percent. 

MR. ROOS. Could I just ask one further question, Mr. 
Chairman? What factors mitigate, in your thinking, the view that 
there will be a rebound in the monetary aggregates in the period 
ahead? What evidence would there be to justify your point of view 
other than wishful thinking? 



4/17/79 - 8 -  

MR. AXILROD. We only have two [pieces] of evidence. One is 
that the most recent week's data show a slowdown in the [decline] in 
the outstanding amount of savings deposits at commercial banks. That 
decline has gone on for five months; savings deposits have been 
dropping very sharply since late last fall. I think that mainly 
[reflects] a shift of those deposits into other kinds of assets, maybe 
even into goods, and [that process] has slowed. Therefore, we 
possibly are reaching the point where the stock outstanding has been 
shifted and [the process] is ending. That in itself will increase 
rates of growth as [it is now1 subtracting [from them]. It involves 
taking away a negative factor. And then there have been slight 
indications in very recent data of some uptick in M1. But, again, 
President ROOS, I don't feel the least bit [confident] that I could 
guarantee the Committee that there's going to be a rebound in M1 
growth this month, next month, or the month after that because I don't 
know how long this kind of demand shift is going to last. In history 
we have not had periods with such rapid rises of velocity as we've 
experienced in the [last] three quarters in a row, including this 
second quarter. S o  on that ground alone, one might think velocity is 
going to drop and money will rise. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I always find it 
difficult to disagree with Steve, particularly after such a lucid 
exposition as the one he has just gone through. I do have to quarrel 
though, Steve, with the conclusion that Larry has already addressed. 
What is the evidence that money will rebound? Last month, you may 
remember, I called attention to the fact that for the five months 
running through February the Bluebook forecast has proven to be 
considerably over the mark month by month for both M1 and M2. To add 
a little interest to this debate--of course, it's always easier to be 
a Monday morning quarterback--1 gave my own forecast in qualitative 
terms. And my guess was that given this consistent pattern the March 
figures would probably come in significantly below what you were then 
forecasting. And with apologies for sounding like "I told you so," 
your March forecast for MI was an increase of 5.7 percent and, as you 
know, it came in at .75 percent. I consider that significant. There 
was a better record on M2; the forecast then was 4.9 percent and its 
growth now is said to have been 3 . 6  percent in March. 

To try to get my arms around what seems to be the problem, I 
had my staff prepare a memorandum, which I have handed out here, and I 
would like to take just a minute, Mr. Chairman, to run through a few 
of the highlights. There has been this pattern now for six months in 
a row, October through March, of a significant overforecasting of 
money growth month by month. That is shown on table 1 by months for 
M2 and M1; those [variances] are in percentage points. The average 
overforecast for M1 for those six months was 5.1 percentage points and 
the average overforecast for M2 was 2 . 8  percentage points, as shown in 
table 1. Chart 1, which is on the next page, is rather revealing. 
These monthly errors are just bound to be big. If anybody asked me if 
I could do better than Steve, I'd say "no I couldn't.'' This is a darn 
difficult job. Usually what happens, though, is that large errors in 
any given month will be offset by errors in the opposite direction in 
the next month. AS shown on Chart 1, about half of the time or in a 
good part of 1975 and 1976 that is what in fact happened. But when we 
got near a trough in interest rates in the latter part of 1976 and 



4/17/79 -9 -  

into 1977, the errors were all on one side. The staff was 
underforecasting money, as shown by the black areas below the zero 
line. We got into a period of rising interest rates in 1978 and the 
errors shown in the black shaded part were pretty much random. From 
late 1978 moving into 1979 the errors have again been systematic; they 
seem to occur at or near troughs or peaks in interest rates. 

Therefore, Steve, I must say to you again, as I did last 
month, that [I question1 the forecast in the April Bluebook, which 
shows M1 growth coming in at 6.75 percent-this is assuming 
alternative B and an unchanged funds rate--in May after 3.3 percent 
[in April], for an average of the two months of 5.5 percent. I 
suspect that's going to be several points too high when we get the 
actual numbers. I'd say ditto on M2, where the Bluebook shows M2 
growth in April at an estimated 7.5 percent rate and in May at a 
projected 5.2 percent, for a two-month average of 6 . 3 5  percent. I 
think that's going to be several points too high. Now, if that's what 
the Committee wants to do, if that's the outcome we're looking for, 
fine. But we shouldn't walk into it accidentally. I'm beginning in 
my own mind to make some mental adjustments in deflating these current 
[Bluebook] figures until I see evidence that money is in fact 
rebounding at current interest rate levels. I'm afraid the evidence 
in the last six months gives me little comfort on that [score], Steve, 
and therefore I suspect that we may be unintentionally, as it were, 
leaning too hard and getting aggregate growth that in retrospect may 
prove to have been our undoing. My fear of this risk is compounded by 
the fact that, contrary to the Board's staff, we expect at least a 
mild recession beginning in the second half of this year. Without 
throwing in any detail, I expect it will probably be the classic 
inventory-type recession, hopefully short and mild. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think we have "Balles rule number one" 
now: That near troughs and peaks forecasts of money are wrong in the 
wrong direction. 

MR. BALLES. Well, in short, Mr. Chairman, those are my 
misgivings. And I say that with apologies to the staff because I know 
this forecasting is a tough job.  But when we detect systematic errors 
that run on as long as these have, I for one feel that we've got to 
make some mental adjustments. This to me says that it would certainly 
be a mistake to tighten right now by raising the federal funds rate. 
I think we can overdo that restraint and actually bring about a 
recession, or exacerbate one that may be in the works in any event. 
I'm very leery about overdoing it on the monetary policy side. I 
think there are limits--and we've spoken of this from time to time, 
Mr. Chairman--about how much can be accomplished by monetary 
restraint. Therefore, without getting into details on the 
specifications for the current period, I have a very strong bias 
against tightening and possibly will make a case for a bit of easing. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John, thank you for those inputs. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I just want to comment on what John said. 
I have some sympathy with that, John. The fact is that I might admit 
that [what you talked about] used to be one of my inside devices for 
forecasting if we had extended misses in the staff projections. 
Incidentally, Steve doesn't really do those. In his position I used 
to find that if the extended misses were in one direction, it was an 



4/11/79 -10- 

indication of a change. But what one has to examine is the reason for 
that. Is it that the staff is assuming there will not be a 
substantial change in the relationship between activity and money 
growth? The issue right now, I think, is whether there has been a 
change in the relationship that is not indicative of the future but 
indicative of a change in the demand function. So when you point out 
that the staff has misforecast over the last six months, all you’re 
pointing out is that there has been some kind of change in the 
relationship, which the staff increasingly has come to believe is a 
change in the demand function. S o  it doesn’t really answer--in case 
this has happened and I’m inclined to think it has happened to a 
degree at least--the aggregate [unintelligible]. You would have to be 
a strict monetarist to believe that there can‘t be a change in the 
demand function of money and, therefore, [that money] must be a 
forecast of the future. 

MR. BALLES. Well, I think your point is well taken, Chuck. 
I’m not a strict monetarist and I’m not a strict Keynesian either. I 
don’t know what that makes me--a non-monetarist and a non-Keynesian. 
Eclectic is one word. I used that word recently to a friend and he 
said: Did you say epileptic? In any event, there is a plausible 
case, and the staff has made it well, for a change in the demand for 
money. I am still somewhat skeptical that the whole outcome has in 
fact been because there’s been a change in the demand for money. 
That‘s because we looked pretty closely this past month at what has 
been going on in money market mutual funds--which have been rapidly 
accelerating--and at RPs, which have been practically flat for some 
months now. And the two of them together have not been accelerating. 
[But that‘s what1 they’d have to do, I would think, to explain the 
very sluggish growth in M1 and M2. I have a hunch that we may have 
seen both the combination of some downward shift in the demand for 
money and also, because we have been on a federal funds target--for 
pretty good reasons starting November 1, given the international 
crisis--the shrinking effect of that on bank reserves. [ S o  I think] 
the very sluggish growth in bank reserves, or in some ways even the 
negative growth quite recently, also explains some of the outcome. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We’ll have Henry Wallich’s question and 
then start the go-around and see where we really come out. 

MR. WALLICH. I wanted to ask Steve what his reasons were for 
placing much confidence on the existing relationship. 
there is at least a possibility that that relationship has changed. 
It has changed, I think, for two years running and has led us to an 
overprediction of $30 billion in that time, if I remember. People are 
now looking at what they consider to be inflation of 10 to 12 percent 
and that is a tremendous incentive to hold down not only Ml balances 
but also lower-yielding savings and time deposit balances. I really 
think that under these conditions we have to assume that there is a 
change in the relationship and, therefore, I don’t see much basis for 
predicting a rebound. I think this shift can go on at a substantial 
rate f o r  a long time. If I were to look at any monetary aggregate 
now, it would be more nearly bank credit plus commercial paper plus 
finance company lending. In any event I am aware that the monetarists 
are divided now, with some taking the point of view that the 
aggregates are moving too slowly and others arguing that the 
relationship has changed. I‘m trying to ask Steve: What is the 
reason for thinking we’ll get back on track with the relationship? 

As Chuck said, 



4/11/19 -1l- 

MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Wallich, I really don't know and 
I don't think anyone knows when exactly we'll get back on the 
relationship. AS YOU said, in the early stages of this expansion 
beginning around the end of ' 7 4  it took us 2-1/2 years to so-called 
"get back on the relationship." We have always assumed that this 
demand shift is not going to last as long because so much [of it] had 
occurred earlier and there is just that much less cash to use up. It 
was because of the uncertainty about the aggregates, as you point out, 
that I tried to stress as much as I did the kind of analysis one would 
go through in assessing the restrictiveness or non-restrictiveness of 
the present level of market rates. In that way I think one gets down 
to what is going to be a very judgmental factor, and that is assessing 
what really is the expected real return on capital. That is, if 
inflation expectations are accelerating, that could be offset by 
declining expectations in the real return of capital. One just 
expects to make less profit on any given investment. And that would 
tend, in so far as [assessing] restrictiveness, to offset the impact 
of accelerating inflation. S o  I really do believe under present 
circumstances that that kind of judgment is critical to policy, more 
so than a judgment--if I may put it this way without meaning it 
prejudicially--about a mechanical application of rules with regard to 
the aggregates. That's the more critical judgment now; it's 
essentially a judgment about the future economic outlook. 

MR. WALLICH. I agree. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I think it 
might be appropriate now to start on item six [on our agenda], which 
is a Committee discussion of the economic situation and policy 
implications. What we've been doing recently is asking for you 
briefly to give your views on the economy, if they involve any 
significant differences from the staff projection, and the monetary 
policy implications this might have in general terms. After our break 
then we'll come back and look at the details and the specifications 
that might go into a directive. Murray Altmann has straightened me 
out finally on my random walk theory and, based on his straightening 
me out, I think we will start with Larry today and come around 
clockwise from there. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I think we're in an almost no-win 
situation today. We're in a posture that was of our own making, in 
that we're reaping what we sowed 2 or 3 years ago by refusing to face 
up to the fact that by stabilizing interest rates we were permitting 
the aggregates to grow much too quickly. I think concerning ourselves 
with the subject of demand shifts is somewhat of an exercise in 
futility because I don't think we, in our monetary policy function, 
can control shifts in demand. We're not able to do that. I think the 
problem is on the supply side. Whereas the aggregates have grown 
excessively for nearly three years, we're in serious danger of 
repeating mistakes we've made in the past--and this is at least a near 
monetarist speaking. For us to jam on the brakes to permit the growth 
of the aggregates to drop as abruptly as they have and to continue to 
tolerate that is almost certainly an assurance of a recessionary 
result. I would just like to emphasize again that at no time did any 
monetarist ever suggest that there should be an abrupt pulling down of 
the rate of money growth from a high level to a low level. That is 
what is happening. I think our main decision today has to be whether 
we are going to expand the growth of money temporarily in order to 



4 / 1 7 / 7 9  -12- 

ease at least the extent of the recession or whether we are going to 
knowingly--and if we do it knowingly, we have to accept part of the 
responsibility--permit monetary growth to continue to be quite low 
and, at least as we see it, assure the advent of a recession. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. Bones 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, [after] listening to our own 
directors on Friday and [based on1 our own testing of the activity and 
the sentiment in our District during recent days, we are more nearly 
attuned to the [analysis] by the staff this morning than we've been in 
some time. We recognize the enormous uncertainties about prices, the 
aggregates, and business growth, and I find it almost useless to 
belabor this since we are very close to the staff's [projections] this 
morning. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Jim. 

M R .  SMOOT. Yesterday in meeting with my own staff on this, I 
think I suffered an information overload. One of the alternatives 
that was presented to me was called "the pure ignorance theory" That 
is, we don't know how the economy got here and we don't know where 
it's going. And I must say that I felt embarrassingly comfortable 
with that view. Nevertheless-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That is the most honest comment we've had 
today ! 

MR. SMOOT. Nevertheless, I have to agree with Bones in that 
we can find no major area of disagreement with anything the staff has 
said at this point; we have minor points of difference, but nothing 
dramatic. If one can abstract from this horrible inflation problem, 
things don't appear to be out of kilter. [The economic expansion is] 
slowing down-I think the way we would like--and, therefore, in 
general terms our view would be to stay roughly where we are. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Willis. 

MR. WINN. I hate to see such unanimity over there. I don't 
want to be a counterforce today. The inflation situation is still 
very bad. It seems to me that any easing would be misinterpreted and 
could only be counterproductive. On the [plus] side, it seems to me 
that the transfer mechanisms really are at work, both from the budget 
side and the food side. [As for] the oil side, we really don't know 
what that means. I have a feeling that our policies are really 
starting to work; they've been slow to take hold, but [monetary 
policy] is not a quick fix. And to be impatient at this stage would 
be a mistake. So I end up right in the middle--[no change]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Fantastic. I've never seen this happen at 
these FOMC meetings before! Bob, you must have some different view. 

MR. BLACK. There has to be one in every group! I have more 
doubts than usual about the staff's forecast, which is really one of 
stagflation for eight or so quarters. I don't deny that there's a 
possibility that can happen, but to me the weight of past evidence 
suggests that we're more likely to get cumulative effects and slip 
into a recession [than to achieve] the kind of soft landing that the 



4/17/79 -13- 

staff is projecting. My own feeling is that we’re probably near the 
end of the current expansion and fairly close to a turning point. 
Inflation has [contributed to1 a pretty severe attrition, I think, of 
real incomes and wealth positions. We see some convincing signs of 
this in the behavior of consumer and residential outlays. Some people 
take comfort in the strength that appears to be developing in the 
investment sector of business, but that is a lagging indicator and I 
don’t think we can take much comfort in that. I’m more impressed with 
the scattered signs that are reported throughout the Redbook of 
lengthening delivery times, of some anticipatory inventory building, 
and a strong current preference of businesses for short-term versus 
long-term debt. When one talks to those in the business community 
there is an unusual unanimity in their views. They all seem to say 
that things are very good now, but they are scared as the devil about 
the future. I suppose that translates, Steve, into a belief that the 
real rate of return on capital is probably dropping. 

So, I think we’ve arrived at the point in policy where we 
have to be seriously concerned about the steepness of the deceleration 
that is taking place in the rate of growth in the aggregates. Some 
slowing of the excessive growth that we experienced in 1976, 1977, and 
a good part of 1978 was clearly needed in an effort to have an 
effective anti-inflationary policy. I hoped we could bring the rate 
of expansion down, but at a more gradual rate of perhaps 1 to 1-1/2 
percentage points a year. I thought it was the best way in which to 
wring inflation out of the economy and I still think so. But the 
deceleration that we’ve experienced since September has not been 
gradual. Even after allowing for ATS, NOWs, and a likely downward 
shift in the demand for money, in my view this has been an overly 
steep decline. If this is allowed to continue, I think we risk 
aggravating any recession that may be impending. If my feeling that a 
recession is close at hand has any merit at all, then at this stage I 
think we have to face up to the question of whether we want to risk 
adding to its severity by reacting to the recent inflationary figures. 
I have doubts about [the wisdom of taking that risk] for two reasons. 
In the first place, I think we probably will see some abatement in 
inflation as a result of the past slowing in the aggregates. 
Secondly, I’m not at all convinced that a severe recession would add 
significantly more to the reduction of inflation than a mild 
recession. And as a matter of political reality, if the recession is 
more serious than it otherwise might be, I think the political system 
is such that we’re likely to have the kind of fiscal policy fallout 
that will aggravate inflation rather than help. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Bob. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I would like to draw the attention of the 
Committee to the change in our perception of what has been going on 
out there. Three or four months ago we were looking at a projection 
for the first quarter--I‘m not criticizing staff, my own perceptions 
have changed markedly as we’ve gotten more data--of a rate of growth 
in GNP of 3 percent. It’s now under 1.3 percent. We were expecting 
to have 3 percent growth in consumption. It‘s now negative; purchases 
of goods actually turned down. A whole range of estimates have come 
in considerably lower than we thought they were going to. The only 
indicator that seems to be up in real terms is employment. And I 
would point out to you that employment is not a leading indicator; it 



4/17/19 -14- 

generally [comes] in fairly strong around the final point of a 
cyclical expansion. 

A l s o ,  two major reasons that we have used in the past to 
increase restrictiveness were an excessively rapid growth of the money 
supply and the need to maintain the international value of the dollar. 
Now both of those reasons have apparently disappeared. In fact, both 
of those would almost suggest that we should ease monetary policy at 
the present time. However, I also feel that anything we do at this 
point would be mainly psychological. It will have its impact six to 
nine months down the road and [at this point it] will primarily be for 
show rather than for any real impact. Finally, I‘m quite concerned 
that if we tighten, within two months we will have to turn around and 
undo it. In my view the economy is slowing down and it would be a 
mistake to tighten credit further. However, given the rate of 
inflation, I think it also would be a mistake to loosen at the present 
time. So I would come out for maintaining the present policy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the picture is mixed. It seemed 
to me possible that we could have one final surge of activity and I’ve 
been quite worried over the last six weeks or so that that might be 
developing in the business sector in business equipment and in 
inventories. Whether right or not, I‘ve become rather more calm about 
inventories in the last couple of weeks. For one, the February 
numbers were better; retail inventories were down. For another, there 
do seem to be some explanations--Jim cited quite a list--for the 
inventory accumulation. The Teamster’s strike, the possibility of a 
rubber strike, the automobile situation, and so forth may have 
accounted for the unusual inventory accumulation that was reflected in 
the Redbook and for the raw materials price figures in the first part 
of this year. So I‘m prepared broadly to accept the staff’s forecast 
except that I, of course, think that the economy is going to weaken 
further and we’ll have a recession toward the end of this year and 
[into] early next year. But let me say that for the time being the 
staff’s forecast looks reasonable to me. 

Another problem that we’re all struggling with is the 
aggregates and how to interpret them. It seems to me that it has 
almost reached the point where it may just be a matter of one’s 
predilection. Some people say we ought to tighten regardless of the 
aggregates because they’re no good anymore and other people say the 
aggregates are just as potent as they used to be and are terribly 
important. Trying to sort through all this, I’ve been looking at the 
various credit numbers. Bank credit, which had shown some strength, 
seems to have been weakening as the quarter progressed as have other 
credit numbers. M5, for example, has been weakening steadily. But 
that measure doesn’t include RPs and money market funds and things 
like that. One of the difficulties we have at this time when interest 
rates are very high--we’ve had it before--is that there’s a good deal 
of grossing up in credit flows. And it’s easy to double count credit 
flows. For example, if a money market mutual fund expands rapidly in 
size and buys bank CDS, you can’t count both the bank CDs in the bank 
sector and the money market mutual fund on the other side because 
that‘s double counting. That’s not really demand for credit or a 
credit flow. If a savings and loan or a mutual savings bank issues a 
money market certificate and buys a bank CD, the same is true. There 



4 / 1 7 / 7 9  -15- 

is excessive grossing, which doesn't really have anything to do with 
the economy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They're netted out in M 7  aren't they, 
Chuck? 

MR. PARTEE. They are, but we don't really [track that]. 
I've found, for example, that our Bluebook doesn't have M I .  But they 
are netted out in another way. That is, the f l o w  of funds accounts 
have a line for funds raised by nonfinancial sectors. That is like 
final demand in the GNP, if you will. In looking at that and relating 
it to GNP, I think I have found something of significance for the 
Committee to focus on. That number has been quite high over the last 
six quarters. It was lower in the earlier part of the recovery and 
expanded sharply in the last half of ' 7 7  and the first three quarters 
of ' 78 .  Going through those five quarters, for example, the numbers 
were 2 0 . 4 ,  1 8 . 7 ,  1 8 . 8 ,  1 8 . 3 ,  and 19.1 percent. The average is a high 
number; it's distinctly higher than it had been before. In the fourth 
quarter of ' 7 8  funds raised as a percentage of GNP dropped from 1 9 . 1  
to 1 7 . 6  percent. And in the first quarter of this year the estimate 
of our flow of funds people is that it dropped further to 1 4 . 2  
percent. That's a rather marked drop--almost 5 percentage points in 
two quarters--carrying it well below where it was earlier in the 
recovery phase. And I think it is indicative of the fact that for 
some reason the demand for credit isn't there. It may be [because of1 
interest rates, it may be nonprice terms, or it may be as Steve 
suggested that the expected rate of return on capital is dropping. 
But fo r  some reason [that demand] isn't there. And I think it does 
indicate in a very real sense that in the financial sector of the 
economy a fading is occurring that is consistent with very slow growth 
if not a downturn in the economy shortly. And I believe we ought to 
keep that very much in mind as we talk about making these [decisions] 
that affect the demand for credit and make credit even more 
restrictive or less restrictive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a couple of observations. 
I sit here listening to all this about the aggregates and it seems to 
me that the only reasonable conclusion is not to put much weight on 
the aggregates. We see relationships that go way out of the range of 
historical experience. We haven't any idea of the validity of the 
forecast [for the monetary aggregates], I'm afraid, and the 
combination of those two events does not make me want to linger over 
the aggregates. When I look at the outlook for real GNP, it does seem 
to me that the staff forecast of six quarters of approximately 1 
percent growth in GNP per quarter is inherently improbable. I don't 
think that has ever happened. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Plus or minus 3 percent 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely the difficulty. 
The reason they have come up with this forecast is that one doesn't 
know whether the 3 percent error will in fact be plus or minus. I 
must say in talking about projection errors that I am much more 
concerned about the persistent errors in the projections of the 
inflation rate than I am about the recent errors in the projections of 
the monetary aggregates. The inflation projections have been 



4/17/79 -16- 

consistently on the low side. And I‘m not just talking about the 
staff’s projections; I think that has been true of most forecasters. 
And [inflation] clearly remains our problem. In any longer-range or 
indeed shorter-range perspective, the inflationary momentum has been 
increasing. In terms of economic stability in the future that is what 
is likely to give us the most problems and create the biggest 
recession. And the difficulty in getting out of a recession, if we 
succeed, is that it conveys an impression that we are not dealing with 
inflation. I’m afraid that is the impression that we are conveying. 
We talk about gradually decelerating the rate of inflation over a 
series of years. In fact, it has been accelerating over a series of 
years and hasn‘t yet shown any signs of reversing. I devoutly hope 
that it will in the second half of this year, but I think the staff is 
probably being too optimistic on what it will show in the normal 
course of events. I think the economy is essentially at full capacity 
and there is a real chance that the concern about a recession will be 
justified. But I also think there‘s some possibility we will have 
more of a boom for a longer period of time than we hope. I think it‘s 
clear that real interest rates are falling and the rate of inflation 
is up. 

MR. PARTEE. It depends on the expected rate of inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. My observation would 
be that the expected rate of inflation has increased somewhat in the 
last six months and the nominal rate of interest has not. Therefore, 
the real rate of interest has declined. I don’t see any reason why 
the profitability of investment under present conditions would be 
declining in Mr. Axilrod’s terms, so I think policy has probably 
gotten somewhat easier. We may be one month closer to a recession 
than we were last month and I think we are late [in tightening], but I 
still am of the view that some greater degree of restriction would be 
more appropriate than the reverse [and] more appropriate than standing 
still. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I think we are in a very difficult situation. 
The real sector points down. Inflation points up. And the question 
is whether we can do anything about the downturn of the real sector 
without aggravating the inflation. I think the answer is no. It is 
very probable that a slowdown is ahead after four years of cyclical 
expansion. It would be really astonishing if we didn‘t get a cyclical 
peak after such a long expansion. The circumstances we observe are 
not those we’ve seen at other peaks. Unemployment is still relatively 
high. Capacity utilization isn‘t all that high. But the economy has 
changed. Six percent [unemployment] is now what 4 or 4-1/2 percent 
used to be, and 84 or 85 percent capacity utilization is probably what 
87 or 88 used to be after all the obsolescence in the capital stock 
that changing price relationships must have caused. S o  I think we 
have all the makings of a cyclical peak; we don’t know whether we will 
descend into a recession or just a slowdown. I see no similarity, 
however, to 1974. There’s no comparable buildup and there’s no 
financial crunch. Meanwhile, inflation and inflation expectations are 
clearly mounting. I think something like 1/2 percent per month or 
every two months is being built into expectations. If I believe Art 
Okun, every 1 percentage point in the inflation rate costs $200 
billion to remove by orthodox means, and I don‘t know of any other 



4/17/79 -17- 

good means. I think that's greatly exaggerated, but I'd like to alert 
you to the very high cost, in terms of an inflation correction, we're 
incurring if all we're doing now is postponing that slightly. It is 
in any event probably inevitable. Actually, I think the choice we 
have is between a mild turndown now, in the second half of 1979, or a 
more severe one later after having suffered some more inflation. I 
don't think the choices are an obvious or foregone conclusion. 

As far as the aggregates are concerned, I don't need the 
aggregates at this time to tell me that the economy may be heading for 
a slowdown. I think the aggregates have become very weak because of 
what seems to be a shift in demand. I see that as plausible because 
the equations by which we're guided don't really encompass 
expectations of inflation of the kind that we now see, where 
expectations have moved from the 8 to 10 percent range to the 10 to 12 
percent range. I think Paul is right that real interest rates have 
declined. In fact, they're probably no longer positive. And in a 
situation like the present, the only halfway plausible guide is to aim 
at positive real interest rates. I'm not even talking about after 
taxes because after tax real interest rates are very demonstrably 
negative except for nontaxable holders. So looking at this 
combination of a possibility of a downturn, or even of recession, and 
almost certainty continued inflation at an accelerating rate if we 
don't act, I come out for some tightening of monetary policy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I see no reason to prolong what 
you've heard from Paul Volcker and Henry Wallich. I agree with their 
positions. I would point out to the Committee that we've had several 
months now of status quo and in that several months we've had at least 
a 3 percentage point increase in the inflation rate. And I can see 
some more if we don't act. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Jim. 

MR. MCINTOSH. Mr. Chairman, if one were to array the 8 or 10 
most prominent forecasts, including the Greenbook forecast, clearly 
the Greenbook forecast with its rather heroic estimates of plus 1 
percent real growth in six quarters would come up on the optimistic 
end of the array. Our own view is that we are heading toward a 
recession later this year, and that view is shared by most other 
forecasts. We don't see the case for tightening at this time, 
particularly since it doesn't buy us anything on the price front in 
1979--and perhaps much of 1980--because of the lags. We think the 
choice is between easing or staying pat. Historically the Federal 
Reserve has had a tendency to overstay its policy at peaks and 
troughs, and itrs our fear that we're about to repeat that 
performance. Therefore, we would argue in favor of a modest move in 
the direction of ease at this time in the interest of moderating the 
impact of the recession that we're [expecting]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I have no particular quarrel 
with the staff forecast. It's interesting, however, that the 
discussion--with just a couple of exceptions--tends to suggest that 
the risk is on the down side rather than the up side. It seems to me 



4/11/79 -18- 

that the evidence is probably increasing that we have a fair amount of 
risk on the up side, at least for a temporary period here. Business 
conditions are very strong in the Southwest and labor markets are very 
tight. Even in that tight labor market there is heavy recruiting 
going on from rather distant areas. The only rationality I can see in 
that is that these out-of-area recruiters feel there’s a significant 
element in that labor market that is familiar with the jobs in 
aircraft factories because certainly they shouldn‘t be attempting to 
pull people out of our market on the grounds of any significant amount 
of unemployment. 

We’re unable to see any indications of tightness in credit, 
with the exception of housing. And in that particular market the 
tightness in credit is a function of legal ceilings on interest rates. 
In fact it appears increasingly that what we‘re seeing in the monetary 
aggregates is the old [pattern] we saw under price ceilings on 
commodities in WWII. We found the price ceiling on the commodity 
disappears when there are alternative uses for the resources that will 
bring higher returns. And we’ve seen [such] alternatives develop with 
closer and closer characteristics of money. S o  if we keep the price 
ceiling on, it seems possible to me that M1 as we describe it at the 
present time is going to disappear. 

Foreign investments continue to come into our area in 
significant volume. A natural disaster struck recently, which 
physically removed one bank. Other bank buildings in the area were 
not seriously damaged. But all the banks are operating. It is 
resulting in a substantial demand for currency. It did reveal, 
however, that a few people in the population still use the mattress. 
Reportedly one party brought in some $5,000 of $50 and $100 bills and 
said that he had decided the bank was a safer place than the mattress. 

MR. PARTEE. Because of the tornado, that’s true. 

MR. ROOS. Was that a nonmember bank? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. A national bank. I assume that it could be 
characterized as an involuntary member. Well, we immediately sent 
people to the area [affected by the tornado] to indicate that we were 
prepared to do what we could to assist. They reported that there were 
long lines of people drawing currency from the banks. One question I 
asked them was whether there were any indications that it was a run 
type of situation or simply a matter that in the circumstances people 
needed currency to continue doing whatever they were trying to do. 
And the report was that it was mixed. People had some questions as to 
whether the bank that was severely damaged--as I say, the above ground 
portion just disappeared--would survive. But other banks in town were 
accepting checks on that bank and I think that helped to reestablish 
confidence. 

Coming to policy, the recitations by Mr. Volcker and Mr. 
Wallich, with which Mr. Coldwell concurred, captured my feeling of the 
present situation more closely than other commentary. I think we 
should at a minimum stand with present interest rates, but indications 
are that those rates are dropping behind other developments in the 
economy and, therefore, probably should be nudged up some. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. John 



4/11/19 -19- 

MR. BALLES. Just to add briefly, Mr. Chairman, to what I 
said before, we should not have a dilemma, especially for those of us 
who expect a downturn, hopefully mild, sometime this year and going 
into early 1980. Intuitively, one is tempted, of course, to tamp a 
bit harder on the credit brakes because of the recent news on 
inflation. Having taken a good hard look at what we might get out of 
that, I doubt if an increase in the funds rate would really give us 
any quick fix. Certainly it wouldn’t do anything that I can see in 
the foreseeable future to affect the things that have been especially 
important in [causing] the recent increase in prices--namely what has 
been going on in food and in oil. And if we did increase the funds 
rate at the moment, given the lag that I think exists between such an 
action and [when] it flows through to the real world, it would be some 
time in 1980 before that would have much of an impact. Secondly, any 
move toward a further slowdown in money--looking at the other side 
now--I‘m afraid would simply exacerbate the recession that we probably 
are going to see in any event. The flattening out of retail sales for 
the past three months in my opinion suggests, as was said earlier 
around this table, that much of the growth in real GNP in the first 
quarter, modest as it was, was in the form of inventory accumulation. 
And while inventories don’t appear to be out of line now, that 
picture, as I‘ve discovered to my sorrow many times before, can change 
very quickly if final sales remain weak. The recent slowdown in 
personal income growth and the heavy debt position of consumers 
suggest to me that we can‘t look to the consumer sector for any real 
strength over the balance of this year. The trend toward austerity-- 
if that’s the right word for it--or less expansion in federal, state, 
and local government spending doesn’t indicate that sector as a great 
source of strength in the year ahead. Although capital spending is 
now a source of strength, in my opinion it’s simply too small and too 
volatile to support any broad-based increase in final sales. And I 
expect before this year is over [such capital spending will] be 
swamped by inventories going the other way. 

So given the outlook on the real side, to tighten monetary 
policy further now would, I fear, seriously risk the repetition of 
1974. In my view the Fed held interest rates too high, too long, and 
certainly exacerbated that recession. Finally, I would add that the 
case for tightening to support the dollar is much weaker now than it 
was several months ago in view of what we heard earlier in the report 
from the Desk. There was good reason starting last November to adopt 
the [policy] that we did and I have no regrets about it. Now that the 
dollar is strong, I think there is more freedom to consider what we 
ought to be doing in view of the domestic outlook. So where I come 
out is strongly against any tightening and with some leaning toward a 
little easing. That’s because of my personal view, as I said to 
Steve, that his estimates of monetary growth will be too high on both 
MI and M2 for the April-May period. That‘s too much restraint for me 
and I think it’s going to make the recession somewhat worse. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When economic theory 
and data appear to be in such disarray, it seems to me that we ought 
to introduce real factors. AS exhibit A I would like to show the 
Committee the last shoe I was able to purchase, which cost me $559. 
It was made in Nebraska, which is someone else’s District, I‘m happy 
to say. But it’s a clear demonstration of the fact that inflation is 



4/11/19 -20 -  

a real problem and that when guidelines are imposed, quality just goes 
to pot. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I’m glad to get facts back into this 
[discussion1 ! 

MR. WILLES. I would simply like to say, when I see all these 
arguments about real interest rates coming back to haunt me, that I’m 
beginning to wonder why I did that. Inflation numbers in the first 
half have been very bad; I don‘t think that should surprise any of us. 
They‘ve been a little worse than we expected, I guess, but we did 
expect bad numbers. I think the second half is going to look better. 
Whereas last year I was anxious for strong and aggressive action, this 
year--two operations later--I’m painfully convinced that slow and 
steady as she goes is the appropriate policy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Mark. Bob. 

MR. MAYO. M r .  Chairman, I think the Board staff‘s forecast 
is a very good one though improbable. I agree with Mr. Volcker; it 
never happens that way. But to make it have jiggles is even more 
improbable. S o  let’s keep our balance on the improbability theory. 
Like so many others, I feel that if anything the Board staff’s 
forecast is too high on the real side and too low on the price side, 
unfortunately. But I am not saying that we are going into a 
significant recession. We may get awfully close to zero, though, 
before this calendar year is over. 

In the Midwest, inventories are not excessive at the moment, 
although I grant the point that they can turn around very fast. I 
think the risk is still much greater on the inflation side than on the 
recession side. I am getting sick and tired, though, of hearing 
market analysts and the press blow up the fact that we are having so 
much difficulty at the Federal Reserve interpreting the monetary 
figures and, therefore, we feel we don’t know what we’re doing. It is 
getting ridiculous. As a non-monetarist to start with, I’ve been 
having trouble interpreting the monetary figures for the last ten 
years and I don’t see that this is any worse. Really, I’m serious! 
I think the emphasis on the confusion has done us harm. We have 
tended to feed it and we should stop if we can, simply because our 
ability to be precise on the monetary aggregates--a precision that I 
feel was never [possible]--has been exaggerated. So I’d come out and 
say that we do know what is happening to the aggregates within the 
usual guidelines of our interpretation here. I might even go so far 
as to stick my neck out and say that I think monetary policy has done 
a good job in the last six or nine months in terms of achieving some 
slowing in the aggregates--not as exaggerated a slowing as the 
published figures on M1 show. But given the environment in which we 
had to work I think we have a [good] record. Having said that, I feel 
it would be premature to ease because of a fear of recession. It 
would exacerbate the inflation problem, so I would not like to see us 
ease. Any tightening we do should be no more than 1/8 point or so at 
the most. To change our basic [posture] from alternative B, or from 
where we are right now, would risk a very bad result. I don’t want to 
cut off any strength in the dollar by easing at this point. I don‘t 
think we need to accentuate the strength of the dollar by tightening. 
so at this particular juncture I’m as much in favor of standing pat as 
I’ve ever been. 



4/17/79 -21- 

C H A I R "  MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm at the end of the 
table and perhaps everything has been said. I look forward to these 
meetings. [I was pleased1 particularly this morning to learn that we 
have a new industry in Nebraska and they're apparently very persuasive 
if they can sell that shoe for $559 to Mark Willes! 

As for the Board staff's Greenbook forecast, we agree 
generally with it, with a bit of exception to a couple of areas. ~f 
you look carefully at it, they have a [rebound] in GNP in the second 
quarter which, as far as our staff can tell, does not have any basis 
other than a hope that GNP will increase to a more acceptable level in 
quarter two of 1979. Also, we'd suggest that housing starts and 
consumer spending may not be quite as strong as they're projecting. 
Thus, we would say that their forecast is a bit on the optimistic 
side, but [the difference] is narrow; we feel the economy might be 
just a bit weaker. 

Turning then to the aggregates, everything has been said 
about the aggregates. To be sure, all of them, including bank credit, 
have weakened measurably [even] with all the technical explanation 
that Steve has given. That, taken together with at least our outlook 
for the economy--and I think it would be true of the Board staff's 
outlook--the fact is that the restraint that has been put in place by 
monetary policy in the past is beginning to take effect. Looking 
forward to 1979, the risks certainly are on the down side. A 
recession--hopefully a moderate one--is quite likely sometime late in 
1979 or early 1980. As for inflation, there's no question that it has 
been accelerating over the past months, but largely as a result of 
factors that we cannot control with monetary policy. That is, oil, 
food, and other such price increases will not be affected, at least in 
the short run, by anything we do here today. Thus, I would prefer 
that we stay where we are at the moment. I think a tightening would 
insure a recession. I don't think that's the way out. 

As a result, I'd stay where we are and be prepared to move to 
a bit easier stance if we find that, indeed, the economy in the second 
quarter is coming in somewhat weaker than the staff is forecasting and 
if the aggregates remain weak. I'd give greater emphasis to M2 than 
M1 because M1 does not seem to have much value at the moment. 
[Unintelligible] all of the measures are weak [andl so long as M1 
remains weak with the rest, it seems to me we can throw it out and 
probably focus on M2 and bank credit a bit more. And I'd be prepared 
to move to a bit easier stance if the economy does indeed continue to 
be weak. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Roger, and thank you 
all. Those were very interesting inputs. I would suggest that we 
take a 15 minute break and reconvene. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. While we're waiting, I'll merely say that 
my impression prior to joining this Committee was that it was just a 
social gathering of folks who enjoyed getting together once a month. 
But this meeting almost makes me believe that you've earned your pay-- 
excessive though it may be! I'm talking of the Governors, of course! 



4/17/19 -22- 

I think we're all back; Jim will be here in a moment I guess. 
Let me make two observations. We've done a fast computer plot on your 
comments and it appears that we have a perfect bell curve. The 
Secretary was predicting to me that we'd have a 5 to 5 vote and for 
the first time in history there would be no new directive. That would 
mean that the Desk could go on doing whatever it is doing now, [even 
though] nobody knows what it is. However, just on the chance that we 
can break the 5 to 5-- 

MR. PARTEE. I wonder what would happen if we didn't have a 
[new] directive. I guess we would continue on the old directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We continue with the old directive. I call 
your attention to page 5 of the Bluebook on which you see the three 
alternatives the staff has laid out. Having looked at that, hold your 
finger there and I call your attention to page 9. If one [starts] 
from the present position of Ml and M2 and plots out the ranges, in 
the case of alternative B the staff didn't update their charts. They 
changed their minds on this after they printed [the chart on page 91 
so, instead of 2-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, alternative B is actually 3 to 
7 percent [in the table on page 51. But that's all right; you get the 
point. 

The new dotted line is an innovation that I thought would be 
helpful. It plots from the last data the trend six months ahead to 
get back to the midpoint--to show us how we're going to get back on 
track. This is known as the "Black amendment." Bob has been pushing 
us to do this--to try to give us a graphic way of glancing at it. So, 
M1 would need to grow at a 6-1/2  percent rate for six months to get 
back to the midpoint [of its long-run range]. Obviously, we can't get 
back on track in one month or two months without being too erratic but 
[this shows howl to trend back. On M 2  the ranges for alternative B 
are 4 - l / 2  to 8-1/2 percent, and it would take a 9 - 1 / 2  percent trend 
[growth] for six months to get us back to the midpoint of the [long- 
run M2] range we established. Page 10 shows the same sort of thing 
for M3; we'd have to have a 9 percent rate [of growth to reach the 
midpoint] and an M3 range consistent with alternative B would be 5 to 
9 percent. Bank credit of 6 to 8 percent is consistent [with 
alternative Bl, and there the midpoint of that 2-month 6 to 8 percent 
range happens to be consistent with getting back [to the middle of our 
long-run range] in six months. 

Let me give you a couple of personal observations. One, I 
hope very much that we can develop a public view of the FOMC that we 
perfom for substance and not for form: That we don't do things 
because they have some announcement value but because they have real 
effects on the economy. [Second,] I hope very much that we can 
establish the view that we're going to take action because it directs 
us toward where we intend to go and not because somebody this week or 
this month has some transitory idea. The more we get the idea 
[across] that we have ranges [and] we're going to get within them--if 
they're wrong we will change them--the more we do ourselves a service. 
That will diffuse the short-range idea that monetary policy can 
somehow affect the concurrent operation of the economy, which in my 
opinion it cannot do. It's false for us to think that it can and it's 
more important that we begin to educate the public that if there is 
monetary action, it will have an effect in subsequent quarters. It 



4/17/79 - 2 3  

should be looked upon as a leading policy direction rather than 
something that’s going to affect today’s activity. 

I’ve been personally somewhat bemused by the use of the media 
to send us a message that there are those who would like us to take 
certain monetary policy actions. There are limits to monetary policy, 
limits to what we can do. There are frustrations in other parts of 
the government where their own policies have been disturbed by events 
that they perhaps cannot control, and that may cause them to look for 
monetary policy to do that which it cannot do. 
prices this month or next month. It cannot change the real activity 
of the economy. Having looked at that and looked at our staff 
projections, I would say that I view these projections as consistent 
with the data I see on the general direction of the economy. The 
staff does not [pretend] that the quarterly figures can be achieved 
precisely. There‘s too much motion in the economy and the economy 
will bounce around from quarter to quarter. But I do believe their 
trend is correct--that is, that the economy is in a slowing mode. 
Whether it will slow into a recession or a low level [of growth], 
we‘ll see. The action we take now will influence that real activity 
six to nine months from now. That’s what we‘re going to be doing 
today. 

It cannot change 

Looking at all of the factors, which you‘ve recited so well, 
if we were really ready to bite the bullet [we could1 say that the 
Federal Reserve knows what affects [economic] growth, we know how to 
measure [the effects of1 our actions, and in our opinion the growth of 
money and credit has been restrained because of our prior action. TO 
say we‘ve done nothing about inflation is to overlook the fact that we 
went to considerable effort for a period of time to restrain the 
growth of money and credit through the actions that we took, which 
have resulted in those aggregates growing more slowly. Now, some of 
you say that’s because of a demand shift. Well, that comes about 
because we got the interest rates to the point where demand would 
shift. [After all], how did it come about? It’s just that we’ve 
gotten [rates] in a range where [demand] would shift; and having 
gotten them there, to say we’re going to ignore it is rather peculiar 
to me because we are the ones who brought it about. We raised 
interest rates 3 ,  4 percentage points. And we are getting the 
restraint in terms of getting people to do something else with their 
money instead of buying things. We are beginning to get the impact, 
as Willis pointed out. So it would be rather peculiar if we should 
then begin, as we have often done historically, to abandon our own 
thinking and be affected by the transitory world around us and take an 
action [as if it would affect the economy] for today instead of the 
action [appropriate] for six or nine months down stream. 

If we were really geared up to do it, we would probably fall 
in line with those who suggest that we begin to [consider easing] in 
order to fulfill our commitment to the public on the levels we expect 
these aggregates to be. If we really believed our own monetary policy 
recommendations, that’s what we would do. We’re not prepared to do 
that because we fear the expectations [effects]--the psychology-- 
because we haven’t yet educated the public to look upon us as doing 
something [now that will have an impact1 in six months. We’ve tended 
to educate them, perhaps for our own egos, to think that what we do 
today [has a] powerful [effect] in the economy. And, therefore, we 
ourselves have made our task somewhat more difficult by giving the 



4/11/79 -24- 

impression that what we are is somehow the bulwark in the fight 
against inflation and we're going to change three price components 
that have been out of control--namely, the cost of food, energy, and 
housing. We're going to lower those by tightening. That makes no 
sense at all. We're going to lower them by bringing the economy down 
to a lower rate of growth and damping demand and letting that work 
itself through the system in the 6, 12, or 18 months that it always 
has taken. We're certainly not going to lower housing costs by 
raising mortgage rates; that's going to change them up. 

So it seems to me that we would do ourselves a great service 
if we would ignore all the static and keep on what I think under all 
the circumstances is the wisest course. And that is to keep a steady 
hand, stay where we are, keep the aggregates under restraint over 
time. I do think that we have not prepared the public for the concept 
of easing at this point. And I think it would be a policy mistake to 
take action now that would exacerbate the economic slowness later; 
that in my opinion would only cause us to [face] a series of other 
transitory pressures to do something else equally as unacceptable. So 
I recommend to you that we follow alternative B and perhaps use a 
money market directive to maintain the funds rate about where it is 
now. With that recitation, perhaps we can go down the list and see 
how you all see it. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Well, if we're expressing preferences for the 
first go-around, Mr. Chairman, I'd have to say I lean toward the specs 
of alternative A as far as M1 and M2 are concerned. I would not make 
the federal funds range as low as is shown under alternative A; I 
would suggest 9-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent. And I would like to see some 
easing within that range from where we've been for most of the past 
two months or so. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, John. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, given my views of the economy and 
how I perceive monetary policy to work, strangely enough, I think all 
these aggregates ranges are really too low. I'd prefer for M1 a range 
of 5 to 9 percent--which would trigger action under a strict monetary 
aggregates directive if the rate came in under 6 percent--and perhaps 
6 to 10 percent for M2, which would trigger action at I percent. I 
emphasize that strict monetary aggregates interpretation because I 
would not move initially. I would sit right where we are until we see 
something happening. If we adopted these specifications, we might 
well see the funds rate move down a little before the next meeting. 
I'm aware of the risks of that, but it does seem to me that the recent 
action proposed on reserve requirements might have at least some 
offsetting effect. Lest some of my more hawkish friends around the 
table think that I'm a late-hatching dove, I would hasten to add that 
if I'm fooled on this and the aggregates begin to grow rapidly, I 
would be just as quick to move the rate up a little, too. But I would 
sit still until we got some evidence. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You'd keep the fed funds where it is. Yes, 
John? 

MR. BALLES. Excuse me, I forgot to add that I would prefer 
the monetary aggregates directive. Excuse me, Bob. 



4/17/79 -25 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob you were finished, weren‘t you? 

MR. BLACK. Yes, I was. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Phil 

MR. COLDWELL. MI. Chairman, the view of the world that you 
portrayed in your initial [comments] just doesn‘t happen to square 
with my view of what monetary policy can do nor with my belief in the 
desirability of public policy [moving] to restrain inflation. So I 
still would advocate that we put additional restraint in this package. 
I’d prefer ranges of 2 to 7 percent for M1 and 3 to 8 percent for M2, 
and a federal funds intermeeting range of 10 to 10-1/2 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And where would you put the funds rate now? 
Leave it where it is? 

MR. COLDWELL. At 10-1/4 percent, the midpoint. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I would much prefer at this 
particular juncture to see [policy] cast in terms of a money market 
directive. I have trouble with these [Bluebook] ranges. I personally 
would not like to see them change, so I’d like roughly 2 to 6 percent 
on M1 and 4 to 8 percent O h  M2. I would very much dislike having the 
fed funds rate drop below 10 percent during this intermeeting period. 
At the same time, I‘m not very anxious to see it move up very much-- 
maybe a shade to 10-1/8 percent with a range of perhaps 10 to 10-1/2. 
I’m not a subscriber to such a narrow range, but in this environment 
it may flow reasonably well. So I‘d go with 10 to 10-l/2 percent with 
probably 10-1/8 at the moment. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, thank you. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I would stick with alternative B. I 
would not object, however, to a tightening of 1/8 point or so, which 
would bring us closer to 10-1/4 percent [on the funds rate]. I think 
that could give a sign of resoluteness without getting us in trouble 
of over-reacting. Again, I would follow it as we go along and to some 
extent see what the market is telling us; I would accept a 10-1/4 
percent rate if the market seemed to be telling us that. Otherwise 
I‘d leave it where it is. I have no particular quarrel with the 
digits on M1 and M2, and I could buy either type of directive. A 
monetary aggregates directive might be a little better this time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, I think we really ought to be 
easing. It’s past time. We’ve already gotten ourselves into 
considerable difficulty with respect to the behavior of the real 
economy. And I agree that there isn’t much we can do to restrain the 
kind of inflation we have now other than to encourage moderate demand 
over the long pull. That’s really the only instrument we have 
available to us to affect prices. The difficulty with easing now is 
that the public perception is wrong. In fact, all these newspaper 
articles and so forth have trapped us, or at least they have trapped 
me. I can’t quite ease in the face of that. Also, I have a modest 



4/11/19 -26 -  

concern yet about the March employment numbers--I'd like to see 
another month's figures--and the possibility of an inventory hump. I 
think the latter is still possible, but less likely than it seemed 
before. 

So for the time being I would favor an unchanged policy but 
in an easing mode, one might say. And for that purpose we might as 
we11 have a money market directive because that certainly is what 
we've had all year. It doesn't make any difference what those 
aggregates have been. We've kept the funds rate unchanged and we 
ought to do it again. And if we are going to do that, it seems to me 
that [our decisions] ought to begin to reflect something of the 
longer-term strategy that you've indicated here--relating to these 
charts that have to do with our Humphrey-Hawkins pledge so to speak. 
I think 3 to I percent is too low for M1 if we intend to move back on 
track at all. I would make that 4 to 8 percent, as I think somebody 
else suggested. Well, there were a number of suggestions along that 
line. And I think we need to raise M2, which is going to miss the 
range even more. In that case, 5 to 9 percent would be a [step] on 
the way to that. That's within the context of the money market 
directive. That doesn't necessarily mean we would move, but we ought 
to try, to the extent that it is at all feasible, to have short-range 
target growth rates that are not inconsistent with moving back into 
the [long-run1 bands that we have specified. Otherwise we ought to 
decide to change the bands and so inform the Congress. So, I would 
raise those two specs a little but with an unchanged funds rate of 
9-314 percent. I'd be happy with a range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/4 percent. 
I don't know why the range needs to go up to 10-1/2 percent; we're not 
going to move there, I hope, in the period to come. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I would counsel that we stay unchanged. My 
[view] is that we should probably be easing. But again I don't think 
we're quite to the point where we should be doing it and [worsen] 
inflation. I think it would be the wrong move. I have no quarrel 
with the specifications of alternative B and I would go for a money 
market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you were very eloquent, Mr. 
Chairman, and I agree with a good deal of what you had to say, but 
overlooked was the fact that inflation has tended to get worse and 
that the economy is very much at capacity and ought to slow down. So 
I find myself very much with Mr. Coldwell in terms of the 
specifications. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I share your views, Mr. Chairman, about what 
monetary policy can do with respect to the real sector; I don't think 
we can do anything that will affect it very much very soon. But 
monetary policy certainly can affect expectations and prices; prices 
can be changed overnight because of inflation expectations and I think 
that's what is happening now. So I think we can do something on 
inflation and we should. I'd go largely with alternative C. For M1 
I'd have a range of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent as in "C." I see no point 



4/17/79 -27- 

in trying to get back on track in six months. Chuck’s thought that we 
should change the track and notify Congress might be one thing we can 
do to favorably influence expectations, because for M1 to grow over 
six months at that‘rate of speed we’d have to have--adding 2-1/2 
percentage points for ATS--it growing at 9 percent for six months. I 
think that would be very inflationary and very alarming to the public. 
Continuing with the specifications, for M2 I’d say 4 to 8 percent. I 
would say 10-1/4 to 10-3/4 percent [for the funds range], go to the 
midpoint of 10-1/2 percent and not go below that without a telephone 
call. If the aggregates are very weak, then we should reexamine. And 
I’d go with a money market conditions directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. A money market directive. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, my preference is for the 
specifications of alternative C except for the funds rate range. I 
would [lower] that down some to, say, 10 to 10-3/4 percent, with the 
idea that we would move during the first week to above 10 percent and 
by the end of the week probably to 10-1/4 percent depending somewhat 
on market developments. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And which way [on the directive]? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. With an aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Alternative C and an aggregates directive. 
Thank you. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt for 
alternative B straight down the line including the funds rate range. 
On the funds rate I‘d remain where we are unless we see the aggregates 
moving outside the lower end of the ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Did you say an aggregates directive? 

MR. GUFFEY. A money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I would opt for alternative A, for 
easing. If that were done, I would urge the Chairman to explain the 
rationale that this is not a permanent softening of our anti-inflation 
emphasis--that we are really doing it temporarily to try to reduce the 
impact of a recession. Sometimes our tendency is not to state our 
reasons publicly. I think we could probably counteract a certain 
amount of the inflationary expectations that this signal might cause. 

Finally, I’d like to compliment you, sir, for your emphasis 
on establishing and announcing longer-range strategies and sticking 
with them, and abandoning our month-to-month fine-tuning over an 1/8 
percentage point on the federal funds rate. That comes like a breath 
of fresh air. It‘s the best news I’ve heard for three years! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, thank you, I think. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. I’m afraid it comes too late, M r .  Chairman, 
since I’m no longer a voting member. But I like both your recitation 
and your specifications and I would go with those. 



4/11/19 - 2 8 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I knew I'd get you someday! Willis. 

MR. WINN. I have no quarrel with alternative B. I just 
wonder, in view of the discussion, if there's some symbolism that 
could be effected without really much change in market conditions, 
such as a 114 point increase in the discount rate. Reserve 
requirements might be expanded on some other items such as on 
Eurodollars and other [components where we know of] problems. I don't 
know whether this is the appropriate time-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Those are certainly things we have to 
consider. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I meant to mention those, too. I 
think that is correct. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Jim. 

MR. MCINTOSH. Mr. Chairman, we certainly agree with your 
comments with respect to adopting a policy that seems to be 
appropriate given the lags in our forecasts. We'd opt for either "A" 
as proposed or for the modification suggested by John Balles. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. Dick. 

MR. SMOOT. I don't know whether it's a fact of whom I'm 
sitting between today but I find myself in amazing agreement with them 
on certain points. We would prefer alternative B. 
quibble about a 118 point increase in the federal funds rate although 
we don't think it's required. As far as [raising] the discount rate, 
that's another possibility we had considered. That might merit some 
consideration if the funds rate rises at all. But fundamentally, 
alternative B is fine. 

We would not 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, thank you all. Let's see what we 
have. Bob did you have a range for the fed funds rate? 

MR. BLACK. I neglected to say it, M r .  Chairman. I had 9-314 
to 10-1/4 percent, but I could leave it unchanged without much 
quarrel, really. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What is it now? 

MR. BLACK. It's 9-314 to 10-112 percent, but I wouldn't want 
to use the top quarter. 

MR. PARTEE. I had the same specs as you did, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have a very mixed bag. Paul, did you 
want a money market or an aggregates directive? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Given] the fact that we've been 
operating with a money market [directive], I presume we would continue 
to do so almost regardless of what we say here today. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We keep saying we're doing something else, 
but we keep going with a money market directive, don't we? 



4/11/19 -29- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that would be appropriate, 
yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, it’s going to be hard to make 
anything out of this. Five have the bottom of the fed funds range at 
9-3/4 percent--1 told you it would be five to five--and one has it at 
9-1/2 percent. John, you said 9-1/2 percent on the bottom side? 

MR. BALLES. Yes sir. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Could we get you up to 9-3/4 percent? Then 
we’ll have six. 

MR. BALLES. Well, I’m a reasonable guy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. On the top side we have three at 10-1/4 
percent and everybody else is at 10-1/2 save Henry, who is at 10-3/4 
percent. Have I misstated anyone’s views? I think Henry is the only 
one at 10-3/4. As modified, John, you’re 9-3/4 to 10-1/4; Bob [Black] 
had the same, 9-3/4 to 10-1/4. Phil and Bones had 10 to 10-1/2. Bob 
Mayo had the “B” range, which is the [current one of] 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent. Chuck had 9-3/4 to 10-1/4; Nancy, 9-3/4 to 10-1/2; Paul, 10 
to 10-1/2; and Henry 10-1/4 to 10-3/4. That would indicate that 
something like 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent might fly. Let’s put that down 
tentatively. There are lots of 10-1/2s on the up side; we’re 
bracketing everybody, you see. We have nobody below [lo-1/2 percent] 
and only one over it. We’re going to have very little room for 
dissent when we‘re through here! 

MR. PARTEE. Henry’s safe! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have one member for easing some and we 
have five for prevailing [conditions]. Now, if John Balles is a 
reasonable man, he’ll stick with prevailing and we’d have six for 
that. 

MR. BALLES. I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, will you say that 
again? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have a range for the fed funds rate and 
now the question is, do we keep the present [rate] or move it up or 
down. You suggested we move down. Five other members of the 
Committee suggested the prevailing rate. And four others suggested 
going up, although Bones did not; he said 10-1/8 percent and that’s 
where we are now, more or less. 

MR. KIMBREL. Right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Where we are is 10 to 10-1/8 percent, so 
you are pretty much for the prevailing-- 

M R .  MAYO. I’m for prevailing also. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we have [a majority for] the 
prevailing rate, obviously. Now for the ranges. For M1, there’s a 
definite split. Let‘s put down 3 to 8 percent. We have two for 3 to 
I ,  one for 4 to 8, one for 5 to 9, and a couple for 2 to 7 percent. 
Help me with my mathematics. It looks as if we need something lower 



4/11/19 -30- 

to catch some who are interested in that possibility and something 
higher to catch others. 

MR. PARTEE. HOW about 3 to 9 percent? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we need two 3 to 8 percent ranges--3 
to 8 on M1 and on M2. That’s the answer! Actually, we need 3 to 
8-1/2 percent on M2. don’t we? Or 4 to 8-1/2 percent. You all 
wouldn’t stick with anything reasonable. You had to have all this 
individuality. 

MR. BLACK. We were reasonable; we just weren’t persuasive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Eight are calling for that directly and one 
is near it. Put down 4 to 8-1/2 percent. There seemed to be a 
majority for a money market directive, which means it’s all an 
exercise anyway. 

MS. TEETERS. Is it 4 to 8-1/2 percent for both M1 and M2? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me see if I can read what I have here. 
This is very hard. Let‘s say a fed funds range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent and maintain the prevailing rate, which now is 10 to 10-1/8 
percent--is that correct, Peter? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. 

MR. BALLES. Would you repeat that midpoint? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The midpoint would be 10 to 10-1/8 percent, 
the prevailing level. The midpoint is slightly off center--asymmetric 
if you want to be technical. The rest is: M1, 3 to 8 percent; M2, 4 
to 8-1/2 percent; and a money market directive. How many of the 
voting members do we have for that? 

MR. PARTEE. An indication? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. An indication only 

MR. ALTMA”. None. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. None. Zero. I knew we weren‘t going to 
get a vote today! I told you we were going to keep [the existing 
directive]. Let‘s go [through] this. How many are happy with the 
9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent [funds range] with the prevailing [funds rate 
initially]? We seemed to have 6 or 7 for that before. I don’t know 
what happened. Because nobody likes the whole thing, I have to know 
what’s wrong with it. That [funds range] seemed to have a majority. 
There were about 6 or 7 people who wanted that. Seven. Okay, that 
takes care of that. 

MR. PARTEE. What about the aggregates? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Obviously, it’s the aggregates that are 
wrong. All right, nobody wanted any of the aggregates [ranges I 
cited]. Let’s go back down the list. John, what do you want for M1 
on a compromise? You didn’t get your 5 to 9 percent the first time 



4/17/79 -31- 

around. You were [not] the only one who went as high as 9, because 
Bob [Black] outdid you--he went to 10 percent. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think I said the 5 to 9 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Oh, we got them mixed up here. 

MR. BLACK. I don’t want him to get the credit! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What I have down here is that John had 5 to 
9 percent. What did you really say before? 

MR. BALLES. I said 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I‘m sorry, I’m talking M2 

MR. BALLES. It was the specs of alternative A on M1 and M2. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You had 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent, right? 

MR. BALLES. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And you don‘t buy 3 to 8 percent. Or do 
you? It‘s a half percentage point each way--very precise tuning. 

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would take the revised specs 
that you indicated of 3 to 8 percent on M1 and 4 to 8-1/2 percent on 
M2. I do it with great reluctance in view of the money market 
directive, however. That‘s my hang-up. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Let’s go down [the list] again. 
Bob, you had much higher ranges: you had 5 to 9 and 6 to 10 percent. 

MR. BLACK. I could come down to 4 to 8 percent on M1. M2 
doesn’t make a lot of difference to me really. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Could you live with 4 to 8-1/2? 

MR. BLACK. Oh yes, I’d like that even better. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That’s the M2 [you proposed]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. 

MR. BLACK. I can live with that part of it, but I-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You need 4 to 8 percent on M1. 

MR. BLACK. If we have a money market directive, I would want 
it that high. If we have an aggregates directive, I could go with 3 
to 8 percent, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right. Phil Coldwell, you had 2 to 7 
and 3 to 8 .  

MR. COLDWELL. Well, what I think is important to look at 
here is the upper part of the M1 range. Seven percent is the peak for 
alternative B, and if we’re going to maintain a steady directive I 



4/17/79 -32- 

think we ought to keep some balance. I lowered [the bottom of the M1 
range] to 2 percent just to give a little balance, hut I’m willing to 
go with a 3 to 7 percent range on M1. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bones, you had 2 to 6 and 4 to 8 .  

MR. KIMBREL. I like the 3 to 7 percent much better and, 
obviously, 4 to 8-1/2 percent is fine, particularly if we’re going to 
have a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bob Mayo, you had 3 to 7 and 4-1/2 
to 8-1/2. 

MR. MAYO. I’m flexible within a 1/2 point on those. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Then you really can be bracketed. 
And you had an aggregates directive. 

MR. MAYO. I had aggregates. But Paul is right: In effect, 
we’re using a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That’s what we’ve been doing, yes. Chuck, 
you had 4 to 8. You don’t like 3 to 8? 

m. PARTEE. Well, I really do believe we ought to have 
something that brackets the path for getting back within the longer- 
run ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And 3 to 8 percent didn’t do that? 

m. PARTEE. No. The 4 to 8 is close--6-1/2 percent is the 
midpoint that is specified on that chart over the six months--so even 
that’s a little short. It really ought to be what Bob suggested, 5 to 
9 percent. But, I, of course-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy, you had-- 

MS. TEETERS. I had 3 to 7 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, 3 to 7 and 4-1/2 to 8-1/2. Paul, YOU 
had the 2 to 7 and 3 to 8 that Phil had specified. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don’t feel very sensitive to these 

I can‘t worry about a half percentage point on either end. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry, you had 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 and 4 to 8 as 

ranges when the figure bounces around plus or minus 5 percentage 
points. 

the ranges. 

MR. WALLICH. I have a hard time because I add 2-1/2 
percentage points to each of these and it gets very high for M1. 
wouldn’t worry me so much. 

M2 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, let’s try it again. Where did 
we come out? Murray, you’re supposed to do the rest! I think we can 
sell 4 to 8-1/2 percent on M2. 

MR. COLDWELL. How about 3 to 7-1/2 percent on Ml? 



4/11/19 ~ 3 3 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. With 3 to 7-1/2. you didn’t pick up Mr. 
Partee, did you? 

MR. PARTEE. No, you certainly didn’t. Of course, you’re not 
looking with us on the money market-- [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, we have to look at the 7 and who wants 
the-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 1’11 go with your aggregates if you 
go with my interest rate. You can go another half percent-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have to resolve this. How do I do it? 
I have to take some votes here on several options. Just on M1, I’m 
going to try 3 to 8, 4 to 8, and 3 to 7. Let’s start with 3 to 7. 
How many of those who vote would buy 3 to 1 percent? One, two, three, 
four, five. I’ll buy it, which makes six. Well, wait a minute; I may 
not. Count five. Who wants 3 to 8 percent? Anybody? 

MR. MAYO. In preference to 3 to 7 ?  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which one of the three--3 to 7, 3 to 8 ,  or 
4 to 8. We’re going to use those three choices for a moment; take 
only one. At 3 to 7 percent, I had five hands up. All right now 3 to 
8 percent. John. 

MR. BALLES. 1‘11 [change] to 3 to 8. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, we’ll change it; we have 4 for 3 
to 7 percent. Right? And 3 to 8 percent suits me. That’s two. 
Okay, let‘s try 4 to 8 percent. That‘s two. That adds up to 8, so 
two people didn’t vote; two people want something different. All you 
folks at 3 to 7 go to 3 to 8, and all you folks at 4 to 8 go to 3 to 
8. Okay? Now, 4 to 8-1/2 percent on M2 seemed all right. [Let’s 
assume for Ml] 3 to 8 percent--that everybody went in the middle. So 
now it’s 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent for the funds range, maintaining the 
present rate of 10 to 10-1/8 percent, with an M1 range of 3 to 8 
percent, an M2 range of 4 to 8-1/2 percent, and a money market 
directive. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Isn’t that right where we started 
Out? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, it’s changed; it‘s absolutely changed. 
How many tentatively [can accept that], without voting [officially]. 
Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John. 

MR. BALLES. No, but for the other reason. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which reason? 

MR. BALLES. The money market directive 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bob? 



4/17/79 -34- 

MR. MAYO. I agree with John, Mr. Chairman 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. Yes sir. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes. 

M S .  TEETERS. Yes. 

MR. WALLICH. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. So it's four and five. What if we change 
it to an aggregates directive? Let's try again with an aggregates 
directive. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. 

MR. BALLES. Yes. 

MR. BLACK. Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL. No. 

MR. KIMBREL. No. 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. PARTEE. Yes 

MS. TEETERS. No. 

M R .  WALLICH. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. There we are again! I suggest we go to the 
next subject and have lunch. I knew we were going to have no 
directive today! Okay. The next agenda item is--. 

I forgot to tell you that I have some information that will 
not be public until this afternoon so you're not to disclose it, but 
the housing starts for February have been revised to 1,384,000, and 
for March the number is 1,793,000. The staff had 2 million in their 
estimate, so the March number is lower than their estimate. The 
permits for March are 1,579,000. Jim, any comment? 

MR. KICHLINE. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No news to you. 

SPEAKER(?). Maybe after that we can reach a consensus. 



4/17/19 -35- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want to vote again? 

MR. PARTEE. What would it take to get two aggregates 
directive people on line for the [money market] directive? 

MR. BLACK. Four is the lower limit for me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What is? Four? 

MR. PARTEE. That's certainly better. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, let's try that one. I knew we'd 
get a compromise here. I threatened to leave it [and stay with the 
existing directive]. 

MR. PARTEE. You're going to try 4 to 8 percent on Ml? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Murray, we're going to take one more stab 
at a vote. Then we're going on to the next topic. We're going to use 
the same fed funds range, which is 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent and 
[initially] we're going to maintain the present fed funds rate of 10 
to 10-1/8 percent; we're going to have M1 at 4 to 8 percent and M2 at 
4 to 8-1/2 percent; and we're going to have a money market directive. 
Okay. Paul, you're just a constant no. 

MR. ALTMA". 
Vice Chairman Volcker No 
President Balles Yes 
President Black Yes 
Governor Coldwell No 
President Kimbrel Yes 
President Mayo Yes 
Governor Partee Yes 
Governor Teeters Yes 
Governor Wallich No 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'll vote yes, so the vote is 7 to 3. It's 
sort of simple! Would any of the dissenters like to change their 
minds? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an April housing starts 
figure for me? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This is the water shed. The fever has 
broken and next month we will have a unanimous vote. Now we will go 
to the next subject, which is consideration of the Manager's 
recommendation with respect to foreign currency operations. Alan 
Holmes . 

MR. HOLMES. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Alan. Quite an 
unwinding job. 
was brought before the Committee previously and that is holding 
balances in foreign currencies. The Committee previously authorized 
the holding of up to $500 million in foreign currencies. But it was 
the desire of the Committee to have the question of whether we should 
hold larger amounts or none at all [studied by the staff]. Developed 

Now we need to have a discussion of the question that 



4/17/19 -36- 

for your consideration was a memorandum submitted jointly by Steve 
Axilrod and Alan Holmes, with supporting memos from the Board‘s 
International Division and from the New York Bank on possible 
recommendations. I might ask Steve and Alan to comment on this and we 
will open it up for discussion. Steve. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I believe the two supporting 
memoranda provide the Committee with the various arguments in some 
depth--with some differing points of view--and I don’t feel it is 
necessary to review those arguments orally. Mr. Holmes and I have 
recommended raising the informal limit on balances to the neighborhood 
of $2 billion for the four reasons that we have outlined [in the 
memo]. One thing I would like to highlight is [something I’ve 
learned1 in the relatively brief time I have been involved in this 
area. It‘s a rather practical approach. And that is, if you are 
going to play in the game, you’ve got to have chips. Playing in the 
game means not only with relation to the rest of the U . S .  government 
but with foreign central banks. So, our holding balances [of foreign 
currencies] would seem to me very crucial in order to have a degree of 
flexibility in dealing with these groups. If the Federal Reserve is 
to have what I think will be a necessary input into the decisions that 
are made in this international game of affecting foreign exchange 
market operations, I believe we need to hold some balances. And I 
would simply stress that view, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you have a question for Steve, before we 
hear from Alan? 

MR. ROOS. No sir, I’ll wait. 

MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, I don’t have very much to add. 
The only thing I would stress is that because we have been in the 
forefront of this activity for a very short period of time we were 
able to buy $2-3/4 billion in foreign currency. Now, that type of 
period may not repeat itself, yet it could. So to give us flexibility 
I would feel much happier if we had more than the $1/2 billion of 
leeway, of which we have already used half at the moment. 
Establishing a limit of $2 billion does not preclude us, in my view, 
from doing what we may eventually want to do, but I feel we have to 
wait for time, experience, and some testing of markets and other 
thinking. I believe the memos are fairly self-explanatory and I have 
nothing more to add. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Fine. Thank you very much, Alan. Now, 
Larry, we will come back to your question or comment. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I‘m concerned about one bit of 
verbiage where reference is made to two possible policies. One says 
u . S .  policy is aimed at countering short-run disorderly market 
conditions. Then there is explicit wording in the Morton-Truman memo 
which says that if U.S. policy is also designed to resist exchange 
market movements that carry the dollar‘s value beyond levels that are 
deemed to be reasonable in either direction, the United States might 
want to be prepared to accumulate substantial holdings. My question 
is this: In terms of the rules of the game that we are playing, are 
we contemplating going beyond just reacting to disorderly conditions 
and actually trying to peg [the value of the dollar]? 



4/17/79 -37- 

MR. HOLMES. I don’t think anyone is suggesting pegging, but 
the whole November program was based on the thought that the dollar 
had gotten out of line, it had gone [down] too far. Now, that is a 
very rough judgment. It’s not pegging. 

MR. ROOS. Whose judgment is that, Alan? 

MR. HOLMES. I think that was a collective judgment of the 
Administration, the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I might mention, Larry, that at Henry‘s 
suggestion the staff prepared some data on a series of currencies, 
looking from 1973 to date at price adjusted exchange rate indices. In 
other words, the weighted average [exchange rates] would be adjusted 
by CPI indices. It might be worth sending this to the members of the 
Committee just for their information. It‘s very helpful. One way to 
look at it is that the difference between inflation rates of two 
countries should be taken into account in terms of where those 
currencies ought to be over a period of time. One could also, in my 
opinion, look at it in relation to the opportunity [costs of] holding 
those currencies in terms of interest rate differentials. That would 
tell you whether the rates were being maintained in relation to [their 
respective] purchasing power. What will you be able to buy at the end 
of the year--or after two years--by holding one currency over 12 
months as compared to holding another currency over that 12-month 
period? None of these ways is perfect, but they are indications. I 
think what Alan and Steve and others are getting at here is that if 
there were a real departure from anything that could be rationalized 
by inflation or interest rate differentials, we might want to say, 
well, there is just total disorder in the market. And we’d have to do 
something as we did on November 1 to get it back in line. We hope 
that doesn’t happen again, but it can happen; basically it happens 
when we have failed to keep up with the situation for too long. 

MR. ROOS. I see. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Next [on my list of people who want to 
comment] is Chuck, then Bones, Phil, and Henry. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, I have real concern about the 
Federal Reserve holding substantial foreign currency balances. I 
don’t think it’s the appropriate thing for us to do. I’ve never liked 
the idea of U.S. institutions in general holding large foreign 
balances. [It means they] aren’t financing their primary activity of 
spending or investment or whatever it is. I think we have a swap 
system that is perfectly adequate; it was developed over time. I 
found the reasoning in both memos very strained as to what the 
advantages would be in terms of being able to operate without the 
blessing of the Bundesbank or whatever. That’s because, in fact, when 
we spend marks--whether we borrow and spend them or we [hold them and] 
just spend them--the Germans are going to have the same liquidity 
problem. We’re going to have the same tolerance of their sentiments 
as we would otherwise. Also, let me mention that we seem to get a 
good deal lower rate of return on these [balances], at least in the 
case of Germany and I guess Switzerland and [Japan]. I was interested 
to see that apparently my concern was shared by the framers of the 
Federal Reserve [Act] because both memos specify that the Federal 



4 / 1 7 / 7 9  - 3 8 -  

Reserve Act says that it is against the law for the Federal Reserve to 
hold foreign currency securities. Then they go on to-- 

MR. HOLMES. Government securities. 

MR. PARTEE. The one [reference] says government securities; 
the other doesn’t. The other says foreign currency securities. Then 
[the memo1 goes on to say that we can get around the law. I don’t 
think that‘s an appropriate thing for the Federal Reserve to do--to 
find a way to get around the law. If we have a need for relatively 
small working balances, that‘s one thing. But if we‘re going to 
develop [a program for1 large amounts of foreign currency holdings, 
that’s another. I also noticed with interest that the memo from 
Messrs. Holmes and Pardee says on page 9 that a good cushion to begin 
with would be two or three days‘ worth of heavy intervention. That 
signals to me an intent here and a very possible threat of building up 
large balances. So I must say I oppose it. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we have some clarification of 
the legal point? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What is the legal point? Paul is asking 
about the legal point of holding foreign currencies. 

MR. HOLMES. We cannot hold foreign government liabilities 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just government, right? 

MR. HOLMES. We can hold private-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My assumption always has been that 
[the authority to hold foreign government securities] was not put in 
the Act originally because in those days there was not much deficit 
financing; there weren’t many foreign government securities. What 
[central banks] held in those days were acceptances, deposits or some 
other form. Am I wrong about that? 

MR. HOLMES. I am not a lawyer but my impression is that the 
Act described what was typically held by a central bank and it has not 
been revised over these many years. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, why the prohibition on foreign government 
securities if it is-- 

MR. HOLMES. There weren’t any. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just wasn’t listed. 

MR. PARTEE. Did they prohibit everything that there wasn‘t 
anything of? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They listed what we could hold. Is that 
what you’re saying? 

MR. HOLMES. That’s right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It’s the absence of a security that didn’t 
exist. It didn’t exist so it’s not on the list. 



4/11/19 -39- 

MR. PARTEE. Oh. so they didn't prohibit it? 

MR. HOLMES. It's not prohibited. It's just not listed as 
one of the assets that we might hold, primarily I think because none 
[existed] at the time the Act was written. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's quite different, I think. There was 
no expressed desire to prohibit. There were just no such securities 
around, so they didn't list them. 

MR. HOLMES. I think it's that simple. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, maybe I'm [approaching] the 
problem from a slightly different angle but I think it may be prudent 
action to acquire some of these [currencies]. My question, though, is 
that I'm not sure I followed Alan when he was suggesting the 
dimensions. The numbers you suggested were $500 million and then $2 
billion. I'm not sure what you're thinking now. 

M R .  HOLMES. As you recall--1 think it was at the February 
meeting--we had been running with an informal limit of $150 million. 
There was nothing formal about that [limit], but it was an informal 
one that we had always respected at the Desk. In February I noted 
that we were making some progress in repaying [our swap debt] and I 
suggested that the Committee might want to consider [acquiring] $500 
million and the Committee [approved that]. Now we're suggesting, 
since we have made such tremendous progress repaying swap debt and 
since there may be opportunities to acquire some more [foreign 
currency balances] in the future--heaven knows if there really will 
be--that $2 billion does not seem an inappropriate amount. I would 
note that at the peak of our swap borrowing we had risks on the other 
side of several times that amount. 

MR. PARTEE. That, of course, was built up when the dollar 
was weak. Now we're going to build up a risk when the dollar is 
strong. 

MR. HOLMES. That's right. We're trying to be a little more 
symmetrical on our asset and liability sides. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't resist the idea of 
building up a small kitty. I do have some resistance to the idea of 
an excessive amount in a single currency. So I think we ought to 
limit the amount in a single currency to a billion dollars, partly to 
limit potential exchange losses and partly to avoid pressures in terms 
of the currency status of some of these countries. Also, we ought to 
limit our holdings to major currencies. I'm certain that the Desk 
isn't going to play in or something like that, but I 
think we ought to have that well understood. I believe we need 
political and Treasury clearance and I assume that that will be done 
before we jump into any major stockpiling. We ought to have a slow 
rate of accumulation, assuming we don't have masses dumped on us, 
Alan. Then finally, I'm a little disturbed about what I hear in terms 
of intervention policy. [Under] the first of November ground rules, 



4/11/79 -40- 

we're going to try to resist further downward movement [in the 
exchange rate of the dollar]. Well, now we have upward movement. 
Theoretically, I guess that first of November policy was established 
by somebody believing the dollar to be undervalued at that time. I 
don't know whether the dollar is valued correctly, overvalued, or 
undervalued now. But it seems to me that we ought to have some sort 
of policy that permits some rate increases along with increases in 
balances. We do not attempt to peg or limit changes in exchange 
rates. Those are my comments, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I believe we should think very carefully 
about what we're doing here; $2 billion is not a large amount and can 
be a perfectly good means of enhancing our operations. It could be 
the first step into a totally different world. If we ever got to a 
very bullish dollar situation, which is not inconceivable, and we 
wanted to restrain the dollar from going up very sharply--not peg it-- 
[because] we would lose our trade competitiveness, we might find 
ourselves authorizing $5 billion a week. And after a few weeks of 
that we might throw in the sponge, as the British did. If that were 
to happen, I don't think we should do that. We still have to think 
about what the reactions of other central banks will be; we don't want 
to promote countries into reserve currency status if they don't want 
that. We don't want to get them in the frame of mind where they throw 
all the burden of intervention on us. We've already attracted to 
ourselves more of the burden of intervention. The New York market has 
increased in scope; I would guess it has become a better market 
because there is a strong supplier of D-mark in it and we will be 
attracting an increasing burden. I'd like to be sure that what we do 
here remains small unless we carefully consider what we should do in 
the other direction. If we do go in the other direction, I hope we 
could find some way of using SDRs and not individual foreign 
currencies. There are technical difficulties but we might overcome 
those. Meanwhile I'd convey to foreign central banks as we accumulate 
[these balances]--provided they agree--that we by no means intend to 
make a total change in our predominant use of the swaps. We don't 
intend first to use the reserves and then the swap lines; and we don't 
want to expose ourselves to their saying that when we've drawn on the 
swap we pay that off out of reserves that we've accumulated rather 
than give us the money outright as we have done sometimes [in the 
past]. These are some of the market strategy considerations that I 
think will come to [unintelligible] and we ought to lay [the ground 
rules] out with foreign central banks very cautiously. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what I have to say is more or 
less along the lines of what Henry was just talking about. Let me 
state it perhaps slightly differently. I don't see this as an issue 
at this point. It may be a nice issue but I assume we're not being 
asked now to go out and acquire a substantial amount of foreign 
currencies to hold more or less indefinitely. What I see as a problem 
here, which is a byproduct of intervention, is that when we run out of 
indebtedness--if that's the way to put it--if we don't hold any 
foreign currencies, we can't intervene on the side of the market in 
which we are now intervening. That may be inconvenient if we're not 
prepared to hold foreign currencies. I don't think intervention 



4/11/19 -41 

policies should be controlled by an inability to hold foreign 
currencies. Also, it makes sense to be symmetrical. If we’re willing 
to go into debt, we ought to be willing to go long on the other side. 
And something like $2 billion may allow us a reasonable amount of 
leeway around zero, but [I don‘t see that] as a permanent holding. 
That‘s the way I view this and on that basis I would support it. I am 
not ready to support a permanent massive holding at this point. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It seems to me that what has been 
recommended is by no means a suggestion that we become symmetrical. 
When we were talking about going short we were talking about some $20 
billion dollars--more than that actually [including] the Treasury and 
ourselves--that we would borrow and have to pay back. If we were 
being symmetrical, we would want to authorize a $30 billion package on 
the [long side]. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Between the Treasury and the Federal 
Reserve - - 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We would have $30 billion on one side and 
$30 billion on the other side, a $60 billion band. No one would want 
to do that. I don’t have a strong feeling on this, but the question 
before the Committee is: Do we at least want to deal in what is less 
than one swap line--in a series of currencies on the long side--as a 
way of continuing the operation of moving in depth to counter swings 
in the dollar, which is very strong again today? And we‘re not trying 
to peg it. As I say, we have had static occasionally from our 
[counterparts] about pegging or whatnot, but we have not tried to do 
that. Alan has consistently taken the view--sometimes with a few 
bruises--to let [the dollar] go a little and move in as it goes up and 
cushion it. S o  it probably wouldn’t mean the end of the world today 
whether we approve this or we don’t. I think some of the things Phil 
said are very worthwhile. If we do this, we might well want to put a 
limit of a billion dollars for any currency and we certainly want to 
list the currencies we’re talking about [acquiring], which would be 
only the major currencies. At the moment we’re only talking about 
three currencies but we might want to add to that. I don’t know that 
we even need to add guilders or anything else at the moment. 

MR. AXILROD. M r .  Chairman, our suggestion was that at the 
moment we would be contemplating three currencies. But we would 
assume that the possibility of the Desk holding minor amounts of other 
currencies would not be excluded. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But it wouldn’t be the world’s mix of 
currencies, I take it. 

MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, it would be the currencies that 
the Desk is now authorized to hold, i.e. the currencies of our swap 
partners. 

CHAIRMFLN MILLER. They are all listed here. It’s a limited 
list of about 10 or 12-- 

MR. TRUMAN. It‘s [14]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They include the Austrian shilling, the 
Belgian franc, the Canadian dollar-- 



4/11/79 -42 -  

MR. TRUMAN. I'm not saying we'd hold them all but-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, no. But this is the list: Austrian 
schillings, Belgian francs, Canadian dollars, Danish kroner, British 
[pounds] sterling, French francs, German marks, Italian lire, Japanese 
yen, Mexican pesos, Netherlands guilders, Norwegian kroner, Swedish 
kronor, and Swiss francs. 

MR. WALLICH. These are our swap partners. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. That's the list. We could do 
anything else we want. I think the point of limiting it to a billion 
dollars in any one currency is a wise one. And I [agree] that even if 
we want to do this, we would be very wise to have consulted with the 
Hill and with the Administration before we [proceed]. I think those 
are very good comments. 

MR. WALLICH. Let me say something about that. It may not 
fit the market situation; it may make no sense, for instance, to 
accumulate yen. 

MR. COLDWELL. I was assuming we'd accumulate marks. 

MR. WALLICH. We would probably, predominantly. That is the 
big intervention currency. I see your point of limiting risk but I 
think it would be better to limit risk by limiting the overall amount 
and then leave it to the Manager [to decide] what is useful in these 
relatively small amounts. I'd prefer that rather than have the Desk 
get to the limit of marks and say now we can make the market orderly 
by working in yen even though it's really the D-mark market that isn't 
orderly. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, can't we work around that through BIS 
and some other procedures to get hold of-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We could limit it to $1 billion without 
prior permission from the Committee. 

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I just think we have a possible exchange 
loss and we would be putting on some reserve currency pressure and 
ought to be very careful about that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. On balance, without going through all the 
arguments, I have to join Chuck in opposing this. 
disadvantages outweigh the advantages. I'm really concerned about the 
point of departure being one which could fairly easily get us away 
from countering disorderly conditions and into imposing an official 
view of what the dollar '"ought to be worth." That's a pretty risky 
game and I don't think we're ready for it. 

I think the 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob, did you want t o  comment? 

MR. MAYO. I find myself supportive of it, Mr. Chairman. It 
seems to me that it does give us another tool. And I certainly trust 
this Committee and even more I trust the Manager that in the 
intermeeting periods the spirit of this would not be violated. 



4 / 1 1 / 1 9  -43 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We lose Managers if the spirit gets 
violated! 

MR. MAYO. I agree with John that I don’t want to see this 
used as a super intervention tool or--well, he didn’t say this--as a 
way to throw our weight around or something like that. But I think it 
can be quite supportive of additional flexibility in monetary policy 
in a broad sense. Like Phil, I think we have to be very careful in 
how we do it, not only with the Hill and the Treasury but also in our 
relations with other central banks. But that‘s why we have such a 
capable Manager and that’s part of his job. So I would vote for this. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Ernie Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I don‘t have a voice in this 
matter today, but if I did it would be on the negative side. It seems 
to me the potential disadvantages tend to outweigh prospective 
advantages. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. I just want to make one additional comment on 
another aspect that perhaps Committee members haven’t thought of. I 
have agreed to talk to the farmers who circled the building a few 
weeks ago and who want to borrow from the Federal Reserve at a low 
rate. I will tell them that we can’t use Federal Reserve credit for 
that purpose because it’s used to run the monetary system and all we 
do is invest in government securities and try to provide the right 
amount of reserves. A few years ago we took the same position with 
New York City when they wanted to borrow--that it wasn‘t a proper use 
of Federal Reserve credit. But we are talking about using up to $2 
billion of Federal Reserve credit to support the mark or the yen, or 
the Swiss franc at a low rate of return. And I think that reduces our 
ability to resist these other demands for the use of-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I thought we were doing it so the crops 
would sell better abroad and maybe get more money on the farm. That‘s 
what I thought we were doing. That‘s what Henry has been teaching me. 

MR. PARTEE. It’s pretty hard to do that with the 
agricultural bloc they have in Europe. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It’s still our biggest export. 

MR. HOLMES(?). Well, I would not view this as supporting the 
mark or other currencies at a low rate but as maintaining an 
appropriate rate for the dollar if we can agree that there is such a 
thing. 

MR. PARTEE. Oh, so it isn’t disorderly conditions. It’s an 
appropriate rate for the dollar. 

MR. HOLMES. I think [it‘s helpful] if we can accomplish an 
appropriate rate for the dollar. For example, suppose this afternoon 
the mark goes to 2 - l / 2  marks per dollar. Is that good for the United 
States? I’m taking an exaggerated-- 



4/17/19 -44-  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I have exactly three minutes to wind up 
this meeting so we can get across the street for lunch. I hope we 
will have time for discussion, particularly of the monetary 
improvement program, at lunch. 

MR. WALLICH. May I make just one comment? There is no 
government or central bank in the world that doesn't have this power. 
We are the only one; we have gold. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's quickly check [vial a tentative vote 
on this proposition to indicate an agreement in principle--not on the 
details. If there is a sentiment in favor holding up to $2 billion, 
let's come back at another meeting with the details worked out and 
some specific proposals. We don't need to work on that proposal if 
there is no sentiment for it. So tentatively, Paul, how would you 
vote? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Black 

MR. BLACK. Yes, Mr. Chairman, up to that [ $ 2  billion] point. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. With the intervention limits and limits per 
currency. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. If those details came in to your 
satisfaction. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. Yes. 

MR MAYO. Yes. 

MR. PARTEE. No. 

M S .  TEETERS. Yes 

MR. WALLICH. Yes 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And I think I would favor it. That means 
we have 8 to 2 [in favor]. And we can have a unanimous vote if we can 
get John and Chuck to straighten up and fly right! How about those 
who are not voting members? I'd just be curious because I would like 
to know what the general feeling is. Ernie? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. I'm negative. 

MR. GUFFEY. Yes. 

MR. ROOS. NO. 

MR. WILLES. No. 



4 / 1 7 / 7 9  -45- 

MR. W I N N .  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And we have First Vice Presidents McIntosh 
and Smoot. 

MR. MCINTOSH. Yes. 

MR. SMOOT. Yes 

CHAIRMRN MILLER. I think there is a sentiment, then, to come 
back with a specific proposal, Steve and A l a n .  Thank you very much. 

Unless there is further business we will confirm our meeting 
on May 22 when the fever will have broken, everything will be cool and 
you will vote unanimously for sound monetary policy! 

END OF MEETING 


	790417meeting
	790417staffstatements



