









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL 

OCTOBER 22, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 



FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
CONFERENCE CALL 

October 22,1979 

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Rice 
Mr. Schultz 
Ms. Teeters 

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members of the 
Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, Eastbum, and Willes, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis respectively 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Stemlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Ms. Farm, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Doyle, Forrestal, Gainor, Smoot, and Williams, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, 
and San Francisco respectively 

Governors 

Board of Governors 



-2- 

Messrs. Boehne, Bums, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia and Dallas respectively 

Messrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Cox, Danforth, Mac Donald, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and 
Cleveland respectively 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of 
October 22, 1979 

[Secretary's note: At the beginning of this session, Mr. 
Altmann called the roll to verify attendance at the Reserve Banks.] 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gentlemen, I think we'll proceed just by 
having Mr. Axilrod update us. And then Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Pardee 
can make any comments they think are appropriate. 

M R .  AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, since the Committee set its 
original objectives for the monetary aggregates [under the new 
program] at its previous meeting, the basic aggregates have been 
running very strong. That is, the Committee set an objective for 
[growth in1 M1 from September to December on the order of 4-l/2 
percent at an annual rate; and the accompanying M2 growth that would 
be the consistent with that was an annual rate of about 7-1/2 percent. 
Achievement of these objectives would be consistent, on our estimates, 
with growth in the monetary base over that period of about 8 percent, 
growth of total reserves of about 7 percent, and of nonborrowed 
reserves of around 5-3/4 percent. Based on data thus far in October-- 
that is, data through October 17, with the last week being 
preliminary-Ml looks as if it's on a path where its growth in October 
will be at an annual rate of about 14.3 percent and M2 looks as if 
it's growing at an annual rate of 13.6 percent. Growth in M3 is 
somewhat slower but still high, at an annual rate of 10.4 percent. 
Those deposit figures, if they don't change, would imply growth in the 
monetary base of something like 11.2 percent and growth in total 
reserves on the order of 20 percent. 

In the face of that demand for reserves, therefore, to hold 
nonborrowed reserves down in the short run would require a substantial 
rise in borrowings from the levels that had prevailed early this month 
and even from the $1-1/2 billion dollar level that the Committee had 
anticipated when it moved to this new program. 

Mr. Chairman, I won't bother the Committee with the various 
technicalities that, of course, will be made clear in the Bluebook for 
the next meeting. 1 would just note that the implied level of 
borrowing over the balance of this month needed to hold growth in 
nonborrowed reserves for September to December down to a rate not far 
from the 6 percent or perhaps even less that the Committee desired 
would be on the order of $2.5 to $2.9 billion. That level of 
borrowing would depend on certain technical factors that we adjust for 
in the paths. We have moved some toward achieving that level of 
borrowing already, with borrowing on Friday for all member banks at 
$3.1 billion. But, of course, that has been with a substantial rise 
in the federal funds rate--to around 15 percent on average on Friday, 
but with some trading at much higher rates. This morning, as Peter 
will undoubtedly note, the funds rate was much higher than 15 percent, 
opening in the 17 to 18 percent range. The implication of these 
figures, Mr. Chairman, is that it may be very difficult, if not 
impossible, to achieve the objectives in the very short run for the 
base and total reserves. It is more possible in the short run to 
achieve the objective for nonborrowed reserves. But these 
developments bring into question whether the informal 14-1/2 percent 
funds rate constraint or the more formal 15-1/2 percent upper limit 



10/22/79 -2- 

adopted by the Committee at its last meeting are viable in this 
situation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, I thought I might fill in on 
Steve’s comments just by giving you some [details] of the surrounding 
market developments and summarizing some of [the developments since] 
October 6 .  The market at that time reacted, as you know, with steep 
rate increases and close to disorderly conditions. Bill rates moved 
up 100 basis points and long bonds were up 50 basis points. By the 
Friday after the announcement, October 12, some stability was 
beginning to emerge and it gained some greater foundation by the 
following Wednesday, October 17, although the atmosphere was still 
fragile and uncertain. However, at that point we were not really 
getting the pressure on bank reserve positions we had been seeking. 
We had started, as you recall, with the idea that funds might trade in 
the area of 13 to 13-1/4 percent with borrowing of about $1-1/2 
billion. But after seeing new strength in the aggregates even before 
the further strength that Steve reported on--that is, even by October 
12--we were thinking that we ought to be increasing the pressure on 
nonborrowed reserves such that borrowing would be pushed up to the 
$1.8 billion area. 

In the week ending last Wednesday, October 17, we did get a 
funds rate of about the 13-1/4 percent that we were seeking then and 
we got a bulge in borrowing on Wednesday that brought the weekly 
average up to $1.5 billion. That was still somewhat under the average 
borrowing we wanted; and since it came [in the form of] a late 
Wednesday bulge, there was not really the sense of reserve pressure 
associated with it that we thought was needed. In the meantime, we 
began to get more data on the aggregates and they looked even 
stronger, as Steve has summarized. So then we thought that borrowing 
ought to be getting up to the $2.5 to $2.9 billion area. To apply 
this greater pressure on reserves, we sold some bills in the market on 
October 18. That did push up the funds rate to 14 percent by last 
Thursday afternoon and predominantly to 15 percent on Friday, with 
some trading in volume at 16 to 16-1/2 percent. 

The market, which as 1 mentioned had begun to find some 
stability in the few preceding days, so ld  off sharply further on 
Thursday and Friday in a worsening atmosphere, as participants sensed 
a more restrictive Fed move and worried about the upcoming Treasury 
auctions. Three-month bill rates moved up another 70 basis points on 
Thursday and Friday and yields on long coupon issues were up about a 
quarter percentage point. 
close to the ragged edge, or maybe even over it, on Friday afternoon. 
There was a real question of auction coverage as we approached the 
Treasury financings for this week. 

In my judgment, the market was getting very 

This morning the funds market opened at 16 percent but fairly 
early on went up to as high as 18 percent. Other market rates were 
pushing somewhat higher in very thin markets. 
trading going on--just a few transactions--and the atmosphere was very 
poor. We went into the market at 9:45 a.m. and offered overnight 
repurchase agreements. At that point we didn’t even have our reserve 
numbers. We did learn subsequently that reserves had fallen short of 
our estimates over the weekend by a sizable amount so that even though 

There was almost no 



10/22/79 -3 

borrowing rose to a little over $3 billion on Friday, as Steve 
mentioned, we still think there is a need for reserves in this current 
week. So we felt that we could go ahead and do a sizable amount of 
overnight RPs and we did about $3.7 billion of them. We’re prepared 
to do more if the funds rate stays as high as the 17-1/2 percent [that 
prevailed] as we were [conducting our] RP transactions. My report 
just as this call [got under way] was that the funds rate was 
beginning to ease back from the 17-1/2 percent level to 17-l/4 
percent, so we‘re staying our hand for just now. We’ll watch that 
closely and be ready to go in again if we get a sense that the funds 
rate is remaining excessively high. In the meantime we stand with the 
question that Steve raised about the consistency of meeting our 
reserves objectives within the funds rate constraints that the 
Committee has set. That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Pardee. 

MR. PARDEE. Very briefly, the dollar continued steady 
against the German mark, on either side of 180 marks to the dollar, 
and against other European currencies. The yen is a bit weak but that 
is a separate case. We have not had to intervene in support of the 
dollar but neither has there been a reflux of funds into dollars 
following the heavy outflows of recent months. The oil price 
situation is a major concern and there’s plenty of pessimism remaining 
about the political situation [in the United States] and U . S .  economic 
policy generally. Market participants tell us that they are taking a 
wait and see attitude toward the Federal Reserve‘s new approach. And 
the higher cost of borrowing dollars is cited as deterring people from 
taking new short positions in dollars but it has not brought them to 
sell other currencies to came into dollars as yet. They say they are 
waiting for evidence that the money supply is, in fact, under control 
and that inflation rates here are declining. That’s my report. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have some obvious facts, the 
first one being that the money supply ran much higher in the last two 
weeks than we‘d contemplated at the time of the [October 61 meeting. 
And that has had a predictable effect on the reserve base that is 
required during the current week and during the next week. It implies 
high borrowings in order to stay on the nonborrowed reserve track, as 
Steve suggested. One reason the money supply is so high may be that 
business [activity] is doing better than we contemplated, which gives 
us more demand for money than we were really counting on at this 
point. But those figures are high enough so that it does at least 
raise the question about the feasibility of our targets. 

We have forced borrowing higher, as has been indicated. And 
on Friday we did have a sizable reserve miss, as Peter suggested, 
which meant that [the funds market] was even tighter than we had 
contemplated. It seems to me that under the Committee decision we may 
or may not face an inconsistency here shortly. With the reserve miss, 
it appears that we have more money to put into the market this week. 
And I would contemplate that that be done if the federal funds rate 
stays above the area that we were talking about--the 15-1/2 percent 
area or what Steve called the formal decision, which [in fact] was the 
formal decision. Whether we can expect the rate to go down to 14-1/2 
percent I suppose is the operative question this morning, but we can 
always take a new decision on the upper limit. I would not 
contemplate that at this point. I think, at least for this week, we 



10/22/79 -4-  

cannot reasonably contemplate going down deliberately to 14-1/2 
percent without perhaps undermining the efforts that we have been 
making. 

So I would just leave this as a preliminary comment to which 
you can react: That we will not operate, at the moment anyway, on the 
14-1/2 percent [informal] limit but will continue to operate in 
general terms at the 15-1/2 percent [formal limit]. That, as you 
recall, is not interpreted as a daily limit but there will be an 
effort to avoid something significantly higher than that for a week as 
a whole. And it will probably take us a couple of days at least to 
find out whether we do have an inconsistency problem or not for the 
week--for the current week, which will then be past. We could face 
the same problem for another week, given the strength of the money 
supply two weeks ago. Whether we are now passing through the peak I 
think depends greatly upon what happens to the money supply figures 
that we won’t have until Thursday. We just have to wait and see on 
that. We will have a real problem, I think, if [money growth1 remains 
high. If it begins coming down, [rates] will begin easing off, at 
least temporarily. That is where we stand. 

Why don‘t I just let the rest of you comment, turning to the 
people here in Washington first. Governor Schultz indicates that he 
has no comments. 

MR. COLDWELL. This is Phil Coldwell. It seems to me that we 
have a situation which we obviously hadn’t contemplated. I think we 
could justify actions to moderate this under the “disorderly market” 
excuse. I agree with you, Paul, that the money supply [figures we 
get] on Thursday will be important to us. I don‘t happen to be in 
love with the Ms, so I‘m not all that unhappy about this. I think we 
have a perception of tightness out there in the market, whether the Ms 
are going to show it immediately or not. Certainly the market is 
showing it. I would hate to undermine our effort by doing an 
extensive amount of RPs to bring [the funds rate] down to any 
predetermined level. On the other hand, I don’t believe I want to 
tolerate a disorderly market in the general government securities 
area. 

MR. PARTEE. I think it’s important that we try to observe 
our nonborrowed target, and for that reason I think we should use the 
full funds rate range. I think the rate this week is unlikely to 
average above 15-1/2 percent since, after all, four days of the week 
are below that level. That won‘t necessarily put the money supply on 
Lrack, of course, because the safety valve is borrowings and I should 
think borrowings would move up. My goodness, with a difference of 
this magnitude between [the cost of] borrowing in the market and 
borrowing at the window, I would certainly think that borrowing at the 
window will go up. So we will have to face that issue and, if [the 
recent trend] continues, the issue of further expansion in reserves 
and further expansion in the money numbers after we get them. But 
let’s not give up the nonborrowed target we had. 

MS. TEETERS. As I understand it, you are in a position to 
supply reserves and not miss the target this week. Is that right, 
Steve? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 



10/22/79 -5- 

MR. STERNLIGHT. We were looking at a need for additional 
reserves. 
RPs. I don't think we could continue doing that much overnight for 
the next two days; that would be overdoing it. I don't know that we 
would have to do that much again on Tuesday and Wednesday, but at the 
moment there is some room for additional day-to-day reserves. 

We did supply some by doing the $3-314 billion of overnight 

MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, I might add that that relates 
to this week. Next week we might have to be absorbing reserves, 
depending on whose figures are right on what market factors are doing. 

MS. TEETERS. I'm willing to face next week next week. I 
would say let's try to hit our nonborrowed reserves target and if the 
[funds] rate doesn't come down, we should confer again. 

MR. RICE. I agree that we ought to stay with our present 
nonborrowed reserves target. I also feel that if this means that the 
rates have to stay above-- 

MR. STERNLIGHT. It's hard to hear you, Governor Rice 

MR. RICE. I would not worry myself if the federal funds rate 
stayed in the 15-1/2 percent area, either somewhat above or hopefully 
somewhat below. Also, I would want to wait for a few days, at least 
until Thursday, to have a better idea of what is happening. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That completes everybody here. Oh, Frank 
Morris is sitting at this table, so we'll let him lead off as District 
number one anyway. 

M R .  MORRIS. Well, what has happened confirms my feeling that 
it's going to be very difficult for us to execute control of reserves 
with a lagged reserve system. I think we really ought to put our 
minds to eliminating what seems to me an obvious and big handicap to 
the successful operation of this new system. And we also need to 
figure out a greatly liberalized carry-over system to make the change 
palatable to the banks. It seems to me that reacting two weeks later 
and having our reserve levels determined by deposits two weeks earlier 
is continually just going to foul us up in this operation. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interject a comment. We are 

The carry-over in effect is 
looking at that. I'm not sure it makes quite that much difference, 
particularly if we have a big carry-over. 
a substitute for this lag we're working with now. But I certainly 
agree that psychologically it looks awkward--always dealing with a 
reserve base that is predetermined from what happened to deposits two 
weeks earlier. 

MR. PARTEE. It ought to show up in borrowings. 

MR. MORRIS. Sure it will. That's true. The [point] is that 
to control the money supply ultimately we are going to have to control 
total reserves, and it's really not going to be a l l  that helpful if we 
make our nonborrowed reserve target and end up with $6 billion dollars 
going out through the discount window. 



10/22/79 - 6  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes for an awful tight market when we 
do. Why don’t we go through the Districts in order. We’ve had 
District 1: I don’t know [who is representing] District 2 .  

MR. TIMLEN. District 2 is [covered by] Tom Timlen, who 
agrees with the Chairman’s recommendation. I must say that I was 
surprised at the limited borrowing by clearing house banks here in New 
York City last Friday, but I suspect it will rise. In saying that I 
agree with the Chairman‘s recommendation, I would also add that it 
seems to me quite likely that the Desk will have trouble trying to get 
the funds rate down to 15-1/2 percent, [given the degree] of 
nervousness and caution among the people who are running the 
commercial bank money desks. S o  while I concur on the Chairman’s 
recommendation, I wouldn‘t be surprised to see [fed funds trading at] 
rates beyond the [formal] range. That’s all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. District 3 

MR. EASTBURN. I think we have somewhat of a credibility 
issue here. A lot of people are expecting more from us than we 
actually can [deliver], given a lot of the technicalities involved. 
Nevertheless, having launched on this course, I think it‘s important 
that we try to accomplish the results with the reserves and aggregates 
that we are aiming for. So I certainly would use the full range for 
the funds rate. I would also be tolerant of seeing the rate exceed 
the range for a substantial period and, if necessary, having as many 
conference calls as we have to in order to plot the way as we go. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. District 4. 

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I share the feeling that we have got 
to show as firm a resolve as we can. As far as technical problems, is 
there a Treasury financing after this--? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is one announced for Wednesday: it’s 
more than a little technical problem, I suspect. 

MR. WINN. Okay. My feeling is that one way we can show our 
resolve is to increase the discount rate again--not to accomplish an 
increase in interest rates but just to keep it in line. Pressure at 
the window gets a message through to the banks that we mean business. 
I have no problem with rates fluctuating a little higher than we 
thought in order to try as hard as we can to meet our targets. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. District 5. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Dave Eastburn came closer than 
anyone else to saying what I think is appropriate. We do have a major 
credibility factor on both the domestic and foreign sides if we don’t 
hit our targets. I don’t think many people realize that the figures 
that were published for the money supply for the week ending the 10th 
allowed us only the 9th and the 10th to work on them [under our new 
approach]. They think [those figures are] an indication of the 
failure of our policy. At some judicious time it might be wise to 
point that out to the market. I certainly wouldn‘t want to try to get 
the funds rate back down to 14-1/2 percent unless it just goes there 
of its own accord. I wouldn‘t want to abandon the reserve target even 
if the funds rate has to go above the 15-1/2 percent upper limit we 



10/22/79 -1- 

set at our last meeting. I would be prepared to go up to 16 or 17 
percent if we had to. I think it's very crucial that we establish our 
credibility at this point. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. District 6 .  

MR. FORRESTAL. This is Forrestal substituting for Kimbrell. 
Mr. Chairman, given the growth in the money supply and in the economy 
in the third quarter, we think it's very important to follow through 
definitively with action [consistent with our decision on] October 6 .  
We think our credibility is on the line and that we are going to lose 
impetus if we don't take follow-up action. So we would support using 
the full federal funds range and even exceeding it if necessary. And 
we certainly would agree with you that the rate ought not drop below 
14-1/2 percent. And we, too, feel that some consideration should be 
given to an increase in the discount rate, as has been suggested. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So what are we up to--District 7? 

MR. DOYLE. This is Doyle substituting for Mayo. We support 
your recormnendation, Mr. Chairman, feeling that it is far too early-- 
despite the tenseness on the scene today--to do anything differently. 
We certainly would wait through at least this week. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. District 8 .  

MR. ROOS. We would support using the full fed funds range 
and exceeding it if need be. One of the problems that we sense is an 
uncertainty on the part of the markets--and probably more generally-- 
as to exactly how we intend to achieve all our goals. I wonder if any 
thought has been given, or should some thought be given, to our 
announcing specifically the total reserves and base [levels] necessary 
to achieve our M1 target? I would think the more specific the 
information is that we give, the greater the degree of stability we 
might expect from the markets and the various forces involved. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will respond to that later. District 9 .  

MR. WILLES. Mr. Chairman, this is Mark Willes. Dave 
Eastburn expressed our views with regard to the federal funds [range]. 
Also, I'd like to agree very much with what Frank Morris said about 
lagged reserves. I think we are getting trapped by our own procedures 
here, making our life more difficult. It is my view, too, that we 
need to think through not only the question of the discount rate in 
this specific instance but what kind of procedures we are going to use 
on the discount rate. If the fed funds rate is going to bounce 
around, and it seems that it is, and if we are going to have borrowing 
numbers of the kind we've been talking about here, that raises some 
real questions in my mind, both about how we administer the rate and 
how we administer the window itself. Finally, I would like to say 
that the point that Larry Roos just made about announcing our targets 
and procedures is, in our judgment, absolutely fundamental. Markets 
really do work a lot better if they have more information and I think 
we are making our own situation substantially more difficult by 
creating additional uncertainty in the market and therefore 
aggravating some of the very things that we would like to see settle 
down. So I would hope that we give that very serious consideration. 
That's ail I have. 



1 0 / 2 2 / 7 9  - 8 -  

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. District 10. 

MR. GUFFEY. I agree with all the statements with respect to 
credibility. I think it’s absolutely essential that we come in at or 
near the target path for the fourth quarter, which also suggests that 
we should use the full [funds rate] range at this point, up to 15-1/2 
percent. I would hope, however, that we would have another meeting 
before we‘d allow the fed funds rate to remain above that 15-112 
percent for a full weekly period. Lastly, I would say that there is 
some question in my mind as to whether or not the horizon that we are 
looking at for the fed funds rate on average--being one week--is the 
proper length of time or whether it ought to be a bit longer than 
that. But with those comments I fully endorse the position that you 
have set forth. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. We would concur with your recommendation, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m not sure if this is being different, but to pick up on 
Mr. Guffey’s suggestion about going the full limit on the 15-1/2 
percent, I agree that before running much above that for a week we 
might want to compare notes again. I think we probably should move up 
some on the discount rate, and I would share fully those comments that 
referred to credibility. It seems as if we are out there now and we 
must deliver. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. 12. 

MR. WILLIAMS. We would certainly agree with the Chairman’s 
recommendations. Dave Eastburn clearly set forth our views and we 
would support everything Dave said. We would also agree with Larry 
Roos about the announcement of targets. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a few additional 
comments. First of all, I think we have not had a [formal] meeting 
here, as I understand it. We have had a consultation and the sense of 
the [discussion] is that the 15-1/2 percent [funds rate limit] still 
holds in the absence of a formal decision to overturn that. We may or 
may not have to consult further, depending upon what happens over the 
rest of this week. We have no guarantee that we will hit these 
[objectives] exactly, especially when we realize that [the funds rate] 
may be over [our range] on particular days and if those days come at 
the end of the week and the average is close to 15-1/2 percent, [the 
higher rate on] those days might carry it over. But I think that is 
implicit in our decision already. I suspect Governor Partee‘s comment 
that the rate was below 15-1/2 percent for the first four days of the 
week means that it’s at least possible to get through this week 
without going over [the range on average] and without deviating, very 
sharply anyway, from our nonborrowed reserves path. I would remind 
you of what both Steve and Peter said: We are now a bit below it. 
Peter may not be able to do $3-1/2 billion [of reserve-supplying 
operations] every day, but presumably if the numbers don’t change, he 
can do something today and in the ensuing days. He can do something 
more today and have some [room] left over for the ensuing days and 
remain within the general paths that we set for ourselves. 

So far as the discount rate comments are concerned, I 
recognize their relevance. I also recognize that if we raise the 



1 0 / 2 2 / 7 9  -9 -  

discount rate right now, that would push market rates up further and I 
do not feel terribly [anxious to see1 that right at the moment. It 
obviously has to be kept under review. But at a time when we are 
threatening to exceed the upper limit of the fed funds range--if that 
remains true without changing the upper limit--I’m not sure that a 
discount rate change would be helpful at the moment in reconciling our 
various objectives. 

There have been a lot of comments about credibility, which I 
well recognize. I think we also have to recognize that market 
behavior, whether one looks at the stock market or the bond market, 
has not ignored short-term movements in the fed funds rate during this 
particular period. Any presumption that the whole market does not 
reflect day-to-day movements of the fed funds rate for this particular 
period is not very valid because I think we are in a learning period 
and all the markets have learned so far is that rates go up. They 
haven‘t had much experience on the down side as yet; presumably they 
will get some at some point. But it is those big money supply figures 
that we are fighting at the moment and perhaps for a week or so the 
markets won‘t have much experience--or at least very dramatic 
experience--on the down side. I do think that raises the possibility 
of overkill as well as credibility. We have to keep both sides of the 
equation in mind and it‘s a very difficult period to steer through. 

Let me say something about discount window administration, 
too. There was a comment in the Wall Street Journal this morning 
which I think carried to the typical reader the implication that we’ve 
tightened up [at the window]. That is not my understanding of the 
situation at the moment. It should not be the situation. We are 
getting more borrowing than we’ve been used to. But I don‘t think we 
want to convey a message at the moment that the discount window is any 
more closed than it has been. Rather specifically, I think one or two 
or perhaps even three days of sizable borrowing is not something that 
should provoke a phone call [from us to the borrowing bank] under 
these particular circumstances. This is also something that we have 
to review, along with the discount rate, as we get into a little more 
normal period. 

S o  far as the comments on giving the market more information 
are concerned, I am not suite sure what the implications of that are 
and what the meaning is. Part of the difficulty of our operations at 
the moment is that we have more targets than we can meet already. For 
instance, specifying a total reserve target or a total reserve base 
target, knowing that borrowings are an important variable here, may or 
may not lend a lot confidence to market participants. I would think 
there should be some sense in the market--and perhaps that can be 
encouraged--that nonborrowed reserves are an important variable. But 
even there it is very hard to specify a target because presumably we 
would want to be tighter, 4s was explained at the meeting on 
nonborrowed reserves, if borrowings were persistently high. So we are 
kind of caught between the devil and the deep blue sea on some of 
this. And at the moment at. least, I cannot quite see myself sitting 
down and giving an explanation to the market that would be reassuring 
rather than disturbing, given that we are playing with at least three 
reserve variables. Althouyh nonborrowed reserves are the immediate 
operating variable, that in itself is not a fixed target depending 
upon what else goes on. So I’m not sure we can provide a lot of 
reassurance beyond the kind of money supply figure that we’ve already 



10/22/79 -10 

given them. It seems to me that a major source of uncertainty in the 
market is simply that the money supply is running so much above the 
more moderate rate of growth that we would like to see between now and 
the end of the year. That will cure itself or not, depending upon 
what the next few money supply figures are. At least that is my 
present view-of this matter. 

To summarize, we will be aiming--hopefully consistently--for 
the nonborrowed reserves path consistent with the money supply targets 
that we talked about. That leaves some leeway on the borrowing side. 
The fact that that path is so far below actuality is forcing a great 
deal of borrowing and forcing a lot of pressure on the market. We can 
stop this session on the hope that the upper limit of the funds range 
that the Committee decided upon will prove at least marginally 
consistent with that target [path] and we can consult again as 
necessary in a few days or a week if the inconsistency is more evident 
than it is this morning. 

MR. BLACK. How about the idea of pointing out to the market 
that we really weren't [using the new approach] on those money supply 
figures but for two days? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I do agree with and it should have 
been indicated at the press conference in New York on Thursday. I 
thought it was but I agree that it wasn't picked up much. Was that 
point made at the press conference? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I understand that it was, Mr. Chairman, 
though I didn't see it picked up in the press. But our press officer 
told me that it was definitely pointed out at the briefing. 

MR. BLACK. Well, it's a subtle point and even if pointed out 
at the meeting, people around here have not picked it up. I haven't 
seen any reference to it. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's hard to make a special occasion 
to announce that. But I think all of us ought to have that in mind in 
whatever comments we make to people in the market or otherwise. 

MR. PARTEE. What do we do if next week's money supply figure 
is strong? 

MR. BLACK. I would think that's one reason rates are as high 
as they are. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't exaggerate that too much. 
I think the fact that they are high and that it's hard to bend them 
down is the principal factor rather than that [the increase] took 
place on October 10. And we face the uncertainty that Governor Partee 
mentioned. He just said to me across the table: What do we do if the 
money supply figures are high in the next published week? I think two 
points can be made. The point that you made, Bob, can be mentioned in 
any contacts we have. And we ought to reiterate--as I have in my 
public appearances or when the question has arisen or when I jarmned it 
into the conversation--that whatever the technique we use, these money 
supply figures don't respond automatically. There is  leeway in the 
borrowing, and in the long run I think it's probably good for the 



10/22/79 -11- 

economy that there is a certain amount of slippage even though it’s 
awkward to us at the moment. 

Any other comments? Okay, thank you. We may be consulting 
again fairly shortly, but we’ll see how the rest of this week goes. 

END OF SESSION 




