









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN M?.RKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

March 20, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

Staff Statements Auuended to the Transcriut 

Mr. Pardee, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations 
Mr. Sternlight, Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations 

M r .  Kichline, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Manager, System Open Market Account 



Meeting of Federa l  Open Market Committee 

March 20,  1979 

MINUTES OF ACTIONS 

A meeting of t h e  Federa l  Open Market Committee w a s  

h e l d  i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board of Governors of t h e  Fede ra l  

Reserve System i n  Washington, D .  C . ,  on Tuesday, March 2 0 ,  

19'79, beginning a t  9:30 a.m. 

PRESENT: M r .  Miller, Chairman 
Mr. Volcker ,  Vice Chairman 
M r .  Bal les  
Mr. Black 
M r .  Coldwell 
M r .  Kimbrel 
Mr . ' Uayo 
Mr. P a r t e e  
Mrs ~ T e e t e r s  
M r  :' Wallich 

:il,ksrs. G u f f  ey , Morr is ,  Roos , and Winn , 
A l t e r n a t e  %embers of t h e  Federa l  Open 
SIarket Coimi t tee  

Messrs. BaughnaQ, &Ed Eastburn, P r e s i d e n t s  of 
The F e d e r z l  Reserve Bznks of D a l l a s  
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

M r .  A l tmann ,  Sec re t a ry  
M r .  Bernard ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  Mannion, A s s i s t a n t  General  Counsel 
M r .  A x i l r o d ,  Economist 

Messrs. Brand t ,  E t t i n ,  Henry, K e i r ,  Keran, 
K i c h l i n e ,  Sche ld ,  Truman, and Ze i se l ,  
A s s o c i a t e  Economists 

M r .  Holmes, Manager System Open Market 
Account 

Mr. P a r d e e ,  Deputy Manager f o r  Fore ign  - 
o p e r a t i o n s  



3/20 179 - 2 -  

M r .  S t e r n l i g h t ,  Deputy Manager f o r  
Domest ic  Opera t ions  

M r .  Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of 

M r .  Kalchbrenner,  Associate Direc tor ,  
Governors 

Div i s ion  of Research and S t a t i s t i c s ,  
Board of Governors 

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governors 

M s .  F a r a r ,  Economist, Open Market 

Mrs. Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market 

Messrs. Gainor and EdcIntosh, F i r s t  Vice 
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Fede ra l  Reserve Banks 
of Minneapolis and  Boston, r e spec t ive ly  

Messrs. Balbach,  J. Davis ,  and Eisenmenger, 
Sen io r  V i c e  P r e s i d e n t s ,  F e d e r a l  
Eeserve Banks of S t .  Lou i s ,  Cleveland: 
and  Boston,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Messrs. Broaddus , Burns, Danf o r t i ; ,  T .  
Davis ,  Fousek, and Mull ineaux,  Vice 
P r e s i d e n t s ,  Federa l  Reserve Banks  
of Richmond, D a l l a s ,  Xinneapol i s ,  
Kansas C i t y ,  Xew York,  EZC? P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  
r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Ms. C l a r k i n ,  S e c u r i t i e s  Trading O f f i c e r ,  
Fede ra l  Beserve Bank of X ~ i i :  York 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
March 20, 1979 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. The 
time has arrived for our annual meeting. This is a special meeting 
because it completes the 12-month cycle [for Reserve Bank Presidents 
to serve as voting members]. Spring comes and the FOMC is 
reconstituted. I don't know if that is supposed to be a coincidence, 
but we are one day ahead of time, aren't we? Tomorrow is the first 
day of spring. I guess we don't need to pursue that. 

So, the first order of business, at least from my point of 
view, is to welcome the new voting members. I believe you have all 
been elected to your new responsibilities without too many dissents. 
Paul Volcker, you were re-elected. Well, thank goodness! Bob Black, 
Bob Mayo, Bones Kimbrel, and John Balles will serve as members, with 
your alternates in line. I don't think that requires action, but we 
do note it. 

The first item on the regular [agenda] is to approve the 
election of officers. For that purpose I will turn over the meeting 
to Henry Wallich to see if he has any suggestions for Chairman or Vice 
Chairman. I hope he has the right ones! 

MR. WALLICH. I would propose [William Miller as Chairman and 
Paul Volcker as Vice Chairman]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Could you elicit a second, Henry? 

MR. COLDWELL. I second. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think you need to get a vote. 

MR. WALLICH. Would you like to approve the slate as 
proposed? Any objections? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No objections? The way you put the 
question the answer is "no" they wouldn't like to but "yes" they 
would! Now we will get down to something serious, the other officers 
DO you all have a list before you? No? I do. All right, I will ask 
the Secretary to read the list of proposed officers. 

MR. ALTMA". 
Secretary, Murray Altmann; 
Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard; 
General Counsel, Neil Peterson; 
Deputy General Counsel, James Oltman; 
Assistant General Counsel, Robert Mannion; 
Economist, Steve Axilrod; 

Associate Economists from the Board: 
Edward Ettin; 
George Henry; 
Peter Keir; 
James Kichline; 
Edwin Truman; and 
Joseph Zeisel. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -2- 

Associate Economists from the Banks: 
Harry Brandt from Atlanta: 
Richard Davis from New York; 
Michael Keran from San Francisco: 
James Parthemos from Richmond: and 
Karl Scheld from Chicago. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are there any other suggestions or 
qualifications? All those in favor say "Aye." 

SEVERAL. Aye. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Opposed? S o  voted. Now, before the 
meeting, a number of items were sent to you that involve the 
continuation of various authorities [in their existing form], with the 
request that you indicate to us if you wished any of these to be 
placed on the agenda. We received no such indication and, unless I 
hear a contrary view, we will assume that those items have been 
approved. Does anybody have any problem with any of those items? 
Hearing none, we will proceed to item 2 on your printed agenda, which 
is the selection of a Federal Reserve Bank to execute transactions for 
the System Open Market Account. This has been and is proposed to be 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Is there any dissent from that? 
Hearing none, that will be approved. 

Next is the selection of the Manager of the System Open 
Market Account, the Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations, and the 
Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations. We are proposing for those 
positions Alan Holmes, Peter Sternlight, and Scott Pardee, 
respectively. Are those acceptable to the Committee? Hearing no 
dissent, we will approve those. 

Next is the approval of the minutes of the meeting on 
February 6 and of the telephone meeting on March 2, which have been 
circulated to you. [Secretary's note: No transcript of the telephone 
conference of March 2 exists in the Committee's files.] Any comments, 
corrections, or suggestions? Hearing none, we will report those as 
approved and move to foreign currency operations with a report from 
Scott Pardee. 

MR. PARDEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see 
Appendix. 1 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Scott. I should have mentioned 
at the outset, and will now, that we are pleased to have you here, Tom 
Gainor, for Mark Willes. I hope you will join in at any time in the 
discussion. At this point are there any questions or comments on 
Scott's report? Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Scott, you mentioned the reaction that if the 
dollar goes down, the Fed steps in and if the dollar goes up, the 
Bundesbank steps in. Do you think the market views the rate as pegged 
in some sense? Are expectations built on that? 

MR. PARDEE. I don't think there is any sense that the market 
feels we have fixed rates. There is a sense in the market that at 
current levels there is a great deal of resistance. I haven't heard 
anybody saying "pegged" as such. They just notice that if the rate 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -3-  

[moves] 50 points, there is considerable resistance--quite often not 
by the central bank--and shortly thereafter the central bank might be 
in. But I don’t hear anybody complaining that we are pegging at the 
moment. 

MR. WALLICH. Do you think they perceive this as a conflict 
among the national policies? 

MR. PARDEE. Some people feel there is, yes. 

MR. WALLICH. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other comments or questions? Thank 
you, Scott. We need a vote to ratify the transactions since the 
previous meeting. I understand [reports] have been circulated or are 
available. Is there any question? If there is no dissent, we will 
record the ratification of those transactions and move on to the 
domestic open market operations and a report from Peter Sternlight. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see 
Appendix. I 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Peter. Any questions or 
comments? Yes, Chuck. 

M R .  PARTEE. Peter, the funds rate did average 10.21 percent 
in the week of March 14, according to the Bluebook. So do you think 
the market now perceives that as just an erroneously high number and 
is thinking of a 10 percent rate as again being the level--? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I would say that the thinking is back to 10 
percent to slightly higher. 

MR. PARTEE. Right where it was before. You [at the Desk] 
have overcome this entirely. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think we have, yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other comments? We also need to ratify 
the transactions on the domestic side since the last meeting. The 
reports have been circulated. Any questions or comments? Hearing no 
dissent, we will record them as approved. 

Now, in December the procedure we followed worked extremely 
well and I thought we might try it again today. In the intervening 
meeting we had the more complicated issue of setting long-run ranges: 
today we are dealing [only] with the directive. I am going to suggest 
that we try the system where we ask Jim Kichline to make his report on 
the economic situation and then get comments on policy from Steve 
Axilrod. Then we’ll do a go-around to get the comments from each of 
you on your views of the economy and your feelings as to the policy 
implications. I’m looking not necessarily for quantitative but 
qualitative views on where monetary policy should be going in the 
intermeeting period. Then after the break we can get down to the 
specifics of the directive. I think that worked extremely well before 
and we will try it again if you are agreeable. So, we will start off 
with Jim’s report. 



3/20/79 -4-  

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Jim. Are there 
questions of Jim before we turn to Steve? 

MR. PARTEE. May I ask just one, M r .  Chairman? Jim, you 
mentioned the decline in contract awards. I presume you mean 
nonresidential. 

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. 

MR. PARTEE. Is it considerable and what kind is it? Is it 
in some [particular] kind of building? There is an offsetting 
development in the strength of durable goods orders. That's why I 
wanted to pursue it a bit. 

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It's quite widespread. As you know, the 
series is highly erratic; it sometimes shows 50 percent increases or 
40 percent declines. We had a 3 percent decline in December and a 
further 3 percent decline in January. And the fourth quarter in total 
in current dollars was only up 4 percent. So in real terms it-- 

MR. PARTEE. It's drifting off. 

MR. KICHLINE. --has been drifting down. In general we have 
no [firm] idea of whether or not this reflects temporary developments, 
but it is something that we are paying attention to. We are quite 
cautious about the [outlook in the] general structures area which, as 
you know, had been coming along. 

MR. PARTEE. It is in the structures area, not in electric 
generating or something like that in the nonbuilding area. 

MR. KICHLINE. No, it's in industrial structures. It's not 
the shopping centers. 

CKAIRMAN MILLER. Other questions? Let's turn to Steve. 

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought it might be 
useful for the Committee's discussion to analyze a little more closely 
recent developments in the money supply and bank credit. Basically, 
they appear to be giving somewhat conflicting signals. Growth in all 
the aggregates has slowed considerably--[the levels have] actually 
declined--in the first quarter, and bank credit has accelerated. To 
set the stage a bit--and focusing on M1 for convenience--Ml growth for 
the third quarter was about 8 percent and for the fourth quarter it 
was 4 - I f 2  percent on a quarterly average basis. And in the first 
quarter the figure is probably going to be something like minus 2 
percent with January and February showing a decline on average of a 
little over 4 percent. Bank credit, on the other hand, had grown at a 
9 . 8  percent annual rate in the third quarter and dropped off to a rate 
of 7.3 percent in the fourth quarter. In the first quarter it will 
probably be back up to about a 9.7 percent annual rate, with January 
and February growing at rates averaging a little over 12 percent. So 
its growth has been very rapid, with loan growth picking up some. 
Unfortunately, neither of these aggregates is an [unequivocal] 
indicator for policy--in the case of the money aggregates to ease, or 
in the case of bank credit to tighten. 



3/20/79 -5- 

I think it is very important to adjust the slow growth in M1, 
and even that of the broader aggregates, for the demand shift that we 
believe is occurring in the public's willingness to hold money. If 
you will pardon a technical expression, we think a lot of the behavior 
reflects not the fact that interest rates are rising and therefore 
that people are willing to hold less cash and moving along a demand 
curve but that the whole demand curve for money is shifting at given 
interest rates and people are willing to finance their transactions 
with less money. There are two ways to look at this. One is to look 
at the alternative assets to money to see if there is any unusual 
behavior in those assets that people may be holding. John Paulus and 
I made some estimates on that in '75 and '76 and the staff has 
reviewed them recently. bringing them up to date. The second way is 
to look at what is technically called the residual in our equation in 
the quarterly model, which tracks the demand for money against GNP and 
interest rates. Both [approaches] have their dangers, but putting the 
two together may give us some idea of the extent of the shift that is 
occurring. 

In terms of other closely related assets, we've estimated, of 
course, that the ATS effect will add about 3 percentage points to M1 
growth in the first quarter. We then made estimates of that portion 
of the increase in money market funds and R P s  that might have come 
from demand deposits, placing that arbitrarily at around 25 percent. 
In the case of money market funds we believe the bulk of the increase 
was coming from savings deposits and in the case of R P s  from other 
market instruments. I would add about another 2 percentage points at 
an annual rate. So that would raise M1 growth in the first quarter 
from minus 2 to around plus 3 percent. It also raises growth in the 
fourth quarter from around 4-1/2 to around 7 percent. If you look at 
the residuals in the models of the growth rate for M1--if you take 
those literally, and I don't believe you should over a short period-- 
the model has been overpredicting M1 growth by a large amount in both 
the fourth quarter and the first quarter. The amount of 
overprediction, setting aside or allowing for ATS, is about 2 
percentage points in the fourth quarter and 6-1/2 percentage points in 
the first quarter. As I say, I wouldn't advocate adding in that 6-1/2 
percentage points and taking that as fact because, after all, itrs an 
error in the model that we are using to indicate something. But if we 
took that 6-1/2 points as an outer limit and added the 3 percentage 
points for ATS, that gets us to [more than] 9 percentage points, and 
we would be having growth at about a 7 percent annual rate in the 
first quarter. 

Now, to give a little perspective to that, in 1975 and 1976 
when the model overpredicted money for 11 straight quarters beginning 
in the third quarter of 1974 that gave us a little more confidence in 
using the residuals as a rough indication of the amount of demand 
shift and, therefore, confidence in using that adjustment to give us 
the economic impact of what was happening to M1. If we had literally 
taken the model Iresultsl--and again it would be an overstatement--the 
growth in M1 in '75 and '76, which was between 5 and 6 percent, would 
instead have been between 9-1/2 and 10 percent. That in my view is 
probably a better analysis, economically, of what that low rate of 
growth in the literal reading of the M1 numbers meant in ' 7 5  and '76. 
But as I say, to the degree that we use the model in this way, I would 
caution that this may be an overstatement rather than an 
understatement. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  - 6 -  

On the other hand, with regard to bank credit, if anything, I 
would tend to subtract from that acceleration. The bank credit growth 
that we've seen in the first quarter has not been accompanied by any 
acceleration in total credit raised. In fact, there appears to be in 
our flow of funds accounts a drop in total funds raised by 
nonfinancial sectors in the economy of around 10 to 15 percent. Much 
of that drop has to do with funds [raised] for the U . S .  government and 
foreigners. The drop is quite small--more on the order of 1-1/2 
percent--for private domestic nonfinancial sectors, the area which may 
be more closely related to economic activity. That's a very small 
drop. So I don't think the bank credit number is an indicator of a 
strengthening in total credit; on the other hand, the credit flows to 
domestic nonfinancial sectors remain generally strong. Another factor 
strengthening bank credit has been that it is displacing other sources 
of funds raised. A considerable amount of the funds raised in our 
market in the fourth quarter was funds supplied by foreign governments 
--monetary authorities buying U.S. government securities in view of 
the weakness in the dollar. This has come to a halt in the first 
quarter; it has been reversed. And that sharp turnaround in funds 
supplied has been made up in part by the banks supplying funds to the 
market, in [effect] a reflow of funds from abroad. In February, on 
the basis of fragmentary data, it looks as if about $4-1/2 billion of 
the $9 billion increase in bank credit was supplied by a reduction in 
bank lending to their foreign branches. So this would be the other 
side of the support operation. The dollar became stronger and the 
money is coming back home in this way. That kind of reflow is not 
associated with any kind of money supply liabilities. It simply 
involves a bank reducing its lending to [foreign] branches and 
increasing its lending in the domestic market. So, we would not see 
that on RP or fed funds type liabilities on the domestic bank. 

Well, Mr. Chairman, the conclusion I would draw from all of 
this--and I present this to the Committee for its consideration--is 
that the behavior of the monetary aggregates when interpreted in light 
of ongoing demand shifts is certainly not in itself a signal for 
easing. And if one believes the extreme estimate on the amount of 
demand shift, the aggregates might weigh slightly, or be not 
inconsistent with, moving in the direction of tightening if the 
Committee thought the behavior of the real economy required it. 

On the other hand, the behavior of bank credit--when 
interpreted in light of overall credit flows and the diminished credit 
flows in mortgages and corporate bonds that is occurring to offset the 
business loan expansion--certainly doesn't give a clear signal for 
tightening. 
easing. So I am afraid the conclusion can't be unequivocal in any 
way. 1f I were asked to give odds on whether these conflicting 
signals were most consistent with tightening, easing, or staying the 
same, I would say they were least consistent with easing. In my 
judgment, the case for that conclusion is the weakest. And the 
strongest conclusion I can give is that they are most consistent with 
staying the same, but not inconsistent, of course, with tightening. 

Nor do I believe these data are very consistent with 

MR. BALLES. Thanks a lot! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you for your decisiveness! Are there 
questions of Steve, besides what did he say? Dave. 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -7- 

MR. EASTBURN. I think I understood. I’m not sure I agree. 
Steve, we did calculations similar to the ones you did, although not 
as sophisticated. trying to find what these other sources of funds 
might add to the aggregates--the money market funds, the RPs, and the 
ATS. We added them back in different ways and just didn’t find enough 
money there to add to the actual figures for either M1 or M2 to make 
that look as if it could be the full explanation. Then the question 
is: What is left? My inclination is to look at what happens to money 
as an indicator of what is happening to the real economy. If one 
looks at the shortfall in that respect, I think one might come to a 
different weighting of these policy conclusions than you did. My own 
conclusion, even after all these adjustments one might want to make, 
is that the weak money supply is telling us that the economy is going 
to be weaker in the future, and that that would call for a different 
policy prescription. 

MR. AXILROD. President Eastburn, that may or may not be. 
The point that I would like to make on these measurement problems is 
that in 1975 and 1976, as an example, when we added back in 1-1/2 to 2 
percentage points because we included the business saving accounts and 
all that in evaluating the money supply, I think that was wrong. I 
believe that understated what was happening because when the public 
decides that the existing stock of deposits is too large--that they’re 
going to take deposits and put them somewhere else--there’s no reason 
to think that that money necessarily is going to go into very close 
substitutes. It could just as well go into Treasury securities and 
items like that. So I think adding up the very liquid assets will 
tend to underestimate the demand shift. At the same time, I wouldn’t 
say that the residuals in equations are the perfect measure. But in 
’75 and ’76, Dave, I think they were a convincing argument that the 
demand shift was greater than we would have gotten by simply adding up 
the money substitutes. And to a degree I think they’re probably 
telling us something close to the same thing in the first quarter. Of 
course, even so, we may not get to so rapid a rate of growth. 

MR. EASTBURN. Could I follow up with one more question? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Certainly. 

MR. EASTBURN. The other part of my question is: How much 
validity is there to the idea that what is happening to money is 
supply induced and not demand induced? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, it’s very difficult to give an answer to 
that, President Eastburn, because we don’t control the supply of money 
and we make no effort to control it. 

MR. EASTBURN. Supply in the real economy [sense or] just 
weakness in the-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. May I interrupt this dialogue to give you a 
flash? We always like to have some drama in these meetings! So if 
you turn to page 8 in part I of your Greenbook, I have data that have 
just flown in. The second column on page 8 shows the [nominal] GNP 
number at 15.0 percent for the fourth quarter of 1978; that has just 
been revised by the Commerce Department to 15.6 percent. If you go 
across the columns to real GNP in the fourth column, it shows 6.4 
percent, which was the last estimate we had; that has been revised to 



3120179  -8 -  

6.9 percent. And the fixed weight business deflator was maintained at 
the 8.0 percent shown. If you go down one line to the data for the 
first quarter of 1979, we have the first estimate of the Commerce 
Department for quarter one. 

MR. PARTEE. It‘s a projection really. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. A projection, excuse me. It‘s not an 
estimate but a projection, for whatever it’s worth. As you can see, 
the staff has 12.2 percent for nominal GNP; the Commerce Department is 
saying 10.6 percent. If you go across to the fourth column, the staff 
is now saying 3.0 percent [for real GNP]; the Commerce Department 
projection is 1.4 percent. If you go across to the deflator, the 
staff has 9.6 percent and Commerce is now saying 10.0 percent. Now 
you can pursue your question, Dave. I didn’t want you to get trapped, 
you see. 

M R .  EASTBURN. I wouldn‘t have been if you hadn‘t given the 
figures ! 

M R .  AXILROD. President Eastburn, the only way I think I can 
answer is to say that, as you know, the System does no more than 
accommodate to whatever amount of money the public wants to hold at 
today’s interest rates. So in that sense we could always have more 
money [growth] if the System were to provide reserves more 
aggressively and let interest rates go down in the short run. That‘s 
the way I would answer. [As for] whether it’s a demand or a supply 
phenomenon, it‘s very difficult to disassociate the two. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I have John Balles next [on my list] and 
then Larry Roos. 

MR. BALLES. I’ll just pick up for a minute on the comment 
that Dave made. We’ve looked at these same numbers, Steve, and 
frankly, we come out more on Dave’s side than yours. We have here an 
array of the different Ms going up to M7. And in a nutshell what the 
facts seem to say is that they’ve all been decelerating since last 
fall, though to varying degrees, of course. Even if we look at the 
latest monthly growth numbers on MI, which includes all these money 
market funds, RPs, commercial paper, and so forth, the percentage 
growth now is less than half--or at least it’s no bigger than half-- 
what it was last fall. And in some cases growth is about a third as 
big as it was last fall. So I don’t see a simple tradeoff between, 
say, M1 and M2 and something in M7. 

The bottom line is that this is a very difficult and slippery 
area, as you well know, and judgments can differ looking at a set of 
facts. From my standpoint, I suspect that you may be overestimating 
the shift in the demand for money. I’m not at all sure it’s going on 
to the degree that would seem to be implied by your analysis, and I 
say that with all due respect. Judgments can differ on these things. 
The alternative explanation is that we’ve simply been very stingy in 
the provision of reserves. I think some combination of those two 
might explain where we’re coming out. But as I say, if one looks at 
the actual components of what goes into the so-called substitutes for 
money, it’s true that money market funds have surged, but the RPs have 
not. They haven’t grown proportionately any more than they did in 
1974. And the sum of those two has not grown proportionately any more 



3/20/79 -9- 

than it did in 1974, based on our look at the data. S o ,  I have to 
register some skepticism, to put it mildly, on the extent of the shift 
in the demand for money. It remains a judgment rather than a fact, as 
far as I’m concerned. 

MR. AXILROD. I have no quarrel with that, President Balles. 
In terms of dimension, I would feel very confident that a minus 2 
percent M1 in the first quarter is plus 1 percent, because I add the 3 
percentage points for ATS. I feel reasonably confident that it’s 
probably as much as plus 3 percentage points: and I have diminishing 
confidence as I go above 3 up to I percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. My questioning was going to parallel somewhat what 
John Balles said. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob. 

MR. MAYO. To follow up on this, I keep forgetting Steve, MS 
still doesn‘t include money market funds or RPs, does it? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes it does. 

MR. MAYO. Both? 

MR. AXILROD. Well, it ought to include them, netting out the 
CDs the money market funds hold. I’m not convinced that we’ve got it 
all measured exactly right. 

MR. BALLES. Your footnotes and documents say that it 
includes both, Steve. Am I wrong? 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, netting out their certificates, and they 
mainly hold CDs. Of course, that’s double counting not to net out the 
CDs . 

MR. AXILROD. Right, they should net them out 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, why don‘t we do a go-around before 
our break. As I said, I’d ask you to give your own ideas of how the 
economy is going and what you think the policy implications are. I 
forgot where we started last time so we‘ll just start with Paul and go 
around that way. 

MR. BLACK. How far do you want to take this, Mr. Chairman-- 
up to the point of giving specifications? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. NO, at this point, it‘s the qualitative 
direction you think [on policy] rather than specifications. Then 
after the break we’ll come to those. 

MR. BLACK. Right, short of specifications 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I look far enough ahead, Mr. 
Chairman, meaning through the year, I think the odds are better than 
5 0 / 5 0  that we‘re going to run into a recession by [year-end], and I’ve 
thought that for some time. I think the odds are being increased by 



3 / 2 0 / ? 9  -10- 

the oil situation and by what's going on in inflation generally. 
Having said that, I don't think we can change that much by any modest 
adjustments in monetary policy. I believe a real easing in monetary 
policy is likely to make things worse. My reasoning is that in the 
short run--and I'm mainly impressed by the evidence of the last six 
weeks or so--1 think we're much more up against capacity [constraints] 
and growing shortages, caused in part by those GNP figures you just 
read and the continuous upward revisions in those figures for the 
fourth quarter. I don't see that the economy has any real margin to 
grow here without seriously aggravating our inflationary problem. I 
think the growth we had late last year is already aggravating our 
inflationary problem. And I believe an attempt to [induce] very fast 
growth here would increase the odds not only of a recession but a more 
serious recession as we go along. 

One doesn't have to speculate to see that inflation is a lot 
worse. In my view we'll be lucky if that Commerce figure stays at 10 
percent for the first quarter when the final number comes out. 
Commodity prices are rising; through the latest information we have 
them rising at alarming rates. I suspect the oil price increase that 
the staff has projected in a very uncertain situation is, if anything, 
low; and it might be substantially low. Essentially, I think we're in 
retreat on the inflation side; if there's not a complete rout, it's 
close to it. And in my view that poses the major danger to the 
stability of the economy as we proceed. It's an obvious danger for 
international stability despite the welcome respite we've had in the 
last three or four months. That remains a major problem not only in 
terms of economic stability but in the dimensions beyond that if the 
dollar stability should give way not just to an erosion but the 
panicky situation we had earlier. 

So, without getting into any more details, there's no doubt 
in my mind that even if we didn't look at the aggregates at all, this 
is the time for some firming rather than the reverse. I think we are 
at a critical point in the inflation program, with the tide against 
us. ~f we don't show any response at all, we are giving an 
unfortunate signal in my judgment. I believe those concerned about 
inflation would find no response during this period almost 
inexplicable in terms of what we say regarding our worries about 
inflation. I do think there is some risk of a boomlet. I don't think 
it would go very far in real terms because I doubt the economy has the 
capacity to meet it. But it could add to those inflationary 
pressures, lead to excess ordering, and potentially to excess 
inventory building that would only make a recession worse if indeed we 
are going to have a recession later this year or in early [19801. So, 
without getting into the real complications caused by the money supply 
figures, but noting that I pretty much share M r .  Axilrod's conclusions 
in that respect, it seems to me that the real factors point in the 
direction I've indicated. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Mr. Chairman, last week I appeared before the 
House Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs to discuss monetary policy in 
the context of our Humphrey-Hawkins report, but the discussion soon 
turned to current monetary policy. Steve and I did our best to defend 
current monetary policy before the Subcommittee. The reason I mention 
this is that I'm obliged to report to you that the Chairman of the 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -11- 

Subcommittee, Parren Mitchell, wants the FOMC to know that he is 
concerned. He says he’s concerned not as an economist because he 
isn’t an economist, not as a monetarist because he doesn’t understand 
the arcane area of monetarism, but as an historian because he has 
noted that every time there is substantial and sustained weakness in 
the money supply, a recession follows. He wonders why the current 
situation would differ from previous situations. 

Now, I must say that I‘m not a monetarist either, but I do 
have some sympathy with Chairman Mitchell’s view of this. It does 
seem to me that we’ve had a sustained period of weakness in the money 
supply. It has been five months, October through February. Perhaps 
that’s marginal; it may need another couple of months to be truly 
sustained, but it’s getting pretty close to a sustained weakness now. 
I think it is also true that the weakness in money supply growth is 
substantial. If one makes the adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts, 
which I think is appropriate, one gets about a 1-1/2 percent average 
rate of increase in the narrow money supply over this five month 
period, compared with the 8 percent rate of increase recorded for a 
good many of the preceding months. That is a significant step down in 
the rate of expansion. I don‘t really believe much in taking these 
developments such as money market funds and money market certificates 
and RPs and that kind of thing as an explanation because they have 
occurred in the past. That‘s simply the reflection of what happens 
when interest rates are high; the rate of return on cash money is zero 
and people try to find substitutes. It’s the process of finding 
substitutes, as I said on the phone the other day, that we’re really 
describing when we look at this. 

Turning to the economic situation, I, too, think there are 
indications that we are in the last stage of a boom. Consumer 
spending has flattened; it has declined in real terms since the first 
of the year. There’s a little push in car sales, but that‘s simply a 
matter of clearing out the small cars because of the prospect that gas 
prices will certainly be higher and gas may be in short supply. 
Housing has clearly turned down. I don‘t think there’s any way one 
can read the decline of the last two months as being an entirely 
weather-related phenomenon because those developments are too 
widespread. There are too many other indications of weakness 
developing in that area, and we’ve just taken an action that will 
assure that the big lenders are not going to have as much money as 
they did before to put into the mortgage market. I don’t think 
capital spending is going anywhere. I’m quite impressed by the 
decline in contracts; I think all we’ve had is a little bubble in new 
orders for capital equipment that isn’t going to last very long and 
can, after all, be reversed by cancellations. One should always 
remember about those new orders that a great many of them are subject 
to cancellation; many orders were cancelled after there was a bubble 
in ‘74 and then the recession of ‘75. So, that can happen. It is 
conceivable that we will have a period of rapid business inventory 
accumulation and we may have some scare buying of materials; that 
seems to have been going on, but I don’t think it will last very long. 

So, I would have to say, looking at the real economy as well 
as the monetary numbers, that I now believe a recession is very 
likely--a recession which at this point the Federal Reserve will have 
done nothing about. We will have made no effort to block it in any 
way. We will have sat here again, seeing very weak monetary 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -12- 

aggregates as a precedent to the recession phase. I believe we're in 
considerable danger of that happening. You often ask us to give our 
views on [economic] growth over the policy period [relative to the 
staff's views], which are at the bottom of page 8 [of the Summary and 
Outlook part of the Greenbook]. I don't think we're going to have 1.7 
percent real growth this year. It could possibly be a bit above zero, 
but not very much. I don't think we're going to have 8.7 percent 
inflation. I think the staff has finally managed to predict a number 
that is higher than the one we will realize. That's partly because of 
my weaker scenario, but partly because I'm also very convinced that 
businesses are raising prices in anticipation of wage and price 
controls. And whether or not wage and price controls occur, these 
firms have taken their action and there will be a moderation in those 
markups in the period to come. And, of course, I don't expect the 
unemployment rate to be 6.3 percent at the end of the year: I think it 
will be 7 percent or above. So, that's the situation as I see it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I've looked over the numbers and 
I've looked over the projections and I also think we're in the final 
quarters of the boom. I had the staff put together for me a variety 
of indicators in the last three quarters before a peak. One thing 
that stands out is that they're never the same. There is very little 
similarity between the various peaks that we've had. We seem to do 
better [predicting] troughs and recoveries than we do with [the end 
of] expansions. I think we're headed toward a recession. As I look 
at the data and the projections, I think the disintermediation and its 
impact on housing are finally taking place. However, I won't feel 
comfortable until I see a March housing starts number [in trying to 
determine] where we really are in that area. The other elements of 
the economy still appear to be relatively well balanced. With the 
possibility that we could dip into a recession and the high costs of 
that in a variety of areas, I would take the position that we ought to 
wait another month until we have some better data. The first 
quarterly estimate by the Commerce Department is notoriously bad. It 
can bounce from here to over yonder in a month's time: in another 
month's time we'll have some more real numbers on the economy and that 
would be an appropriate time to move. I don't think we need 
additional restraint at the present time. For heavens sakes, our 
policies are finally beginning to work. Now is the time to sit back 
and let them work and not make it seem as if we're panicking about 
what's going on in the economy currently, which I think some people 
are doing. Also, I doubt that most of the spot prices are going to 
hold; some of them have been pushed up and are now beginning to recede 
somewhat. So, my recommendation is no change in policy at the present 
time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Bob. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out somewhat less optimistic 
than the staff. Like many, we've been impressed by the strength we've 
had in the economy. It has been much greater up until now, as far as 
the statistics show, than we had expected. But I'm becoming 
increasingly concerned by the appearance of scattered signs that we 
frequently do see before a major downturn. The Redbook mentioned a 
number of these, [including] a lengthening of delivery times, high 
capacity utilization, tight supplies in the market for skilled labor, 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -13- 

and the inventory figures. The last inventory figure, though partly 
explainable, coupled with an apparently heavy shift toward short-term 
borrowing on the part of businesses is certainly the sort of thing one 
might expect. And I'm especially concerned about the probability that 
in view of the petroleum situation we'll have some spawning of a 
general shortage psychology, which will lead to inventory buildups and 
probably heavy demands for short-term credit. And that will make it 
pretty difficult to keep M1 under control without pushing interest 
rates up rather high. Coupling this with the latest price data and 
the impending labor negotiations, I have to rate the possibility of 
stagflation or worse as pretty high. So my figures would come out 
lower than the staff's, somewhere in the neighborhood of what Chuck 
Partee said. 

Turning to the policy question, I think we have a difficult 
choice this morning. The weakness in the aggregates has persisted for 
about five months and this weakness has been a source of increasing 
concern to many of us, both within and [outside] the System. It seems 
to me that one could make a pretty good case for some easing this 
morning. But on the other side of the coin, there are three reasons 
why maybe we ought not take any action this morning. One, of course, 
is that we really don't know what those aggregates are saying. We, 
like so many others--John Balles and Dave Eastburn as well as Steve 
Axilrod--have tried to see what we could do by adding back in the 
things that might have been reducing the aggregates. And some of the 
arguments that people have made don't seem to us to hold water. But I 
don't think we can rule out the possibility, indeed the probability, 
that there has been a downward shift in the demand for money. If so, 
that's an important reason for not doing anything at this particular 
time. The second point is that historically we often have had a burst 
in the aggregates in April because of faulty seasonal adjustments, and 
I don't think we can rule that out. We could also have a temporary 
spurt in economic activity. And finally, the improvement in the 
dollar in the foreign exchange markets has been so fragile that I 
think any reversal of policy now could certainly jeopardize that. 
That gets me to the point where we work on [the specifics of] policy, 
and I won't say anything about that until after the break. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Willis. 

MR. WINN. M r .  Chairman, a sobering exercise at a time like 
this is to go back to the first quarter of last year and use our 
models or any other approach and ask oneself what conditions would 
produce a negative rate of growth in money supply in the first quarter 
of this year. We get astronomical interest rates and a lot of other 
things that we really haven't seen. So then we ask ourselves, given 
that everybody is expecting weakness at this time--and that's 
certainly the news--where do we find it? Again, if we follow our 
models, they may not work out quite this way. Having spent the winter 
falling into potholes, I take a pothole approach to economic 
forecasting. One of the potholes, of course, is in the energy area, 
with tremendous problems with respect to refining capacity. I really 
don't see how we can get out of this on any short-term basis. What 
this means for the consumer is that he may find he can't buy, beg, or 
steal gasoline. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The latter they can always do. 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -14 

MR. WINN. Okay. Then we divert more of our oil supplies to 
producing electricity; with the shutdown of the atomic plants in this 
area, I don‘t quite know what this means. Another pothole I would 
call to your attention is the fact that we focus pretty much on the 
domestic scene in terms of our analysis. Now, the international 
situation looks a little better at the moment, but as I travel around 
and see the diversions of some of these economies into the military 
side, I get concerned about what this means down the road. If a 
country puts that much of its [economic resources] into the military, 
the tendency is to use it in one form or another. How this will turn 
out, I don’t know, but we certainly can see trouble in Yemen and lots 
of other places that aren‘t in the headlines at the moment. The third 
point is the confidence factor on the international side and the 
tremendous flows that occur. And I look at confidence in another 
area--at many of our so-called monetary mechanisms. Take the credit 
unions and look at their loan/deposit ratios and their lack of cash; 
yet they‘re in the share draft business. What does it mean if 
customers really step up their demands for [withdrawing] their money 
from some of these [institutions] or want to transfer it? So, I would 
project the potential for weakness that everybody’s talking about, and 
then I’m raising the question of whether there are other possible 
developments. The only real weakness I can find at the moment in the 
District is the coal situation, but in other areas such as cement 
there is strength. A number of the raw materials producers are at 
capacity. Steel is running flat out. There’s just isn’t any [more 
capacity]. If we get demand for steel in excess of [the current 
level], we will really be faced with a blow-up the other way. Now, it 
may not occur. 

M R .  MORRIS. Did you say the demand for coal is weak? 

MR. WINN. Yes, weak 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That’s the one place where it‘s quite weak. 

MR. WINN. I would say I end up confused in my outlook; I 
think the uncertainty level is really quite high. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. So far it has been a 
very cheerful report! Now we come to Dave. 

M R .  EASTBURN. Mr. Chairman, before I start, could I ask you 
a question? Is there anything that you would care to say about the 
discussions going on in the Administration currently? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don’t know that there’s anything I am 
able to say. The President is giving very careful consideration to 
making some decisions about energy. He hopes to do so by the end of 
the month and then announce them. I think he is perhaps trying to 
bite off an awfully large number of issues. I don‘t know whether 
he’ll end up doing that. Of course, the core one is whether he will 
do something about decontrol or not. But there‘s a whole series of 
other things. He has not made any decision so far; it’s a question of 
options. On the economic side, I think the main concern is whether 
the wage and price standards program can hang together. There is good 
compliance by the major corporations, but there’s a feeling that 
medium and small corporations are ignoring it. They are going to put 



3/20/79 -15- 

some effort, I think. to [change] that. They’re also doing some 
technical things. They’re sweating it out as to whether they can get 

to fall into compliance, but it has been extremely 
difficult. 

MR. EASTBURN. I was impressed by the Vice President‘s 
comment, I believe over the weekend, in which he mentioned monetary 
policy and continued restraint on the monetary front as being 
important. I wondered if the Administration might be starting to put 
us in the forefront of-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think the Administration is frustrated. 
There’s nothing much they can do in the fiscal area now that would 
have much impact [in 19791. The deficit for this year is going to be 
less in any case, mainly because inflation is higher and, therefore, 
revenue flows will be higher. And there has been some shortfall of 
spending so that the deficit is now projected to be $33 billion [in 
fiscal 19791. I wouldn‘t be surprised to see it near $30 billion. 
And yet if they begin to cut back their $29 billion deficit projected 
for next year, that’s the short-term problem. So I think they look 
with great anxiety over to 20th Street and Constitution Avenue to see 
whether we can contribute to a solution. I don’t think they have any 
particular views on what, if anything, we can do. 

MR. EASTBURN. Well, my view could be summarized by reporting 
on a meeting that we had last week with some business people and 
[other contacts]. The discussion around the table was very optimistic 
about current conditions, almost uniformly so, until I took a [poll] 
asking who thought there would be a recession this year. And about 
three-fourths of the hands went up. And that’s where I come out. I 
agree very much with the analysis Chuck gave. I think the staff’s 
projections are too optimistic. I‘m also skeptical about the Bluebook 
projection that the money supply will bounce back in the next month or 
so. I think that the slow growth of money is telling us something 
about the real economy and that that has implications for policy. I 
would dearly hope that we could hold the funds rate where it is in the 
next month but I would like to have policy tilted so that if the 
aggregates continue to be weak, we could edge that rate down. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. M r .  Chairman, I, too, share the feeling that 
some business weakness, but not anything major, is likely early next 
year. I recognize that no two periods are exactly parallel, but 
history suggests that some things we experienced in ‘73 and ‘74 are 
coming back. Certainly, we are seeing a lot of anxiety about the 
prices of oil and food. We‘re seeing capacity constraint difficulties 
that have already been [mentioned]. There is the feeling that 
inventory building cannot be very far behind and some concern that the 
labor growth we have seen may be related as much as anything else to 
additional people entering the labor force [in an effort] to offset 
[the effects of] inflation. Indeed, [inflation] is the number one 
concern that we continue to hear about and it’s taking its toll. We 
would be reluctant to put much emphasis at the moment on movements in 
the aggregates because they are confusing, both to us and to the 
market as a matter of fact. It would appear that the markets are 
expecting some slight firming. I feel that our failure to do that 
might very well raise some unnecessary and unneeded questions at the 



3/20/79 -16- 

moment. It would seem that foreign exchange markets also would 
probably welcome a touch of firmness. Finally, while our projections 
are pretty close to most of the Board staff's projections, I want to 
make [clear my1 feeling that the staff probably has not projected a 
rate of price increases as high as we think it will be; we expect that 
to be more like 9 percent or probably above 9 percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bones. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, my position is essentially reflected 
on this button that I'm wearing which reads-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I must need glasses, I guess. All my life 
I've never had glasses but I can't quite make that out. 

MR. ROOS. Well, I stole a page out of the MIT buttons and 
this reads "MB 10-5 + 1Q = R." Translating that, it says that when 
the monetary base decreases from 10 percent to 5 percent and remains 
that way for one more quarter, there is a very real probability of a 
recession. Inasmuch as we're flooding the Midwest with these buttons, 
I'll be glad to present this to you, sir, at the end of the meeting 
because it is historic. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. MB 10-5? I could read that as more bunk 
for 10 minutes instead of 5. 

MR. ROOS. In spite of that, I'll proceed! As we analyze the 
behavior of money, and of course we do place a great deal of weight on 
the behavior of money, we observe that from December of 1977 through 
October of 1978, the monetary base grew at about a 10 percent rate. 
Since October of last year to the present there has been an abrupt 
decline in that rate to an average of about 6-l/2 percent, with it 
being close to 5 percent recently. Growth in bank reserves, which we 
think is important, has declined to a negative figure since October-- 
less than zero as compared to a 10.2 percent rate of increase from 
December 1977 through October of last year. 

Mr. Chairman, in spite of the confusion that some of my 
colleagues have expressed, if we look back in history, most of the 
postwar recessions that have occurred--with the exception of [the one 
precipated by] unusual circumstances with the oil situation in '73 and 
'74--have been preceded by an abrupt reduction in the rate of money 
growth that has persisted for two or more quarters. For example, what 
happened prior to the recession in 1970 was that from mid-1968 through 
the end of 1968 money was growing at about a 9 percent rate. Early in 
1969, monetary policymakers permitted that rate to fall to about a 3 
percent rate; it persisted at 3 percent for a couple of quarters and 
there was a recession. Look at graphs. Whenever this phenomenon--an 
abrupt drop in the rate of money growth--has occurred and has 
persisted, there has been a recession. So based on that analysis, 
which is not one to be taken lightly, I think if we're going to err, 
we should err at this time in the direction of moving toward slightly 
expanded growth in the monetary aggregates rather than anything of a 
restrictive nature. We should certainly watch this very carefully 
this month and next month because if [the weakness] persists, we're 
going to be in trouble. I would just add in closing that there is an 
old saying that politics makes strange bedfollows, and I'm glad to be 
in bed with my strange bedfellow Governor Partee on this issue! 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -11- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's an historic occasion! Thank you, 
Larry. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I'm also 
falling into bed with some people that normally I would not have 
associated with in the past. We have done some of the same work that 
Steve has described this morning and a couple of conclusions are 
apparent to me at least. One is that M1 is totally unreadable now 
and, as a result, I don't think we should put a great deal of weight 
on it. But by the same token, the impact on M2 is not nearly as 
great. It has been rather readable. In any event, if one looks at 
all of the aggregates, it's fairly clear that there has been a 
substantial deceleration in their growth. And given the environment, 
most people, including myself, would look for recession some time 
later this year or early [19801. It seems appropriate that we be 
careful not to worsen that [prospect] in the sense of doing any 
further tightening at this time. If we're going to move at all over 
the upcoming month, then I would prefer to skew our ranges and targets 
in such a way that we would, indeed, move [the funds rate] down a bit. 
Whatever we do today is not going to have an impact on bringing 
inflation down further, it seems to me. We have rather strong 
constraints in place now as we have had starting last May. To do 
anything further at this point would not have an impact on inflation 
for some period out but would ensure a recession. As a result, I 
would prefer, for this month at least, to hold about where we are but 
to adopt a policy that will permit us to move back a little if indeed 
the aggregates continue [to growl at a low rate through the month of 
March. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Bob. 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I still see considerable economic 
strength. Though the signs are increasing that we may now have some 
of the characteristics of the last stages of the boom, I don't think 
they are as strong as they have been at comparable times in the past. 
But I still would not be surprised at all if we have a couple of 
quarters of zero [GNP] growth at the tail end of this year and early 
1980. I don't get terribly distraught about that prospect because I 
think it is a function of a monetary policy that, despite all our 
picking at it, has been a fairly successful one over the last year or 
so given the circumstances we had to deal with. We are in a trap. I 
think we all recognize that; if we don't, we should. The business of 
[being accused of] overstaying our [policy of] restraint is still 
true; that will be true inevitably each time we come to this pattern, 
regardless of what we do. And I say that advisedly because part of 
our job description is to be a convenient whipping boy. I don't say 
that with any bitterness; I think this is part of the function of the 
Federal Reserve System. We are handy [as a scapecoatl. We can 
portray an image that is very greatly oversimplified in the public 
mind--to the extent that they pay attention to us at all--and I am 
willing to suffer with that. Even our best efforts at economic 
education seem unable to put a dent in that. 

So I think we are in for some problems later this year, but I 
don't feel any sense of panic about that. To the extent that we have 
an influence, and we certainly do, I think we are part of the creation 
of the leveling out--1 hate to use the word recession. I won't be 
like Fred Kahn and make it a banana much less a kumquat, which I 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -18- 

gather has succeeded the banana. We have some concern, and properly 
so, about a very low level of economic activity. But I view it as 
something that we can build on, not something to be afraid of. 

I find Steve's analysis very good. Sure, he is in a 
position, given his job description, to have to overly quantify some 
things that are extremely difficult to quantify in order to be as 
helpful as he can. But I think the tenor of his remarks is basically 
sound, and I interpret [his remarks as supportive of] my own feelings 
that it is too early for any easing. I would prefer to stay where we 
are and lean a bit toward--and really just a little--more pressure 
because I don't think it would do any harm. 

On the international side, although I'm not as pessimistic as 
Paul is, I think the basic tenor of his remarks is correct: We still 
do have a very serious problem in maintaining the value of the dollar. 
The improvement that we are seeing now, the "stability" in the value 
of the dollar, I think is going to continue partly for a very negative 
reason--that there is more concern about the stability of the 
Deutschemark, the yen, and the Swiss franc. That is damning with 
faint praise. But I think this will help us stabilize the dollar, 
even though it seems to some people that we're all going down 
together. We are still looked upon as a leader in terms of 
[unintelligible] government action. To overstate it or simplify it, 
we are seen as the Rock of Gibraltar. I would prefer to see us stand 
up and take the rap, since we're going to get it anyway, and keep the 
pressure on a bit longer. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Tom. 

MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, the Ninth District economy has 
been very strong and continues strong. Our District's unemployment 
rate is lower than that for the country, at 4.4 percent versus 5 .8  
percent. Our help wanted advertising is at a record high in the Twin 
Cities area. Farm income in our District is up sharply. The 
inflation rate in the Twin Cities was 11-1/2 percent for the last 
year, considerably higher than for the country. The only negative 
factor in our otherwise positive picture is housing starts; they are 
down. And at least in Minnesota we're not willing to say that that 
isn't weather-related this year. 

MR. PARTEE. I wouldn't think you'd build anything in that 
weather ! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They built two houses! 

MR. GAINOR. On the national level, we continue to be very 
concerned about inflation. Of course we're uncertain, as everyone is, 
about the impact of the oil shortage, and we don't fully understand 
the current state of the monetary aggregates. So in view of the 
uncertainty about oil, housing, and the aggregates, we would favor 
holding the line for this month. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Tom. John 

MR. BALLES. I hope Chuck has a king size bed because I would 
like to crawl into it too! There is no sense in reviewing in detail 
the way I come out because essentially I'm in agreement with Chuck's 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -19- 

analysis; we were apparently reading the same tea leaves. If that 
analysis is right, then the strategic problem for us now is how to get 
a soft landing. We can't stuff the genie back into the bottle as far 
as inflation is concerned. We shouldn't expect instant results from 
the tightening that we've engaged in since last November 1. We all 
know about lags in policy and, unfortunately, they seem to be longer 
on the price side than on the real economy side. So we're going 
through that usual agonizing period when the bad news comes now in 
terms of the damping the economy and the good news comes later-- 
perhaps as much as a year later--when monetary restraint begins to 
show through on the price front. The real danger at the moment, 
therefore, is overstaying restraint. 

I fully understood and concurred in the moves we made on 
November 1; in effect, since that time we've been targeting interest 
rates. It was done almost under crisis conditions because of the 
potential for international economic and financial disruption at a 
time when the dollar was going down like a rock. But we've done that 
and now we've seen some extremely slow monetary growth, even after 
adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts and so forth. And given the fact 
that the staff forecast for money has been way over the mark for 5 
months in a row now--and as Steve well knows I'm not being critical 
because this is a very slippery business--I will bet you a drink or 
dinner, Steve, that the actual March numbers will be about as weak. I 
suspect they will be down several percentage points from your present 
forecast, as they have been in October through February. So I am 
getting an increasingly uneasy feeling about overstaying restraint and 
I would begin to hedge our bets by a slight tilt toward a lower funds 
rate, trying to get money growth back up a little closer to what we 
declare to be our 12-month objective. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, John. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I suppose I'm as confused as 
anyone else. A nice warm bed is always attractive but-- 

M R .  PARTEE. I didn't know it was so warm! 

MR. BAUGHMAN. --that particular bed is rather crowded right 
now anyway. We have worked the numbers, as presumably everyone else 
has, and come to fairly inconclusive conclusions. By inquiring around 
I have attempted to get some impression of the activity in mutual fund 
accounts because, as you know, one can draw checks on most of them but 
the minimum size, though it varies, is very often $500. And it 
doesn't take a very large number of $500 transactions to equal the 
number of checks over $500. Now, the very small proportion of total 
checks in the system over $500 does account for a very high proportion 
of the total volume of expenditures handled through the check 
mechanism. So if there were some fairly persuasive evidence that we 
were getting a significant number of transactions through these money 
market funds--and after all it is expenditures not balances that move 
the economic machine--then there might be some basis for feeling a 
little less distressed about the indicated slow growth in [bank] 
balances. I take some comfort also in the indicated resurgence in 
demand for bank credit; I hadn't been inclined to downplay it to the 
extent that Steve has in his analysis this morning, although there may 
be justification for that. I hear generally from bankers that they 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -20- 

see quite a strengthening of demand for credit from their customers 
and across a broad array of types of activities. 

Just an incidental point: There’s a good deal of resentment 
in the western part of our District with respect to the very large 
amounts of emergency credit the government is injecting into 
agriculture [because] the evidence is that fair amounts of these funds 
are being diverted into conspicuous consumption on the part of the 
borrowers. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I didn‘t know anything was conspicuous in 
Texas ! 

MR. PARTEE. We should have had Ernie here to view those 
large tractors. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. I can see them all back home! It is 
interesting that we have had a fairly persistent decline in the number 
of rotary rigs in operation. The decline has been significantly more 
in Texas and to some extent in Louisiana than in the country as a 
whole. And this [is occurring] in an environment of obviously short 
supply of the items they would drill for. I also hear more reports at 
the present time than I have heard at any time previously relative to 
“shut in” supplies. As I say, this is a somewhat puzzling situation. 
I have raised questions with people engaged in this business as to 
why. The explanation given is almost universally weak prices and 
excess supplies of natural gas within the Texas market, When one 
asks, given the gestation period of bringing a well into production 
and given the trend in supplies and prospective demands for oil and 
gas, why a temporary price weakness in a given location should result 
in a significant reduction in the amount of drilling activity, [the 
shutdowns] seem to make a lot of sense to the people I‘ve talked to, 
although I’ve had difficulty fitting it together in my own mind. 

The weakness in housing in Texas at the present time I think 
is a phenomenon of usury ceilings. I would raise a question as to 
whether the national figures have been looked at state-by-state in 
connection with the usury ceilings to see whether that might be a 
significant factor--that such states might account for enough of the 
[weakness in] total housing starts that it would be important. AS I 
say, I think it is the dominant element in the picture in Texas, 
particularly for single-family housing at the present time. 
the demand is there; we’ve seen no indication of resistance to 
interest rates. It’s simply that with the legal ceilings and the 
legal question about points as well as the difficult aspects of points 
in the financing process that lenders have stopped making commitments 
on one-family dwellings. Of course, the fact that the legislature is 
in session and is considering this matter [of the usury ceiling] may 
be contributing to the shut-off of commitments at the present time as 
compared with lenders making more intensive efforts to try to work 
around the ceiling if that were not the case. 

I believe 

I’ve raised questions with everyone I’ve come into contact 
with who would seem to be in a position to know whether in the current 
circumstances there is something in the international arrangements 
which might be an explanation for the high volume of expenditures in 
this country from what appears to be a falling or a low volume of 
balances. Again, [that effort] has not been very productive. I 



3/20/79 -21- 

haven't uncovered anything there but I'll have to admit it still seems 
to me that something may well be there which we have not discovered or 
documented. It seems to me-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We're running a little low on time and I 
wonder if you could just conclude. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me, although based on historical 
experience it would be a very high risk position, that we should 
maintain the position we have had in recent months with respect to 
monetary policy. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think we're facing an emerging 
conflict between the domestic and international requirements of 
monetary policy. 
quite clearly, we're moving into a period where they are going to be 
in conflict, because I think we're approaching a cyclical peak in the 
economy some time around midyear for the reasons cited by Chuck 
Partee. I would simply add one more point: In the month of January, 
when we had no increase in industrial production, we had a whopping 
increase in inventories, which suggests that final demand was 
extremely weak. Now, this picture of an approaching cyclical peak is 
not conclusive and, of course, it won't be conclusive until the peak 
is three or four months behind us. And that is why monetary policy 
has always lagged in the past. If we're waiting f o r  conclusive 
evidence, we'll inevitably lag again. But if we change policy now in 
the face of inconclusive evidence, it means that we have to be 
prepared to shift again if it appears that the economy is somehow 
getting a second wind, which I think is unlikely but possible. In my 
view, we don't know much about the demand for money; we used to think 
we did a few years back. But we do know something about the supply of 
money. And one thing we know is that we're not going to get much of a 
supply if bank reserves don't grow, and they haven't grown for the 
past six months. If it's our objective to avoid a recession, I think 
we have to move today; I don't think we can wait for another month. 
One thing I've found around this table is that one can always make an 
impressive case for waiting for another month. But the evidence 
suggests to me that the time to move is now. I think the issue is 
whether we seriously are concerned about avoiding a recession or not. 
Paul, I think, is resigned to a recession; I think the international 
constraint may be more of a factor in his thinking than he let on. 

In the past year they've been nicely in harmony but, 

VICE C H A I W  VOLCKER. Inflation is a factor in my thinking. 

MR. MORRIS. But the issue is whether we will be better off 
in 1980 with a 7 percent unemployment rate or an 8 percent 
unemployment rate. I'm inclined to believe that in the long run we 
will be better off with a 7 percent unemployment rate simply because 
that is likely to be more conducive to the maintenance of the kind of 
conservative fiscal policies that are now being talked about in the 
Congress. I'm a little concerned--as I was about Nancy's idea of 
waiting a month--about John Balles's phrase "slight tilt," which 
implies a move to 9-7/8 percent or something like that [on the funds 
rate]. It seems to me that if we're going to move, we're going to get 
some flack no matter how much we move. We're going to get just as 
much flack moving to 9-7/8 as we would to 9-1/2 percent. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -22- 

MR. BALLES. My slight [tilt] was to 9-3/4 percent. 

MR. MORRIS. I think we ought to move at least to 9-1/2 
percent and we ought to move now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I’ve listened to a lot of wisdom 
around this table and-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you agree with any of it? 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, a good share of what has been said on 
both sides. I thought after the first two speakers that we had a very 
well defined two-camp arrangement. The subsequent speakers have 
blurred it somewhat. I look at this by trying to nail down, at least 
in my mind, a couple of points. First. looking at the economy, I 
think we do have [some strength] in labor markets, new orders, capital 
spending, business inventories, and loans. There is perhaps some 
weakness showing up in personal income--although I‘m not quite ready 
to concede that--and in housing and industrial production. But the 
primary weakness in this economy right now is that it’s [experiencing] 
an inflationary surge and there’s concern about oil prices and 
uncertainty on the international political scene. My interpretation 
of all this leads me to feel that we are near capacity in effective 
labor and in several industries, so I don’t really expect industrial 
production to be able to grow very fast unless we find some way to 
push a magic button and improve our productivity. On inflation, I 
think the surge is in food, raw materials, and energy. I give very 
little [weight] to the aggregates these days because they are totally 
confusing; I think we’re utilizing some stock we built up in the 
latter part of last year. Whether they will take off under the new 
set of rules I don’t know. From a policy standpoint, I think we have 
to balance some of the risks. Are we willing to risk a further surge 
in inflation, carrying it up beyond the 10 percent the Commerce 
Department is talking about in the first quarter and perhaps even up 
to a figure in the 15 percent area? I would view that [development] 
as perhaps one of the most debilitating to our entire economy of 
anything [that could happen]. The other risk, of course, is a 
potential recession. And the balancing of these risks is what I think 
the Open Market Committee’s decision is all about today. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thanks. Did you indicate which direction? 

MR. COLDWELL. I did not, Mr. Chairman. I‘ll wait until 
after the [break]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry. 

MR. WALLJCH. I think we’re in imminent danger of building 
into the economy a higher rate of inflation and of putting ourselves 
into a position, with or without a subsequent recession, of having to 
work that off and starting from a higher level with less chance [of 
success] than we had the last time around. It’s not true that we 
can’t work off inflation; we did it after the experience of ’74 and 
’15, But we’ve done very poorly of late and our surprises have always 
been that we’ve found more boominess in the economy and more inflation 
than we expected up through the last forecast which shaded the 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  - 2 3 -  

boominess a little. So, I see our main risk on the side of inflation. 
And I fear that we’re in some danger of validating the increase in the 
price of oil and accepting that as inevitable. I think we ought not 
to do that; I’d accommodate this kind of outside shock only partly. 
It seems clear that the economy is much closer to capacity than we had 
thought. That is, I think, accountable for a good part of the 
pressures we’re getting. Whether or not a recession is in the works 
is probably something that is beyond the power of monetary policy now 
to remedy. I think we have more chances of doing something about 
inflation than doing something about a recession. If there is a 
recession, it is likely to be a moderate and short one. I have that 
reaction because of the fact that it’s so widely advertised and, in 
the face of that, business behavior has been to step up plant and 
equipment expenditures. It seems to me they’re looking beyond the 
valley; they can’t possibly be planning to put much [capacity] in 
place before some kind of a slowdown occurs. Meanwhile, the inflation 
pressure is threatening the President’s wage and price program and if 
that collapses, we‘ve lost one further instrument. It threatens the 
dollar and if something happens to [weaken] the dollar, we will have 
more inflation. All this suggests to me that the dangers are more on 
the side of inflation than on the side of the real sector. I don’t 
want to minimize those real sector risks; I think they are real. I 
might add that people who are concerned about excessive boominess and 
excessive inflation are not just a small minority. I’m surprised how 
much support one sees around the country, even in the Congress and 
even among economists whom we have listened to and not usually found 
on the restrictive side--and even, if I may say so ,  amony some people 
in the Administration. So if we are talking about beds, there are 
some prospects for unusual bedfellows here. 

A s  for the aggregates, I have much sympathy for Steve‘s 
analysis. I think it is reasonably persuasive except perhaps the 
magnitude. 
something like a proxy for the aggregates, realizing that it’s not a 
very good measure of total credit. S o  that brings me to what I should 
say about policy. I think if we fail to do something that recognizes 
the threat of greater inflation, we will really add to that inflation. 
A demonstration [of our anti-inflationary resolve] is needed. At a 
minimum, I would not relax the funds rate for that reason. I’m very 
reluctant to push it up because I can see that six months from now we 
might regret having done that if the economy has weakened. I think 
some demonstration--an action on reserve requirements or the discount 
rate--might be more [appropriate], within a broader program than this 
Committee would ordinarily deal with. On the funds rate, I would like 
to hear the rest of the discussion. 

I would look at bank credit at the present time as 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Henry. Well, this has 
been very helpful. I think the best thing to do is to take a break 
for a few minutes and come back as near to 11:30 a.m. as we can and 
see if we can wind this up. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let me make a couple of observations. One 
is that in the course of these four years of business expansion, we’ve 
had all the elements of a long expansion. And we’ve had some new 
territory to explore since we‘ve had only one other period in our 
lifetimes when there has been high inflation during peacetime in the 



3 1 2 0 1 7 9  -24- 

United States. We‘ve had it in the whole decade but it’s higher than 
even the ridiculous rates of 6 percent we had in the ‘ I 3  to ’75 
timeframe. We don’t have much in our models to help us understand 
those periods. There were peculiarities in that period related first 
to the aftermath of mandatory controls and then the oil boycott, so we 
can’t crank that into our model and assume that that was an experience 
or a base from which all future periods of like rates will track. 

In this particular cycle we’ve had an usual experience where 
we have alarmed the public about inflation in order to get policy 
changes and they reacted by finding out that inflation is a danger, 
which makes our policy direction more difficult. Nonetheless, without 
alerting them, we couldn’t get the policy changes. And one of the 
things that consumers did in the face of this was to engage in 
preferring goods to money and, therefore, there was anticipatory 
buying which worked against our efforts to cool the economy. And 
businesses, having been burned so badly in 1973-74, have behaved 
extremely cautiously during this period. Their investments in either 
capital or inventories have been cautious. On a net investment basis, 
after replacement, we are not back to where we were at the prior peak. 
[Business firms] are actually investing less today than they were at 
the peak of the last cycle on a net basis. So there has been nothing 
exuberant about business behavior. They‘ve been quite prudent, I 
think. We now have recently [unintelligible]. And the question 
before the house is: Does this mean that businesses also have begun 
to cave in to the inflation psychology and have begun to opt for goods 
over money? And will this create a speculative boom that [produces] 
another peak of sustained inflation, which then will result in a 
bigger bust? 

Well, the data appear to be confusing. To the extent that 
any business decisions currently represent capital commitments, I 
would say that we should have little concern. Number one, the actual 
expenditures will be spread over a time [period] that we all predict 
to be soft economically at any case. In terms of material actually 
bought and paid for and labor actually employed, it will come at a 
time when there’s not excessive economic activity. To the extent that 
it works on the supply side and deals with increasing capacity and 
modernization and reduces unit costs and contributes to productivity, 
we should all be applauding and encouraging it. To the extent that it 
represents inventory accumulation, on the other hand, it could be 
dangerous because it could result in excess stocks, leading later to 
cutbacks in production, thereby exacerbating the slowdown and tipping 
the economy into unnecessary recession. So one has to analyze that. 
Now, to the degree that stocks are being replenished because of [final 
sales] in the fourth quarter being stronger than expected, that‘s part 
of the solution. To the extent that stocks are being accumulated 
because of the fear that there may be a trucker’s strike or a rubber 
strike, one has to admit that that’s not speculative behavior but a 
prudent hedge which has an impact on the economy later but does not 
represent a shift. To the extent that the accumulation represents a 
fear that the energy situation is a problem in terms of availability 
and cost--[if that fear] is rippling through the world again and 
feedstocks and petro-based products of all types and materials related 
to that are being bid up--if that is either hoarding or a hedge or a 
speculation, we have a problem. And to what degree that’s all 
happening [I don‘t think] any of us can judge. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -25-  

In any case, what we do today is unlikely in my opinion to 
have much impact on the real behavior of the economy for the next two 
months. Therefore, what we should be doing today is thinking about 
what our policy direction should be as the year progresses, thereby 
being more consistent with our longer-tern view that the monetary 
aggregates affect the economy over time. We could send up red flags 
or white flags or yellow flags and people are probably going to behave 
pretty much based on these other factors. 
situation is probably more overwhelming right now than anything else. 

S o  with all that, I would ask you to turn first to page 7 of 
the Bluebook and thumb through to page 13. Look first at the staff’s 
suggested alternatives for our directive for the period. Then look at 
page 13 where we can see [the projected outcomes relative to our long- 
run ranges1 if, for example, we took alternative B and were within the 
growth ranges contemplated for the aggregates for the next 2 months 
under alternative B. If we were pursuing M1 in the 4 to 9 percent 
range and we hit the top of it, we would get growth back up to just 
within our long-term range. We’d still be below on M 2 ,  at the top of 
our range on M3, and we would be just touching the bottom of our [Ml] 
growth range; on bank credit we’d be at the upper bracket. The 
Bluebook also continues to present to you the rates of growth for 
monetary aggregates that would be required to get back to the [upper 
limit], the midpoint, or the [lower limit] of our own target ranges 
over a period of time. Those I believe are shown on page 10. 

How they view the energy 

With all of that, my thought would be that the right posture 
now is one of seeking to [guide] the aggregates back toward our 
ranges, but not doing so with undue acceleration or signals of undue 
concern by moving too rapidly. I would be more patient for the reason 
that I think the economy is going to pursue its own course right now. 
Nor do I think we ought to start to send any particular signals of 
unusual tightening or monetary restraint because that wouldn’t do much 
in the short term and in the long term it would work against our 
desire, if we believe in our own ranges and the objective of getting 
back inside the ranges. For that reason I would be inclined to take a 
moderate course of more or less even keeling where we are; I‘d [put] 
our objectives for M1 and M2 in the 4 to 8 or 4 to 9 percent area 
[unintelligible]. Those are just my personal observations. I would 
appreciate having inputs from each of you. 

I might say that on the thrust of policy the score card reads 
as follows: John Balles, slight tilt toward a lower funds rate; Bob 
Black, no action now; Phil Coldwell will tell us later; Bones Kimbrel, 
some firming; Bob Mayo, hold the current position, although I gather 
from what Bob said that a trifle more restraint would be acceptable; 
Chuck Partee, what he said was that it‘s time to do something and 
reading between the lines I think he’d like to ease. Nancy Teeters, 
no change in policy; Paul Volcker, some firming; Henry Wallich, hold 
is what he actually said, but to demonstrate in some other ways that 
we are continuing our concern about inflation, which we obviously are; 
Ernie Baughman, maintain policy; Dave Eastburn, maintain the funds 
rate but tilt policy to ease; Roger Guffey, if anything, move in the 
direction of ease; Frank Morris, 9-112 percent today-- 

MR. MORRIS. Tomorrow would be all right. 



3/20/79 -26- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry Roos, err on the side of moving 
toward ease; Willis Winn. I’m not sure what you came down on, Willis. 

MR. WINN. Hold steady. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And Tom Gainor, hold the line. So that’s 
the rundown. Now let’s see what you’d really like to do. John 
Balles. 

MR. BALLES. Well, in my tilt toward less restraint--1 
certainly wouldn’t call it ease--on the specifications I would land 
somewhere between alternative A and alternative B. Specifically, on 
M1, the 4 to 9 percent range would be acceptable to me. On M2, I 
would make the range 5 to 9 percent based on my view that we shouldn’t 
let M2 fall further below the lower end of our 12-month range. That’s 
why the 3-1/2 percent in the Bluebook bothers me. And on the funds 
rate, I would like to see a range of 9-1/4 to 10-1/4 percent with an 
immediate move to 9-3/4 percent. One reason in particular for tilting 
toward a lower funds rate at this time is the point I referred to in 
my earlier remarks about the consistent over-forecasting by several 
percentage points on both M1 and M2 that has been going on for five 
months now. If that over-forecast continued in March, which is my 
full expectation, we’re going to see some more very low numbers in the 
growth of the monetary aggregates in the month of March. That would 
make a full six months and that begins to worry me. We really have a 
dilemma in the sense that the announcement effects could be 
counterproductive both with respect to the value of the dollar and the 
public‘s perception of what we’re up to. But realizing that there are 
lags in the impact of policy, as I continue to stress, and given my 
expectation of a recession by the middle of the year, I think it’s now 
time to begin to unwind this posture we’ve been in since November. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I guess it’s most accurate to say 
that I want a foot in each bed. I’m worried about both inflation and 
recession. I‘m worried about what a recession might do in speeding up 
inflation later by causing us to throw in all our chips. So I think 
we have to be sensitive to both concerns in reaching a policy decision 
and I believe we ought to let the behavior of the aggregates guide 
what we do in the weeks just ahead. We [at the Richmond Federal 
Reserve Bank] tend to do that more than perhaps most people around the 
table. I believe we could do this pretty well with alternative B 
coupled with an aggregates directive. As I read this, that would give 
us a midpoint [on M11 of 6-1/2 percent and would trigger some action 
to lower the federal funds rate if the aggregate came in at 5-1/2 
percent or lower. Growth at that rate would mean--if we look at this 
on a 3-month moving average basis, which is the way we like to do it-- 
no further deviation of M1 from the path that we’ve set from the 
fourth quarter of last year to the fourth quarter of this year; it 
would continue to be about as much below the path as it has been. For 
a change, I‘m less concerned on the up side and wouldn’t be bothered 
if we hit a 9 or 9-l/2 percent rate of growth in M1. I suppose what I 
said is tantamount to saying I want an aggregates directive on the 
bottom and a money market directive on the top. The M2 range in 
alternative B would suit me fine, but I have even less faith in that 
than in M1 because I think the tightening of money has depressed M2 
more. The money market funds have been coming mostly out of M2, I 



3/20/79 -27- 

think, rather than M1. So far as the federal funds range is 
concerned, I would prefer to see that stay at 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. 

MR. PARTEE. That's " B . "  

MR. BLACK. That would be "B." I'd buy those specifications. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Phil Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to do some of 
what Bob is suggesting, but with a tilt to it. I took your 
specifications to a degree: for M1, 4 to 8 percent; for M2, 3 to 7 
percent; and for federal funds, 10 to 10-1/2 percent, with a midpoint 
of 10-1/4 percent. A zone to play with between 10-1/8 and 10-3/8 
percent will enable the Desk to move around a bit. And if the 
aggregates come in extremely weak again, I would expect consultation 
by the Committee. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Coldwell has 
just spoken my piece. I would favor exactly the numbers [he proposed1 
of 4 to 8, 3 to 7, and 10 to 10-1/2 percent. I would not like to see 
the funds rate drop below 10 percent; I think that clearly would be 
misunderstood. In my view the danger is on the side of inflation. 
And with our visibility in the markets, both domestic and 
international, any failure to recognize this danger of inflation could 
indeed cause us problems. I would like to see us with alternative B 
and those numbers. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. It so happens that I've also jotted down 10 to 
10-1/2 percent on federal funds. I would treat it asymmetrically, 
rather than jump immediately to 10-1/4 percent. But if the market 
urge tended to push it toward 10-1/4 percent, I wouldn't resist it. 
For M1 4 to 8 percent is fine and 4 to 8 percent is all right for M2, 
although I don't feel strongly about that versus the 3-1/2 to I-1/2 
percent. I would do a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, if I had the nerve, I would suggest what 
Frank Morris did because I think that is what's really required if 
we're to have any chance of avoiding a recession. And [even] that 
might not do it, but it's a start. But I do think there is more of a 
signal hazard in the current rate of inflation than that policy would 
make appropriate. I believe that we have lost a lot of ground with 
reference to the projections that we gave to the Congress just six 
weeks ago and we don't have a sliding base or anything of that kind 
any more. So I would hate to see us lose any ground relative to those 
presumed growth rates in the aggregates, unless we could say to 
Congress that we're doing that because the business outlook is really 
very much stronger than we expected, and that's not the case. If 
anything, it's very much weaker than we anticipated or than we said 
was consistent with our policy. I think it's important to look at the 
aggregates and I would go to an aggregates directive. I could live 
with 4 to 8 percent [for Ml]. If you look at [the chart on1 page 13, 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -28- 

4 percent picks the growth up just a bit and 8 percent would get us to 
about the lower limit, so I could live with 4 to 8 percent in the 
spirit of compromise. I would like to raise M2 to 4 to 8 percent also 
because I think it’s very difficult to interpret what may happen in 
terms of the distribution of money market certificates between banks 
and thrifts when there is no differential and that is going to tend to 
favor the banks over the thrifts. Therefore, I would lift that range 
just slightly in order to allow for that contingency. So 4 to 8 
percent on both M1 and M2 I think would be satisfactory. 

On the funds rate range, I would like to tilt it downward a 
bit, though not as much as John Balles would. I can‘t visualize 
within those aggregate ranges any reason at all for taking the funds 
rate over 10-1/4 percent. So I think 10-1/4 percent ought to be the 
top and 9-1/2 percent ought to be the bottom. And I would treat [the 
range1 asymmetrically; that is, I’d leave the funds rate at 10 percent 
or a tad above where it is now until the aggregates begin to move. If 
they begin to show weakness within their ranges--toward the lower end 
of the ranges or below--1 would then move the funds rate down. I 
think the time has come to do that, if in fact we have another month 
where the aggregates are quite weak. Now, the staff is predicting 
that they won’t be: and if the staff is right, there wouldn’t be any 
easing. But if the staff is wrong, there would be an easing. So my 
preference would be 9-1/2 to 10-1/4 percent with a midpoint of 10 
percent from the standpoint of current Desk operations. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. Well, I can live with a 4 to 8 percent range on 
M1. And I don’t think 4 to 8 percent on M2 would make too much 
difference; I happen to agree with Phil that if things begin to come 
apart, we will need to have a meeting. I would like simply to stay 
where we are and would recommend a federal funds range of 9-1/2 to 
10-1/2 percent. If there’s any question on economic developments, the 
funds rate should be shaded down. I notice that we seem always to end 
up at the top of whatever our range is in the actual operations of the 
market, and I would like to see the funds rate on the low side of 10 
percent, but certainly not above 10 percent at the present time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Paul 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think we need to make some move 
in recognition of what has been happening on the inflation front. And 
I think it’s good for the stability of the economy in the long run, as 
I said earlier. In terms of getting back into the longer-range 
targets, these figures on page 10 don’t look particularly frightening 
to me in terms of what it would take to get back [into the ranges] by 
the third quarter. It seems fairly natural; it’s only a 6 percent 
rate of growth in M1. I’m not sure we wouldn‘t get that, or maybe 
even exceed it, in the ordinary course of events. I don’t know. I 
don‘t think that target itself, though written in our records, is 
written in heaven, given all the uncertainties that we had when we set 
it. But it doesn’t look to me as if we’re out of sight of it 
completely when I look at what it takes to come back. I also think 
we‘re in a much better position in terms of any easing move that we 
might want to make as time wears on. If these concerns about a 
recession, which I share to some degree, are true, we’re going to want 
to be easing at some point; we‘re going to have to. I would rather 



3/20/19 -29- 

make a small gesture now toward some firming and have a little more 
credibility when the case for easing is clear without upsetting the 
whole psychology of our basic anti-inflation program. I think we’d be 
a little better off. Looking at it in terms of the funds rate, I 
would be happiest going to 10-1/2 percent, which is a fairly small 
move when it becomes visible. I could live with the figures that Mr. 
Coldwell or Mr. Kimbrel cited certainly, which would involve a very 
modest move to 10-1/4 percent and putting the range at 10 to 10-1/2 
percent. 

I’ve been sitting here thinking about whether the money 
market or aggregates approach is better. With that kind of range and 
with some modest initial move, I could live with the aggregates 
approach easily enough, although I was originally thinking of a money 
market [directive]. Any of the ranges that have been mentioned for 
the aggregates seem a little on the high side to me except for the M2 
range of 3 to I percent, which doesn’t bother me at all. For M1, 8 
percent on the high side does worry me and I’d rather go with 
something like 2 to I percent and make sure we stay at 10-1/4 percent 
[on the funds rate] or move slightly higher if M1 actually gets up to 
the I percent area. I recognize that we have the telephone conference 
alternative at all times too, so the exact level of the aggregates 
isn’t quite as important to me as the movement on the funds rate. I’d 
like to make some gesture there immediately. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, I question the meaning of the aggregates. 
I think we have to add something to them, both for ATS and for shift 
in the demand curve, so I believe they are much higher than they look 
on paper. I would, therefore, take the C alternative, 3-1/2 to 8-1/2 
percent for M1 and 3 to I percent for M2. And somewhere in the 
directive I would make reference to the view that the aggregates are 
being interfered with by technological developments due to ATS and 
other factors, which I think should also be reflected in our one-year 
targets. There‘s no sense running after those if we have good reason 
to believe that something has happened to the demand for money that 
makes a given amount of money go further than we thought it would. On 
the funds rate, I would like to push it up just a little to 10-1/4 
percent and go to a range of 10 to 10-1/2 percent. But I do think the 
inflationary environment calls for some other kind of action, so I 
would say that the Board should move on reserve requirements or the 
discount rate or some combination of these in a moderate way. AS far 
as the nature of the directive is concerned, I’d like to have a money 
market directive with the range of 10 to 10-1/2 percent and, as I 
said, move to the midpoint of 10-1/4 percent with reasonable 
promptness. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, alternative B as presented in 
the Bluebook is an acceptable prescription for me. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. I would keep the funds rate where it is and I 
would use the bottom of the alternative A range [for Mll as the guide. 
I’d accept any growth in the aggregates above that bottom. And if the 



3120179 -30- 

aggregates started to break through that bottom, I would have a 
telephone conference call. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Roger 

MR. GUFFEY. I would prefer ranges for both M1 and M2 of 4 to 
8 percent--paying little attention to M1 but more to M2. in which I 
have somewhat more confidence--with a funds range of 9-314 to 10-114 
percent, centering on 10 percent, which may or may not be a 
perceptible move downward. That is 10 or 15 basis points that perhaps 
the market would read. And I would favor going to 10 percent 
immediately. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, I would move to 
9-l/2 percent on the funds rate. When that has been recognized in the 
marketplace, I think the Chairman ought to hold a press conference and 
explain this unprecedented development of the Fed moving the funds 
rate down before we're actually in a recession. 

MR. PARTEE. We don't know that for sure. We might actually 
be in one. 

MR. MORRIS. We might actually be in it, yes. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't actually know there's going 
to be one. 

MR. MORRIS. But it would be an unprecedented move and I 
think we would have to explain to the market that with a 10 percent 
funds rate, we've had no increase in bank reserves in six months and, 
therefore, no increase in the money supply. We need to explain that 
although our concern about inflation has not diminished, we also have 
concerns about the economy and want to keep it on a slow growth path 
rather than send it into a recession. We should note that if our 
concerns about the economy should change--if it turns out that the 
current trend toward a softening in the economy tends to be a short- 
term phenomenon--we will be quite prepared to move the funds rate back 
up to 10 percent. At least we'd have a head start on the job that I 
think we're going to have to do later on anyway. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. If our concern, Mr. Chairman, is to avoid or at 
least minimize the recession, and if our concern is about continuing 
to undershoot the growth ranges for the aggregates we had projected, I 
think there's no way we should tolerate a range that could possibly 
entail M1 growth at a rate as slow as 4-114 or 4-112 percent. So I 
would recommend raising the lower end of alternative A, if you will, 
to 6 percent so that under no circumstances could M1 growth continue 
at 4 to 4-112 percent. The M2 range is satisfactory as shown and in 
order to have the greatest opportunity of avoiding a continued 
undershoot of the aggregates, I think we should widen the fed funds 
range and allow the possibility that the rate could be reduced 
significantly. If the signal problem is difficult, let's make the 
range 9-1/4 to 10-114 percent. I think we should have an aggregates 
directive and an understanding that the Desk should keep an eagle eye 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -31- 

on these aggregates and not permit them to sag by concentrating on 
maintaining the funds rate near the upper end of its target range. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Larry. Willis. 

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I'd take generally alternative B 
with a 4 to 8 percent range on both the M1 and M2 ranges and an 
aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Tom. 

MR. GAINOR. Mr. Chairman, we would favor alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. As usual we have complete unanimity! 
For M1, 4 to 8 percent seems to be the most popular range, with six 
[members]. And we have for M2 four who said 4 to 8 and four who said 
3 to 7; we had one for 3-1/2 to 7-112 and one for 5 to 9. For the 
funds rate, 5 people want 10 to 10-1/2 percent--six, I guess. 

MR. PARTEE. Of the voting members? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'm talking just about the voting members. 
Well, I have Phil Coldwell, Bones Kimbrel, Bob Mayo, Paul Volcker and 
Henry Wallich. That's five. I miscounted, excuse me. 

ME1. COLDWELL. The 10-1/2 percent is at least a ceiling on 
all the ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, nobody was over 10-112 percent. 

MR. COLDWELL. There was variation on the bottom, though. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, one of us, Nancy, had a 10-112 percent 
top limit but that was with a 9-112 percent bottom. Chuck had 9-112 
to 10-1/4, Bob Black had 9-3/4 to 10-112, and John Balles had 9-1/4 to 
10-1/4. But on the low side we had five with a lower limit of 10, two 
at 9-1/2, and one each at 9-3/4 and 9-1/4 percent. I haven't said 
anything yet. 

MR. BLACK. It averages Out to 9-314. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. It looks to me as if we could cut 
this on a 4 to 8 percent on M1. I don't know quite what to make of 
M2, but 3-1/2 to 7-112 percent looks to be a mid-range [preference] 
And the compromise area might be 10 to 10-1/4 percent on fed funds. 

MR. PARTEE. And then just have a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, and just have a money market 
directive--stay or more less where we are. That's what would seem [to 
be closest to a consensusl. How many would favor that? 

MR. BALLES. A question first, Mr. Chairman: What is your 
reading on the consensus view for the midpoint of the federal funds 
range? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. As I look at this, I'd say the consensus is 
to stay at about the prevailing rate, which is 10 percent plus. Five 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -32- 

were for the prevailing rate. One--that was you--was for a lower 
rate. And Phil and Bones were for just a slight firming--I would say 
something a little over 10, maybe 10-1/8 percent. Some wanted higher. 

MR. PARTEE. It is just four weeks until the next meeting, is 
that right? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's correct. Well, let's try that one 
in a quick straw vote: On MI, 4 to 8; on M2, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2; on the 
fed funds rate, continue in a 10 percent plus mode. It has really 
been about 10-1/8 percent, hasn't it? So let's say around 10 or 
10-1/8 percent, in that range. Paul, how would you feel about that? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I can buy the ranges for the 
aggregates but the one for the funds rate I can't. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You can't buy the funds range, all right. 
But you can buy the aggregates. John? 

MR. BALLES. If we're talking about preferences, it's a 
little too tighz for me. I would say no. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The aggregates bother you? 

MR. BALLES. The aggregates directive is what I'd like and I 
failed to mention that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I mean do the aggregates numbers that were 
suggested concern you also? 

MR. BALLES. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Bob Black. 

MR. BLACK. I would go along with it, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to point out that with the 4 to 8 percent M1 range and a money 
market [directive], we would not do anything until we got a rate as 
low as 4 percent on M1. I'd rather see that [trigger] a little 
higher, but I can live with it. If one looks at those charts, that's 
not-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It shows a tick up. 

MR. BLACK. It's a tick up, but I'd go with it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. No, I think the ceiling on the funds rate is 
too low. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. I find it a little difficult too, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Which part of it didn't you like? 

MR. KIMBREL. The funds range is just entirely too narrow. I 
think the aggregates ranges are fine. 



3/20/19 -33 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I’d prefer the 10-112 percent upper limit. I 
don’t care that much about the 9-112 versus 9-314 percent [on the 
bottom]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I would buy it for four weeks, but I find 
it too tight. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I could buy it. I think we should stay just 
where we are at this point. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. No, I can live with the aggregates, but I’d 
like to see the funds rate a little higher. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It looks as if we’re going to have a very 
close vote today because we have those who think this is too tight and 
those who think it’s too loose. We have three who indicated they 
could accept it and five who indicated they couldn’t. Of those, John, 
you would prefer it to be less restrictive? 

MR. BALLES. Let me say something here because I realize we 
have to have a compromise between those who feel the current proposal 
is too easy and those who feel it’s too tight. The one thing that 
could be changed so I could go along with it would be to move from a 
money market directive to an aggregates directive. At least that 
would-- 

MR. PARTEE. With a quarter point range on the funds rate? 

MR. BALLES. Well-- 

MR. BLACK. It changes the trigger point. 

M R .  MAYO. Yes, but not much. 

MR. PARTEE. What would we do in the case of a tie? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The Chairman decides, obviously. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A plurality-- 

MS. TEETERS. Maybe the thing to do is to stay with 9-3/4 and 
That would 10-112 percent with the understanding that we can consult. 

get both ends of the spectrum. 

MR. PARTEE. You mean just continue the present fed funds 
range? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But you said widen the range. 



3/20/79 -34- 

M S .  TEETERS. No, [retain] the one we've been operating with, 
the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, which gets both ends of the spectrm. 

MR. BALLES. Yes, that would make a lot of sense. 

MR. PARTEE. I think so, too. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, let's try 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent. Is that where we are now? 

M S .  TEETERS. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. What was our directive last time? 

MR. ALTMA". We didn't have a range. We had "maintaining" 
the prevailing rate provided the aggregates stayed within their 
ranges. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's what I thought. 

MR. PARTEE. Oh, really? I thought we had a range. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we had no range. It's one of the few 
times when we had no range at all. However, let's try it with a 9-3/4 
to 10-1/2 percent range now. 

MR. BLACK. Is this with a money market directive? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. From what 1 hear, let's try this on an 
aggregates directive first. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that means no change in the 
prevailing federal funds rate? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That means we stay where we are, the 
prevailing rate. We have 4 to 8 percent for M1, 3-l/2 to 7-1/2 
percent for M2, 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent for the funds range and we 
stay around 10 percent plus--10 to 10-1/8 is the maneuvering room--and 
an aggregates directive. Let's try it again. Paul. 

Vice Chairman Volcker 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Teeters 
Governor Wallich 

NO 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
NO 
Yes  
Yes 
yes 
NO 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I would vote for that, which means we would 
have a 6 to 4 vote. Okay, let's take a final vote. Secretary, would 
you read what it is we're proposing? 

MR. ALTMA". The M1 range is 4 to 8 percent and the M2 range 
is 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent; the funds range is 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, 
with the initial objective at the prevailing rate of 10 to 10-1/8 
percent. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -35 -  

MR. COLDWELL. And a money market directive? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. A n  aggregates directive. 

MR. ALTMANN . 
Chairman Miller 
Vice Chairman Volcke 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Teeters 
Goveror Wallich 

Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
No 
NO 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 

!r NO 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, we have a vote. There's some other 
business for the meeting, I think. 

MR. ALTMA". Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The next item is the consideration of the 
Manager's recommendation with respect to foreign currency operations. 
Alan Holmes. 

MR. HOLMES. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Alan. Any questions 
or comments? Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Alan, do you have the feeling that the Germans 
would want us to use Treasury funds raised in their market to repay 
swaps rather than go to a second renewal? 

MR. HOLMES. Yes, I think the Germans would like it and the 
Treasury would not; so there's a bit of an impasse there. 

MR. WALLICH. Yes, I wouldn't either. I think the Treasury 
is right. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any other questions or comments? 

MR. PARTEE. What would be the effect of that anyway, Henry? 

MR. WALLICH. Well, we use up the easily disposable money 
where nobody can say "no" when we want to use it and we put ourselves 
in their hands. And they can restrain us-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We can draw on the swap but we have to get 
their concurrence. 

MR. PARTEE. I see. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It cuts down our flexibility. 

MR. PARTEE. I agree with you. It's undesirable. 

MR. WALLICH. Particularly in light of the 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  - 3 6 -  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Other questions or comments to Alan? Next, 
we have distributed a memorandum from Peter Sternlight and Bob Mannion 
on the Lending of Securities. Unless there are any comments or 
dissents, we could approve that. 

MR. COLDWELL. May I raise a question, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL. In view of the rising volume in the lending 
area it seems to me that we ought to be raising our interest rates on 
this, perhaps to a 2 to 10 percent range instead of the current range. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have a differential now, Governor, 
and I think it's one that generally induces the dealers to look 
elsewhere before they come to us, although as you mentioned there has 
been an increase this past year. I think that is largely just because 
of general shortages of collateral in the market. 

MR. PARTEE. What is that differential customarily, Peter? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. We are charging about double what they would 
have to pay elsewhere. 

MR. PARTEE. About double? 

MR. HOLMES. And with an escalating scale if they don't pay 
off [on time]; that's the point. 

MR. COLDWELL(?). My only point is that we are starting to 
see an enlargement of this and I would raise questions as to the 
desirability of our providing more and more [of these securities 
loans]. I think we can provide a little more disincentive to borrow 
by raising that rate slightly. Two percent is not a large change. 

M R .  WALLICH. I'd like to support this, because it seems to 
me it would induce greater effort on the part of the market to find 
collateral in advance and be prepared [to meet obligations]. It would 
also be helpful should the float become very large again, so we're not 
a cheap lender of last resort anyway. 

MR. HOLMES. Well, we're not a lender of last resort, 
Governor Wallich; as you know, we will lend only in the case of a 
failure to a dealer. They just can't come and borrow from us for any 
purpose. 

M R .  WALLICH. Yes, I see your point 

MR. COLDWELL. But they do come and borrow. The question is 
the degree to which they push to try to cover [their shorts1 before 
they come to us. A little more price disincentive might-- 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the difference between 3/4 percent and 
1-1/2 percent is already a substantial incentive for dealers to try to 
find collateral anywhere. I think over this past year, with the 
growth in the use of the repurchase agreement by banks, there has just 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -37- 

been that much less collateral in the market. I don't think that's a 
lasting situation; at least I hope it's not. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that this is a religious 
issue. I can see charging a little more but it's perhaps a peculiarly 
bad time, given the unfortunate profitability situation of government 
securities dealers for some time now. I wonder whether we couldn't go 
along as we are now without throwing a rock in the bucket. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want to review this in six months 
instead of a year? Why don't we put it on the agenda for a 6-month 
review and approve it the way it is instead of waiting for the full 
year? And we will see how it goes. 

MR. COLDWELL. I would like to have a little study done on 
the question of what [a rate change] would perhaps do. 

M R .  PARTEE. Quantify the idea of raising the margin, and see 
what the effect would be. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, on that basis, may we have your 
approval? Thank you very much. The next item is a review of the 
Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations. Has that been 
distributed? 

MR. ALTMANN. Yes, it's attached to the-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Is there any change? Is there any dissent 
from approving it? Hearing none, we will approve it. Item 14 of the 
agenda involves a, b, c, and d--the review of the Authorization for 
Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, the 
Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations, 
and the Special Authorization. No changes are proposed in "a" and "d" 
and minor changes are proposed in "b." Are there any questions about 
those? 

MR. COLDWELL. We have reached the alternate procedural 
1 imi t s- - 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's "c" and we will come to that in just 
a second. Any problems on agenda items 14a, b, and d? There are 
minor changes in "b." But the changes involve taking out the word 
"proposed," which used to be before the words "IMF article IV." 
That's because it's no longer proposed; it's now effective. That's a 
big change! I hope you all will go along with that. On those three 
documents are there any problems? May we approve them? Yes, Bob. 

MR. MAYO. I have just one slight worry, though I'm not going 
to oppose approval. In "a" I have no objection to the $300 million on 
any day, but I think this is-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we are not there yet. 

MR. MAYO. Oh, we are not on '"a"? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Isn't that "c"? Have you changed them on 
me? 



3/20/79 -38- 

MR. COLDWELL. It's attachment A; that is the '"A" [he's 
referring to], Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, then let's take the one that has 
several proposed changes, the Procedural Instructions with respect to 
Foreign Currency Operations, and deal with that. Then we'll pick up 
the others, which don't have changes, other than the minor one that I 
mentioned. Alan, do you or Steve want to comment on this? 

MR. HOLMES. Well, I think the memo that we put out ought to 
be self explanatory. I am not one who particularly likes daily limits 
on operations, but I can see why members of the Committee would like 
them, and I think those that are being proposed are ones we can live 
with for the time being. If we do run into problems operating under 
them, we will certainly come back to the Subcommittee and to the 
Committee. I don't foresee any problems at the moment. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve, any comment? 

MR. AXILROD. NO, I have nothing to add. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are you all familiar with what is being 
proposed? We went without limits for a while except the $ 8  billion 
limit on the total position. What's being proposed now is that we 
limit the changes between meetings. Would you review it for me? 

MR. ALTMANN. Under the procedural instructions, paragraph 1A 
says that the Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee, or with the 
Chairman if the Chairman believes that consultation with the 
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available, any operation that 
would result in a change in the System's overall open position in 
foreign currencies exceeding $100 million on any day or $300 million 
since the most recent meeting. The proposal would be to increase 
those two limits--to raise the daily figure from $100 to $300 million 
and to raise the figure for the change since the most recent regular 
meeting from $300 million to $1 billion. In paragraph 1B. which has 
to do with changes in the net position in a single currency, the daily 
limit would be raised from $100 million to $150 million and from $150 
million to $300 million when the operation is associated with 
repayment of swap drawings, and the intermeeting limit would be 
dropped. 

Paragraph 2 has to do with operations going beyond those 
limits, which would have to go to the Committee for approval. It says 
that the Manager shall clear with the Committee or with the 
Subcommittee if the Subcommittee believes consultation with the full 
Committee is not feasible in the time available and so forth "any 
operation that would result in a change in the System's overall open 
position in foreign currencies exceeding' the limit. The old limit 
was $500 million and the proposed alternative is $1-1/2 billion. 
That's for the change since the most recent regular meeting. Anything 
beyond that would have to go to the full Committee. Those are the 
proposed changes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think you all have had a chance to review 
[this memo]. Are there questions now? Bob, you had a question. 



3 / 2 0 / 7 9  -39 -  

MR. MAYO. Yes, my only question is on paragraph l A ,  Mr. 
Chairman. The $300 million on any one day doesn't bother me; I'm a 
little uneasy about the $1 billion since the most recent meeting. 
This is a very volatile [market] and I guess my question is, Alan: Do 
you really need that much room on the cumulative amount? 

MR. PARTEE. Without contacting the Subcommittee? 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. HOLMES. I would think, Mr. Chairman, that if we have an 
opportunity to pay a billion dollars in Deutschemark debt between 
Committee meetings, we ought to go ahead and do it. Now, if we are 
intervening heavily on the other side, obviously, we are going to be 
reporting this [intervention] regularly to the Subcommittee and to the 
Committee generally. But I would like that larger leeway for the time 
being because our main effort now will be directed at repaying debt, 
and I think we ought to do that as rapidly as we can. 

MR. COLDWELL. That's not the question, though, Alan. The 
question is: Is it the Manager's prerogative to carry this up to a 
full $1 billion without consultation even with the Subcommittee? 

MR. HOLMES. Well, as you know, we report daily to the 
Subcommittee on what we have done. We are not without surveillance on 
any of this. 

MR. WALLICH. If I may add to this-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, there is pretty close contact 
[between the Manager and the Subcommittee]. I would certainly expect, 
if operations of that order of magnitude or anything remotely 
resembling that were in prospect, that prior conversations would have 
taken place. So-- 

MR. PARTEE. Then why not make it subject to prior approval, 
if there have been prior conversations? 

MR. WALLICH. Because the Subcommittee is sometimes hard to 
get together. 

MR. PARTEE. In that case, the Chairman-- 

MR. COLDWELL. The Chairman can act [for] the Subcommittee. 

MR. HOLMES. That's what it says. 

MR. WALLICH. We can do that. I think that reduces the 
flexibility somewhat. The Chairman, too, may not be easily accessible 
so I don't see a great deal of risk here. 

MR. PARTEE. If the Chairman is not accessible, does somebody 
substitute for the Chairman? 

SPEAKER(?). Yes 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -40- 

MR. WALLICH. I guess that's the Vice Chairman 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you can't, [then] you get the 
Subcommittee or the Vice Chairman. You could have the Chairman not 
there and the rest of the Subcommittee [available], couldn't you? 

MR. ALTMA". We've had one occasion when the Chairman of the 
Committee was not available and, as a matter of the fact, the Vice 
Chairman of the Committee was not available. And we went to the Vice 
Chairman of the Board who is able to act as Chairman of the Committee. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But in the first instance if the 
Chairman wasn't there and the rest of the Subcommittee were 
available-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are you all clear on what we are talking 
about now? There could be no more than $300 million in one day, 
right? And we are talking about a cumulation of $1 billion between 
meetings. We couldn't run this up [to $1 billion] in one day, Phil, 
because at $300 million a day we would need three full days, or more 
precisely 3 and 1/3 days, of maximum operation to get there. So it 
would have to be getting up there and we watch it every day. I think 
the Committee would really be doing something wrong if we were not 
[aware] because we are in touch with this not [only] by the day but by 
the hour often. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If $300 million is right for the 
daily limit, and I think they need something like that flexibility by 
the day, it's hard to see that three days of operations [could occur1 
without formally figuring the-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We will do whatever the Committee wants. 
We can cut this back to $500 million or whatever you think, but I 
don't think it represents a serious problem. 

MR. MAYO. Well, I don't either, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted 
to hear this sort of discussion. It has helped me. 

MR. PARTEE. I think it's procedurally poor. 

M R .  COLDWELL. I think it is, too, but it's even worse on the 
next page. I don't think it's desirable for the Subcommittee to 
authorize an open position above $1 billion. The full Committee ought 
to look at an open position change above $1 billion. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I just have to disagree because we have had 
to suspend these rules when we got into difficulty. Now you want to 
put them in so we can suspend them again if we get into difficulty. 
The only way we could operate on the day we did $1 billion dollars in 
one day was to have some authority to do so .  So on that day we did 
suspend the rules. You're kidding yourself about your procedures 
because when we got into the real heat of battle you had to give us 
complete authority. Now you are saying while we don't have the heat 
of battle put the limit down tight; and when we have the hear of 
battle and the real danger comes and the authority could be abused, 
we'll take it off completely. That's poor procedure in my view. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't disagree with $1-112 billion, Mr. 
Chairman, but I think the Subcommittee ought to be formally involved 
before we get to $1 billion, maybe at $600 million. 



3 / 2 0 / 1 9  -41- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want to cut it to $750 million? 

MR. PARTEE. Say $ 6 0 0  million, or 2 days-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, two days or $600 million is fine. 
Does that suit everybody? 

M R .  HOLMES. We can live with almost anything, but if we run 
into trouble, we’ll come back. The thing that frightens me the most, 
Mr. Chairman, is that if we get a sudden huge capital conversion and 
the Germans come in and offer us, say, $350 million, I would much 
prefer to be able to say yes right then and there--and [not] say I 
have to wait and consult first--because [the $350 million] might not 
be there when I get back. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, Alan, when it goes up to $ 3 0 0  or $400 
million after one day’s operation, it would be possible to go to the 
Subcommittee and get prior approval. 

MR. HOLMES. I think we can do it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I think that’s all right. We keep some 
leeway. We can operate that way. With that amendment, to $600 
million, may we have your approval? Any other questions or comments? 
I don‘t want to cut this short, but hearing none-- 

MR. COLDWELL. I will not vote for the $1-1/2 billion. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Does anyone else feel negatively about 
that? Certainly, if we get back into really active trading again, it 
could run that [much]. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I, for one, would feel that they need 
the leeway because it‘s just too cumbersome to get the Committee 
together when caught in the heat of battle. We can’t get into that 
kind of-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are there any other questions on that? All 
those in favor say “aye.” 

SEVERAL. Aye. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Opposed? 

MR. COLDWELL. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. So voted. I believe that we have only one 
other item unless there were questions on the other three parts of 
agenda item 14. I assume that those with no changes and this one 
little minor change are acceptable. Is that correct? Hearing no 
dissent, that’s approved. The next thing is to confirm that our next 
meeting is on April 17 and to adjourn for lunch, which will be in the 
usual place. Thank you all very much. 

END OF MEETING 


	790320meeting
	790320staffstatements



