









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING 

May 22, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 

staff Statements ADDended to the TranSCriDt 

Ms. Greene, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations 

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist 



M e e t i n g  of  F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee 

May 2 2 ,  1979 

A m e e t i n g  of t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee was 

h e l d  i n  t h e  o f f i c e s  of t h e  Board o f  Governors  of t h e  F e d e r a l  

Reserve Sys tem i n  Washington,  D .  C . ,  on Tuesday ,  May 2 2 .  1979,  

b e g i n n i n g  a t  9 : 3 0  a.m. 

PRESENT: M r .  Miller, Chairman 
M r .  V o l c k e r ,  V i c e  Chairman 
Mr. Bal l e s  
Mr. Black  
Mr. Coldwe l l  
Mr . R i m b r e l  
Mr. Mayo 
M r .  P a r t e e  
h l r s .  Teeters 
Mr. W a l l i c h  

Messrs. G u f f e y ,  Norris, Roos, and Winn, A l t e r n a t e  
Members of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Baughman, E a s t b u r n ,  asd W i l l e s ,  P r e s i d e n t s  
of  t h e  F e d e r a l  Rese rve  Banks o f  D a l l a s ,  
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  and  V i n n e a p o l i s ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Mr. Altmann,  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  B e r n a r d ,  A s s i s t a n t  S e c r e t a r y  
M r .  P e t e r s e n ,  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
Mr. Oltman,  Deputy  G e n e r a l  Counse l  
M r .  Mannion, A s s i s t a n t  Gene ra l  Counsel 
M r .  A x i l r o d ,  Economis t  

Messrs. B r a n d t ,  E t t i n ,  K e i r ,  Keran ,  K i c h l i n e ,  
S c h e l a ,  Truman, and Z e i s e l ,  Associate 
Economis t s  

Mr. Holmes, Manager System Open Market  

Mr. S t e r n l i g h t ,  Deputy Manager f o r  D o m e s t i c  

M r .  Coyne, A s s i s t a n t  t o  t h e  Board of 

Account 

O p e r a t i o n s  

Governor s  



5 f 22 179 - 2 -  

M r .  Siegman, Associate D i r e c t o r ,  D i v i s i o n  
of I n t e r n a t i o n a l  F i n a n c e ,  Board of 
Governors  

t a r i a t ,  Board of Governor s  

S e c r e t a r i a t ,  Board of Governor s  

M s .  F a r a r ,  Economis t ,  Open Market  Sec re -  

Mrs. Deck, S t a f f  A s s i s t a n t ,  Open Market 

Messrs. B a l b a c h ,  J .  D a v i s ,  E i senmenger ,  and 
Fousek ,  S e n i o r  Vice P r e s i d e n t s ,  
F e d e r a l  Rese rve  Banks o f  S t .  L o u i s ,  
C l e v e l a n d .  B o s t o n .  and  N e w  York.  
r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Messrs. Broaddus ,  B u r n s ,  Danf o r t h  . T. D a v i s ,  MS. 
Greene ,  and  Mr. M u l l i n e a u x ,  Vice P r e s i d e n t s ,  
F e d e r a l  Reserve  Banks of Richmond, Dal las ,  
!4inneapol is ,  Kansas  C i t y ,  N e w  York,and 
P h i l a d e l p h i a ,  r e s p e c t i v e l y  

Mr. Ozog, Manager,  S e c u r i t i e s  Depar tmen t ,  
F e d e r a l  Rese rve  Bank of N e w  York 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of 
May 22, 1979 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
Welcome to our FOMC meeting. Initially I would like to inform YOU--I 
think everyone knows this--of the passing of Angus Powell last 
Saturday. He Certainly was a dedicated [Reserve Bank] Chairman and 
was courageous during his years of illness. And we certainly shall 
miss him. 

Second, I would like to call to your attention something that 
happened in the [intermeeting period] that is of concern to me and I 
hope is of concern to you. My experience so far at the Federal 
Reserve has been rather impressive in terms of the security with which 
our deliberations are handled, but on May 1 there was an article in 
the Washinaton POSt where two different reporters independently had 
received information about FOMC proceedings which they quoted as from 
Federal Reserve sources. T believe they are reliable reporters and I 
believe they could be expected to be accurate in that respect. The 
fact that either through inadvertence or sloppiness or deliberate 
disclosure any activities of the FOMC were reported to the press is of 
considerable concern to me. 

One of the reporters is James Rowe. who now works for the 
Washinaton POSt in New York, though he was in Washington for a long 
time. His source may not have been from the New York Bank--I'm not 
saying that--but he got his information while serving in New York. 
The other reporter is John Berry, who is here in Washington. The 
first reported that there was [an intermeeting] vote. That 
information was inaccurate, so whoever the Federal Reserve source was 
it apparently was not someone who is directly involved in the FOMC or 
if so that person was disguising his or her comments. But it would 
appear more likely that these sources are people on our staff 
someplace who have picked up information from conversations or reports 
and have translated that somehow in responding to reporters. 

[Let me cite some examples from the articles.] "Informed 
sources said that today the Board apparently was concerned with world 
financial markets." That wasn't even discussed in the telephone 
consultation, as I recall. So that's incorrect. They reported that 
there was a vote, which is [also] incorrect. "Sources said the Fed's 
policymaking Open Market Committee held a special telephone meeting 
last Friday." Well, that's true; it was a consultation. "The Federal 
Open Market Committee was closely divided on the question during the 
telephone meeting." "Fed sources said the agency does not believe the 
$4.1 billion jump tin M11 is cause for alarm." Other examples 
include: "One source noted...;" "however, sources explain that the 
action.. . ; "which sources said...;" etcetera. I think this means 
that all of us have an obligation to somehow tighten up on our 
discipline about this sort of thing. It would be very upsetting if we 
were to get into a posture of trying to imitate other irresponsible 
agencies of government that do not have any way to maintain 
confidential information. 

[ A s  for how this could happen], there seem to be several 
possibilities. One is just sloppiness in terms of with whom 
conversations are held and under what circumstances--too often 



5 / 2 2 /  I 9  -2 -  

speaking freely in front of those who are not and should not be privy 
to FOMC [materials or deliberations]. Another is that there seems to 
be a tremendous American sensitivity to [a perceived1 responsibility 
to answer any reporter. And that's just false. No reporter has a 
right to place a call and get you or any of your people on the line: 
he can be ignored. Here. any reporter who calls my office is referred 
to Joe Coyne. If it is a legitimate question and it would be 
appropriate to respond, we arrange to do it. Also, we have found that 
there are con artists. There are people who call secretaries--and we 
have had instances of this occurring recently--where consequent 
information gets out by the caller using a false name and by creating 
with the secretary the impression that he has some knowledge [about 
what is going on at the Federal Reserve]. By doing that, suddenly 
information may get spilled out, because the secretary thinks, "Well, 
if you know that, you might as well know the rest of it." 

I just hope that you share my concern and will be willing to 
look at how, either through education or better discipline, we can 
avoid [a recurrence of] this sort of thing. 

Next, I want to report that when I was visiting the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland recently, Willis Winn had the effrontery to 
present me with a gift. The thing that impressed me about it, if you 
look at it [closelyl, is that I decided Willis had a message. So the 
message is that when he speaks today, I will turn this [hourglass] 
over and there will be no sand to run, so he will immediately be cut 
off from speaking. And for those of you who behave, I will give you 
your 3 minutes with the other one. But this one is for you, Willis! 

M R .  MAYO. In proper interbank rivalry, Mr. Chairman, I am 
deeply hurt that you didn't bring the T-shirt that we gave you. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Oh, yes, I must bring in the T-shirt. But 
I haven't got it because immediately when I brought it home my wife 
confiscated it. And she said she wanted one from every Federal 
Reserve Bank so she could have 1 through 12, or A through L or 
whatever it is. Is it L or K? What's San Francisco? It's L. I 
thought I was right the first time. So I must follow that up. 

MR. MAYO. I must add for the benefit of everyone else that 
this T-shirt is being offered to member banks for $ 2 . 0 0  and to 
nonmembers for $10.00. It's part of our improvement of service! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That's a reversal of policy. We have been 
r u i n g  the Fed for a long time offering things to nonmembers for 
$2 .00  and to members for $10.00. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, most of us don't have as much fat 
in our budgets as Chicago does to buy these T-shirts! 

MR. MAYO. Mr. Black, I shouldn't admit this, but the T-shirt 
was issued by our credit union, which is independent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let's move on to our meeting. Our 
first action is to approve the minutes of the meeting of April 17.  
These have been circulated. Are there any changes or corrections? 
Hearing none, we will record those as approved. Second is a report on 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  - 3 -  

foreign currency operations since the last meeting, and Gretchen 
Greene is here today to give us that report. 

MS. GREENE. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Gretchen. Any questions? Yes, 
Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. Take Henry's question first, because I have a 
question for Ted Truman. 

MR. WALLICH. Gretchen, when you operate as agent for the 
Bank of Japan, can you tell anything from the way the orders are given 
and what rate indications are given about how forceful they want to be 
in defending the yen? 

MS. GREENE. Not completely because their instruction is 
based on their close in Toyko. And how that relates to rates in New 
York depends very much on what has happened between the time of the 
close in Toyko and our opening in New York. In general I would say 
their instruction has been to limit the further weakening of the yen 
in New York, with the greater burden for intervention on them in Toyko 
rather than in New York. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. This question comes out of the Greenbook 
Supplement, so I would like to ask Ted if I may. With the improvement 
of the balance of payments position, why don't you expect a better 
performance of the dollar? 

MR. TRUMAN. The improved balance of payments position does 
give us encouragement, as Gretchen has pointed out. But our feeling 
is that we probably have some ways to go. The United States current 
account position still is in deficit in a world where Japan, Germany, 
and Switzerland still have--[though it's1 less substantial--a surplus. 
So the feeling is that under current conditions we probably need a 
surplus to be out of the woods. That's the first point. The second 
point is that we need the exchange rate adjustment to be maintained in 
order to get us there. As you know, our staff forecast does show a 
current account surplus beginning in the first half of 1980. 
[Another] point though, as Gretchen mentioned, is that inflation rates 
have come up abroad on average. Taking a longer-term perspective and 
putting that together with our forecast, inflation rates abroad are 
still below ours on average and are expected to be below ours over the 
forecast period. In those conditions a stable dollar in nominal terms 
will in fact mean some real appreciation. So too much more of that 
would tend to make the market think we would not quite get there in 
terms of adjustment. For what it's worth, the forecast for the dollar 
as [implied by] the forward rate would suggest a 1 to 2 percent 
depreciation over the next year or so. So we are in some sense more 
optimistic than that reading of the market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Gretchen, I've been interested in the strength 
of the gold price during this same interval when the dollar has been 



5/22/79 -4- 

strong. What do you hear about that or what is your view on the 
movement in the gold price? 

MS. GREENE. Well, there is a variety of factors: demand, 
supply, and psychological. On the supply side, of course, is the fact 
that the Treasury has announced a halving of its [gold] auction 
[amounts] and the IMF has announced a modest scale-back in the amount 
it will auction. There appears to be some lesser willingness on the 
part of the Russians to sell gold, and that has been going on much of 
the year. So the supply picture is tighter than it had been. 
Industrial demand appears to be quite good, even at these higher 
prices. And, of course, gold reacts very [strongly] in an environment 
in which there is a sense of scarcity of certain important strategic 
commodities. It is also reacting strongly to substantial demand for 
other precious metals, particularly silver. The relationship between 
silver and gold is extremely important in our [unintelligible] here. 
So, even as the dollar has improved, the price of gold has continued 
to go up. 

MR. PARTEE. It could also be consistent with your comment 
that it’s not so much that people have improved their opinion of the 
outlook in the United States but that the outlook has deteriorated 
everywhere else. So all currencies are looking almost equally bad, 
which leaves gold as the alternative. 

MS. GREENE. Well, the demand for gold is quite strong, 
interestingly enough, in Zurich and in Paris, too. 

MR. PARTEE. Zurich and Paris? 

MR. TRUMAN. Where in fact the price of the local currency 
has gone up much more [than the dollar]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Gretchen, what is the level of our yen balance 
at the moment? 

MS. GREENE. It‘s just under $200 million, about $195 
mil 1 ion. 

MR. COLDWELL. Are we participating in yen intervention? 

MS. GREENE. We haven’t in recent weeks. We have not for 
some time. We have not purchased any yen since the last FOMC meeting. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. [Our earlier purchases amounted to] $185 
million [equivalent], as I recall. Of course, [their dollar value] 
changes with the value of the yen, doesn’t it? So I’m not sure [what 
it is] from day to day. 

Our next order of business is to ratify the transactions in 
foreign currency operations since the last meeting. I suppose a 
historic note on paying off all of our swap debt is in order. You 
have received the [written] report, I believe. Are there any comments 
or questions? If there’s no dissent, we will ratify the transactions. 
Thank you very much, Gretchen. Let’s move to the report on domestic 
open market operations from Peter Sternlight. 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -5- 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Peter. Questions or 
comments? Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Peter, you mentioned that prior to the Treasury 
financing there was a change in the funds rate [objective] and you 
moved expeditiously so that the market would be apprized of that. How 
important do you regard it generally, other than in circumstances 
associated with a Treasury financing, that the market be apprized of 
exactly what the objective is? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the System has its objective and I 
think we want that objective to be apparent to the market. We felt at 
the time that it was particularly important that the message get 
through clearly and quickly or it might otherwise have [been an issue 
as the Treasury auction] approached. Sometimes it's convenient to let 
the market tighten on its own if that is the [desired] direction of 
change and just step in to indicate the bounds of any change that 
might be indicated. But in this case the change was made on a Friday 
and the Treasury's auctions were going to be on Tuesday and Wednesday. 
We wanted to make it known that we were aiming for something higher 
and, since our initial step would be in the direction of pushing the 
funds rate higher, we wanted to be sure we would have time to indicate 
to the market just how high--to indicate an upper bound as well. I'd 
say it's ordinarily important to let the market know what we want, but 
at times like that it is particularly important to let it know very 
promptly. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Peter, thank you very much. Excuse 
me, Phil, [did you have a question]? 

MR. COLDWELL. Peter, in your visits with the dealers what is 
your reading now of the dealer market? 
about developments in the economy and market prospects? 

Are they becoming pessimistic 

MR. STERNLIGHT. I'd say they've become more conscious of the 
flattening or softening in the economy at least for the near term. 
Whereas a few weeks ago there was a fair amount of sentiment that 
rates were likely to push higher in the near term, I'd say that is not 
the expectation at the moment. At least there is a feeling that for 
the near term there is likely to be little change, though many people 
in the market still feel that over a little longer horizon, say the 
next several months as against a shorter outlook of only the next 
month or so, there might well be a need for higher rates because of 
persisting inflationary pressures. The sentiment among quite a few in 
the market is that the economy has not reached a peak and might well 
continue on a strengthening course, although only moderately gaining 
strength. 

MR. COLDWELL. I haven't looked over [the data] but have they 
followed that questioning judgment in terms of their portfolios? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. They have. There had been a tendency to 
keep their inventories of securities very low or modestly short until 
the time of this last refunding. In that refunding they took on a 
substantial supply of the 10-year and 30-year issues. As I mentioned, 
the distribution of those issues was quite slow, although it would 



5/22/79 -6 -  

appear that even when some retail demand developed some of the dealers 
at any rate were not all that eager to get rid of their supply. Some 
apparently are a little more willing now to hold on to their supply in 
the anticipation that maybe those securities will rise in price. I 
wouldn't call that-- 

MR. COLDWELL. Have they been building their long positions? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. In the longer area there is a net long 
position, which was not true a month ago. What they did was to take 
on a long position--this is in the over 5-year area--with the 
refunding and it has been whittled down some. But they still have a 
net long position. 

MR. PARTEE. Would they have a negative carry on that, Peter? 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Just about even at this point, I would 
think, or maybe slightly negative. 

M R .  EASTBURN. Peter, could I ask you a question about the 
discount rate? Is the market now in a mood to make a distinction 
between a technical adjustment of, say, 1/4 point and not confuse that 
with a signal for tighter money? 

M R .  STERNLIGHT. It might well be because I think there is an 
appreciation [of the current situation] among market players. Even 
though they don't see the grounds for a general push to higher rates, 
they are conscious of the growth in the volume of borrowing, and they 
are aware that borrowing has gotten up to the level that on some past 
occasions has triggered a rate increase. So I think that might be a 
fair characterization. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Our next action is to ratify 
the transactions on the domestic side since the previous meeting. You 
have the reports. Are there any comments or questions? If there is 
no dissent, we will record the transactions as approved. 

I asked Murray Altmann at the last meeting to give me a 
rundown on how we've been doing with our individual forecasts. Did 
you distribute this to everyone? Well, I must arrange for you to get 
this [tabulation], which has your forecasts from March of last year 
when we looked at the period from quarter four '77 to quarter four 
'78. It turned out that the actual increase in real GNP was 4.3 
percent. The staff had 4.4 percent. So, Jim, I must say that's 
fairly close. However, only 5 of those governors and presidents who 
were then participating had c4.31 percent within their ranges. Now. 
on prices, the actual increase was 8.8 percent. The staff had 6 . 6  
percent, not so close. Nobody had a figure as high as 8.8 percent. 
The highest were our perennial optimists, Henry Wallich and Willis 
Winn, who had 8 percent as the top of their ranges. But they were the 
only ones with an 8 even showing. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What period are you talking about? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This was the fourth quarter of 1978 over 
the fourth quarter of 1977. We were meeting in March of [19781 and 
[since] that time we haven't done any update. Unemployment at the end 
of the period, in the 4th quarter of 1978, was 5.8 percent. The staff 



5/22/79 -7- 

had forecast 5.9 percent. And five of the participants had 5 . 8  
percent within their ranges. Now, in June [of 19781, we looked at the 
[first] quarter of '78 to the [first] quarter of '79. The growth in 
real GNP was 3.1 percent and not a single person came in that low, nor 
did the staff. Everybody was higher. The staff had 3.8 percent. No 
one was as low as 3.1 percent. Prices rose by 9.1 percent. No one 
even came close. The staff had 7.3 percent. And the unemployment 
figure was 5.9 percent and, of course, the staff was at 5.9 percent, 
having figured that precisely! 

MR. PARTEE. But not knowing the real GNP! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. There were four of us who had that also. 
In the future when you consider the staff forecasts and criticize 
them, remember they're not too bad compared to those made by the rest 
of us. So we turn to you now, Jim, for your new forecast and how you 
see things. 

MR. KICHLINE. I don't know what to do after that! 

M R .  MAYO. I assume the staff put these figures together! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we didn't want the staff [of the 
Research Division] to do this; Murray did it so we'd have an objective 
[observer]. The other members of the staff didn't even know it was 
being done. 

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.] That completes my 
presentation, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. Are there any questions 
before we go on? Yes, Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Jim, do you have any specific figure that you are 
using to reflect the effect of energy price increases on inflation? 
Have you quantified that even in a rough way? 

MR. KICHLINE. You're talking about in something like the 
deflator? 

MR. ROOS. Yes. What has happened? 

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in the second quarter of this year, for 
example, our estimate of the business product deflator in total is 
10.3 percent. If we exclude food prices, in the second quarter of 
this year it goes down to 10 percent. Excluding food and energy, it's 
8-1/4 percent. So the energy component [accounts for] about 1-3/4 
percentage points in the second quarter alone on the aggregate 
inflation rate. Energy in these accounts are only worth something 
like 7 percent by weight, but we're getting increases of 40 to 50 
percent at an annual rate in many of the energy components. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil Coldwell 

MR. COLDWELL. Jim, I assume you saw that note sent to me 
concerning the parallelism between 1973-74 and 1978-79 on retail sales 
and real sales versus the peaks and troughs. How do you interpret 
that? 



5/22/79 -8- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sent by whom? 

MR. COLDWELL. It was sent to me by one of the members of 
Jim's staff in response to a question I asked at a Board meeting. 

MR. KICHLINE. I think it has been distributed to all the 
Governors. I would interpret the data with some degree of confusion, 
I guess, in the sense that there are a number of major differences. 
A s  I believe the memo pointed out, retail sales peaked in February of 
1973-- 

MR. COLDWELL. On a real basis 

MR. KICHLINE. --on a real basis, which was about 10 months 
before the trough in economic activity. The peak in real terms [in 
the current cycle] would be December of 1978, so we've experienced 
four months of declining sales. But there are a number of major 
differences. One is the behavior of consumers. In that earlier 
period, the saving rate was considerably higher and consumers seemed 
much less willing to take on goods and spend as freely as they have 
this time around. So I'm a little disturbed about trying to make that 
comparison because of different consumer behavior. Secondly, though 
the energy situation was a bit similar as 1973 went on, that was a 
period when we had the storage situation by early 1974 combined with 
very rapid price increases. And it strikes us that at this point the 
situation is considerably different from what we experienced in 1973. 

MR. COLDWELL. One point that struck me was the percent of 
real disposable income being devoted to energy and food. The data 
show a quantum jump in '73 and it looks as if we're getting another 
one now, although the figures aren't complete nor are they [measured] 
in precisely the same fashion. 

MR. WALLICH. But what is really impressive is the reduction 
over the years in the fraction [of disposable income] people have to 
spend on food and gasoline. Since the ' 6 0 s  standards of living have 
risen enormously in that respect and what's happening now is just a 
small catch-up. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we need higher prices for food! 

MR. PARTEE. Higher for [food] and for gas. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR.  BALLES. Jim, we've had this unexpected bad news for the 
first quarter in terms of real growth at about .4  percent. It's 
evident that real final demand actually declined and that what skimpy 
growth we had was in fact in inventories. In view of that and of the 
weak news we've gotten so far for the second quarter for those series 
for which we have data--1 don't think there's a single strong report 
out so far that I'm aware of--what is the case for a bounceback of 
real GNP in the second quarter? I must admit I'm getting pretty 
skeptical. This is a devil's advocate type of question, but there are 
weak spots in the economy and that is spreading-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John, you mean a bounceback to 2.2 percent? 



5/22/79 -9- 

MR. BALLES. Yes, a bounceback. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. A hop? 

MR. KICHLINE. One major area to point to is business fixed 
investment. The first quarter was quite depressed in the construction 
area [but] the March numbers came roaring along with a bounceback. I 
would suspect that in the second quarter both shipments and, 
importantly, nonresidential construction activity will average 
substantially above the pace in the first quarter. That’s one area. 
Housing may well turn out to be less of a negative in terms of 
expenditures in the second quarter compared to the first. It‘s not 
that I expect it to be rising and contributing to growth, but it may 
well be less of a drag on average for the quarter. Consumer spending, 
I think, is a very questionable area. We do anticipate a bounceback, 
but it is by no means a certainty. [If we don’t begin to see that,] ’I 
would say that over time one would have to get concerned about that. 

State and local construction activity is also an area that 
was depressed in the first quarter due to weather effects. The 
evidence seemed to suggest a bit of an increase in March, but not a 
great deal. We are banking on the view that that sector will perform 
similarly to business fixed investment, particularly the construction 
part. The bounceback that we have forecast is nothing like that in 
the first quarter of 1978, when [GDP growth went from1 about zero to 9 
percent. We’re really talking about fairly small changes. Also, I 
think the infomation coming in has to be discounted to some extent. 
Industrial production is a clear case where we know the nature of some 
of the problems. But, as this [reported weakness] goes on, I’d say 
one would have to be more concerned about the possibility of a weaker 
picture than a stronger one. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Jim, the information on durable goods 
orders will be released at 2:30 today. Do you have those data yet? 

MR. KICHLINE. No. We’ve tried--unsuccessfully--for the last 
two months to get them and have not been able to. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They will show a significant decline in 
orders in April. 

MR. PARTEE. Including defense? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I don’t have the details. Overall it is 
quite a significant decline. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jim, to what extent do 
your figures embrace the latest increases in crude [oil] prices by the 
individual OPEC countries? And, secondly, do you allow anything for 
the increased pressure on the oil companies to deal in effect in the 
black market on the spot market? 

MR. KICHLINE. well, let me [defer to] Ted to answer the 
first question. 
how to answer that. Implicitly we have built in huge increases in 
crude oil prices and we have also built in a change in Department of 
Energy regulations on the pricing as well as pricing between various 
grades of gasoline. Putting all that together makes us come out with 

With regard to your second one, I don’t know quite 



5/22/79 -10- 

a big number. That's the sort of thing we've done. It's very clear 
that the gasoline that is being imported directly has gone up 
substantially in price. There are reports now of gasoline reaching 
New York that has an Amsterdam spot price of 85 to 87 cents a gallon. 
So if you're talking about dealing in the spot market in that way, at 
the margin it is very expensive crude and very expensive in terms of 
refined products. 

MR. MAYO. But you feel that has already been built into your 
forecast? 

MR. TRUMAN. I was going to answer that in part, President 
Mayo. The forecast went to bed a little over ten days ago or so, and 
in the Greenbook we had forecast a fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter 
increase of 23-1/2 percent on the OPEC market for crude adjusted, 
compared with a little under 21 percent in the previous [Greenbook]. 
The announcements have come out since the Greenbook forecast was 
finalized, so essentially [what has happened] in the last week would 
add another 1 percent [or maybe a little less] to that. 

MR. MAYO. That's all? 

MR. TRUMAN. Well, to the extent that we've kept track of the 
increase in the surcharge, which we've tried to do, [that is our 
estimate]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Frank 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say that I am 
pleased that Jim had such a good record last year because I have a 
very strong feeling that his record is not going to be as good in the 
next twelve months. It seems to me that we have-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want me to tell you your record? 

MR. MORRIS. It wasn't so good in the last twelve months. It 
seems to me that we have a classic cyclical decline; the [evidence] is 
almost overwhelming. And I think the latest piece of evidence that 
you cited--that there was a [big] decline in durable goods orders is 
the last straw. Now, the staff projection does assume--as it has all 
along--a 6 percent rate of growth in M1 adjusted for ATS, and we have 
not gotten that for seven months. 

MR. PARTEE. Except for April 

MR. MORRIS. Yes, there was one month. But that was 
generated by the IRS and not the FRB. So I think we have not created 
the financial climate that you've been predicting. Would you want to 
comment on that? 

MR. KICHLINE. Sure. I'd make two comments. One is that in 
terms of a concern about the cyclical turn, I could perceive three 
possible scenarios right now. 
continued very strong growth that presses against resource 
availability and intensifies inflation. I would say that the 
information coming in tends to weaken that case, if not remove it. 
The second possibility is that we have a situation with serious 
distortions and one would anticipate either a deep or a prolonged 

One is that we will have a situation of 



I 

5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -11- 

contraction in activity. I don't think we have those sorts of 
distortions. So what I am left with then is the middle course, which 
we believe is reasonable at this time; it involves small real growth. 
Now, whether or not that will turn out to be a technical recession in 
the sense of two consecutive negative quarters, where those negatives 
are very small, is not really a big issue as far as we're concerned. 
It's the general pattern of what happens that is important, and we 
think the economy is in for that kind of period of small real growth. 
But it may well slip into a mild contraction in the technical sense. 

With regard to the monetary aggregates, one of the things we 
have been getting that we did not anticipate is a further downward 
shift in the money demand function. So what we have in effect with 
the slower growth of the aggregates is interest rates that have been 
about on track with our forecast for some time. In addition, we've 
assumed that the rate of growth for M1 at 6 percent adjusted for ATS 
was over a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter period so that if there 
were shortfalls we would get back within the ranges and stay on track. 
Hence, to the extent there was a difficulty, we assumed it would be 
very short-lived and we'd have a resurgence of growth. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Henry 

MR. WALLICH. Jim, am I right in thinking that among the 
various price indexes--the deflator, the business fixed weight 
deflator, and the CPI--there has been an unusually wide discrepancy in 
the recent months? I see the CPI increase for the first quarter of 
this year was 13 percent. The other indexes are in the 10 to 11 
percent range. 

MR. ZEISEL. I think mortgage interest rates probably played 
a part in the differential. 
are driving that measure up; they don't play that kind of role in the 
gross business fixed weight price index. 
weighting is probably the most significant variable. 

They have a heavier weight in the CPI and 

I think the difference in 

MR. WALLICH. It does make a difference whether the rate of 
inflation was 10 percent or 13 percent over the last three months, 
even if we give it the usual Federal Reserve discount. 

MR. PARTEE. Was it a 13 percent increase on average over the 
[first] quarter? 

MR. WALLICH. No, it was [measured] end-of-quarter to end-of 
quarter. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's one difference. 

MR. WALLICH. That accounts for some of it, probably. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to say that I think Jim gave an 
admirable answer to Frank on probabilities except that we do have the 
energy situation, which is very, very difficult to [judge]. It is 
such a new factor. Obviously it's going to lead to more inflation 
than otherwise. It's also obviously going to lead to less spending 
than otherwise. But how far either will move, I just don't think 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -12- 

there's any way of knowing. One can imagine that the inflation effect 
will fan out because it will show up in wage demands and automatic 
cost-of-living increases and that kind of thing, and we may get as 
much secondary effect from it as initial effect. One can imagine on 
the spending side that not only will people have to lower spending for 
other necessities, but that it will have a great psychological effect 
on spending, as you say, for durables, for housing, for vacation 
homes, and for tourist travel. We're getting into the summer season 
when tourist travel is a very important element in budgets. Who knows 
what's going to happen? So there's an unusual amount of uncertainty 
connected with the energy situation today. But I think it's on the 
negative side. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy 

MS. TEETERS. Have you evaluated the economic impact of 
sharply rising interest rates, Jim? Have you looked at what the Wall 
Street Journal or [people on] Wall Street have said? Suppose the 
prime rate went to 13 percent. What would be the effect of that on 
your forecast? 

M R .  KICHLINE. Well, if it went to 13 percent, one would have 
to ask why. If it went to 13 percent because all these numbers are 
wrong and we have a rip-roaring economy under way, that's a different 
situation than if it went to 13 percent as a result of policy actions. 
But I don't see a rip-roaring economy in the cards. Given available 
information, I'd presume we'd be talking about a substantial increase 
in the funds rate to get the prime to 13 percent. And I think we 
would be talking about a substantial downward push on real activity 
over the period ahead and some improvement in our inflation forecast-- 
but for the time period of a year and a half, relatively little on the 
inflation side. 

MS. TEETERS. My other question is: Is there a reason for 
the peculiar pattern that you have on real disposable income? It 
seems to have a quarterly pattern that comes and goes. 

MR. KICHLINE. It comes and goes with social-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's the July 1 factor. 

MS. TEETERS. The social security? 

MR. KICHLINE. It's social security, which is worth about 
$ 9 . 8  billion in July. So there's a third-quarter blip upward-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That will fill many columns of newspapers 
in July. Willis Winn. 

MR. WINN. May I borrow a little sand to feed my machinery? 
I still get the reading that the financing of [housing] has been 
turned off almost absolutely. And there is about a 3-month lag 
between financing and starts. O n  that basis, starts should [fall] 
very sharply starting by the end of June. Insurance industries, in 
contrast with the banks, report very little demand for financing at 
the moment, which is rather surprising. All of that leads me to feel 
that commercial construction is in for a rather sharp decline, though 
maybe not until the third quarter. 



5/22/79 -13- 

The other comment I’d make is that the trucking industry 
reports rather sizable declines in the last two weeks. Now, whether 
that’s the adjustment to the after-strike effect or whether there’s 
something basic happening, I don’t really know. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you all for your questions and 
comments. Let‘s turn now to Steve for his observations. Then we’ll 
do our go-around. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, [we’ve had] stability in the 
federal funds rate and short-term rates in general since the beginning 
of the year, except for the most recent 25 basis point increase in the 
funds rate. [However], an apparent worsening of inflation and 
inflationary expectations presumably would have the effect of reducing 
real rates of interest. These two factors together raise questions 
about how to interpret monetary policy with regard to [whether] it is 
restrictive or not in relation to credit markets. The Committee, of 
course, has worried in the past about interpreting M1 and M2, but 
there are similar problems I believe in interpreting the credit 
markets. It might be helpful in that context to review what might be 
elements of restraint and elements of nonrestraint, so to speak, in 
the credit markets. 

If you accept the proposition that market interest rates have 
been declining in real terms because of increases in rates of 
inflation, I think you have to look for elements of restraint in 
lender and borrower attitudes in relation to those interest rates. 
And I believe several elements of restraint have emerged since the 
beginning of the year and even since the last meeting. The most 
evident one perhaps is in the mortgage markets, as Jim has mentioned, 
and probably stems in part from the action taken in mid-March to 
eliminate the differential on money market certificates. In the six 
months prior to April, inflows to savings and loan associations for 
the most part had been running at annual rates over 10 percent, 
generally between 10 and 12 percent. In April, the annual rate of 
increase in deposits at S&Ls was 3-112 percent and our estimate is 
that it will be around 6-1/2 percent in May. So that rate of inflow 
halved from around 10 percent to 5 percent, and there has been a 
similar change at mutual savings banks. We don’t have the latest 
commitment data, but in view of this [reduced deposit inflow] and the 
need for S&Ls to rely more heavily on Home Loan Bank borrowing, 
unlikely that we’re going to have an increase in outstanding 
commitments in any lasting way. The declining trend in commitments 
that has been in evidence since November probably will continue. 

it’s 

I would also point out that at smaller banks, loan to deposit 
ratios have been rising steadily thus far in this expansion. We don‘t 
have data beyond the end of 1978, but at that point they were well 
above the ratios in the 1973-74 period. There’s not a marked cyclical 
trend in such ratios at small banks, but after being flat they had 
been going up steadily in this expansion. And I think that’s 
beginning to imply some restraint on availability [of funds at1 these 
banks, which of course have less access to the money market than 
larger banks. Their [reduced] access would in [turn] cut down on 
federal funds sales to large banks. 

With regard to other factors affecting attitudes, these 
[developments] affect the attitudes not only of suppliers but also of 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -14- 

borrowers. The debt burden on consumers, [taking into account] both 
mortgage debt and consumer credit debt, is well above what it was in 
the 1973-74 period. Of course, that [concern] is in part alleviated-- 
[analytically at leastl--by inflation expectations, which make the 
debt burden seem light. On the other hand, any uncertainties about 
future income will make it seem very heavy. Furthermore, we've had 
very recently a continued step-up in the deterioration in business 
liquidity; the ratio of liquid assets to current liabilities of 
businesses is approaching very closely its ' 7 3 - ' I 4  lows. Another 
ratio, short-term debt to total debt, is pretty much at its high of 
the ' 1 3 - ' I 4  period. So in that area too we're now getting what might 
be characterized under more ordinary circumstances as a strained 
situation in business liquidity. Its actual impact on spending will 
depend, of course, on how businesses assess their future cash flow. 

Finally, I would add that attitudes toward credit may also be 
being influenced by the impact of the gasoline shortage. Whether that 
would dissipate if, through a miracle of bureaucratic manipulation, 
the gas shortage turns out to be transitory, [I don't know]. In any 
event at the moment I believe it's making people very conservative 
with regard to spending, and thus borrowing would not appear 
attractive or needed at current interest rates. 

Offsetting those elements of restraint is the general point 
that there has been no change in private short rates. There's 
considerable availability of bank credit at current prices and bank 
credit has been strong, as large banks have been able to borrow 
through fed funds, RPs, and Eurodollars. And corporate bond yields 
are up since year-end by about 6 0  basis points. I would estimate that 
a third of that is because of the nuclear power plant failures, which 
have made lenders more cautious with regard to financing utilities. 
But I would guess that most of that increase probably reflects the 
worsening of inflation and should not be interpreted as a tightening 
of the bond markets. 

I would venture the judgment, Mr. Chairman, that on balance 
one can say that nominal interest rates have not become more 
restrictive since the beginning of the year, or even since the small 
action taken a couple weeks ago. However, I would say that lender and 
borrower attitudes toward credit have worsened in a sense and that 
given the level of interest rates and those attitudes, the posture in 
credit markets should be characterized as somewhat more restrictive. 
That is, it seems to me that there's less of an inclination to use 
credit and more of an inclination on the part of certain institutions 
to restrict the supply of credit at current interest rates. 

One approach to policy when there are uncertainties about 
interpreting credit [conditions] is to put a lot more reliance on the 
aggregates. That is the reverse of the other approach, which is to 
look at credit when there's uncertainty about the aggregates. The 
aggregates have their problems, but perhaps they're gradually being 
resolved. I would point out that M1 now has moved back up into the 
1-1/2 to 4 - l / 2  percent range that the Committee has adopted, as can be 
seen on the charts on page 10 of the Bluebook. M2 has moved up close 
to the bottom [of its range]. And if the staff's forecast for the 
May-June period is in the right direction, M1 will be moving up closer 
to the middle of its range and M2 might actually touch the bottom or 
move up into the range. 



5/22/79 -15- 

I think it continues to be the better part of wisdom for the 
Committee to take account of both credit market conditions and the 
aggregates in its policy deliberations and instructions to the 
Manager. And in view of the recent developments in the aggregates and 
the uncertainties about credit conditions, one approach might be to 
have a rather wide range for the aggregates--that is, not to take any 
tightening actions unless the aggregates were moving close to the 
middle of their long-run ranges or above, and not to take any easing 
actions unless they were falling clearly below the bottom of the long- 
run ranges. One way to do that would be to widen the ranges from the 
4 to 4-1/2 percentage points that the Committee has been using to 5 or 
5-1 /2  or even 6 points, and to put most of that widening on the upper 
ends and not on the lower ends of the ranges. This could be 
accomplished with either a money market directive or a monetary 
aggregates directive, depending on how sensitive the Committee wants 
to be to changes in the aggregates. Under current circumstances, and 
[given] my interpretation of the restrictiveness of credit conditions, 
I would recommend a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Steve. I would suggest we begin 
to go around the table. I think last time we started with Larry 
[Roos], didn't we? We'll switch over this time and start with Roger 
[Guffeyl and come around the other way. I think the procedure we've 
been using recently has been helpful and I would suggest that we 
follow it again. That is, let's limit comments on the economy to any 
variance from what has been projected by the staff. Then each of us 
should give a general indication of the policy posture that should be 
followed without specifying the exact numbers. Just say generally 
whether it implies steady as we go, a tightening or easing up, or any 
other thing. So let's start with Roger and go around. 

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, we have 
very little quarrel with the staff projections, particularly as to the 
pattern, but our forecast is perhaps a bit weaker in the latter part 
of 1979. Our analysis suggests that the housing figures might be 
weaker in 1979. In talking with some savings and loan people in our 
District, the impact of this money market certificate change has been 
very dramatic. That, coupled with usury rate ceilings that apply in 
several of the states in the High Plains region, essentially has 
closed down any future housing commitments by the savings and loans. 
There is apparently nothing in the works that would pick up that 
slack. Thus, we would anticipate that overall the housing projection 
by the staff might still be a bit high, even after the adjustment they 
made this time. In looking at the Board's model and trying to work 
through the housing starts and the potential for a bit of an increase 
in the saving rate, the [growth] drops off very quickly it seems. So 
our best judgment would be that in the latter part of 1979 and into 
1980 we would have somewhat lower growth than the staff has projected. 

With respect to policy, [my view is] cast against the 
background of growth in the aggregates being very slow. 
numbers that have been published for the first quarter and what the 
April numbers now show, there is not a great deal of strength--even if 
the April numbers are adjusted. It would be my judgment that now is 
certainly not the time to take any additional tightening actions. And 
perhaps not until we see the figures in May and June would it be time 
to consider easing. As a result, it seems to me that for policy 
purposes we ought to be looking at [maintaining] the interest rate 

Given the 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -16- 

level and adopting [a directive based on] money market conditions 
without regard to where the ranges may be. 

I've not thought about Steve's proposal for wider ranges. ~t 
is not very attractive to me at the moment. Nonetheless, I'd like to 
see interest rate levels stabilized as they have been in the recent 
past. I'd also like to endorse a proposal that I think [was implied 
in] Dave Eastburn's question. And that is that it is tine for the 
Board to consider an increase of 114 percentage point in the discount 
rate, which is merely an alignment. We're seeing considerable 
pressure. Loan to deposit ratios are increasing in our part of the 
world, and understandably so. It's that time of the year. But I 
think the pressures are getting fairly strong. Lastly, if one looks 
at bank credit, which some apparently are prone to do, our 
information, as best as we can track it down, is that a great deal of 
the support for bank credit may be coming through the Eurodollar 
market. And if there is an increase in the reserve requirements for 
RPs, as the Board has proposed, it's going to make the Eurodollar 
market much more attractive--a cheaper source of funds. Unless 
there's some way to police the movement of funds offshore that come 
back in through the Eurodollar market, I think we would just be 
worsening that problem rather than making it better with that 
[proposal], M r .  Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Bob. 

MR. MAYO. Well, I'll start off where Roger left off. I, 
too, feel that an increase in the discount rate would not be 
inconsistent with a policy position that is essentially a stable one. 
I think it would have some announcement effect in terms of our 
continued concern about inflation without really having a substantive 
effect, if I make myself clear. I think we have passed a [cyclical] 
peak in this current quarter. My guess, for what it's worth, is that 
in the years to come the National Bureau of Economic Research will 
record this quarter as the turning point. It has all of the 
ingredients, without some of the distortions, of the early '74 period. 
Credit expansion and many of the aspects of the real economy, as 
pointed out by the staff, indicate a turning point. 

I'm not ready, however, to see us respond to a recognition of 
that turning point--even if all of us agree that it is here--by a 
significant move toward easing. I think that would be premature 
because of our continued very high levels of inflation. It would be 
misinterpreted. I'm not sure yet whether I buy Steve's widening of 
the range for M1. I'm more inclined to narrow it and be willing to 
jiggle [the funds rate] up another eighth of a point or so if indeed 
the aggregates come in strong in the rest of May and June, although I 
don't expect them to do so. I am more ready than I have been in many 
months to see us ease, but I'm not ready to do so today. Let me put 
it this way: I have opened my mind a little more in that direction. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like Murray's 
record to show that we agree substantially with all of the portions of 
Jim's forecast that are correct and disagree violently with those 
portions that are incorrect! 



5 /22 /79  -17- 

M R .  MAYO. That's pretty good. Keep going. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And give us the wisdom to know the 
difference. 

MR. MAYO. And let us pray. 

MR. WILLES. Well, somebody told me that's [all] we're left 
with! I just have a couple of quick comments. We're very much in the 
staff's camp with regard to business spending. We still think that it 
could turn out to be a plus for the year and could be the sector that 
will carry us through with positive real growth. I must say that your 
report on new orders doesn't sound very consistent with that. I hope 
that turns out to be a fluke. On the inflation side, we think a case 
can be made that is slightly more optimistic than the staff's--not in 
the near term but in the longer term. If you think as we do that the 
basic rate of inflation is determined primarily by the size and 
direction of the federal deficit and by the stance of monetary policy, 
both of those basically have been moving in the right direction. That 
would suggest that the long-run outlook for inflation is a little 
better than we might suppose. Food and OPEC and all these other 
things somehow keep making life less orderly than we would like. But 
even so,  our feeling is that we may be moderately pleasantly surprised 
on the inflation side. 

As for policy, we certainly wouldn't want to tighten up, 
whatever that means. I'd like to suggest that a tightening of 
monetary policy can be done in a number of ways, in our view at least, 
including a change in the rules of the game. And we would put the 
application of reserve requirements on RPs and things like that as a 
change in the rules of the game that would have a tightening effect. 
so we hope that will not be done. In terms of interest rates, I agree 
with what Steve said. In terms of the aggregates, I almost thought he 
was going to say that given what has been happening we could start to 
give more credibility to M1 and, therefore, we could narrow the range. 
He went in the opposite direction and he lost me. So, I'd like to 
think about that for a minute. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Mark. John. 

M R .  BALLES. Well, when I asked the question of Jim Kichline 
about what the case is for a bounceback in the second quarter, I 
probably tipped my own hand as to my increasing skepticism. I'm 
afraid that what I see is pretty much what Bob Mayo sees in terms of a 
probable cyclical peak in this quarter. As a matter of fact, our 
forecast for some time has been showing a short, shallow recession 
beginning in the second half of this year and going into the first 
quarter of 1980. But that's obviously just as judgmental as yours, 
Jim, and I don't know that it's any better than yours. Nevertheless, 
it is different. The recent news that has come in for the second 
quarter when we were expecting what I mistakenly called a bounceback 
and was corrected by the Chairman--it's more of a little hop, if 
anything--gives me some real concern. This is the time in the 
business cycle when we could get some very unpleasant surprises. We 
certainly got one in the first quarter and I would be prepared to see 
one in the second quarter, I'm afraid. 



5/22/79 -18- 

As for what to make of this troublesome development whereby 
bank credit has been growing more rapidly than the aggregates, our 
staff has recently updated their analysis in that area. I must say, 
after looking at it, that I don't really think the strong growth of 
bank credit proves very much. If we look back at earlier cycles, we 
find that bank credit tends to be more or less coincident with the 
cycle. That was certainly 
true in the ' 7 3 - ' 7 4  recession where the deceleration of monetary 
growth preceded the peak in that business cycle and the formal 
recession by quite a few months. 
bank credit would accelerate at this time in the cycle. Corporate 
liquidity is down, as Steve has correctly pointed out, and 
corporations wish to avoid locking themselves into high long-term 
rates. Hence, they turn to their banks for credit accommodation and 
try to wait out the period of high rates and plan to do some funding 
when long-term interest rates are coming down. So on balance I'm 
really not impressed at all by the fact that bank credit has been 
growing faster than the monetary aggregates. 

It peaks very shortly before a downturn. 

There are all sorts of reasons why 

During April we fought the "battle of the bulge," as I call 
it, on M1. It is said to have gone up at a 11 percent annual rate. 
[But] as the staff knows well, in view of the history of earlier 
Aprils, in our monetary theories it's tremendously difficult to 
compute seasonal factors for the month of April. I sympathize with 
the staff on this. But 17 percent could later turn out to be 8-1/2 
percent or something like that. If we look at Aprils of preceding 
years, seasonal factor corrections have been made following the 
benchmark revisions and have involved some pretty [big] downward 
revisions. Whether that will occur for this April remains to be seen. 
But it's probably the most unreliable month in the year in terms of 
getting a good fix on what is really happening. Since the May figures 
as now projected by the staff--correct me if I'm wrong, Steve--show a 
1 percent rate of growth for M1 and a 5.4 percent rate for M2. I 
wonder if it isn't time to unwind the snugging up of the funds rate 
that we did in April. We were leaning against what at that time 
appeared in the best judgment of the staff to be a bulge in the money 
supply. In view of the figures that we already have for April and 
those projected for May I wonder if we should inch the federal funds 
rate downward a bit. In short, based on my perceptions of spreading 
weaknesses in the economy and on the long cumulative impact of 
monetary growth well below the target range, even considering the 
April figures--and with May coming in on the weak side and the June 
projections weak--in my opinion this is no time to be snugging up any 
further. If anything, I would lean toward reversing the April action 
on the funds rate. That's all, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, John. Ernie. 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I, too, missed the turn in 
Steve's comments. I thought it was [going to be a recommendation] to 
lean more on the aggregates and he winded up [suggesting] a wider 
range on the aggregates. But I assume-- 

MR. AXILROD. If I may, President Baughman, I did want to 
lean more on the aggregates but I didn't want to [suggest] that the 
Committee should tighten with growth rates as low as they are under 
these alternatives. That's why I [proposed] a wider range on the high 
side. 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -19- 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. I'd like to toss in a couple of points which 
seem to suggest something a little different than some of the points 
that have been made thus far. One, we were advised that Sears Roebuck 
recently sent out mailings to most of its credit customers raising 
their [credit limits]. Sears apparently inspected its records and 
discovered that a high proportion of [its cardholders] were at the 
maximum amount authorized. It has been reported that they got a nice 
response, which I construed as indicating that those consumers at 
least were still willing to use credit that was made conveniently 
available to them. I have also encountered--and it seems impressive, 
possibly because it's surprising to me--a number of instances of what 
I would call small speculators on houses. People are acquiring 
ownership of several units of housing. Frequently a part of the 
explanation given is the recent increase to $100,000 in the amount of 
capital gains. I don't know how they're going to hitch that to gains 
on more than one unit, but in their minds they seem to be able to do 
it. 

A development that I am still unable to explain is the 
persistent decline in the number of active drilling rigs. In an 
attempt to check into that, we heard a whole array of what seem to me 
rather peripheral explanations. In total I suppose they have to add 
up to the fact that for increasing numbers of owners of these rigs-- 
most of them are for lease--people who would hire them apparently are 
not willing to accept the risks and the costs involved in drilling. 
But that seems to me to be an incongruous development. 

The housing bounceback that I've been inclined to expect in 
Texas in particular, with the revision of the usury law which seemed 
to be moving through the legislature satisfactorily, may not now 
materialize. We have a phenomenon in Texas at the present time which 
has been rather colorfully characterized as the "killer bees" where a 
miniority interest in the state legislature--but a group still large 
enough so as to prevent a quorum from being constituted--has simply 
absented themselves from the chamber. That has consequently stopped 
the forward motion of legislative action. 

MR. PARTEE. Where else but in Texas would the legislators be 
fugitives from justice? 

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, the speaker of the Senate under his 
interpretation of the law has called the Texas Rangers into action and 
sent them out to find these fugitives and bring them back. But it's 
reported that they have crossed the border. And unless he's willing 
to create an international incident, he probably cannot reach them. 

I have no particular quarrel with the staff's projection. It 
seems to me about as reasonable as can be made in the circumstances. 
However, in our discussion I think it might be appropriate for us not 
to focus exclusively on whether real economic activity is going to be 
a small plus or a small minus--the difference is possibly not very 
great--but to continue to focus a little more on inflation. Inflation 
is probably doing more damage now and has more potential to do damage 
to our economy than whether the rate of economic growth is a small 
positive or a small negative. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Ernie. Frank 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -20 -  

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, I think we 
are close to a cyclical peak. Conceivably, it may already be behind 
us, with weakness in consumption and housing being covered up 
temporarily by inventory accumulation, the classic form of a peak. I 
don't think we should casually assume that the recession is going to 
be very mild. We talk about the lack of imbalances in the economy. 
Very often we don't recognize the imbalances until sometime into a 
recession. For example, in late '13, I think no one forecast as 
severe a recession as we had in '74-'75. If we are seeking a soft 
landing, then I think we've got to move monetary policy now in a less 
restrictive direction. If we're going to recognize the lags of 
monetary policy, we have to do what we've never done before and that 
is to move before the evidence is overwhelming that we are in a 
recession. Now, this would take some explaining to the public because 
it would represent a radical departure from the past practice of 
always overstaying a policy of either ease or restraint. That has 
been the record of the past 15 years and I would hope that in this go- 
around we could break out of that cycle. [To do sol it seems to me 
that we have to move toward ease at this meeting. A modest easing in 
rates now, although coming at a time when inflation is very high, 
could very well forestall a need for very sharp declines in interest 
rates later on. So I think the moment is now. I'm sure I won't get 
much support for this proposition, but I feel very strongly that now 
is the time. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Frank. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I am delighted to see the 
slowing in the economy. I've been hoping for it for a year. I think 
we're getting some reduction in the level of activity and I hope it 
continues for a while longer. I think we need to look at our basic 
objectives here because we have a problem of whether we are aiming to 
maintain a semblance of real growth or to contain inflation or a 
combination thereof. It seems to me that our current posture has some 
elements of restraint but those elements of restraint are coming in 
the housing field, largely in the usury ceilings and the thrift flows, 
which of course are the traditional ways. I think we run a risk on 
two sides. We run a risk of recession, of course, and we run a risk 
of some acceleration in inflation. The latter stems primarily from 
what I'd call an energy tax, because we are being hit with a very 
sizable tax thrown at us by energy costs. I suspect we can weather 
the food cost problem, especially to the extent that we can open up 
our borders to further imports, if there is anything to bring in. But 
I don't think the energy cost impact is going to go away and it is 
going to [spread] throughout our economy. You may recall the last 
time around that it took several months if not a year or more [for the 
energy shock] to [exert] its full impact. I suspect that the retail 
sales picture is giving us the signal that things are being slowed by 
energy costs and agricultural or food costs. Frankly, I welcome the 
slowdown. I'd prefer it hadn't come from further energy cost 
increases, but maybe over the long haul this will do us a favor and 
force us into some actions we should have taken six or seven years 
ago. 

A s  for our monetary policy posture, I still believe that 
inflation will be our principal problem in the coming months and 
years. Whether we can achieve a reduction in inflation by a nice slow 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -21- 

pattern is something we have not yet proved. I suspect it's going to 
require more strenuous efforts than have been mounted so far. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. I share Phil Coldwell's feeling. I think we're 
in some danger of excessive preoccupation with the business cycle. rt 
matters much more whether we come down from I percent to .4 percent 
growth than whether we go from .4  to -1 or -2 percent. So in that 
sense an important move is already behind us. I think inflationary 
expectations have increased substantially in the last quarter. The 
leading models have raised their projections of inflation for the next 
two years by about 1 percentage point. And as we know, we've always 
been below on our projections. I think we're now building inflation 
into the economy to a degree that we've never had it; consumer 
behavior shows that. We also have evidence that inflation in the 
American economy is much less variable than it is in other countries 
and is, therefore, much harder to bring down. what we see in our own 
forecast is that at best we have to look forward to a period of a very 
slow deceleration of inflation. I think that will be regarded as 
unsatisfactory. And I expect that this situation is going to cause us 
to adopt wage and price controls sometime this year or next year. 
people are sufficiently excited about the inflation and sufficiently 
disenchanted with the actions in the fiscal and monetary fields. If 
we don't succeed in bringing inflation down, then the predictable 
pattern is that after a mild dip we'll go into a renewed expansion 
starting from an inflation base of 8 to 10 percent, whereas last time 
we started at 5 percent. And that will land us in an area where not 
even Italy is today. We are now the country with the most inflation 
among the major countries except Italy, I believe. 

As far as monetary policy is concerned, I think we still 
believe that somehow there's a free lunch--that we can accomplish our 
objective of reducing inflation at no cost--and I believe that's no 
longer true. We will have some costs, either in terms of much more 
inflation or in terms of reduced economic activity and a less than 
soft landing. I agree with Steve that real interest rates are 
falling; and that I think is the basic stance of monetary policy. We 
are [now] accommodating an external shock from food and oil. It's no 
longer the view of the economics profession that external shocks 
should always be accommodated, but our policy is doing that. It's not 
surprising, therefore, that in the ranking of inflation fighters we 
find ourselves near the bottom of the scale, as the Redbook among 
other things shows. 

As is obvious from my remarks, I would urge a tightening, 
even though it is late in the game. I think the impact on the real 
sector would be very slight. The real sector is going its own way 
with little benefit from monetary policy. [A tightening] will have 
some favorable effect on expectations. I think we have to look at 
interest rates at this time. The aggregates have become so unstable; 
for six months there has been no growth [in M11 and then we get 17 
percent in one month. Why should we allow our funds rate decisions to 
be triggered by that kind of mechanism? So I would agree with Steve 
to have a wider range--1 think that is fine--and a money market 
target, with a rise immediately in the rate. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Paul. 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -22-  

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have heard a great deal of wisdom 
even without our getting around the rest of the table, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m not sure it has yet resolved all of the uncertainties in my own 
mind. I do share a lot of the feeling that has just been expressed 
about inflation; I think we tend to duck that issue. Something was 
said earlier about there not being much precedent for bringing down 
the rate of inflation rapidly. I’m afraid there isn’t much precedent 
for bringing it down slowly over a number of years either, which is a 
measure of the difficulty of our problem. I’m impressed by the degree 
that inflation is now built into thinking in terms of the business 
outlook. I’m also impressed--the supporting factor--by the degree 
with which capacity problems and backlogs exist. But certainly the 
outlook is uncertain. The recent news hasn’t been very buoyant. So I 
would conclude that the time is not very propitious for much of a 
change in either direction. There’s a fair amount of time before our 
next meeting. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. When is our next meeting? 

SPEAKER(?). July [ill. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think that with either new 
financial or monetary data or business news, the Chairman might see an 
occasion for at least a telephone consultation some time in that 
interim. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Paul, there’s some sentiment that we should 
act like Congress and go home for six months and everything would get 
better! 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I sometimes agree with that, 
particularly if the Committee were to make precisely the decision that 
I’d like; then, I‘d like to go home for 6 months, too. I can‘t 
foresee that. Frank Morris said that we can’t casually assume the 
recession will be mild. I suppose we can‘t casually assume it, 
although it looks that way to me now--if we’re going to have one. But 
we can’t always be looking at the worst. If we’re going to balance 
these risks of inflation and recession we have to run not too scared 
that the recession is going to be worse than we expect. So it is a 
question of bringing about a balance. A s  I thought about what to do, 
I arrived at the same conclusion that Steve did up to a point--that 
maybe for lack of anything better we should go back and look at the 
aggregates a bit. I certainly think we ought to widen the range. I 
just don‘t see how we can operate on a narrower range even with less 
than the extreme volatility that Henry just mentioned. My 
disagreement with Steve would be that I was thinking of widening the 
range mostly in the downward direction rather than widening it on the 
up side. But I do think that’s a reasonable approach as we watch both 
the aggregates and the business news in the next six weeks. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I come to exactly the opposite conclusion 
that Steve did. I think we ought to pay careful attention to the 
aggregates and the growth in the aggregates in the period ahead. I’d 
widen the range on the funds rate and guard to see that we don’t have 
undue weakness in the aggregates. There‘s a good chance that the turn 
has already occurred in the economy, that March will have been the 
high in industrial production and that the second quarter--and we’re 
two-thirds through the second quarter--will be the high in real terms. 



5/22/79 -23- 

There is a very good chance that that's true. We've always, with no 
exception that I can recall, had great difficulty keeping the 
aggregates growing in the early stages of a recession. To go to an 
interest rate target now at this turning point in the economy would be 
exactly the wrong prescription for the Committee to follow. S o ,  I 
would say that we ought to have an aggregates target with modest 
growth. What we ought to do to fight inflation is to see that we have 
only modest growth in the aggregates over a sustained period of time, 
not crunch the economy into what--1 agree with Frank--could be a very 
serious recession. I think we could be in a much more serious 
recession this year than the one in '74-'75. So I would like to see 
quite modest growth in the aggregates over a sustained period, and I 
think that probably means that we ought to have a wider funds rate 
range. If I could echo what was said I guess by John Balles, it may 
be that a somewhat lower funds rate would be consistent with the 
discount rate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I find it interesting that everyone is saying 
that they agree with the staff projection but we're all, almost to a 
person, talking recession for the first time. I don't see the 
strength from the consumer side to keep [the economy] going at the 
rate that is being projected by the staff. These low levels of 
disposable personal income are such that they won't support an 
expansion in that range. In essence, I think we have accomplished 
much of what we started out to do last fall, which was to slow the 
growth in nominal GNP. Now, it came out of real growth and not 
inflation, but that shouldn't surprise any of us given the action by 
OPEC. I also think a move to tighten at this time is just out of the 
question as far as the domestic economy is concerned. And it would be 
the wrong prescription for the international situation; I think it 
would make things worse in trying to keep the [exchange] values of the 
yen, the mark, the Swiss franc, and the dollar all together. Evidence 
of further tightening here would just lead to a further appreciation 
of the dollar in the international market. However, I'm not quite 
ready to back down [completely]. 
little. And the only reason I think we should move [the funds rate] 
down a bit is that it's six weeks until the next [meeting]. I believe 
the rest of the information coming in over the quarter is going to be 
poor. But we do have our telephone network. Consequently, I would 
recommend staying where we are and, if anything, I would probably 
widen the fed funds range. And if I understand it, I can understand 
why [Steve was] calling for a widening of the ranges on the monetary 
aggregates. 

I think we should be backing down a 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Bob. 

MR. BLACK. M r .  Chairman, we have various [developments], all 
of which have been mentioned but in slightly different combinations. 
For some months now we have been fearing that [the economy] might be 
near a turning point, and we could argue that conceivably we might 
have passed it now. We could see a little more weakness in consumer 
spending because of attrition in real income and less [strength] in 
residential construction. This flurry of indicators that we have had, 
ending with a decline in new orders that you reported to us, creates 
more than just a mere suspicion that the economy has weakened 



5/22/19 -24- 

significantly. So, our guess is that it is right at a turning point 
or even beyond it. 

Now, having said that, I end up in roughly the same position 
as Governors Coldwell and Wallich in saying that I think inflation is 
still the major policy problem that we have to confront. I think it's 
good to bear in mind the fact that following the November 1973 turning 
point inflation accelerated for some time, credit demand expanded, 
there was a lot of upward pressure on interest rates, and M1 grew 
fairly rapidly. So I think we've got to be concerned about this and, 
as Chuck was suggesting a while ago, our objective ought to be to get 
the rate of growth in the aggregates down--gradually, but nevertheless 
down. So far as the discount rate is concerned, M r .  Chairman, I 
recognize the arguments posed by the current spread [between the 
discount rate and the funds rate]. I wish that in the past we had 
adjusted the discount rate more promptly to keep it more closely in 
alignment with the federal funds rate, but we have not done that. If 
at this particular juncture we are in fact near a turning point, [to 
move the discount rate up now] would look rather bad on the record, so 
I would not favor it for that reason. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Willis. 

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I sense a growing ugly mood in our 
society. I don't know whether the reaction is going to be in the 
political sector or in the economic sector or in the racial area, but 
I suspect it won't be a moderate reaction. So I think we are in for 
some rather volatile times ahead that could throw these estimates off, 
but I certainly don't want to predict them. My feeling would be that 
this is not the time to tighten. But in view of the uncertainties and 
the inflation problem and other problems, I would say that we would be 
well advised to stay where we are in terms of the current status of 
policy. I would favor a slight increase in the discount rate because 
of the position of the banks; the inviting differential there is hard 
for them to resist. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Willis. Dave. 

MR. EASTBURN. I continue to think that we are going to have 
a recession of probably moderate dimensions and I believe we may be 
pretty close to a turning point if not there. I would agree with 
Frank that ordinarily we should be anticipating that and should not 
run the risk of overstaying the expansion as we have often done. In 
view of that, I have spent a little time trying to think through the 
strategy for the next year or so. In thinking about that I am 
assuming that we will continue to have substantial inflation and that 
the dollar will continue to be in some jeopardy. And if we do have a 
recession, even of relatively modest proportions, the budget situation 
will turn around and we'll see increased deficits. So we will be 
getting more stimulus from fiscal policy. Given the characteristics 
of the situation that we will be confronted with in the next year, I 
think we should probably have less easing in monetary policy than we 
ordinarily would in a recessionary environment. This leads me to feel 
that we should not be as hasty to ease as we ordinarily might be. And 
when we do ease, we should perhaps not be overzealous in easing and 
should strive for what Chuck has suggested--the kind of moderate 
increases in the aggregates that we need to have for some sustained 
period of time. With that kind of a strategy fo r  the longer range, it 



5 /22 /79  -25-  

seems to me that the message for today is that we ought to hold where 
we are. I'd watch [developments] and not be hasty to ease. So, I 
would stay where we are. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Dave. Monroe. 

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, we have just concluded a series 
of meetings with business leaders around the District and two 
impressions continued to come through almost monotonously. One was 
the fear of continuing and even escalating inflation and the other was 
concern about the supply of gasoline. Coming from those meetings I 
guess we have more reason to believe that we are now in or very near 
some business slowdown. I'm not saying that that's bad; it may be bad 
or it may be timely. Frankly, we have reason to hope it's true and 
that the slowdown will be moderate and last for some modest period of 
time. Our projections are pretty close to those of the staff. We 
[agree with1 those generally. 

Moving [on to other1 concerns that we heard in these 
discussions, many related particularly to the recreational field. 
Cruise ships are altering drastically their pattern of going to ports 
where they cannot be refueled. For the first time since it opened, 
Opryland in Nashville, Tennessee had motel rooms available over the 
weekend before last. Travel in the area is limited over the weekends, 
not because gasoline is unavailable but because people fear that it 
may not be available. The coal operators that we talked with 
characterized [their business] as a disaster area. Inventories are 
tremendous; even at reduced [prices] there are no markets available. 
Some of the mines are simply discontinuing operations temporarily. In 
the natural gas area they are talking of abundant supplies and no 
limit until maybe it all comes to a screeching halt in late '81 or 
'82. Residential activity, particularly in South Florida, is of boom 
proportions. The activity there is just unbelievable, with much of it 
coming from offshore Caribbean interests that are buying not one, but 
four or five units at a time. Some are occupying units and some are 
not even bothering to occupy them. There is no restraint for funds 
that we detect from the banks; however, we are beginning to learn more 
and more of some restraints at the thrift institutions. In terms of 
the major feeling that came through in our discussions with these 
people, it was not one of recession but rather a modest [slowdown]. 

We are inclined to believe that the widening of the ranges 
that Steve is suggesting is fine; we don't have any difficulty with 
that. But, frankly, we would be very anxious to maintain the present 
posture with regard to the funds rate. We rather like it where it is 
and think it is taking its toll. If we had any strong feeling, it 
would definitely be against any downward drift [in rates]. We think 
that would be wrong and would be interpreted in the market as a 
feeling that we are giving up to some extent on our tug against 
inflation. As for the discount rate, we would favor a slight increase 
simply as an adjustment move. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Bones. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, those of us who watch the longer- 
term behavior of the aggregates are not in the slightest surprised by 
the fact that we are seeing a softening in the economy. There is 
absolutely no question in our mind that this problem is with us; the 



5 /22 /79  -26- 

only questions that we see are how deep the downturn or recession will 
be and how long it will persist. Of course, we believe that the key 
to how deep this recession will be and how long it will persist lies 
in the control of growth in the aggregates. We do not believe that 
the aggregates have a life of their own; we think they are 
controllable. We believe that as long as the Committee continues to 
attempt to stabilize the federal funds rate, we are going to have the 
volatility in the behavior of the aggregates to which some of the 
preceding speakers have referred. 
concentrating on aggregate growth, we would seek a 2 to 3 percent rate 
of growth in M1; that may be [equivalent to] a 6 percent rate in the 
old pre-ATS days. We don't think the upturn in M1 in April is 
necessarily conclusive evidence that growth will continue. We should 
watch it. The way we see it, any one month uptick or downtick in the 
monetary aggregates is not very indicative of anything. If we had our 
druthers--and we don't have our druthers--and were really 
concentrating on control of the aggregates, we would encourage a 
widening of the fed funds range and a narrowing of the target ranges 
for the aggregates. 

Finally, in anticipation of the inevitable tendency to swing 
[policy] around the other way and become expansive if a recession 
occurs--and we think one will occur--1 would hope that in the calm of 
this day we can resolve not to repeat past errors. Let's resolve not 
to panic at that time, not to move aggressively toward expansion or to 
respond to the political pressures to get ourselves out of a softened 
economy. Basically, I think we ought to be firm. I'd like to see us 
target on the aggregates; I don't think I will live to see it, but 
that would be our prescription, M r .  Chairman. 

If we were controlling and 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. With life expectancies what they are today, 
Larry, who knows? Thank you all very much. With that degree of 
wisdom--I cannot say unanimity--perhaps we should take a break and 
think about it. We can come back in 15 or 20 minutes and make a 
decision. Is that all right with everybody? We will recess now. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Are we all back? Anyone who is not here 
please speak up! Are any other chairs vacant? 
The durable orders figures are now available; they will be released at 
2 : 3 0  p.m. so we should keep them confidential until then. I haven't 
seen the details but you now have them, Jim, so why don't you just 
give us the rundown. 

We are missing Phil. 

MR. KICHLINE. Durable goods orders are down 8-314 percent in 
total. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This is April over March? 

MR. KICHLINE. Right, and this is the advance number. As you 
know, the numbers have been bouncing around. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. March was revised, incidentally. 

MR. KICHLINE. That's right, March is now up 2-314 percent. 
I don't have the earlier number with me, but that is not a big change. 
primary metals are down 8-1/2 percent; they were up 1-3/4 percent in 



5/22/19 -21- 

March. Most importantly, nondefense capital goods orders are reported 
in this advance number as down 13-1/2 percent for April and they were 
up 6-1/4 percent for March. Even if one strips out aircraft, the 
numbers are very weak; so [the total1 is not bouncing around because 
of aircraft orders. It is a general picture of negatives across the 
board. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Jim. To proceed with our 
discussion of current monetary policy and the domestic policy 
directive, I have asked Steve to take his unpopular theory, which 
didn't exactly gain wide support and enthusiastic applause, and reduce 
it to something specific so at least we can start off this discussion 
with something before us. 

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would recommend for 
Committee consideration the alternative B range for the federal funds 
rate, which is 10 to 10-1/2 percent centered at 10-l/4 percent--the 
prevailing federal funds rate. With regard to the aggregates, I would 
suggest an M1 range of 0 to 5-1/2 percent, which is a wide range, with 
more of an increase on the up side compared with alternative B than on 
the down side. That would mean, if the Committee adopted a money 
market directive as I would also suggest, that easing would occur 
until M1 got above the midpoint of the long-run range. With regard to 
M2, in view of recent events and to provide some room for the shifting 
of funds to banks because of the regulation Q action taken in the 
spring, I would recommend a range of 4 to 9 percent, one percentage 
point higher on the upper end than the alternative B range. In terms 
of M2 then, no tightening would occur until M2 was well into its long- 
run range. And as I indicated, M r .  Chairman, I believe that a money 
market directive is desirable under the current circumstances. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Steve, thank you. I think it might be 
helpful for the Committee to turn to page 10 of the Bluebook. There 
you have, in effect, a display of the alternative B ranges. Jot down 
in pencil that the alternative B range for the federal funds rate is 
10 to 10-1/2 percent. All the other data for alternative B are there. 
You will recall that Steve is suggesting 0 to 5-1/2 percent [for the 
M1 range] but alternative B as printed is 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent; and 
the dotted line shows that 3-1/2 percent is the rate of growth we 
would need in M1 from April for six months to get us to the midpoint 
of our long-term range. Likewise, for M2 the alternative B range 
shown is 4 to 8 percent and Steve is suggesting 4 to 9 percent. 
Again, the dotted line--going out to 8 percent in the future--is the 
rate at which M2 would have to grow for six months to be at the 
midpoint of our long-term range. Why don't we start with our Vice 
Chairman. Paul, what would be your suggestion? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to raise a technical 
question and make a technical point. You estimate that about 10 
percent of the April growth was due to the tax business? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have assumed that will be washed 
out in the next month or so? 

MR. AXILROD. That's right. We have a little stronger growth 
rate on average for April and May together than we think is the 



5/22/79 -28-  

underlying trend. June itself. at around 5 percent, is closer to what 
we think is the underlying trend, even though that‘s a shade above it. 
S o  we washed out the April-- 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These numbers that we’re looking at 
for May and June are really below normal in some sense. 

MR. AXILROD. Well, we have zero for May. At current 
interest rates we think the normal rate would be more like 3-112 to 4 
percent on average if the ATS stays as it is. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wouldn’t be all that far from wheEe 
Steve is. On the funds rate, I have no problem. AS I suggested 
earlier, taking account of the unwinding of the tax effects, I would 
prefer to see the M1 range go from a minus number up to 4-112 percent: 
and I’d keep the M2 range near where it is. I would treat it during 
the period very much as Steve suggested: If [money growth] really 
goes down, I’d lower the funds rate; and if it goes to the up side, 
I‘d move up pending some dramatic business news. 
[at least] one piece of disappointing news. Housing starts [are 
disapointingl; durable goods are even more so. 

Each meeting we get: 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Paul. Did you say you would 
agree with the money market directive? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I could go either way on that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now let’s start alphabetically. John 
Balles. 

MR. BALLES. I wonder if I could ask first, Mr. Chairman, for 
a clarification by Steve to make sure I understand the ground rules 
regarding how this money market directive would work within the 
broader ranges that we’re talking about. I’m not sure I got that. 

MR. AXILROD. As I would understand it, President Balles, the 
Manager would raise the funds rate from 10-114 toward 10-1/2 percent, 
at as deliberate a speed as the market could bear, when M1 and M2 on 
average got toward the top of their ranges. There would be a degree 
of flexibility as to whether he would start moving with M1 at either 5 
or 5-112 percent. If it was over the range, he would then have to be 
at the top of the federal funds rate and would have to come back to 
the Committee for instructions. It’s symmetrical reasoning, of 
course, on the down side. So a money market directive would imply a 
less prompt movement relative to the aggregates than a monetary 
aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. You mean an old money market directive 
instead of the managed money market directive we’ve been using. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that’s correct. 

MR. BALLES. I thought I understood you to say, Steve, with 
respect to your 0 to 5-1/2 percent M1 range that no easing would occur 
until M1 got down to the zero. 

MR. AXILROD. That’s right. But zero or half-- 



5/22/79 -29- 

M R .  BALLES. Close to it at least. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. That would get [Ml] to the 
bottom end of the long-run range. 

MR. BALLES. No tightening would occur, however, until M1 was 
growing at around 5-1/2 percent. I wish you hadn't called on me 
first. I could think about it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do you want us to skip you for a moment? 

M R .  BALLES. May I? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure. Bob Black. 

M R .  BLACK. I'll be glad to help him out, Mr. Chairman! It 
seems likely to me that any further tightening could certainly 
aggravate any recession that might be developing. At the same time, I 
don't think we ought to abdicate to the forces of inflation. So I 
think Steve has done remarkably well in choosing the proper ranges. 
Though mine were slightly different, I can buy his ranges completely. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That is helpful. I didn't think I'd see 
that. 

MR. BLACK. Well, it's for unusual reasons; I didn't get 
there by the same route he traveled. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, the ranges Steve suggested are 
just about one half point off my suggestion. I thought we ought to go 
from 0 to 5 percent on M1. On M2 I had 4 to 8 percent rather than the 
4 to 9 percent; I could accept 8-1/2 percent. It seems to me that the 
10 to 10-1/2 percent range on federal funds is a bit narrow, but given 
the way we are consulting I guess it doesn't matter if we're going to 
move it up [as necessary]. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Why don't we just do away with the Desk and 
have a daily conference? 

MR. COLDWELL. That's a possibility! I do want to understand 
a little more [precisely], Steve, whether we're talking about the Desk 
not moving until we reach the 5 percent or the 8 percent levels or 
conversely the 0 or 4 percent levels. That means we're using up the 
entire range on the aggregates before there is any move off the 10-1/4 
percent funds rate, which is the midpoint of the funds range you're 
talking about. 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. 

MR. COLDWELL. In other words, we hold the market steady 
until we hit the outer bounds, whatever they may be. 

MR. AXILROD. Or are very close to them. 

M R .  COLDWELL. A 16th or a 32nd of a point? 



5/22/79 -30- 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Within 1/2 percentage point. 

MR. AXILROD. I think within 1/2 point, [as] in the past, 
depending on how much certainty we have regarding the data on the 
aggregates. 

M R .  COLDWELL. Well, I just wanted the ground rules straight 
this time so we don't have another-- 

MR. AXILROD. That's with the money market directive. 

MR. COLDWELL. That's all I have. I'd go with a money market 
directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Phil. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. I like the idea of a money market directive. 
I, too, had in mind for M1 that maybe a range of 0 to 5 percent would 
be fine. And for M2 I had thought maybe 4 to 8 percent-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And otherwise the same? The fed funds 
range is okay as proposed? 

MR. KIMBREL. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you very much, Bones. Bob Mayo. 

MR. MAYO. I don't have any particular problem if we use a 
money market directive in going with 0 to 5 percent. On M2 I'm 
indifferent on whether the range is 4 to 8 or 4 to 9 percent. If we 
did go to a monetary aggregates directive, I would narrow the ranges 
on both M1 and M2. There is a little quirk here that probably should 
be mentioned, but it may not be of any importance. And that is that 
our present directive has a fed funds range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent. Granted, we don't let out the new information until after 
the next meeting, which is a long time from now. But I'm just 
wondering if it would look as if the Committee had indeed tightened up 
from 9-3/4 to 10 percent on the lower bound of our funds rate range. 
So I'd prefer an asymmetrical midpoint of 10-1/4 percent and I'd keep 
the 9-3/4 percent as the lower bound. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Bob. Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. I think that's an important point you made, Bob, 
about the funds rate range having been at 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent, so 
there would be an appearance of tightening if we went to 10 to 10-1/2 
percent. Of course my view, as I expressed before, is that we ought 
to ease. So I would put the funds range at 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent, 
making it a little easier than last time. There has been plenty in 
the news to justify an immediate reduction of a quarter point in the 
funds rate. I'm referring not only to the new orders figures, which 
are going to hit like a ton of bricks, but also to housing starts, 
which were disappointing, and to industrial production, employment, 
and retail sales data. All those data have come out since the last 
meeting of the Committee and in addition we have the fuel shortage. 
In effect, it's all new news that we're looking at in today's meeting. 
So I would take 9-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent as the range, with a 10 
percent midpoint and a prompt move to the 10 percent. 



5/22/19 -31- 

On the aggregates, just judging from this longer-term chart, 
I would not like to see M1 as low as zero for the two months, which 
would put it below the bottom end of the range again. So I would 
suggest 1 to 5 percent for M1. On M2 I think we ought to recognize 
that money market certificates are doing much better in the banks 
because of our success in getting rid of the differential, and for M2 
I think we ought to have 5 to 9 percent, which would also move us 
about to the bottom--perhaps just slightly above the bottom--of the 
range by the end of the projection period. And as I said before, I 
would take the aggregates directive. I think it's much more clearly 
indicated now than it has been at any time in the last six months. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Chuck. Nancy. 

MS. TEETERS. I'd keep the funds range at 9-3/4 to 10-112 
percent because if we do need to [ease policy], that gives us more 
leeway to do it. Also, I think Bob's point is right: I don't think we 
want even the appearance of tightening at this point. And I have no 
preference on the ranges for the monetary aggregates: 0 to 5-112 
percent is fine and 4 to 9 percent is fine. I would go with a money 
market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Nancy. Henry. 

MR. WALLICH. Well, the news isn't very conducive to 
[focusing on1 what I think is important. The news that we hear is all 
about the business cycle and very little about inflation. I think 
monetary policy at this time doesn't do very much to the real sector: 
it doesn't shape expectations. So I would go for a mild tightening. 
I agree with Steve on a widening of the ranges but I'd widen them at 
the lower side so as not to trigger a reduction [in the funds rate] if 
the very unreliable aggregates should come out [on the low side]. On 
M1 I'd say -1 to 4 percent and on M2 2 to I percent. I'd move the 
federal funds rate up to 10-1/2 percent within a range of 10-1/4 to 
10-3/4 percent and adopt a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Henry. Ernie 

M R .  BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer alternative B as 
specified in the Bluebook and with an aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Ernie. Dave. 

M R .  EASTBURN. I would agree with Steve's proposal. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Roger. 

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would go for an M1 range of 1 to 
5 percent rather than zero on the bottom with the anticipation that we 
may get weak growth that would trigger a downward movement [in the 
federal funds rate]. I'd go with 4 to 9 percent on M2 and 10 to 10-112 
percent on the funds rate with a money market directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you, Roger. Frank. 

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I agree with Chuck Partee's 
aggregates of 1 to 5 percent and 5 to 9 percent but I think his 
federal funds range is a bit too timid. History tells us that in a 



5/22/79 -32- 

recession it's very difficult to get monetary aggregates to grow 
unless we push interest rates down. So I think the funds range ought 
to be 9-112 to 10 percent with a move to 9-314. 

M R .  PARTEE. Of course, Frank. if the aggregates come in 
really low--if they come in minus, say--we'd have to take another 
look. 

MS. TEETERS. Do we have another month coming up like April, 
where we don't know what the seasonals are? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Every month is that way! 

MR. AXILROD. The next month that's like that [typically] has 
been July. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Larry. 

MR. ROOS. I would prefer alternative B with a wider federal 
funds range of 9-314 to 10-112 percent. And in order to help the 
unreliable aggregates become a mite more reliable, I'd go with an 
aggregates directive. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Thank you. Mark. 

MR. WILLES. I have a preference for "B" as it stands. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Willis. 

MR. WINN. I support Steve's recommendation. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John Balles. 

MR. BALLES. I've wrestled with Steve's compromise because I 
have great respect for his recommendations. When everything is said 
and done, I do like a couple of things he recommended. I like the 
money market directive and the widening of the ranges. But to be true 
to my own convictions with respect to M1, I really have to be in favor 
of a 1 to 5 percent range and on M2 5 to 10 percent. The lower number 
of 5 percent is with a view to not driving [M21 further below our 
long-range target. On the federal funds range, my preference would be 
9-112 to 10-112 percent with an immediate move to 10. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's another one of those months! Looking 
at fed funds, six voting members have indicated a preference for 
leaving the fed funds rate at 10-114 percent. Of those, four want to 
have the range at 10 to 10-112. Two members want to move the rate 
immediately down to 10 percent and one wants to move it immediately up 
to 10-1/2 percent. Those who want to move down to 10 percent also 
want a range of 9-112 to 10-112 percent. And Governor Wallich wants 
to move the range up to 10-114 to 10-314 percent. 

As far as [preferences on] the ranges go, there's a mix. 
[For Ml] zero is the bottom on five of them. There are ones and minus 
ones. I don't know if we can synthesize this or not. It looks easier 
to do the fed funds range than the aggregates ranges. 



5/22/19 -33- 

MR. COLDWELL. I suspect you could do it by testing Committee 
sentiment on the boundaries. Take the boundaries on the top and 
bottom: 10 versus 9-3/4 percent; 0 versus 1 percent; and 5 versus 6 
percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, nobody suggested 6 percent. 

MR. WALLICH. I thought Bob Mayo came out with 0 to 6 
percent. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bob Mayo, according to my list, had 0 to 5 
percent. Did I get that right? 

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think [most] were for 0 or 1 percent on 
the bottom and 4 or 5 percent on the top. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Let's try to 
specify [the ranges] for a moment. People have different [preferences 
but] let's still try 0 to 5 percent. That seems to be the most 
predominant one. The next most predominant one seems to be 4 to 8-1/2 
or 9 percent [for M21. On the fed funds range, the midpoint seems to 
be predominantly 10-1/4 percent. And one could make a case that if we 
combine those who want lower with those who want higher [limitsl, we 
might maintain the 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range and have an 
asymmetrical midpoint. I'm not sure that fits anybody's definition 
but we might try that in terms of a tentative look. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I make one suggestion? If 
it's a question of the publicity of [a change from] 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 
percent, as I believe both President Mayo and Governor Teeters 
mentioned, you could marry that with the 10 to 10-1/2 percent by 
simply indicating that there might be a telephone conference if the 
rate got down to 10 percent--before a move to 9-3/4. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In other words, we could leave the 9-3/4 
percent [lower limit] and merely say that we'd have a call if it got 
down- - 

MR. AXILROD. That way you wouldn't have-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'd have an understanding to that effect. 
Well, it looks as if we'll probably have a telephone conversation 
anyway. With that caveat, let's see who would buy that: Aggregates 
ranges of 0 to 5 and 4 to 9 percent, and 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 for the funds 
rate, with the 10-1/4 percent rate maintained for the time being and a 
conference call if it gets to 10 percent and is going down. what 
would be the sentiment on that? 

MR. ALTMA". Do you want a show of hands or do you want me 
to call the roll? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Why don't you just call the others; don't 
call me. 

MR. ALTMA". Vice Chairman Volcker. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess this is within my 
limits of tolerance. If we go down to 9-3/4 percent on the funds 



5/22/79 -34- 

rate, we ought to go to 8-1/2 percent on M2. That would make me a 
little happier but you're right about the understanding on the funds 
rate. 

MR. ALTMA". President Balles. 

PRESIDENT BALLES. No. 

MR. ALTMANN. President Black. 

MR. BLACK. Yes. 

MR. ALTMANN. Governor Coldwell. 

M R .  COLDWELL. I agree with Paul. I prefer 8-1/2 percent [on 
M2] but the rest of it is acceptable. 

MR. ALTMANN. President Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. I could buy it, but I would prefer the 8-1/2 
percent also. 

MR. ALTMA". President Mayo 

M R .  MAYO. I also would prefer the 8-1/2. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. I can't support it. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. I can support it. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. NO. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Do the same thing with 8-1/2 percent. 

MR. ALTMA". 

Vice Chairman Volcker 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Teeters 
Governor Wallich 

Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, John, to make it acceptable to you 
what changes would need to be made? 

MR. BALLES. Some that are not acceptable to the clear 
majority. I have felt for several months now, and have so 



5/22/79 -35- 

recommended, that we should be edging down on the funds rate. And I 
think this time I've got to stick to my guns. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. Chuck what change would you need to 
be satisfied? 

MR. PARTEE. I could accept it a l l  if we had a monetary 
aggregates directive. 

[in a position similar to that of] John Balles, I suppose. You want 
to tighten and he wants to go lower and you can't change your 
philosophical position I suppose. 

funds rate, to 10-3/8 percent, but I don't see anybody who is much 
inclined to go that way. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. All right, we'll test that. Henry, you're 

MR. WALLICH. I could compromise on a small increase in the 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, let's just see what the vote would be 
if it were an aggregates directive instead, with 0 to 5, 4 to 8-1/2, 
and 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would the aggregates directive be 
consistent or inconsistent with the Axilrod caveat? 

MR. PARTEE. Oh, no it can't be consistent with that. 

MR. MAYO. No. then it's a money market directive. 

MR. WINN. [Unintelligible.] 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We'd have to get rid of that. 

MR. PARTEE. He said we wouldn't go below 10 percent-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Without consulting. 

M R .  PARTEE. With a monetary aggregates directive, if the 
aggregates are weak, we're going to go below 10 percent. 

MR. AXILROD. The caveat was "without consulting.' 

MS. TEETERS. But if we go to a [monetary aggregates] 
directive, Steve's scenario would change. How would it change? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. we would move the funds rate up or down 
well before the aggregates got to the outer limits of the ranges. 
We'd move more promptly. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. If the aggregates are strong, we would 
tighten sooner; and if they are weak, we would ease sooner without 
consulting until the funds rate gets to 10 percent and then we'd 
consult. 

MR. WALLICH. But these [aggregates] are very unreliable now. 
I don't know why we should expose ourselves to that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, that's just the sentiment-- 



5/22/79 - 3 6 -  

MR. PARTEE. I don't know why you say they're so unreliable. 
They haven't been unreliable at all except for one month--April. 
They've been very reliably weak every month. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. If you want to tighten, that's not 
reliable ! 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it's quite as good, but 
I can go along with it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. John? 

MR. BALLES. No. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Still "no." Bob Black? 

MR. BLACK. I cannot [agree to it], Mr. Chairman, if I 
interpret it correctly that this would mean we would raise the federal 
funds rate if M1 started coming in at 3-112 percent. That would be a 
tightening. If we had a money market directive on the top and an 
aggregates directive on the bottom, I could live with it a lot better. 
I would not want to tighten. If we tighten [with growth in M11 at 
3-1/2 percent, we don't even approach-- 

MR. PARTEE. All we would do is move the funds rate 118 point 
at 3-112 percent [on M11. That's right at the borderline isn't it, 
Steve? 

MR. AXILROD. Yes. The usual zone of indifference has been 
that or sometimes a little larger, depending on the uncertainty we 
feel about the aggregates. 

MR. PARTEE. And M2 would [have to] be up there, too. 

MR. BLACK. At 6-114 percent, the way I figure it. 

MR. COLDWELL. About a 4 point zone of indifference. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Anyway, Bob, your sentiment would be-- 

MR. BLACK. I would vote against that, Mr. Chairman. As I 
interpret an aggregates directive, this is much tighter on the top 
side and it's easy on the down side. I'm more concerned about the 
weakness in the economy and I wouldn't want to tighten that soon. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Bones. 

MR. KIMBREL. I really don't like it. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We're losing ground, Chuck. We gained your 
vote and lost three. Stop the count: let's forget it. 

MR. PARTEE. I thought it was clever. 



5/22/19 -31- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Not clever enough. Have you another 
suggestion? 

MR. PARTEE. No, I don't. I'd rather cut the funds rate to 
10 percent right now, so I feel unhappy if I'm not permitted to do 
that. I would rather [vote against] the directive if that is not 
called for. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we have a majority, I gather, of six 
to three. I wish we could narrow that spread. Is there anybody here 
from the State Department who knows how to put Israel and Egypt 
together? 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Couldn't we promise Henry that at the 

We're not doing very well. 

proper time we will tighten and promise Chuck that at the appropriate 
time we will ease? 

M R .  MAYO. That's good. Let's leave it there. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. And get the vote on that. 

MR. MORRIS. How do we know when the appropriate time is, M r .  
Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Leave it up to the Chairman! Well, I think 
we better conclude this so we can go to lunch. We now have before us 
a proposal, which we are going to vote on officially. Maybe somebody 
will be kind and at the last moment switch. The range for M1 would be 
0 to 5 percent and the range for M2 would be 4 to 8-1/2 percent. The 
fed funds rate would initially be at 10-1/4 percent and would move in 
a range of 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent but not below 10 percent without 
consultation. And the movement within the range would be based upon a 
money market directive. I shall vote for that. 

MR. AL"N. 
Vice Chairman Volcker 
President Balles 
President Black 
Governor Coldwell 
President Kimbrel 
President Mayo 
Governor Partee 
Governor Teeters 
Governor Wallich 

Yes 
NO 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
Yes 
I wish I could but I can't. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Put down a maybe! Thank you very much, I 
think. I suppose we will be calling up for a new directive in the 
interim period. 

MR. PARTEE. Especially with a I-week interval. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, I'm sure we will be. Now we'll move 
to consideration of the Manager's recommendations with respect to 
foreign currency operations. I'm very sorry that we have no swaps to 
renew this month, Alan! 



5/22/19 -38- 

MR. HOLMES. That's exactly what I was going to say! 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, I'm sorry. 

MR. HOLMES. It is rather nice to be out of swap debt for the 
first time in almost ten years--the first time going back to the pre- 
71 period [unintelligible] Swiss franc debt. 

MR. MAYO. You're not going to retire on that note! 

MR. HOLMES. No, I don't think that will be possible. 

It might be worthwhile, M r .  Chairman, to say a few words 
about our market operations on behalf of the Treasury as well as the 
Federal Reserve. As you know, earlier this year we were sharing with 
the Treasury any purchases of Deutschmarks that we made in the market, 
typically on a 50/50 basis, although different proportions were used 
at different times. After the Treasury was able to repay its 
remaining swap debt to the Bundesbank in late March, all March 
purchases, as noted, were for System account and were used to repay 
swap debt. After April 27 when that [swap] debt was finally repaid, 
all purchases have been to cover the Treasury's Carter bond 
indebtedness. A total of 5-1/2 billion Deutschmarks were involved in 
that and the Treasury had spent 1.2 billion of that amount in 
intervention earlier this year. The Treasury has already covered a 
billion of that amount. That means they only have about 210 million 
Deutschmarks to go. Once that has been accomplished, I think there 
would be a real possibility of the System once again sharing with the 
Treasury any Deutschmark purchases. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Any comments or questions? 

MR. PARTEE. What do you mean by once again sharing 
Deutschmark purchases? We have shared them in the past? 

MR. HOLMES. Oh, yes. 

MR. PARTEE. Deutschmark purchases? 

MR. HOLMES. Yes. All year, up until the time the Treasury 
got out of debt, we were sharing. 

MR. PARTEE. I see. 

MS. TEETERS. Does that mean that we'll be accumulating 
D-mark balances? 

MR. HOLMES. That would mean we would be accumulating. The 
amount, of course, would depend on what the Committee decides. 

MR. WALLICH. Alan, could you recapitulate quickly how much 
the Treasury accumulated over what period of time so that one can get 
an idea of how fast this accumulation occurred? 

MR. HOLMES. The accumulation comes very fast on some days 
and then it just disappears. So I think one can't really take an 
average that's meaningful here. But the billion Deutschmarks have 
been accumulated since April 21, including purchases on April 27. 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -39- 

MR. WALLICH. Is there some flexibility, if we should be 
[approaching1 our limits on that accumulation, of pushing more of the 
intervention on the Bundesbank? My impression is that they have been 
reaching for it anyway. 

MR. HOLMES. I don't think there is any problem in pushing 
the Bundesbank to sell dollars. They are quite happy to do that. 

MR. WALLICH. Until they reach a liquidity constraint problem 
which-- 

MR. HOLMES. Which is [some distance] away yet. 

MR. WALLICH. We could find ourselves accumulating in a 
couple of weeks an amount that we have debated about over a month on 
whether we should or should not. I just would like us to be aware of 
that. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, we have [agenda item] number 9 coming 
right up for debate again. 

MR. PARTEE. It could easily amount to a couple hundred 
million dollars a week, couldn't it? 

MR. WALLICH. Easily. It could be that in a day 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The alternate choice is to have a strong 
dollar and, therefore, cut our inflationary pressures in this country. 
That would be rather unfortunate because it would show that we're 
interested in fighting inflation! 

MR. WALLICH. That's our only hope now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, shall we move to item 9 ?  We have [on 
the agenda] a discussion of the System's holdings of foreign currency 
balances. We have a memo, which I assume has been circulated to 
everyone. It's a very short memo. Steve and Alan will you [introduce 
the subject]? 

MR. AXILROD. M r .  Chairman, the Committee had a discussion of 
three memos [on this issue] at the last meeting. Following that 
discussion, the Committee asked us to present a specific proposal. 
This memo, briefly put, is our specific proposal. I have nothing 
further to add. Mr. Holmes? 

MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, I might just say a word about our 
current understanding with the Germans on the accumulation of 
Deutschmarks. At the very beginning the Germans 

At the May BIS 
meeting, however, Chairman Miller and Dr. Emminger agreed that it 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -40- 

I 
understand, too, that Under Secretary Solomon reached an agreement 
with the German finance ministry just last week for the United States 

That’s for the United States, 
either the Treasury or the Federal Reserve. I’m not sure that all 
these agreements are engraved in stone and there seems to be some 
uncertainty as to who agreed to what. But I believe that is the 
position. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. There’s no misunderstanding on the 4.1 
billion. 

MR. HOLMES. The 2 billion I think-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The 2 billion is news to me. 

MR. HOLMES. It’s news to the Bundesbank, too. So I think 
that is left to be discussed. But in general the Germans are 
agreeable to the United States--the Treasury or the Fed--building up a 
certain amount of balances. 

MR. WALLICH. Are there similar agreements with the Japanese? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. No, we’re going to come to that in a 
second. 

MR. PARTEE. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, Chuck, there are policy issues. And 
there is also a question of buying [marks] without any place to invest 
them, which isn‘t very attractive. So we need a little cooperation 
because having the Treasury holding sterile balances of marks is not 
attractive. 

MR. HOLMES. Now we have reinvestment facilities for-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They can deny [us the use of] these 
investment facilities. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could invest in the Euro market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, but that creates all kinds of 
[complications]. We‘ve already agreed not to [do] that, so it’s more 
complicated. There is no problem on the 4.1 billion, which just 
brings the Treasury back to where it was on November 1. The policy 
memo presented sets forth the recommendation of our task group that we 
authorize the Federal Reserve System to hold up to $2 billion in 
foreign currencies concentrated in the principal currencies of DM, 
yen, and Swiss francs, with no more than $1 billion in any one 
currency and only relatively modest holdings of any other currencies 
that might be useful in transactions. Now, as for the Germans, as far 
as I know we have no understanding or commitment to accumulate 
balances at the moment for the Federal Reserve. 

MR. HOLMES. I think the Bundesbank has said that they have 
no problems if it’s a small amount. 



5/22/79 -41- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. But we haven't crossed that bridge in terms 
of [understandings with1 us. The Japanese government, both their 
ministry of finance and their central bank, have been urging that we 
go into joint intervention with them to show a force in the 
marketplace. The Treasury has been urging this upon us. We have been 
consulting with the Japanese as to whether a package could be put 
together that would be directed toward strengthening the yen, which 
seems to have depreciated too much and may result in aggravating 
surplus problems again later this year or next year. We originally 
had consulted to see what could be in such a package. They have taken 
some initiatives on their own to give guidance on capital outflows. 
They also have taken some liberalizing steps at the same time. That 
may [produce] countervailing forces but at least their consultations 
with their banking system now would begin to [set a] program schedule 
[relating to1 some of these outflows [that will] take a little 
pressure off. They still desire that we announce a program of joint 
intervention with them--a program designed to counter the excessive 
depreciation of the yen and assure an orderly market. 

The scale of such an intervention would be governed by [our 
decisions regarding the recommendations in] this memo. [Under this 
proposal] the most we could accumulate in yen would be $1 billion, 
which means that the most that we could accumulate beyond what we now 
have is about $813 million. The Treasury is prepared to intervene to 
the tune of $200 million in aggregate. It would seem to me that if we 
were interested in doing this, it would have a desirable market 
effect. Then we should limit our intervention to 10 percent of the 
aggregate. So if we were doing $1.2 billion, there would be $12 
billion of total intervention before we did $1.2 billion, and the 
Japanese would do all the rest. We would not be running each account 
in that ratio but we'd be balancing out week to week to make sure that 
that relative ratio was maintained. Alan or Gretchen, do you have any 
views on how effective this would be in the market or whether it would 
be desirable? 

MR. HOLMES. I think the idea of the joint intervention 
probably would be impressive to the market. I start with that. As 
far as the operational side is concerned, if we can really work out a 
flexible system where we keep to the right proportions but not day by 
day, I think we can do it. But, Gretchen, you may have more 
operational problems with this than I'm suggesting. There are 
operational problems, but I think they're manageable. We were able to 
do that before with the Japanese when we were intervening on the other 
side--when we were acquiring yen we had joint intervention--and I 
think it can be done. 

CHAIRMAXT MILLER. Gretchen, any particular comment? 

MS. GREENE. I just wanted to say that on a day-by-day basis 
we are going to need operating flexibility because these formulae are 
very difficult to maintain in an ongoing operation. 

MR. WALLICH. Also with respect to the Treasury's share there 
would need to be flexibility. 

MS. GREENE. Yes, Henry, I'm afraid we do need that. We've 
come into a tremendous amount of paperwork problems, particularly when 
the proportions are so tight as 10 percent and 20 percent. 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -42- 

MR. WALLICH. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Now, there are two questions before the 
Committee. I’m told by our Secretary that on the first one what we 
need is an understanding that the policy set forth in this memo is 
acceptable. We have not before had formal votes and Mr. Altmann’s 
recommendation is that we not have a formal vote but have an 
understanding that we will abide by this policy. Is that correct? 

MR. ALTMA”. That’s correct. We’ve had informal 
understandings about limits within the overall $8 billion open 
position allowable under the Foreign Currency Authorization. 

this is a policy decision we would follow if the Committee agrees. 
CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have an authorization for $8 billion; 

The second issue is whether we should enter into an 
understanding with the Bank of Japan on this joint program and 
announce that we would be operating for our own account--the Treasury 
and the Fed--in coordination with the Japanese. We wouldn‘t put the 
percent in such an announcement; we’d merely say we will operate 
together. 

MR. PARTEE. Can’t we separate these two issues? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Surely. As I said, we’re going to have two 
issues-- 

M R .  PARTEE. Well, my point is perhaps a little different 
from what you’re thinking. I might be prepared to undertake a joint 
operation with the Japanese. 
how much open position we can have in currencies, absent the special 
arrangements such as that. 

But that‘s separate from the question of 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Sure, we can decide not to have the-- 

MR. PARTEE. We could stay with the $500 million [limit] on 
one [currency] and then have an additional $1 billion approved in a 
special arrangement. I just want to indicate that that’s the way I 
probably would come out. I didn‘t want to-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I’m not sure it is going to help 
chuck, but it may help me. I have no problems with the first 
understanding, but I want to make explicit what seems to me implicit 
here. And that is that the balances we acquire we don’t acquire for 
the sake of acquiring balances but mostly as the by-product of what we 
want to do in intervention. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. That‘s the only reason to acquire them-- 
to counter the appreciatiation and work on both sides of the market. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever [side] it happens to be. 

MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question? Does the 10 percent 
refer to total United States participation--Treasury and Federal 
Reserve--or is it 10 percent for [each]? 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -43- 

MR. HOLMES. As I understand it-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Both. U.S. intervention would be a maximum 
of $1.2 billion. If the Committee wants to do a billion dollars, the 
Treasury is merely indicating [a willingness to do $200 million]. Why 
does the Treasury want to go in for such a small amount? Is it 
because they already have a large-- 

MR. AXILROD. They have large amounts of yen already. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They got them through the sale of SDRs and 
through the IMF drawings. So it isn't that they're declining to hold 
yen balances; they really are showing good faith. They already have 
yen balances and that's why they would do a smaller amount at this 
point. Phil. 

MR. COLDWELL. M r .  Chairman, I'm agreeable to the Committee 
approach [outlinedl in this memo. I would be much less happy with the 
Japanese approach because I'm not at all convinced that the Japanese 
yen is undervalued and I'm not at all sure I want to jump into a joint 
intervention for the purpose of improving the Japanese yen position. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, why don't we separate the issues? 
First let's see what the sentiment of the Committee is regarding the 
recommendation on the agenda. I think the best thing is just to get a 
vote on it. 

MR. ALTMA". A vote? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I mean a count on whether we agree on the 
policy, not a vote. 

holdings] and with these limits [on individual currencies]? 
MR. PARTEE. This is on going to $2 billion [on outright 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck, if you want to Suggest a 
modification You may. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, my preference would be $500 million. I 
think there's a great deal of exposure involved here. I believe the 
dollar may be considerably undervalued and that there could be a very 
considerable appreciation of the dollar over the next year, and I 
wouldn't like to see us lose this much money. I also have a feeling 
that the shoe ought to be pretty binding on the other side. That is, 
when a currency is declining as sharply as ours did last year, it 
ought to be up to the country involved-- 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. I'm laughing because all during the year up 
until November 1 we said it was up to the foreigners to straighten out 
the dollar. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's right. It finally went so far that 
I agreed to it. I think a country has its reservation points. And it 
seems to me that it ought to be the concern of the country as to what 
that reservation point [is when its currency is] on the decline. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Chuck, I didn't mean you had that 
atttitude; I meant that as a nation we were taking that attitude. 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -44- 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I had that attitude, too. I was very much 
opposed to it until [the dollar's weakness] went so far that I knew it 
was oversold. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Let's run down [the list] and ask the 
members if they are for the policy and if so, if they have a 
preference for the $1 billion or the $500 million limit per currency. 

MR. KIMBREL. [I would agree] with the memo. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The maximum is $2 billion in any case, but 
the question is whether you want a maximum of $1 billion per currency 
or $500 million. 

MR. PARTEE. I meant I wanted the $ 5 0 0  million in the 
aggregate. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In the aggregate? Oh, I misunderstood you. 
well, then we'll have to ask again. 

MR. AXILROD. That's what we have now. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, we already have that. In other words, 
you would not want to expand it to $2 billion. Then the question is: 
Do you like the proposal in the memo? Paul. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it is reasonable. 

MR. AL"N. President Balles. 

MR. BALLES. I share Chuck's view. I have real reservations 
about going up to $2 billion, based on a very skeptical attitude 
regarding decisions on what constitutes excessive movements one way or 
another vis-a-vis what the market is saying. I'd keep it where it is. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay. 

MR. ALTMA". President Black. 

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'd rather cut it in half. I worry 
about the Constitutional issues on this since the executive branch of 
the government clearly has the responsibility in the foreign area. 
And I worry about the point that Chuck raised about criticism we would 
get from taking any losses on this. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. May I come back with an argument? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Well, it's not necessary. The Treasury is 
with us on this; we're working with the Treasury. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. I'd be willing to go with the billion dollars. 
And I guess I could be talked into the half billion dollar limit on 
individual currencies. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In other words, you are going with the 
Black proposal. Anybody for the White proposal? 



5/22/19 -45- 

MR. ALTMA". President Kimbrel. 

MR. KIMBREL. Yes. 

MR. ALTMA". President Mayo. 

M R .  MAYO. Yes. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Partee. 

MR. PARTEE. No, I would remain with $500 million. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. I would go with this proposal. 

M R .  ALTMANN. Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. I would remind you that we didn't flinch when 
were short $6 billion but here suddenly, when we're gong to be long, 
$500 million gives us pause. I go with the [proposal in the1 memo. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. We have 5 votes in favor and there are 10 
members. That makes it very neat, doesn't it? They're not really 
votes but sentiments. I have a swing "vote" but I really don't think 
this sort of policy ought to be followed unless we're fairly uniform. 
Could we all agree on doing $1 billion with a $500 million limit at 
least to keep this [going] and then we can review it from time to 
time? I don't think this is the sort of policy we ought to pursue on 
a split [opinion]. Does everybody agree to that? 

MR. BALLES. That's a $1 billion total limit? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Yes, for the total limit and $500 million 
per currency, except that which is approved outside of this. [Hearing 
no objection] let's turn now to Japan and take that as a discrete 
item. Apart from the authority we just granted, would it be your 
sentiment to enter into the program with Japan? Go down the list 
again. 

MR. ALTMA". Vice Chairman Volcker. 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I would like to give that 
authority but we [now] have the limit so small. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would be a separate understanding. 

MR. MAYO. This is separate from the $1 billion? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would mean [only] as to Japanese yen. 
we would go to $1 billion and be outside the authority, but no other 
yen would be held. We wouldn't add the $1 billion here and the $500 
million and have [$1.5 billion]. This would be the sole authority for 
the yen. 

policy just adopted. 
VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are making an exception to the 



5 / 2 2 / 7 9  -46-  

CHAIRMAN MILLER. This would be for yen [only]; and no yen 
would be held under the other policy. 

MR. PARTEE. I think that's a good way. 

MR. AXILROD. This would also be an exception to the total. 

MR. ALTMA". The current balances? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Including the present balances. 

MR. AXILROD. It would also be an exception to the total. 
That is, if the Manager had a billion dollars in yen he could still 
have $500 million in DM. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. The first policy we just approved would no 
longer include yen. We'll pull yen out of that and approve a 
specific-- 

MR. BALLES. What are the amounts involved for Japan, Mr. 
Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. A maximum of $1 billion of balances [held 
by] the Federal Reserve. 

MR. HOLMES. Of which we have roughly $200 million. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. It's $187 million, or about $200 million 
now. 

MR. PARTEE. So $800 million more-- 

MR. HOLMES. It's $800 million. 

MR. PARTEE. And a couple of hundred million for the 
Treasury, so it's about $1.2 billion 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. In the program we described. Paul 

VICE CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. 

MR. ALTMANN. President Balles. 

PRESIDENT BALLES. Yes. 

MR. ALTMA". President Black. 

MR. BLACK. I'd rather not go this far. 

MR. ALTMANN. Governor Coldwell. 

MR. COLDWELL. NO. 

MR. ALTMA". President Kimbrel. 

PRESIDENT KIMBREL. Yes. 

MR. ALTMA". President Mayo. 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -41- 

MR. MAYO. Yes. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Partee 

MR. PARTEE. This would be in concert with the Japanese? 
They would be in, doing 10 times what we're doing? 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Ten times what this nation is doing--a 
combination of the Treasury [and the Federal Reserve]. 

M R .  COLDWELL. That's your biggest exposure, Chuck. 

MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. On the other hand they've had 
quite a decline in their currency. So, yes. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Teeters. 

MS. TEETERS. I have one question. Does this give us any 
idea at what level we're going to support the yen? Are we going down 
to the two hundred-- 

MR. HOLMES. That I don't know. But certainly the Japanese 
feel that the yen has depreciated far too much. It's back toward the 
2 0 0  level. Whether 2 0 0  is the [right] level I think one has to judge 
from what happens in the market. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Nancy, I don't think we can peg it. In the 
present market conditions I think it would be desirable to get it in 
the 200 to 2 1 0  area. But that's subject to [conditions] changing. I 
wouldn't hold to that if we felt there were a really massive change 
because there is no use fighting it if it's really massive. 

MS. TEETERS. I'm a little concerned that the Japanese seem 
They sort of put out a target and I don't want to to be pegging it. 

be dragged in unless we're really sure we want to do it. 

MR. HOLMES. Well, although the Prime Minister said "go back 
to 200," they found they couldn't do it. And they spent billions. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. They're accumulating massive profits now 
because they've sold their products on the 200 basis. If they don't 
get it down again, we're going to see price cutting in yen and we're 
going to have another flood of Japanese imports. 
that problem all over again with surpluses. 

We're going to have 
That's the problem. 

MR. HOLMES. That's the basic underlying problem. 

MS. TEETERS. I would approve then. 

MR. ALTMA". Governor Wallich. 

MR. WALLICH. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN MILLER. Okay, I'll approve it then also. I think 
we have a fairly strong sentiment to do that. We'll circulate to the 
governors a suggested statement that might be made with the Japanese 
perhaps at the beginning of next week. 



5 / 2 2 / 1 9  -48-  

That is the end of our meeting unless there is other 
business. The date of our next meeting is July 11, which is a 
Wednesday. That's an odd one. That was worked out because of the BIS 
meeting. well, thank you all. We'll have our luncheon immediately, 
and we're on time! 

END OF MEETING 


	790522meeting
	790522staffstatements



