









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


TRANSCRIPT 

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE CONFERENCE CALL 

October 5, 1979 

Prefatorv Note 

This transcript has been produced from the original raw 
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat’s files. The Secretariat has 
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader’s understanding. 
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription, 
the notation “unintelligible” has been inserted. In some instances, 
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker’s thought or 
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement. 

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully 
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was 
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of 
the Committee’s policy actions. The edited transcript has not been 
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee. 

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader’s 
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of 
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses, 
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are 
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner 
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom 
of Information Act. 



FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
CONFERENCE CALL 

October 5,1979 

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman 
Mr. Balles 
Mr. Black 
Mr. Coldwell 
Mr. Mayo 
Mr. Partee 
Mr. Schultz 
Ms. Teeters 
Mi. Wallich 

Messrs. Roos, and Timlen, Alternate Members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee 

Mr. Eastburn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Mr. Altmann, Secretary 
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary 
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel 
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 
Mr. Axilrod, Economist 
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations 

Messrs. Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Mr. Kalchbrenner, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, Board of Governors 

Messrs. Doyle, Forrestal, Gainor, Smoot, and Williams, First Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, 
and San Francisco respectively 

Governors 

Board of Governors 



-2- 

Messrs. Broaddus, Cacy, Cox, Danforth, Mac Donald, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and 
Cleveland respectively 



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of 
October 5 ,  1979 

C H A I W  VOLCKER. Gentlemen, we will have a bit of a rump 
session this morning. This is by no means meant to be any kind of 
decisionmaking session. I just wanted to bring you up to date a 
little. I expect to see you here [in Washington] for a meeting 
tomorrow. I am sorry for the uncertainty about the scheduling of the 
meeting, but a few things had to be put in place and there was some 
uncertainty about when they would be put in place. But I think we can 
go ahead tomorrow. The general issue, of course, is whether the 
present situation requires some monetary policy action and if so, what 
kind. The reason I think we should come together physically is that 
we really want to consider a change in operating technique of the kind 
that we have often discussed one way or another in the past. 

You will have very shortly, if you don‘t already, a 
memorandum that Steve Axilrod and Peter Sternlight prepared describing 
a possible approach that involves leaning more heavily on the 
aggregates in the period immediately ahead. [Secretary’s note: A copy 
of the memorandum is appended to this transcript.] And the complement 
of that is leaning less heavily on the federal funds rate in terms of 
immediate policy objectives. We have had some considerable discussion 
of that over the past couple of weeks here and that memorandum 
attempts to distill some of the thinking. I want to discuss tomorrow 
whether we want to adopt that approach, not as a permanent [decision] 
at this stage, but as an approach for between now and the end of the 
year, roughly, in any event. This will [involve] a series of 
decisions--whether we want to adopt that technique, and if so where we 
want the money supply path to be, what kind of broadened constraints 
we want around the federal funds rate, and so forth. I think those 
are the kinds of policy decisions we would have to focus on. 

Of course, there are other possible actions that could be 
taken that are more immediately under the purview of the Federal 
Reserve Board itself rather than the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Before getting any further reaction--and I don’t think we ought to 
have a long substantive discussion this morning by any means because 
that’s the purpose of the meeting tomorrow--it may be useful to review 
very briefly where we stand. [Let‘s hear] from Mr. Kichline on the 
economy, Mr. Axilrod on the monetary side, and Mr. Truman on the 
international side, with any comments that Mr. Pardee and Mr. 
Stemlight want to add on the immediate market situation. S o  let’s 
just take a few minutes to do that if we may. I’ll turn the floor 
over to Jim Kichline. 

m. KICHLINE. Recent information on the economy has tended 
to come in somewhat stronger than the staff had anticipated. This was 
indicated most clearly this morning with the information on the labor 
market situation in September. Employment increased significantly in 
September and the unemployment rate is reported to have dropped 0.2 
percentage point to 5.8 percent. 
some selected information on fiscal output, we would anticipate that 
industrial production probably rose about 1/2 percentage point in 
September. 

In light of this information and 

In other areas, the data also have generally tended to be a 



1 0 / 0 5 / 7 9  -2-  

bit stronger. For example, the new order figures and shipments data 
for August have been revised up substantially. One cautionary note 
relates to inventories where the most recently available information 
now suggests that inventories grew very strongly in August following, 
as you know, a very rapid increase in the preceding several months. 
Overall, our tentative thinking now is that real GNP in the third 
quarter probably increased around 1-1/2 percent at an annual rate-- 
about 3/4 percentage point more than we had anticipated at the August 
meeting of the Committee. We believe that part of the increase--in 
fact the major part--will disappear as we get into the fourth quarter 
[when we think] we will be seeing some inventory adjustments. So we 
have a little larger negative in the fourth quarter. That, of course, 
remains to be seen in terms of what actually transpires. I would say 
that overall the information on the near term is clearly stronger than 
we had anticipated. 

On the inflation side, it's hard to find good news. The new 
information obviously is the producer price index, and that shot up 
1.4 percent in September. The increases were widespread, but 
particularly difficult is the food situation where we had anticipated 
some relief. And given the large increases in food prices at the 
producer level, this should feed into consumer prices over the next 
several months. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you, Jim. Let's just go to Steve 
and Ted and we [can] comment later. 

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the aggregates are running high 
in the ranges that the Committee had set at the previous meeting on 
September 18. At that time, the Committee adopted an M1 range of 3 to 
8 percent and an M2 range of 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent for the period 
covering September to October. With data through October 3, our 
estimate is that M1 growth in that period will be 7-1/2 percent, very 
close to the upper end of the range, and that M2 growth will be 9.7 
percent, also close to the upper end of the range though not quite as 
close as is M1. 

With the money aggregates running strong and a rather 
considerable amount of churning and pressures in the foreign exchange 
markets, the federal funds rate has drifted up--I'm sure Peter will go 
into more detail on that--and along with that we've had some upward 
pressures on other short-term rates. In the long-term market, [yields 
on] high grade corporate issues have reached record levels for the 
year, rising on the order of around 11 basis points since the 
Committee meeting. They are at the point where in the latest week we 
estimate a new high grade corporate offering at very close to a 10.15 
percent yield, apparently reflecting the worsening of inflationary 
expectations as well as the fairly sizable calendar of such offerings 
in recent weeks, led particularly by the IBM offering of a billion 
dollars. 

Bank credit growth continues to be very strong. We had very 
large demands through the September tax date. I would guess that was 
because of strains on corporate liquidity positions and the need to 
finance large inventories while having to make large tax payments. 
But we have not seen an unwinding of that commensurate with the 
increases in that period, so for the month of September we think that 
bank credit is going to grow at about a 19 percent annual rate as 



10/05/79 - 3 -  

compared with 10 and 13 percent in the previous two months. And we 
estimate that business loans in September grew at around a 20 percent 
annual rate as compared with an average growth rate of 18 percent in 
the previous two months. So banks have been very actively searching 
out funds to finance these demands that they've been accommodating and 
we have had a resumption of fairly sizable CD expansion in recent 
weeks as well as continued large takings from the Euro-dollar market. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Truman 

MR. TRUMAN. Since the last meeting of the Committee, we have 
two pieces of information on the external side. One was the August 
trade data, which came in somewhat better than the staff had 
anticipated: the other was the full data on the second-quarter current 
account transactions, which showed higher net service receipts than we 
had anticipated. This has led us to adjust our outlook somewhat in a 
positive direction but not dramatically. The dollar is down about 2 
percent on average since the Committee meeting and down about the same 
against the mark. This week, however, the weighted average value of 
the dollar has risen about 3/4 percent and again about the same 
against the mark. The chief impetus to the dollar's appreciation has 
been the developing expectations among market agents that a new series 
of measures to support the dollar's value would be announced during or 
after this week's meetings in Belgrade. The price of gold, as you may 
know, has moved quite erratically--particularly this week. It rose to 
a high of $448 per ounce in New York but this morning it was fixed in 
London--the first fix--at $367.50. Rumors of stepped up official 
sales of gold in the future have been one of the factors contributing 
to the break in the price. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight and Mr. Pardee. 

MR. HOLMES. Yes, Peter is getting ready to come on. Paul, 
there is a rumor in the market that I think you ought to hear about. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. There has been word from our Desk--1 think 
these rumors actually started in the foreign exchange markets but a 
few of the domestic dealers have been calling us on this--about a 
rumor that Chairman Volcker has resigned. And this is having a 
downward effect on the securities market. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer is "not yet!" 

MR. COYNE. Peter, this is Joe Coyne. We Will be Saying 
"absolutely ridiculous. 

MR. STERNLIGHT. Steve reported on the aggregates and the 
interest rate changes. I just want to convey also the extent of 
apprehension and the expectancy in the market that something is being 
shaped up to deal with the current situation. AS far as the funds 
rate goes, as Steve mentioned there were upward pressures around the 
end of the quarter. We had trouble getting out all the reserves that 
we would have liked and we had the fed funds rate averaging 11.90 
percent in that week: on several days it was higher. We have still 
been aiming for 11-1/2 percent, but with an approach of being tolerant 
of rates somewhat above that and strongly resisting anything below 
that. Yesterday many people in the market were getting the idea that 
we were probably really aiming at something like 11-5/8 percent. And 



10/05/79 -4- 

in restating our approach today, we are making more acknowledgments of 
that in light of the background situation. We have been saying that 
we are aiming for about 11-1/2 percent or somewhat higher but if it 
got up to 11-3/4 percent we would continue to resist a rate as high as 
that. And now Scott Pardee has some comments. 

MR. PARDEE. Well, the exchange markets are currently very 
chaotic. The dollar is higher than it was early this week, largely 
because of supportive intervention by the Bundesbank and ourselves. 
But the number of rumors and the types of rumors that have emerged-- 
many of them are incredible and some are credible--have dominated the 
exchange market thinking over the whole week. The one that Chairman 
Volcker has resigned, with all the elaboration of the scenario under 
which he resigned, has been going around for the last 2 hours. I hope 
it is denied very quickly so that at least that rumor would be put to 
bed. But everyone is waiting for whatever the Federal Reserve is 
going to do this week, and basically the dollar has not moved very 
much in the last 2 or 3 days. 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me summarize some of this by saying 
that late last week--actually beginning before then but particularly 
late last week and in the very early part of this week--these markets, 
by which I mean the gold market very obviously and the foreign 
exchange markets, were “depressed.” I guess that’s the right word. 
And the atmosphere was very nervous. I think that has been largely 
turned around by an expectation that there will be some action. The 
markets have recovered to a considerable degree on that expectation, 
but I‘m not sure that there is much else that accounts for [the 
turnaround] . 

The discussions abroad were very difficult in a number of 
respects. The feeling of confidence is not high, I should say, in a 
number of directions and that increases the difficulty of restoring a 
sense of stability. One of the alarming things earlier, to me at 
least, was the sensitivity and responsiveness of some of the commodity 
markets outside of gold and silver to what was going on. There were 
some very sharp increases in prices of copper and other metals at the 
end of last week and at the beginning of this week, a development that 
has since subsided somewhat with the improvement in the gold market 
and the exchange market. But, quite clearly, we are in a very 
sensitive period. 

S o  that is the background in which we will be meeting. Any 
comments that people at the other end of the telephone might want to 
add--or any questions--would be in order at this point. 

MR. BLACK. How is this memorandum coming to us? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By telegram or telex or whatever the 
normal method is, so far as I know. It’s on the wire. You should 
have it. 

MR. ROOS. May that wire be shared with our research people-- 
those cleared [to see FOMC material]? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it can be shared with one or two 
of them. I guess the message said one. 



10/05/79 -5- 

MR. ROOS. Our research director? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, one. Now let me say in that 
connection that there are a lot of complications that can be 
introduced with this procedure and a lot of questions about precisely 
[howl it can be done. If we are going to go in that direction, I 
doubt if we are going to decide precisely all these things for all 
time. In fact, I‘m sure we‘re not. There’s going to have to be a 
certain amount of discretion permitted the Desk and I suppose myself 
in this, in conjunction with the people here who will have to make the 
estimates as to precisely how this will work in practice. I think 
that is a practical necessity if we are going to move in that 
direction at this time. So, I wouldn’t encourage you to come in with 
the idea that we can have a mechanical answer to all the questions 
that arise from operating in this manner. I think there would be a 
very definite change in procedure and approach but I don’t think we 
can identify every possibility that may arise by some mechanical rule 
at this stage. 

MR. BALLES. Steve, if you have the numbers ready there, how 
do the latest estimates we have on these different M’s compare to our 
long-term ranges? Are we at or above the upper ends in both cases? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That will be in the memorandum. Just 
roughly, the latest estimates are the estimates used at the last 
meeting which haven‘t changed substantially. Whatever you may think 
of their reliability, which is another question, the estimates 
themselves are barely within the ranges for the year. 

MR. BALLES. One other question, Paul. Without trying to 
probe into what the forward course of action might be that will be 
discussed and decided upon tomorrow, is there anything we should be 
prepared to do on very short notice after the meeting in terms of 
contacting our directors? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don‘t know of anything at this stage and 
I don’t think you should worry about that at this point. I think 
there is a need to come in here as inconspicuously as possible. I 
believe you’ve been working with Murray Altmann and [others] so that 
you‘re at diverse hotels. I imagine you do know that the Pope is 
coming in [to Washington, D.C.], which may be good cover. It may not 
be. I‘m asking for a Papal blessing of this meeting. Murray suggests 
that we‘ll have a large cloak under which to put the meeting! I don’t 
know if there will be transportation difficulties--whether you are 
going to have any difficulty getting to this building in the morning. 
We don’t think so but there may be a certain amount of congestion and 
disturbance so if you’re anyplace close, you’ll probably want to walk. 

M R .  MAYO. Should we plan, Paul, for a meeting that lasts 
more than three hours? 

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I don’t know whether it will be 
necessary but I would [suggest that you] not commit yourself [to 
leaving by a certain time]. I would hope that we can finish in three 
hours but if you ask me whether that‘s a certainty, it is not. It’s 
about as good as the money supply figures; all this scheduling [is 
difficult]. Obviously we want to emphasize the fact that you should 
be as quiet as possible. I suspect you will get some inquiries as to 



10/05/79 - 6 -  

whether there is a meeting, so maybe you can make up a cover story f o r  
your people so that there isn't any knowledge of this meeting. If 
there are no other questions, I will see you in the morning at 9:30. 
Thank you. 

END OF SESSION 


	791005confcall



