









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING

July 9, 1980

Prefatory Note

This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations
Mr. Meek, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist
Mr. Zeisel, Associate Economist

Mr. Axilrod, Economist



Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

July 9, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, July 9,

1980, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mr. Schultz
Mr. Solomon
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Mr. Black, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Petersen, General Counsel
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist
Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis,
Keir, Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel,
Associate Economists

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account



7/9/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of
Governors

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division
of International Finance, Board of
Governors

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Mrs. Scanlon, Economist, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors 1/

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Messrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, Gainor,
and Monhollon, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas
City, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and
Richmond, respectively

Messrs. Brandt, Burns, Corrigan, Danforth,
Fousek, Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, New York,
Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco,

Richmond, and Chicago, respectively

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Messrs. McNees, Mullineaux, and Ms. Nichols,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago,
respectively

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

1/ Entered the meeting following the ratification of System
open market transactions in Government securities, agency
obligations and bankers acceptances.

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
July 9, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may have a long day ahead of us. If we
don't use it all up with the Open Market Committee meeting, we'll use
it up [discussing] monetary reform legislation. With that in mind, we
will have lunch around the table in a convivial atmosphere. I am told
that people worry about food and drinks being spilled on the rug.
We'll see whether we can have lunch in the august Board of Governors
meeting room without spilling anything on the rug; if we do spill, we
won't be able to have lunch around the table again.

MR. SCHULTZ. Either that or the Governors can't have [a
rug]; it's one of the two.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd like to welcome Governor Gramley
officially to this august body in a new guise. He is completely
unfamiliar with the table; I believe we literally have a new table
since you were last here. So we welcome you to the table literally
and figuratively.

MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you very much.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several First Vice Presidents with
us today because of the absence--for various reasons--of some of the
Presidents, and we welcome you. I don't think we have anything else
of that order of business, Mr. Altmann. We need to approve the
minutes then.

MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I hear a second? Without objection
the minutes are approved.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's the same problem I have in the Board
meetings!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Pardee.

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, I think it's worth
emphasizing one point, which is that the reluctance of the Bundesbank
to intervene directly in support of the dollar on as large a scale in
the last few days--which means depressing the D-mark--is [related to]
the fact that they are at the bottom of the EMS. So there is this
contradiction and dilemma for them. Basically, cooperation with them
on intervention had been very good,

But they have this dilemma, and
they are very, very aware of it.

MR. WALLICH. They also seem to take the attitude that if we
are going to allow the funds rate to move sharply in response to
reserve-based techniques, they logically should let the dollar rate
respond more. I don't think we should accept that argument. One
could argue just the other way: That precisely because it is
necessary for us to tolerate wider fluctuations in the funds rate, we
want to make a greater effort to avoid repercussions on the dollar



7/9/80

rate. We have to try to persuade them of that; they don't accept that
now.

MS. TEETERS. In November of 1978 we put together a $28
billion emergency package. Is that still in existence?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, we didn't have $28 billion,
Nancy. We would have had $30 billion, but that included $10 billion
of Carter notes. Of the $10 billion of Carter notes, we actually
ended up selling--I don't remember the exact figure.

MR. PARDEE. About $6.5 billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON(?). We still have [our holdings of]
Swiss francs pretty much intact; but Treasury balances of
Deutschemarks, where the pressure is, are [nearly] depleted. They
have ended up, in a sense, more in a hole than we are. If you compare
our swap drawing with their using up the balances--they owe that money
for a longer term--they're in the hole by about $3 or $4 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are those first Carter bonds due?

MR. TRUMAN. Not until September of next year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a little more than a year away.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we must have most of the $20 billion.

MS. TEETERS. How much did we have and how much do we have
left?

MR. PARDEE. We have about $2 billion left.

MR. TRUMAN. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That $30 billion was theoretical in the
first place.

MS. TEETERS. What did we actually have out of the $30
billion?

MR. TRUMAN. Treasury balances are $2+ billion in marks, not
including their swap balances, and $1.2 billion in Swiss francs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we have left in the swaps now?

MR. TRUMAN. In the swaps? They've only used about $1
billion, so we have about $6 billion left.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One billion out of how much that we have
in Germany?

MR. PARDEE. We've used $1.1 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And what's the limit with Germany now, $6
billion?

MR. PARDEE. Six billion.



7/9/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it's $9 billion.

MR. PARDEE. The swap line is $6 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $6 billion, and the Treasury has $1
billion.

MR. PARDEE. The Treasury considers itself short right now
under the Carter notes by over $3-1/2 billion, [so] we are in a hole.

MS. TEETERS. I don't think I got an answer to my question.

MR. PARDEE. The answer to your question is that we can get
more resources at some stage if the Treasury wants to go back and
negotiate a new Carter note.

MS. TEETERS. All right, but that doesn't tell me how much--

MR. PARDEE. The man who negotiated the last Carter notes is
sitting next to you. He's not at the Treasury now.

MS. TEETERS. How much did we actually draw in November of
[1978]?

MR. TRUMAN. Governor Teeters, of the $30 billion, we have
$20 billion worth of resources [in] notes [and] currencies now
available. And there's a net plus, in some sense, in the unused
portion of the $10 billion Carter notes, which in round numbers is $4
billion. That's the answer, I think, to the question you asked.

MS. TEETERS. Okay, thank you.

MR. SCHULTZ. How much of the Carter notes come due a year
from September?

MR. TRUMAN. A year from September only one comes due and
there's another one [due] in December. I think the total amount is
about $1.5 billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but then they start coming due
about every 6 months for about 2 more years, Fred, because I
originally put them out with 3- and 4-year maturities. Then we had
scheduled them at 3-1/2, 4-1/2 and 2-1/2 and 3-1/2. So a whole series
is coming due. The question of availability depends on how we look at
our debt. Looking at it very short term and ignoring the fact that we
owe this money and are going to have to get it somewhere else later
on, we still basically have sufficient resources. We have quite a few
billion dollars, although in previous periods when the dollar came
under heavy pressure we spent as much as $5 billion a month [in
intervention]. This problem is getting more and more serious, and I
think in our considerations of domestic policy we probably have to be
a little more sensitive to it than we have been in the last few
months.

MR. WALLICH. Even if we are able to repay, which I hope we
will be, we won't really be getting out of debt. We'd be substituting
dollar debt for D-mark debt, which is an advantage. But that's really
the best way to look [at it] until our current account improves.



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Our current account, of course, looks
relatively good compared to other countries' current accounts. In
round numbers, the deficits are $12 to $15 billion in Germany, $15
billion or more in Japan, and $5 billion in France. There's a small
deficit in the United Kingdom, despite their oil, whereas our
projections are for close to balance this year and a surplus next
year. Some people [expect] a surplus this year. If one just looks at
current accounts, we don't look too bad; in fact, we look very good.
But people obviously are looking at other things, too. Of course,
it's affected by the recession.

MR. WALLICH. What about recession?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a major question is whether or
when we can expect some interest rate declines in the rest of the
world. [Foreign officials] are a little ambivalent about it. They're
in the same position we are. They want to maintain this psychological
posture of getting on top of inflation and not appearing to yield to
it. And they haven't had much improvement on the inflation front,
although in some countries they've had a little. On the other hand,
they're becoming a little worried about a business slowdown and
perhaps a world recession and [there is] some sentiment that easing
might be a good idea. But nobody wants to be first. Nobody wants to
show the white flag on the inflation front. So they're quite
ambivalent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But [I'd point out] one thing. I
assume the members of this group are aware that there is one quasi-
phony component in our current account calculation. We are figuring
in for 1980 $40 billion of services income from abroad. In practice,
we are only going to get about half of that because we are counting as
services income for the United States all profits earned abroad by
American companies, even if those profits are reinvested abroad.
Therefore, in terms of what crosses the exchanges, we still need about
$20 billion of capital income to validate a so-called equilibrium
current account. I think I've made my point clear. If I haven't--

MR. PARTEE. Is this unique to us?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Other countries don't do it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the other countries don't do it.

MR. WALLICH. No, they don't do it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We changed a few years ago, presumably to
get on the same basis as other countries. But we have so much more
foreign investment. It's much bigger for us than for anybody else.

MR. TRUMAN. I think President Solomon overstated the figures
somewhat. If you correct for both sides, as both the inflows and the
outflows are counted on that basis, the difference is about $15
billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's $15 billion, not $20 billion
this year?



7/9/80 -5-

MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Last year, in fact, the adjustment on the
reinvested earnings was $14.5 billion or something like that.

MR. WINN. When we look at gold market developments and some
of these flows, I wonder if we're not being a little oblivious to the
fact that it's not all economic considerations that are causing them,
with the Saudi situation now surfacing. In terms of the news, it's a
potential Iran. We hear rumblings out of places like Nigeria and
South Africa that we may get big money market flows, which have
nothing to do with interest rate differentials or the economic outlook
or anything of [that nature], although I don't know how to put a
number on it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. Common wisdom in
the market, however, is that the [noneconomic factors] on balance
probably have helped us a little so far. There is some political
instability in Europe particularly, but not with so much
[unintelligible].

MR. WINN. On the other hand, with our freezing of the
Iranian [assets], if you were a Saudi trying to maneuver would [the
United States] be where you'd want to put [funds]? I don't know.

MR. SCHULTZ. There is some indication that SAMA is now
making direct investments in this country in bits and pieces of $50 to
$100 million. We first heard about it from the Texas bankers. It
began 5 to 6 months ago and seems to be continuing.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We've had some substantial increases
in SAMA purchases of Treasury obligations. But I don't think we are
getting the same percentage of their investable surplus.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the real difference this year is these
other countries with current account deficits. Even the Swiss, the
Germans, and the Japanese have advertised the availability of their
government securities to the Saudis in particular, which they never
did before; and they are selling them. The French also are selling a
fair amount of securities to the Saudis. I don't know [whether they
are selling] to other people too, though they probably are, but they
are selling to the Saudis and they didn't do that before. The Saudis
had great difficulty getting investment outlets. Now they have more
open to them.

MR. WALLICH. In a sense, every country with a good currency
can expect some inflow--in fact, a very large inflow in the aggregate
--from these sources. The Germans, the Swiss, the French, and the
Japanese probably all benefit from this to an extent that they don't
seem to want to admit. So they've generated concern about their
deficits that I think is needless. They can count on some financing
automatically. They don't have to go out and borrow the money.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Is it considered a political no-no to sell
gold in the current environment?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I don't think so, necessarily. I
don't think it's a political problem in the sense that you may be
suggesting. It's a question of whether it's very useful or desirable
at this stage. [If we sold gold], we'd have to do it alone; I think



7/9/80

that's pretty clear. It isn't anything that's ruled out a priori, but
it's a practical matter of whether it's a good idea.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, it's between selling assets and
borrowing money. That seems to me the significant difference.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The psychology, Ernie, is that
[selling gold] seems to be much more effective if it's a component of
an overall package of forceful measures than if it is done by itself.
In the present climate it would look like a major act of weakness.
And that might spur some additional dollar selling unless we did it on
an enormously massive scale, not just the levels that we have before.
On the other hand, if the situation gets to a point where once again
we have to begin thinking carefully of a package, then along with some
monetary policy measures it would be appropriate and add to the
effectiveness--this is my own personal feeling--to do some substantial
gold selling. And in that situation I think the Congress would
understand that. We'd have less of a political problem also. So I
think both factors operate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I should say, in connection with the
political problem, that I don't think there are any great political
constraints so far as the thinking in the Administration is concerned.
There are politicians who would make a noise that would reflect upon
the credibility of the action. If we sell some gold and then
immediately get some congressional opposition, the market would say:
"Well, they're not going to sell very much because there's too much
opposition." And, therefore, it might not be very productive in terms
of the impact we'd want to achieve.

MR. BAUGHMAN. There would be some grass roots opposition to
it. I can report that, but I don't have any impression--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps I spoke a little misleadingly
because that kind of opposition, I think, does reflect on the
credibility of the action. It raises questions about whether it could
be sustained and what the [total] amount would be and whether it's
really an accepted technique or not, even though in some sense I think
it's not a political deal for the Administration except in terms of
appraising that reaction. I can't quite see the Congress opposing it
in a formal sense but there would be a lot of noise by these limited
groups.

We have to ratify these transactions.

MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they are ratified. Do
you have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?

MR. PARDEE. I'd simply note that first maturities of six
swap drawings on the Bundesbank in the amount of $190 million will be
coming up over the period before the next FOMC [meeting]. I expect to
roll those over, renew them, if we do not have a significant reflow in
marks that would enable us to repay them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We presumably will renew those as
necessary--if necessary. Hope springs eternal. Mr. Meek.



7/9/80

MR. MEEK. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interrupt you just a second for a
clarification. It may be that I was up too many hours yesterday, but
did I read the Bluebook wrong? On the first or second page, where the
paths were shown, I thought it said we are marginally above the
minimum targeted growth. If I look at the figures, it looks as if we
are marginally below. Then there was a footnote on page 3 that said
we changed the target [for total reserves] and made it a little
higher; but it said the original target was $43,377 million and the
subsequent target was $43,293 million, which is lower.

MR. SCHULTZ. It's supposed to be the other way around.
Steve gave an actual yesterday, if that still stands. The figures are
transposed, aren't they, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Well, no. The figures actually got changed at
the last minute, so the marginally above was correct when it was
written. It's wrong with regard to M-1A and M-1B; and M2, of course,
is well above. It should read that with regard to M-1A and M-1B we
were marginally above; the figures were changed at the last minute and
the text was not. I think that's the answer.

MR. PARTEE. So the path is below what was originally--

MR. AXILROD. No, the path is above because of M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the footnote seems to be wrong on page
3. I'm just gratified that I read this correctly. I found something
the matter with it.

MR. SCHULTZ. Steve, yesterday you gave figures which
indicated that the target had been raised over the period by some $170
million.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, the footnote numbers seem incorrect. I'll
get those numbers. The $43,377 million is not the original target but
the one we now have; $43,293 million was the original target. Those
are simply transposed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just wanted to demonstrate that I was
wide awake when reading your report!

MR. AXILROD. You are quite right; those figures are
transposed.

MR. SCHULTZ. Now that we have had that little ego trip--!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Meek.

MR. MEEK. [Statement continued.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You were supposed to absorb reserves [to
remain on] the path, right? I thought you absorbed less reserves than
the path called for.

MR. MEEK. In fact, yesterday there was less demand for
matched transactions than we had planned to make. So we wound up



7/9/80

doing less than we expected. And there is quite an abundance of
excess reserves to be mopped up today.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Your point is that the mopping of the
reserves is justified not just by the weakness in the foreign exchange
markets but also by the reserve path.

MR. MEEK. Indeed. We had considered going in early, but the
dollar began to strengthen at about the time we were prepared to go
in, so we held off until our normal intervention hour.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions? These actions in
the last six weeks do not provoke any questions?

MR. WALLICH. I might say, just to make clear that we are all
listening carefully, that I keep hearing about market perceptions that
we have moved back to a funds rate objective with a very narrow range.
Do you hear that?

MR. MEEK. Yes, I think there has been some feeling in the
market to that effect. It is a problem we get into when borrowing at
the discount window is at frictional levels because it is somewhat
indeterminate whether the funds rate will be in the 8-1/2 to 11
percent range. The result is that when we put in reserves at 9-1/2
percent, people chose to interpret that as being the top of some
range; similarly, it has been quite clear that we have been defending
8-1/2 percent as the bottom of the range. It's a box that we tend to
get into. I think yesterday's action of mopping up reserves when
funds were trading at 3-3/4 percent caused the market to pause at
first blush but the action was later construed as being consistent
with our normal operating procedures.

MR. ROOS. Isn't that market perception contributing perhaps
to the weakening of the dollar and an implication that we may be
repeating some of the mistakes we have made previously that were
inflationary?

MR. MEEK. Well, there's always concern in the market about
the level of interest rates and the general thrust of policy.

MR. ROOS. In other words the markets are really in doubt as
to whether we are determined to carry through with a primary emphasis
on controlling reserves?

MR. MEEK. I wouldn't say that that is in question.

MR. PARTEE. The market is doubting whether we have an
objective of fighting inflation and whether we are going to let
interest rates decline or push interest rates down long enough so that
it will encourage these flows of funds into marks, Swiss francs, and
other currencies.

MR. ROOS. But I mean those market--

MR. PARTEE. Whether we follow the aggregates or not is an
academic point. They follow the M1 numbers, which come out on Friday
--or this time on Monday. But the emphasis is on the thrust of policy
toward inflation.

-8-



7/9/80

MR. MEEK. There are two markets that we are talking about
here. The government securities market is always very obsessed with
trying to invent a federal funds rate range if one doesn't exist.
They react to what we do as though it has significance when it doesn't
have any.

MR. ROOS. Do you tell them that it doesn't have any
significance?

MR. MEEK. Of course.

MR. ROOS. Good.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a proposal to raise the
intermeeting limit [on changes in System holdings of securities].
What is the intermeeting period?

MR. ALTMANN. It would be for the period through the 12th of
August.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it the limit is normally $3 billion
[and the proposal is to raise it] to $4 billion because we are getting
a decline in reserve requirements that is going to have to be offset
in the normal course of events.

MS. TEETERS. How much do we have to offset?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the decline in reserve
requirements?

MR. MEEK. It's $3-1/2 billion in the week of June 30.

MS. TEETERS. Is $4 billion enough if you have $3-1/2 billion
to mop up?

MR. MEEK. It's right on the edge on our [staff's] estimates.
The Board [staff] has somewhat lower estimates. But it seemed prudent
to have adequate room. These estimates are notoriously unreliable.

MR. PARTEE. I think, Mr. Chairman, that we want to be very
certain that we mop up any reserves here. I can't understand why in
the world the market thinks we won't, but there seems to be some view
of that. So if it's right on the edge, I would make it higher; I
would propose $4-1/2 billion.

MR. MEEK. Well, $4 billion would be quite adequate, I think.

MR. PARTEE. But you said that was right on the edge.

MR. MEEK. The $3 billion [normal limit] is right on the
edge.

MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see. I misunderstood you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always change it again; fine-tuning
this figure doesn't have much significance. But if you are convinced
that $4 billion [is appropriate], is there a motion to that effect?



7/9/80

MR. PARTEE. So moved.

MR. GRAMLEY. Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we approve until the
next meeting a $4 billion limit. We need ratification of the
transactions. Can I have a motion to that effect?

SPEAKER(?). So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we approve your
operations since the last meeting.

[Before] we turn to the economic situation, I might just
[raise] another point here so that you are aware of it. You might
already be aware of it; I believe you have been sent a copy of the
resolution that Mr. Proxmire and Senator Garn have introduced about
Federal Reserve policy. This arose essentially out of the report by
Arthur Burns' Committee to Fight Inflation, which is made up of an ex-
Secretary of the Treasury, an ex-Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board, and a few distinguished ex-Congressmen. Among other things the
report said that Congress, as Mr. Burns had suggested in a speech last
September, ought to support the long-term thrust of monetary policy
toward restraint against inflation and ought to reinforce that
commitment by a Congressional resolution. That language was in the
Committee's report and apparently Mr. Proxmire read that and thought
it was a good idea. So he has introduced a resolution, the language
of which I have examined in its present form word by word. It seems
fairly unexceptional but I have a little concern, frankly, about the
whole exercise. It starts off with all these [whereas phrases]--
whereas the Congress has the constitutional power, and whereas the
Federal Reserve is an agent of the Congress, and whereas the Congress
can tell the Federal Reserve what to do, whereas this and whereas
that--[and then says] we support [the Federal Reserve] in this general
long-range intention [to restrain inflation]. It seems to me the kind
of language that could easily be converted in some other circumstances
to say whereas we think interest rates are too high we direct you to
lower interest rates. So, it may not be the most desirable precedent
in the world, but I'm not sure there is anything we can do about it.
I just have a little worry about it. We have not been active in
supporting this but we have not been active in working against it
either. My own [instinct] is to let events take their course. But
there may be an effort--and there's danger in this--to put in some
different language in the operative paragraphs that could give us a
little difficulty. We will wait and see, I guess. As it is, I think
it's unexceptional. I don't know how helpful it really is, but you
ought to be aware of it. Maybe it is helpful; I don't know.

MR. MORRIS. Do you think Mr. Proxmire knows the implications
of this resolution with regard to real output and employment?

MS. TEETERS. Well, the third paragraph says "to maintain
full employment and balanced growth."

-10-



7/9/80

MR. PARTEE. Yes, but there is a phrase that says "get back
on the targets for the aggregates." I see your point. There are a
lot of things in it; they could change it from year to year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It worries me a little, frankly. I'd just
as soon it didn't come up. I discussed it with Arthur and I'm not
sure he's so happy himself that this [process] has started. I'm sure
he's convinced that he thought it all through, but I don't know what
we can do.

MR. SCHULTZ. When did you talk to Arthur Burns?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A couple of weeks ago.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I talked to him the day before yesterday,
and he told me that the resolution as originally introduced had been
much more specific and that he had Proxmire make it much more general
and so forth. So it was a bigger problem when--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the main difference between [the
current version] and what was initially introduced is that the first
sentence talked about the long run anti-inflationary policy and so
forth--I can't remember the language--but had a phrase in it about
long-term interest rates. It said, in effect, that [such a policy]
could bring down long-term interest rates in the context of dealing
with inflation. Arthur got them to take out the specific reference to
interest rates. In fact, the reference wasn't bad because it was in
the context of bringing down inflation. But it's illustrative of the
kinds of things we could get in a resolution of this sort some time in
the future that would be very difficult. Looking at this, my own
feeling is that we can't go out and say we don't [favor] a resolution
that says Congress supports our long-term efforts to deal with
inflation. But I feel a little nervous about the implications of this
for the future. Indeed, there may be an attempt to modify this in the
present. What I am saying is that if it just died quietly, I wouldn't
shed enormous tears; there may be some other aspects of this that
aren't apparent. Undoubtedly, I will be asked to comment about it in
my testimony. I suppose I am forced to say it's a fine resolution.

SPEAKER(?). What else can you do? It would be like talking
against motherhood to oppose it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think you would be justified
in going on to say that it might create--I don't know how to phrase
this but you'd have to handle it cautiously--dangers for the future.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I could say that I don't think it is
wise for these resolutions to be all that specific but that a
resolution with this kind of general sentiment is [fine].

MR. WALLICH. Could you say that if Congress wants to
influence Federal Reserve policy directly that the appropriate way is
to do it by legislation rather than resolution? I would expect that
[such] legislation would not [be enacted]. That is a tough statement.
But we could be snowed with these resolutions and the pressure--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I did ask if there had ever been a
resolution quite like this, referring to policy. And I think it is

-11-



7/9/80

true--well, at least nobody was able to tell me off-hand--that there
has not been. The nearest thing to it was the concurrent resolution,
adopted in [1975], which in part gave rise to the whole monetary
targeting exercise. In some of its initial versions that did talk
about interest rates; [those phrases] were pretty much extracted, so
the resolution became largely procedural instead of referring to the
objective of policy except in the broadest way. But there have been
many attempts to introduce resolutions like this. There has been a
resolution circulating in Congress in recent months about bringing
down interest rates. It never got anywhere, but it had some
signatures on it. There have been other attempts of that kind, which
weren't pressed very hard. We weren't able to find any precedent for
this kind of thing actually passing in Congress. I don't know if
there is anything else to be said about it but I thought I'd ask for
any reactions you had. And you ought to be aware of it.

MR. BAUGHMAN. I don't see how it could be opposed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Kichline and Mr. Zeisel, it's up
to you.

MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me interrupt you. If I remember
correctly from the Bluebook, this is an artificial 4-1/2 percent in a
sense because it doesn't allow for a depression of M-1A from NOW
accounts and so forth.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. Whatever shifts occur would be subtracted
from that. So if the shift were one point, the number would be 3-1/2
percent; and if it were 2 points, it would be 2-1/2 percent, etc.

MR. PARTEE. A shift over and above what is already assumed
in M-1A and M-1B?

MR. AXILROD. These are shifts that could be related to the
introduction of nationwide NOW accounts beginning around the end of
this year. So the 4-1/2 percent subsumes whatever is going on now.
This is the new introduction--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, if I understand correctly, the target
doesn't fully allow for what is going on this year.

MR. AXILROD. Well, given what is going on this year, we
think that 4-1/2 percent is more reflective of unchanged policy than
4-3/4 percent because there seems to be a little more movement out of
demand deposits into NOW accounts.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're just saying that the 1/4
percentage point allows for that.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. It's a small amount. We raised M-1B a
bit.

MESSRS. KICHLINE and ZEISEL. [Statements continued.]

-12-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a very complete and very
comprehensive presentation. I'm sure it leaves a certain amount of
questions in peoples' minds. I have two or three myself, so I might
start. We will spend a little time here on the economic outlook
before we get to the aggregates discussion. Your forecast, obviously,
has a very low recovery in disposable income in '81 by historical
standards. You also have a low increase in productivity. When we
have a low increase in productivity somehow we have to have a low
increase in disposable income. But there's a certain amount of
chicken and egg involved; if we had a faster recovery, we might get
more productivity. I guess I'm groping for a question here. How low
does the rise in disposable income have to be [to reflect] the fact
that productivity is not performing the way it used to and how much is
[related to] a sluggish recovery in some sense?

MR. ZEISEL. Well, the point you made earlier applies to
virtually all of the variables in the sense that we get low growth in
disposable income in part because of the sluggish improvement in
employment, which is related to the sluggish improvement in output,
which is consistent with the sluggish improvement in productivity.
The question is: Where does one get aboard the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how much of it is the other way
around? I'm asking how much [reflects the fact] that anything is
going to look less buoyant than it looked before because we get less
productivity growth, all other things equal.

MR. ZEISEL. Of course, any improvement in productivity
performance would give us the potential for a greater increase in real
income. In a sense that's partially endogenous and partially
exogenous. Our projection of sluggish productivity growth is
consistent, as I mentioned earlier, with our projection of the very
sluggish recovery in output growth. But it's also consistent with the
longer-term problems that seem to be plaguing productivity
performance. We have an underlying trend rate of growth of
productivity of less than 1 percent at this point. If productivity
were performing, let's say, as we thought it was back in the late '50s
and '60s--at another 1-1/2 or 2 percentage points above that--that
would give us the potential for a considerably improved outlook. So
that could be very significant.

MR. MAYO. Your capital spending assumptions tie into this
productivity assumption, too, don't they?

MR. ZEISEL. Well, over the longer haul, obviously, that's
correct. Over the short run it would not be a significant variable.

MR. MAYO. I'm thinking really of the capital spending that's
already in place or under way.

MR. ZEISEL. The capital/labor ratio, as I'm sure you know,
has deteriorated in recent decades and people feel that that has
played a significant role in the deterioration of productivity. But a
lot of other factors appear to be operating as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure this has something to do with the
chart you've labeled "Prices II." There's a striking difference here.
In '75-'76 [the percentage rise in] the gross business product

-13-



7/9/80

deflator went down, my word, from 12 percent to 4 or 5 percent. Now
you say it can't go down much. Of course, it had gone up very
sharply. But how did we manage to get it down 7 percentage points or
thereabouts in only a year or 18 months and now we can't get it down?

MR. PARTEE. Look at the previous [chart], Paul.

MR. ZEISEL. Well, several things are operating. One factor
is the behavior of energy and food [prices], and I think we ought to
abstract from those. But even [so] we had a very significant
deceleration. Part of the answer is the very vigorous recovery in
output and productivity during that period. The productivity swing
between 1974 and 1975 was about 8 percentage points; it went from
about a 3-1/2 percent decline to a 4-1/2 percent increase. We are
figuring on a recovery in productivity of a little more than half
that. So in a sense we don't get the improvement in unit labor costs
and the removal of pressure on prices that such productivity--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a 4 point [swing], if I
understand you correctly.

MR. ZEISEL. Well, yes.

MR. KICHLINE. Actually, if you flip the page and go back to
[the chart labeled] "Prices I," the numbers on the top panel of that
chart show the peak was in the fourth quarter of 1974 when unit labor
costs were up 14.9 percent [from a year earlier]. The fourth quarter
of 1975, one year later, was the low point [when the year-to-year
increase was about] 4 percent. So we had [nearly an 11] percentage
point swing in unit labor costs in that particular period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had an 8 point swing in productivity
during that period, so we must have had a 4 point swing or so in
compensation?

MR. ZEISEL. I don't have [compensation figures] quarterly; I
have hourly wages figures.

MR. PARTEE. Compensation is [charted] on the previous page;
that shows around 3 percent, I think.

MR. KICHLINE. It was 2-1/2 percent to 3 percent
[unintelligible].

MR. GRAMLEY. Wasn't there another factor going on during
that period, though, that affected all of these variables on both
compensation and prices? The wage-price control program [affected]
1974. There was an enormous catch-up increase, which inflated the
rates of increase; and when that was over, everything settled down
again. That was an important part of the improvement that took place.

MR. ZEISEL. That was a very important component. We had an
explosion and then a deflation, so that played a significant role
temporarily. A combination of forces was operating that I'm afraid
cannot be exactly disassociated from one another.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In some sense it could be argued that you
are rather pessimistic on both compensation and productivity.

-14-



7/9/80

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we are pessimistic relative to past
cyclical performance. And I think the productivity assumption is a
very tenuous one. There are alternative explanations of why
productivity declined, and one could very easily suggest that we may
get a bigger rebound. At the same time, on the compensation side we
have a situation where real wages have declined for a substantial
period of time. In fact, I would view it the other way around on the
compensation side: We think we have a good forecast given the
assumptions. But one could very easily think that there will be more
intense upward pressure on wages and that compensation might not slow
as much as we have built into our forecast.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because real wages are declining?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in a sense that puts pressure on the
bargaining units and on workers who wish to command higher nominal
wages to offset that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All [I'm talking about is] this pessimism
relative to earlier cycles. It's pretty deeply related to the
productivity picture one way or another.

MR. ZEISEL. It is very deeply related. I think that's
absolutely correct.

MR. GRAMLEY. Is that really true? If you had a higher
productivity growth plugged into your forecast, unless you had a
change in the monetary and fiscal policy, wouldn't the main effect of
that simply be a lower rise of employment with the same increase in
real GNP and hence the same increase in real disposable income? If
you look back at the charts, the biggest increase in real disposable
income was in '77, when by no means did we have highly favorable
productivity developments.

MR. ZEISEL. We'd also have a good deal less pressure on unit
labor costs and prices and presumably the ability, therefore, to move
into a different fiscal position as well.

MR. GRAMLEY. If you removed policy constraints and found
that policy were more expansive, then you would have a larger rise in
real GNP.

MR. ZEISEL. But what we have provides the basis for allowing
that, I believe.

MR. PARTEE. I would agree with Lyle. I think you're
substituting manhours for lack of gain in productivity. So you don't
actually get a difference in real output in the forecast period, but I
think it does lead to pessimism on the price front compared to what
might otherwise be the case.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To the extent it came out in lower prices,
with the same money and fiscal assumptions you get more output.

MR. SCHULTZ. What effect do you get from the fact that
energy prices in manufacturing never made very much difference? They
were so low in terms of the costs. Now the situation is quite
different; a lot of manufacturing firms are thinking in terms of

-15-



7/9/80

capital expenditures of the kind that lower their energy costs. What
does that do? Is there any way to calibrate that sort of thing?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, that's one factor. It tends to cut
several ways. One of the arguments is that, given the rising cost of
capital, firms will tend to substitute more labor for capital. It
depends on the industry. In fact, President Morris had a conference
at the Boston Fed about this whole role of energy and productivity and
capital investment, and it's a cloudy area. But the balance of
thinking is probably that energy prices for many firms are a
relatively small part of total costs. So it's hard to sort out where
that will fall; one has to do an awful lot of disaggregated work. We
think that it probably on net adds something to capital investment
demand, but relatively little if you abstract from what's happening in
the energy sector directly. And that's obviously a different animal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just ask one more question. On
these charts of econometric exercises with and without tax cuts, is
there a lower real GNP in '83 with a tax cut? If I understand it
correctly, you also have a lower unemployment rate. Offhand that
somehow seems inconsistent.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, unemployment adjusts with a lag. And
these are rates of growth. We have a higher level of real GNP but
these are rates of growth of real GNP.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, you still have a slightly higher
level of [real GNP].

MR. KICHLINE. That's right, but it's reversing. The
difference in the unemployment rate in 1982 is 0.8 percentage point
and in 1983 it's a half percentage point. So the gains on the
unemployment side are disappearing, but with a lag.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, that was a fine presentation. I
have only two questions. One has to try to put monetary policy in the
context with the thrust of fiscal policy, and in the first section of
your report you have a table on the federal budget and also one on the
high employment budget. My question has to do specifically with the
high employment budget assumptions. We've had some discussion of this
before, Jerry, as you surely remember. To refresh my recollection,
what unemployment rate are you assuming here?

MR. ZEISEL. I think it's about 6 percent. Governor Gramley,
do you recall?

MR. GRAMLEY. If it's the official one, it's 5.1 percent.

MR. BALLES. And this uses the official one?

MR. ZEISEL. Yes, we'd be consistent with that.

MR. KICHLINE. In the last several months there was a
generalized governmental review of the calculation of this high
employment budget and an agreement on the calculations involved. So
we're using that.

-16-



7/9/80

MR. BALLES. Well, as you know, this calculation is very
sensitive to differences in the unemployment rate assumption. A lot
of observers, including my staff, think that the non-inflationary full
employment rate is somewhat higher than 5.1 percent and may be closer
to 6 percent. Have you made any alternative calculations? What would
happen if you assume 6 percent, for example?

MR. KICHLINE. We have done that in the past. We have not
done that this time. The way we use this high employment budget in
our own approach is to look at the change in the budget from one year
to another. Differences in the unemployment level used mainly affect
the level of the budget rather than the swings from one year to the
next. And I might note that for 1980 and 1981 this projection has a
fairly dramatic increase. On a calendar year basis we are going from
a surplus of roughly $18-1/2 billion in 1980 to [a surplus of] $39
billion in 1981. Now, the levels would be different if we calculated
the budget on a higher unemployment figure; but the swing, we think,
is indicative of the thrust of policy.

MR. PARTEE. You'd just raise [the non-inflationary full
employment rate] by 0.9, would you? Is that effectively what you
would do?

MR. BALLES. Well, by how much is the question, Chuck. I'm
trying to get some range of estimates here as to how restrictive
fiscal policy is going to be and I doubt that it's going to be as
restrictive, in terms of the level, as what the staff shows. What I
was trying to find out is what the level would be with a 6 percent
assumption.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have not done that calculation, and I
don't have in mind any rules of thumb that would allow me to give you
an answer right now.

MR. BALLES. Okay. Maybe we can talk about that later.

MR. KICHLINE. We can certainly do [the calculation] and
circulate it.

MR. BALLES. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I have one more
question. It's related to the chart entitled "Domestic Nonfinancial
Sectors," the opening chart in the fourth section. I'm particularly
interested in the reality of what will be going on in financial
markets in terms of federal borrowing, broadly defined. The red bars
on the chart show federal borrowings. Did I understand you to say
that that is on the unified budget basis? In other words, what I'm
trying to get at is: Does it include that very large and growing
amount of off-budget activities--the mortgage pool, the government
sponsored enterprises, and what have you?

MR. KICHLINE. No, it does not. It includes the Treasury
issues and a small amount of agency issues. It does not include FNMA
or the Home Loan Banks, for example. We have numbers that start at
$75 billion for 1980; there's a narrower definition of the budget and
it does not include the off-budget items.

MR. PARTEE. $75 billion?

-17-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That includes the off-budget agencies,
just not the sponsored ones, doesn't it?

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

MR. BALLES. It does include the off-budget?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon how one defines off-
budget. My understanding is that it literally includes the off-budget
agencies but it doesn't include the [agencies] not owned by the
government, [such as] FNMA and the Home Loan Banks.

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. It captures the [funds raised
by] the Federal Financing Bank, for example, as a Treasury issue.

MR. BALLES. How much bigger would the number be if you
included the so-called privately owned, government-sponsored
enterprises and the mortgage pools? I have a hunch it would be
considerably bigger, but I'm not sure.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. One of the problems here, by the way, is
that this chart covers "nonfinancial" [as defined] in our flow of
funds accounts. We consider the sponsored agencies to be the
financial sector, so we are dealing with a different concept here.
But in 1980 we have sponsored credit agencies raising about $11-1/2
billion of funds and in 1981, $20 billion. So [compared] to these
numbers, you get [borrowings of] something like $87 billion under that
broader definition in 1980 and $120 billion in 1981.

MR. BALLES. That makes a difference, doesn't it?

MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes.

MR. BALLES. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. I have one detail question and then two
substantive questions. This Administration forecast [that you show]
is not yet published, is it?

MR. KICHLINE. No, it is not.

MR. GRAMLEY. This is the one coming out in July?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is this firm?

MR. KICHLINE. We understand that the economic assumptions
are firm as a basis for the midyear review. What are not yet firm are
the precise outlays and receipts--the budget side associated with the
economic forecast. But it has not yet been presented officially; my
understanding is that it will not be delivered until July 21.

MR. GRAMLEY. The first substantive question I'd like to ask
Jerry. On the compensation per hour projection, you noted that one
element of optimism isn't in the line shown here--the fact that it
includes an increase in compensation due to payroll taxes in 1981.
So, in fact, in order to get this performance, private compensation

-18-



7/9/80

would have to improve still more than the line indicates. But isn't
there yet another element in it in the sense that this year we are
looking at a rise in wage rates of roughly 1 percentage point faster
than we had in 1979? And that's not showing up in the compensation
per hour figures because we're getting a shift in mix, for cyclical
reasons, that is going in the other direction. In 1981 that shift in
mix will not be taking place; on the contrary, it will be reversed.

MR. ZEISEL. That's correct.

MR. GRAMLEY. To get the kind of performance in compensation
that's shown here we're going to have to have a very significant
slowdown in the rate of increase in average hourly earnings adjusted
for overtime and mix.

MR. ZEISEL. That's correct, and we do build in a calculation
of the effects of mix on the compensation figures. The average hourly
earnings index itself declines between '80 and '81 by slightly more
than 1 percent. I don't have a figure for the fourth quarter '81; it
would be a bit more than that, though, as opposed to a compensation
decline over that same period of 0.3. So the point you're making is
absolutely correct. The underlying wage adjustment has to be greater
than the compensation decline that we show.

MR. GRAMLEY. The second question I'd like to direct to Mr.
Kichline. In the discussion of the assumptions on the first page,
you've noted that M-1A goes up by 4-1/2 percent. But the Bluebook
says something else is involved that I think we need to be aware of,
namely that the assumptions about interest rates that are plugged into
the forecast include an assumption that the money demand function
drops by 3 percentage points both this year and next. So if the
demand function had been unchanged, M-1A growth of 7-1/2 percent would
be required to give us the same amount of monetary stimulus. Isn't
that correct?

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. In effect, the way to view the
4-1/2 percent [M-1A growth] is that it has the power of old-time 7-1/2
percent money, old-time being pre-1974 money.

MR. GRAMLEY. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. First, I think the staff forecast is very well put
together. My staff's forecast is close to that of the Greenbook but I
personally feel a little more pessimistic just because I think we're
coming out, I hope, of a very wrenching inflationary experience, which
I believe tends to lessen our ability to rely on econometric models.
And I think some of our past sins, so to speak, in not encouraging
enough capital formation and productivity in this country are catching
up with us. Maybe I'm just getting older, but this causes me to
distrust even more than usual the figure factory, if I may call it
that, on the projections for 1981. So, I'm just a little more
pessimistic personally.

I have one detail question on the unified budget. You are
more optimistic than the Administration for fiscal '80. Following up
on Lyle's point, is this $55 to $60 billion [deficit projected by the

-19-



7/9/80

Administration] fairly set at this point or is the [potential]
variation really more than you've indicated here? And why are you
more optimistic? Is this a shift--shall I call it a political shift--
of a deficit from one period to another by the Administration?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, the early number the Administration was
working with on outlays was something like $578 billion, $3 billion
higher than the staff's estimate. Now, that may come down a little.
We looked back at the last eight fiscal years, from 1972 through 1979,
and the mid-session review has overestimated actual expenditures by
about $2 billion. That's about 1/2 percentage point. So we feel
reasonably comfortable that we're close, given past experience. On
the receipts side, the Administration had $519 billion as an early
number as opposed to [our] $523 billion. That relates, as I
understand it, to some tax multipliers, the response of tax receipts
to income over the last three or four months. And it's a messy
business. So I would view [the two projections for] 1980 as really
quite close. The real issue is 1981.

MR. MAYO. Well, [comparing] the $59 billion Administration
[preliminary deficit estimate], for what it's worth, and your $52
billion, I take it that you feel the receipts will do a little better.
That's part of it?

MR. KICHLINE. For 1980?

MR. MAYO. Yes, for 1980, the year we are in right now.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. We have $4 billion more in receipts than
their preliminary number. And as I say, it's really a technical
matter. Their forecast is not materially different from ours for the
second and third quarters--the last two quarters of the fiscal year.

MR. MAYO. This is also minor, but do your projections for
'81 assume that what the Congress is trying to do on speeding up
corporate tax collection [will materialize]?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it includes that; it excludes certain
other things. It excludes, for example, the withholding of interest
and dividends. We made some adjustments where we felt it was quite
unlikely that the Congress would be willing to go along with the
Administration's proposals.

MR. MAYO. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our differences with the staff
forecast have widened a bit this time. For 1980, we believe that the
drop in real GNP will probably be greater than the staff is
projecting. This concern stems mainly from three factors: the
growing evidence that the international situation may be weaker than
we've been assuming, the conditions in the construction industry--and
specifically housing--and retail sales. If you plot housing starts
and retail sales in real terms opposite similar periods of other
postwar downturns, this time they practically drop off the chart; the
drop is far greater than anything we've had before. And we don't
believe that that weakness has yet spread to other parts of the

-20-



7/9/80

economy to the extent that it likely will. So, expecting this greater
weakness, we think the unemployment rate will probably be higher by
the fourth quarter than the staff is projecting, though we think the
rise in the deflator will be less. We have estimated the deflator at
8.5 percent versus [the staff's] 9.4 percent for the four quarters
ending in the final quarter of this year. And in 1981, more
differences [emerge] because we firmly believe that if we stick to our
targets on the aggregates, as I think we will, then the outcome will
be much better than the staff is projecting. We are guessing that we
might have an increase in real GNP in the neighborhood of 6 percent as
compared to the 2.5 percent forecast by the Board staff. This would
mean a good deal less inflation and it also should mean less
unemployment. Our forecast is a guess too, of course, but we feel
[the results could be] quite different from what the staff has
projected.

MR. PARTEE. Is that because compensation goes up a lot less
in your forecast, Bob? How do you have less inflation? That's what
I'm asking.

MR. BLACK. Well, we keep the money supply under better
control.

MR. PARTEE. I understand that. But looking at the factors
of costs and prices, is it better productivity?

MR. BLACK. Yes, I would think so. If we make progress on
the inflation front, I think people's expectations are going to turn
around very markedly. And we have [projected] more private investment
than has been assumed, offering commensurate increases in
productivity.

MR. PARTEE. Well, not [until] next year, though.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. I was interested in the estimates of
uncertainties accompanying the forecast, which were based essentially
on a number of simulations. I wonder if you'd take a minute to put
that into qualitative judgmental terms and let us know what you think
the chances are on the up side and on the down side of the forecast.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In 60 seconds.

MR. KICHLINE. As you know, we do recognize that forecasting
point estimates is not the way to go in terms of associating some
degree of [certainty with the forecast]. We believe there is a
standard error associated with any forecast, and that's why we've
attempted to work with the model in generating ranges of uncertainty
or confidence intervals. In that memorandum we used the model to try
to calculate the probabilities of hitting the Humphrey-Hawkins targets
as defined by the Administration's forecast.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't clear on that. Let me make sure
I understand. The Humphrey-Hawkins targets are the Administration's
forecast in the terminology you're using?

-21-



7/9/80

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in the short term, yes. The first two
years are defined as the short term; they represent projections but in
fact are short-term Humphrey-Hawkins targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When you say Humphrey-Hawkins targets do
you mean the Administration's projections that are in these charts?

MR. KICHLINE. That's right.

MR. MORRIS. That's not what Messrs. Humphrey and Hawkins had
in mind, though.

MR. KICHLINE. In general, I would say that with the monetary
policy we have assumed--looking at the model results in both years,
particularly 1981--there is a fairly small probability of [an outcome]
within a narrow range of those targets. I didn't go into this in the
presentation, but a good deal of the difficulty revolves around the
Administration's [forecast of] 13-3/4 percent growth in nominal GNP
with interest rates not much higher than they are currently. That
tells you something: Really, their implicit monetary [growth]
assumption has to be high. So the exercise we've gone through
suggests that there's a fairly wide range [of uncertainty] associated
with the point estimates we've presented for the broad aggregates, for
1981 in particular. And looking at the Humphrey-Hawkins targets,
there's a fairly low probability of [an outcome] within a narrow range
of those targets--particularly of hitting the unemployment and price
projections simultaneously.

MR. EASTBURN. May I follow up and ask another related
question, which is a simple one? How confident do you feel in your
Greenbook projections and what side are the errors on?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, given the policy assumptions, I feel
fairly comfortable with the real side forecast that we have. I know
there's been a tendency for economists to underestimate the strength
in the economy at turning points. But in general we have built in
very restrictive monetary and fiscal policy assumptions relative to
past cyclical experience. At the same time, on the price side I feel
reasonably comfortable. I find it very difficult to expect much
greater price improvement next year, particularly in light of what is
happening on energy; and food prices aren't going to help. Both of
those were positive forces in 1975. So I feel reasonably comfortable
with [our forecast of] both prices and real GNP. If we're wrong, it
may well be that some of the assumptions are wrong. And I would
prefer to stop there.

SPEAKER(?). In other words, two plus two still equals four
but maybe it's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this depends upon one's judgment of
this 3 percent shift in M1 demand. What was that shift in the past
year, say?

MR. KICHLINE. Very little, if you mean over the course of
1979.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was thinking of the past 12 months.



7/9/80

MR. AXILROD. From reading the model--which is all this is
talking about--in the year 1979 there was virtually no shift. There
was a little downward shift, but I wouldn't take the model that
seriously on that. For the year ending in the second quarter of 1980
there was a shift of about 3 percentage points, all of which occurred
in the second quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. As far as the forecast is concerned, which I
view as very well done, I find myself much closer to the
Administration's than to the staff's, certainly for 1981. I think we
have to count on a high nominal GNP, quite possibly a good rise in
real GNP, and an even higher deflator than either the Administration
or the staff have. The latter is based on [our past] experience of
always tending to underestimate inflation. We've had a very patient
labor force. Outside the strongly unionized sectors wage increases
have been very low, and one must anticipate that at some time there
will be a concerted push to make up for that. We also have to bear in
mind that, in a sense, our staff forecast is a formal exercise based
on an assumption of a given rise in money supply. And that is
interpreted optimistically with a 3 percent [demand] shift. We have
never been successful in sticking by our money supply targets and I
fear that the same thing will happen again. That means that we have
no very clear ceiling on the up side and that there's a real
possibility of going to higher rates of inflation and much higher
rates of nominal GNP than any of this says.

Well, let me just ask one small technical question. Jerry,
you were skeptical about business fixed investment spending, partly on
the grounds of low capacity utilization. Isn't there a chance that we
are once more overestimating our true capacity, as I think we did the
last time round, and that the pressure begins at lower capacity use
levels? And secondly, given the high increases in wages that firms
[already have implemented] and that seem ahead, isn't it possible that
they may put more emphasis on modernization than expansion?

MR. ZEISEL. As far as the first point is concerned, it's
always possible that we are estimating capacity incorrectly. But we
have tended to scale down the effective capacity level in our index by
introducing a factor of downtime that is much greater than we had
earlier. So I think we're far more realistic in terms of effective
capacity than we were, let's say, 6 years ago. As far as the latter
point is concerned, certainly that [possibility] is there. The
tendency to shift toward capital because of the [high] relative price
of labor versus capital has existed and continues to exist. We have
tried to build that in. What we've viewing here is a cyclical
performance rather than the longer-term secular considerations which
really bear upon that to a greater degree. We also are moving out of
a period in which pollution control and related expenditures have
borne such a heavy weight relative to total expenditures, as they did
a few years ago. So that's a factor lowering the possibility for
[business investment] expenditures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. My question has been answered.

-23-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I'm curious about your projection [for the
external sector]. I know you said yesterday that the real growth of
our trading partners was strong--and Japan's was quite strong--in the
first quarter. But [these countries] seem to me to be subject to the
same pressures that we are: high interest rates and rising oil
prices. What makes you think that we're not going to export our
recession and have a worldwide recession, which I assume would weaken
your forecast markedly?

MR. TRUMAN. I'd make several points. We are definitely
assuming that [other countries] will have a slowdown. [We expect real
GNP] growth to go from approximately 4 percent in the last two years,
1978 and 1979, to 1 percent. To some extent zero is an artificial
number in this context; indeed, the same forces will be operating on
them, including higher energy prices. On the other hand, as shown in
the second [international] chart called "Activity Ratio," they also
didn't expand as rapidly, so they in some sense are in a less strongly
pronounced cyclical position than we are. As I said, for two of the
countries we are expecting what one would classify as a recession this
year. Those basically are the answers I would give you.

As far as exporting our recession, clearly [our economic
performance] has some impact on them but it's easy to exaggerate that
effect these days. We are [relatively] less important in the world
economy. In fact, we now account for under 20 percent of world trade
whereas a number of years ago we were a third of world trade. There's
less feedback effect on the rest of the world, with probably two
important exceptions. One is Canada, which had negative growth in the
first quarter--2 percent at an annual rate. And their statistics are
looking just like ours, with housing starts falling out of bed and so
forth and so on. There's Japan, too. The automobile situation
suggests--[unintelligible] other factors determining it--that there
may be a little less of an impact on Japan than one would normally
expect because of the continued demand for small cars.

MS. TEETERS. But that is one of the risks in the forecast.
Things could be considerably worse--

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but we may be going through the same
phenomena. I've asked the staff about that. We're worried about that
with a nine-month lag, right? In general, we've been forecasting a
slowdown in every [Greenbook] and we haven't seen it yet in the
numbers. After real growth in the first quarter on the order of 3
percent, depending on how you cut the numbers--which is a healthy
annual rate--we estimate that the G-10 countries will get something
like 1 percent growth for the year. That means growth is going to
have be something very close to zero on average [over the final three
quarters].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There will be a few further complications
if the LDCs don't get financed. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I'm fairly comfortable with the forecast. I
have a feeling that the staff might be on the optimistic side with
regard to prices. I noticed that food price increases are really
nothing exceptional at all in this forecast and intuitively I would

-24-



7/9/80

have expected a considerable burst in food prices later this year and
early next year as animal inventories are reduced and can't go any
lower and we get a very substantial reaction in meat prices. I also
agree with Lyle that the pressures on compensation are all going to be
on the up side of this forecast rather than the low side. And then
I'm not really sure about energy; that's a wild card. [The staff has]
a 16 percent increase year-end to year-end, which is fairly modest; on
the other hand, one could make a case that a surplus would make even
that a rather large increase. I'm just not sure about that. If we
did have a little more in prices, we might have a little less real
growth, given the policy assumptions. And that would be the tendency,
I think, as the year goes on. In addition, there is no allowance here
for shocks. One can't have an allowance for shocks, but in fact many
of the main features of our economy in the last few years have been
conditioned by unanticipated shocks. And there could be more in the
future--the large country difficulties, large company difficulties,
large bank difficulties, whatever they might be--that could adversely
affect the outlook.

As far as the money number is concerned, I think assuming
that 3 percent demand shift is a very conservative stance for the
staff to take. Remember what that means. If the demand shift were
less than 3 percent, interest rates would be higher than forecast
given GNP; and they're already forecast to be pretty high. Back in
'75 we didn't put in much demand shift, and we [forecast] very high
interest rates rather early on in the recovery, [and those rates]
never materialized. So I think taking a sort of midpoint figure for a
continued demand shift is conservative and the proper way to go. If
it's [more] than this, we'll have credit conditions that are a little
easier than forecast. But given the great uncertainty in this area--
and I don't understand the thing nor do I think the model is much
good--the staff assumption seems proper and conservative. And we
ought to keep that in mind.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. I think this balance sheet ratio page is telling
us something. It shows us very clearly that compared to 1974-75 the
corporate sector is less liquid, the household sector is substantially
less liquid, and the commercial banks are less liquid. At the same
time, we are going into a recession of about roughly the same scale as
the one in 1974-75, but we are coming out with a much more sluggish
recovery than we had in 1975 and 1976. And throughout the whole
period debtors will be carrying substantially higher interest rates
than they've ever carried through a recession. This seems to me to
add up to a much higher level of business failures and loan losses at
banks than we've seen before. Would you want to comment on that?

MR. KICHLINE. I don't know that I'd say "before" and refer
to 1974 and 1975. We had very special factors then, involving
particularly the REITs. I do think, however, that the combination of
high inflation, which is really the problem behind this whole chart,
as well as sluggish income growth in general portends difficulties for
individual units in the business sector, in the household sector, and
probably in the state and local government sector as well. I don't
know that I would want to [compare the current situation with] what I
would view as a very special period complicated by the recession in

-25-



7/9/80

1974-75, but there is clearly a potential for delinquencies and
business failures that should not be ruled out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I think somebody ought to be optimistic here and
try to search for what might be a more positive approach or we are
going to have all the probabilities on the wrong side of the forecast.
Your housing starts figure, as I understand it, is for single-family
homes.

MR. KICHLINE. No, it's both single-family and multifamily.

MR. ZEISEL. Combined.

MR. WINN. Well, the inventory of single-family homes is
rather a puzzle in terms of the overhanging supply, which may be
larger than it seems. But in apartments and the whole commercial
area, one can't beg, borrow, or steal space. One gets the feeling
that that could snap back somewhat more quickly than it has in other
cycles. So that's a positive [note].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can't beg, borrow, or steal space, but
with the rent control laws and all that does anybody want to build?

MR. WINN. Yes, it's starting to pick up in some areas. At
least the builders and the people in the financing area are talking
about a fairly sharp turnaround, Paul. So that's a positive. Second,
if one looks at these declines, how much is psychological and how much
is real in terms of the shock effect that we had? And to what extent
can we have factors that will go the other way? For example, my guess
is that while the 1972 to 1979 budget experience indicates that
expenditures fell short [of the estimates], I have greater confidence
in the Administration this year so I think that may not be the case.
We may get a bigger deficit in 1980 than has been projected,
[particularly] if we get the tax cut--and at least the discussions of
that seem real. And perhaps people are not being sophisticated in
their analysis and are simply taking the present deficit and then
adding on the tax cut, whatever that may be. You talked about a
deficit in the area of $110 billion for next year. In that
environment what kind of reaction will we get in terms of peoples'
behavior? Third, [in the area of prices] I realize the animal problem
gives one pause but, on the other hand, the grain prospects look quite
good. So I don't know to what extent we might get a stand-off on the
food side. Psychologically we have the problem that gasoline is about
to run out our ears in terms of storage. What happens if we start to
cut gasoline prices? I realize the Saudis and others are talking
about raising [prices for] crude, but what kind of psychological
impact will we get from that kind of development and from the scare
[tactics]--the "look what lies ahead with $110 billion deficits" and
that kind of talk? Will we again get some psychological reactions?

We have talked about the shift in demand for money and so
forth. But when we look at these capital ratios, have we made
allowance for that shift in terms of how they will behave, even though
you've commented on the deterioration that has occurred versus
previous cycles? So, I'm trying to search for things that could give

-26-



7/9/80

us a positive push at this time rather than the more negative kinds of
inputs that we hear.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you were going to introduce some
animal spirits to overcome the animal inventories! Well, one of the
difficulties of having so comprehensive and able a presentation is
that it provoked a great deal of discussion and [consumed] a great
deal of time. Nothing looks very happy, except Mr. Winn's last
interjection. As I judge this, we have a problem in that if we base
our analysis on any kind of traditional analysis, econometric or
other, we run into all sorts of dilemmas. And it makes one wonder how
all this can be reconciled except by saying: "Let's have a more
expansive budget and a more expansive monetary policy and then
everything will look all right on these traditional grounds." That's
if we ignore the inflationary implications, which I take it we can't
ignore. That is the dilemma we have. We don't have a situation where
we can play the game the way we have played it traditionally. I don't
think we can, anyway. Well, if we are going to have any coffee break
at all, we can go chew on that physically as well as mentally for a
few minutes and come back and enter into the policy discussion.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We spent a long time on the business
outlook; I think we should have spent a long time because [the staff
presentation] was interesting and illustrated some of our problems
very amply. But I don't think we are going to get beyond the long-
term ranges before lunch, so I suspect we will [continue the meeting]
after lunch. We have to consider these forecasts a little, in
preparation for the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. We have some figures,
as you know, from the Presidents and from the Board members, and we
ought to have at least a little discussion about how they came out and
how they should be presented. Let me defer that for later. I guess
it could be argued that we ought to do that before the policy
[decision], but I won't be that logical. I'll do it afterwards. But
I do think we need some time to discuss non-monetary policy matters.
So [the meeting] may run a fair amount of time this afternoon. I
won't try to finish before lunch; our meeting will have to continue
afterwards anyway. I hope to finish [our work on] the long-term
aggregates before lunch at the very least.

I have the sense, as I suggested before, that this
presentation of the business outlook, which is based upon past
relationships and past performance of the economy, does point up very
well our dilemmas and the basic issue we face. It's a philosophical
question almost as to how we approach a system which in some sense has
run out of steam in terms of the postwar presumptions, if I can put it
so grandly. The economy has been getting less liquid for 30 years.
We have had rising inflation for 15 years, I suppose. Both of those
factors, and I'm sure some others, have changed the nature of the
economy and the nature of expectations, and they have implications for
cyclical analysis. If one assumed that expectations were stable in
some sense and weren't affected by inflation, the overwhelming thrust
of what comes out of the business analysis is that we should have a
big tax cut, an easier budget, and a substantial increase in the
monetary aggregates, and everything will go along happily on past
cyclical grounds. We'd have room for a bigger recovery and everything
would move as it did in previous cycles. We could look ahead, if not

-27-



7/9/80

happily, on a more or less even course [consistent] with past history.
I doubt that it will be so simple because expectations will be
affected. We will get financial market repercussions from that kind
of policy that are probably inconsistent with that [historic]
evolution. We'll get exchange market reactions that would be
inconsistent with following that course. I don't think there's so
simple an answer. It's not the answer that our policy to date,
anyway, has suggested. On the other hand, the opposite view--that if
we just keep clamping down on the money supply all the problems are
going to disappear nicely and the inflation rates are going to come
down much faster than these projections show and the various dilemmas
will be reconciled in the next year or two in a very happy kind of
way--doesn't leave one feeling entirely comfortable in the pit of
one's stomach. At least not me.

I suppose it's a matter of raising the questions; it's not
only what we should be doing, but what we think the analog should be
in other public policies, whether fiscal policy or wage-price policy
or otherwise. Those are appropriate questions, particularly for me.
I think they are always appropriate for the Committee but there's a
certain spate of testimony we have to deliver in the next couple of
weeks on a whole range of economic problems, from monetary policy to
fiscal policy, to wage-price policy, to silver, to the Monetary
Control Act and everything else. So we do have to think implicitly or
explicitly about complementary policies as well as about our own
policy and approaches. With that very general introduction, maybe Mr.
Axilrod can set out the more specific considerations with respect to
where we go on the aggregates this year and next.

Let me just say one other thing in that connection. We
obviously have to review the aggregates and announce a rather specific
conclusion for this year. We also have to say something about next
year, but the degree of specificity with which we state [our
objectives for] next year is quite an open question. We can go all
the way from saying these are our preliminary ranges--we wouldn't say
final in any event--for M-1A, M-1B, M2, M3, and bank credit in a
manner similar to what we would do for 1980 to the other extreme of
indicating a qualitative direction. Or we can alight anyplace in
between those two extremes. It is an open question we should resolve
regarding whether we want to go with one of those extremes or some
place in between in terms of what we say in the Humphrey-Hawkins
report. I think it's useful to be as specific as we can be in the
first go-around here--as specific as we can in getting individual
views, however generally we want to [cast it] as a consensus for the
Humphrey-Hawkins report.

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You did not consider the possibility--
maybe it shouldn't be considered, but let me raise it--of correcting,
in a sense, the M-1A/M-1B relationships for what has gone on so far.

MR. AXILROD. Well, we did. We assumed that an unchanged
policy from what was adopted in February meant that M-1A growth could
be about 1/4 point below the midpoint of the range and M-1B growth
about 1/2 point above the midpoint.

-28-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's not reflected in the ranges you
are proposing.

MR. AXILROD. We didn't change the ranges, but we spelled
that out as an assumption.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Theoretically, we have the option of--

MR. AXILROD. That's right. That's why I particularly
stressed M-1A and possibly M-1B; but M-1A is a more logical candidate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to put this in context: The charts
that you have drawn later [in the Bluebook] for the short-run ranges
are based upon what we know through June. M-1A and M-1B are both
below the cone [for the year thus far]; in fact, they're below the
channel. If we took the estimate you have for July--which may be in a
state of flux, but just so the Committee can appreciate it--M-1B would
be just about at the lower end of the cone, whereas M-1A would still
be below the cone. You have M-1B almost back in the cone--not quite,
I guess, but very close to it.

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Projecting M2 into July--June is already
[plotted on the chart]--it looks a little more clearly above the
midpoint.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. We expect that by the time the
year is out, M2 will have grown [at a rate] somewhat above the
midpoint.

MR. PARTEE. And M3 will be just a little below the midpoint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an M3 estimate for July? I
don't know whether you do or not.

MR. AXILROD. I do have one. The July rate of growth for M3,
at 5.8 percent, is weaker than that for M2 and M1 because we still
have very weak bank credit demands and consequent reductions in large
CDs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What you basically have for the July
projection is: M-1A below the cone, though probably within the
channel; M-1B just about at the lower side of the cone; M2 higher in
the range; M3 a little low in the range; and bank credit--what, below
the bottom of the range?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, well below the range.

MR. PARTEE. After having run for a year or more above the
top of the range. It does suggest that we could reduce the M-1A range
on technical grounds; I guess one could justify a half point reduction
in the lower end.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, one of the considerations--to repeat
what Steve just said--is that for this year one might take the point
of view that M-1A particularly should be reduced. If we do that, just

-29-



7/9/80

keep in mind what we might want to do for '81 and what visual
appearances we want to give of--

MR. PARTEE. I mentioned the lower end of the range. Your
point about the top end is very well taken.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would have some arguments against doing that
in addition to the problem that it creates for '81. Number one, the
credibility issue of having stated targets and leaving them alone at
this point is worth thinking about. The other is that if we start
fooling around with these ranges and try to get them a bit tighter or
[the expected outcome] a little more in the middle of the range, it's
likely to get us into trouble. We have to fight Proxmire all the time
anyway because he is always trying to get us to narrow the ranges; and
at some point that is going to give us problems. I think we should
try to hold out for somewhat broader ranges.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will remind you in that connection, as
Fred just implied, that we got some criticism last year--I don't think
it was serious--that the logic was to reduce the width of the ranges
at [the midyear review]. I don't suggest that we should necessarily
do it, but we should have that in mind. That is, we ought to reject
it consciously if we don't do it, because one can make the argument in
pure logic that we ought to be a little more certain now about where
we are going to end up at the end of the year than when the year
began. Let's hear what you have to say in general about this matter,
Mr. Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. Well, I'd like to [harken] back [to] what you
said earlier and what Fred just said. The thrust of your introductory
comments was that [people] behave differently these days because of
expectations than they would ordinarily.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One might argue that anyway.

MR. EASTBURN. Well, I think it's very true. In light of
that, it seems to me that this exercise we go through twice a year
goes beyond policymaking so far as the aggregates are concerned and
goes to the public impact in terms of creditability and expectations.
I would prefer your statement to be fairly simple. I'd say, first of
all, that we are reaffirming the anti-inflation stand that we have
been maintaining and, consistent with that, that we are going to
maintain the targets we had established for 1980. I'd indicate the
uncertainties involved in doing that. We talked at great length here
about the shifts and the uncertainties involved in the shifts; and if
we are uncertain about them, [why] talk about that publicly at great
length? It seems to me that would not enhance our credibility but
would create a great deal of public confusion. And I would not
indulge in a lot of fine-tuning among the various averages. That to
me would even further compound that problem. So for 1980 I would
stick with what we have; I'd do any qualitative explanations necessary
but leave the numbers where they are. I would confine comments on
1981 to a qualitative statement that we intend to pursue our long-term
policy of gradually reducing the rate of growth of the money supply
without being specific about the numbers at this time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

-30-



7/9/80

MR. ROOS. I am very close to where Dave is on this. I think
it would be a terrible mistake to adjust these ranges. This probably
will be the first real test from a credibility standpoint of whether
we are fulfilling what we announced our policy would be last October.
To horse around or to adjust the range to accommodate what is
happening rather than what we set out to achieve would be very
detrimental to our credibility. I think consistency is terribly
important. I part company [with Dave], if I understood Steve's
remarks about the inflationary consequences of moving back up into the
range, in that I think that we should say publicly--I think you should
tell Congress--that we have fallen below the lower limits of our
announced ranges for the narrow aggregates and that we are going to do
what is necessary to get back within the ranges. But no one should
construe that as having inflationary implications other than over a
very short period of time. We are going to get back into these ranges
because we do not want to exacerbate the recession we are in. We
don't want to make it worse by continuing [to foster] growth of the
narrow aggregates below the ranges. And I think we should make at
least a strong statement--we don't want to be specific--that going
into 1981 we are going to reduce gradually the rate of growth of the
narrow aggregates. Incidentally, our people did a study of M2 and
they feel that M2 is not an accurate predictor of GNP, so I'd resist
moving to place greater emphasis on our M2 targets. But I think we
ought to tell Congress what we are going to do--that we are going to
correct for this [current] undershoot and that next year we are going
to continue our policy of gradually reducing the rate of money growth.
We will enforce our credibility by being candid. I don't think we
ought to play games.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we ought to associate
a change in the ranges--if we think we have good grounds for a change
--with playing games or horsing around. All "B" is arguing is that a
technical adjustment is required.

MR. ROOS. Don't you think, given the tendency of the Open
Market Committee in past years toward base drift, that people--or at
least interested market participants and others--knew that we were
playing games in those days to make ourselves look good?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is something to what you
say, looking at history. And I'm not arguing for changing the ranges;
but I just don't want to associate any change, particularly in this
case when we could argue that we have a technical reason for making
the change, with playing games. We said a certain range was valid at
one point; I don't think we can say that it's valid forever just
because we happened to say it [once]. Don't change the ranges lightly
without a good reason is what I think you are saying. Don't revert to
changing them automatically because we change them every quarter to
take account of what has happened. I just don't want to overstate the
case for not changing. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, as to the general economic and
psychological setting, I am persuaded that we are in a situation where
our conventional belief no longer stands up that monetary and fiscal
policy, if handled appropriately, have the capacity for nudging the
economy along a path toward full employment and price stability. And
I am persuaded that we will not be able to achieve those desirable
objectives without engaging in some direct interference in some of the

-31-



7/9/80

price and wage making processes. But even if that's true, it seems to
me that the best contribution monetary policy can make is to behave as
if that were in fact the situation and hope that somewhere along the
way the necessary [steps] will be taken to address the structural
rigidities in the economy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me for interrupting you, Ernie, but
you reminded me: I would appreciate it if people, when they are
making their comments, would express any assumption they are making
about fiscal policy or wage-price policies--as you have just done to
an extent--and say what they think is appropriate. Your comment on
wage-price policy just reminded me of it.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, turning to what's immediately at hand, I
think it's a close call as to whether to make any adjustments in the
targets that were announced last February. I can make a fairly
persuasive case either way, I think. It seems to me that we are under
rather strong pressure to do something with the 6 to 9 percent range
on bank credit. Of course, if we do that, then we have made a change
and that opens up the whole set of ranges for other changes. If it
were not for that, I would come out on balance for no change. If we
were to come out [for no change], we could just incorporate some words
rationalizing that any time we are aiming at a family of targets, we
obviously are not going to be able to hit all of them. And in this
circumstance we are simply pursuing policies which, as things have
developed, give greater priority to the money measures than to the
credit measures.

With respect to next year, we have a choice of being either
fairly specific or quite general. If we go the route of being quite
general, we should reiterate with some firmness of conviction, as
already has been suggested and as we have done previously, that we are
of a mind to move to lower rates of monetary growth until such time as
we get to that level of growth which is judged to be consistent with
full employment under conditions of price stability. But as next year
has the potential of giving us a fairly unusual looking set of
numbers, until such time as we get to the point of presenting those
numbers it might be appropriate now to take a little time to elaborate
on the point that as the new legislation goes into effect, we think
it's going to have a substantial impact. Just by way of illustration,
its impact could be such that a posture of moderate slowing in the
rate of growth of our narrowest money measure might bring our target
for growth of that particular measure down to zero. So I would want
to try to get across that idea. It seems to me that if we are going
to get much benefit in the economy from monetary policy in this next
year or so, it has to flow pretty much from getting across the idea
that we are going to impose a policy that will continue to move in the
direction of being consistent with price stability, whatever those
numbers might be. That's all I have right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You assume a tax cut next year or the
desirability thereof?

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I take it as a given that there will be
one. It's not something that I have endorsed in any of the speeches I
have made.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

-32-



7/9/80

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I'm quite comfortable with
alternative 1 as stated, [namely to maintain] the present ranges. I
would, of course, do the proposed revision of the bank credit range.
But I don't consider that in the same box as the four aggregates. As
a matter of fact, I think we have gone out of our way to make it clear
to the [Congressional] Committee--I'm relying on memory here, so
someone can correct me if I am wrong--that [our aggregates targets]
would be "associated with" bank credit expansion of such and such.
We've said that bank credit isn't a target in the sense that the
aggregates are a target. As far as next year is concerned, I
subscribe also to the idea of [describing our objectives]
qualitatively.

I see no reason though, Mr. Chairman, why you in your
testimony couldn't indicate that we are at a different point in terms
of the outlook for the ranges for this year--that at this time we are
closer to the low end of the range for M-1A and a little higher than
the midpoint for M-1B, and so forth. You could do it qualitatively
without disturbing your credibility; I think it would enhance your
credibility. And for next year, somewhat differently from Larry, I
would put a little more reliance on M2 because I think it is a more
stable aggregate against which to measure than M-1A or M-1B. We are
going to have a lot of volatility and unpredictability even [though
we're more than] a third of the way through the year. So I would lean
toward more reliance on M2 looking forward. It isn't as important in
calendar year '80, but I think it is very important in calendar year
'81. So, I think you can indicate qualitatively [how] we are leaning
in our thinking without getting into quantities and without disturbing
credibility. Fred Schultz's point is very apt that Proxmire would
like nothing more than to see us try to fine-tune some of these
ranges. He would say: "Aha, you are working in my direction but you
are too cowardly to come out with a point estimate." I would argue
very vociferously against either fine-tuning or a point estimate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One problem you remind me of--it is more
of a potential problem--is that if we put more emphasis on M2 and also
say qualitatively that we are going to reduce its range, my impression
is that we may maximize the tension between the economic projection
and the monetary projections.

MR. MAYO. Well, you have to go further than I indicated,
Paul, in that M2 has certain qualities that remove it a little from
transaction accounts. That's why we have M1. I don't see any harm in
indicating that we may not be able to reduce M2 but that we expect or
hope to have slightly lower M1 ranges. I don't think that would get
you in too much trouble because M2 does include the ingredients of
housing finance and so forth. That would not detract from the
credibility of a qualitative statement of that type.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I don't think there is a
compelling case to change the ranges this year, although I wouldn't
object to revising M-1A down by 1/2 of one percentage point. For next
year, I disagree with most people who have talked so far. I think we
ought to give some numbers for next year. If we fail to do so, we
could generate some adverse psychology to the effect that the Federal
Reserve is not willing to speak except in very vague generalities. On

-33-



7/9/80

the other hand, the problems of setting ranges for M1 numbers for next
year are really formidable. I disagree with the staff recommendation
that M-1B should be boosted by only 1-1/2 percentage points next year;
that's much too low. If in the current situation we are getting a
boost of 1-1/4 points to M-1B and then we go to national NOW accounts,
[the effect will be greater]. The NOW account is a much more
marketable concept than the ATS account; furthermore the S&Ls, since
they do not have demand deposits, cannot [offer] ATS accounts. So the
1-1/2 points seems much too low. Now, if we go with 2-1/2 points,
which is closer to where I think we are going to come out, then we
will get some very strange numbers. For example, for M-1A we will get
a range of -2 to +1 percent and for M-1B, 5-1/2 to 8 percent. I just
think our ability to set ranges for M-1A and M-1B next year is so
limited that we'd be much better off simply telling Congress that, due
to this new technology change coming next year, we can't do a very
good job at estimating and, therefore, we are only going to set a
target for M2 next year. Now, we could add M3 to that and set targets
for M2 and M3. And I would say for M2 that we are going to scale down
the range by 1/2 percentage point to 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. If we
are not willing to make any commitment, even a tentative one, on what
we are going to do in '81--particularly if you are [testifying] at a
time when the foreign exchange markets are very turbulent--we are
likely to get adverse psychological feedback. I don't see any real
hazard to [my suggestion]. We are going to have to come up with some
scaling down of the [ranges] and 1/2 percentage point is about as
small as I can accept.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Despite the fact that it's inconsistent
with the economic outlook as presented? It's only 1/2 percentage
point more inconsistent than the present range.

MR. MORRIS. I don't think 1/2 point is going to make very
much difference, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SCHULTZ. Except that it is in the wrong direction.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What would you say about taxes and wage-
price policy?

MR. MORRIS. We ought to scrap wage-price policy. I don't
think it has contributed anything in 1980, and in an environment such
as we are going to have in the next couple of years I think the
marketplace could do a better job than presidential guidelines.
Presidential guidelines might end up providing a floor for wage
increases in the kind of soft situation we are contemplating.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do I infer from what you are saying that
you are much more optimistic about the wage outlook than the forecast
suggests?

MR. MORRIS. Yes, I am, because I think we can affect
expectations if we really demonstrate to the marketplace that things
are changing, that we are doing things differently.

MR. BAUGHMAN. We can't affect existing contracts.

MR. MORRIS. Yes, but remember, 80 percent of the American
labor force is non-union. It doesn't [work under] any contract. On

-34-



7/9/80

taxes, I would urge the Congress to set that issue aside until they
come back in the next session and treat it as a tax reform issue
rather than as a consumption stimulus issue. One could make a good
case for offsetting the increase in social security taxes for the
consumer and one could certainly make a case for investment stimulus.
This, of course, is essentially what is in the package. It seems to
me, again psychologically, that it would be better to do this when the
economy is turning up rather than having the Congress make a panicky,
seemingly fine-tuning, effort before it goes out for re-election.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, like several of the others who have
spoken, our preference for 1981 would be the retention of the existing
ranges. I come out pretty close to where Dave Eastburn and Larry Roos
came out but, of course, I wouldn't want to overstate my case as you
said Larry was close to doing. So, I feel pretty much the same
without overstating it. Just attribute [the overstatement] to him!
If we lower our targets now--and because of where we are I know there
is a real temptation to do that--people are going to interpret it as
meaning that we have just forgiven our misses as we have done in the
past. That's just one step away from their concluding that if we
overshoot on the up side as we come out of this--which is where we
usually have made our mistakes in the past--we will do that just as
readily [this time]. So, that is the principal reason I would stick
with these targets. But we ought to recognize that there are other
aspects of credibility involved, and one is that to achieve these
targets--to get anywhere near the adjusted midpoints of the ranges for
M-1A and M-1B--we have to have pretty darn rapid rates of growth in
those aggregates between now and the end of the year. And I'm
convinced that a substantial body of the financial public is apt to
conclude that we have thrown in the towel [on fighting inflation]
unless we do a very good job of explaining that. I think you, Mr.
Chairman, and the rest of us will have to combat that in talks if
indeed we do decide that is what we want to pursue.

I am also aware that this course will probably weaken the
dollar temporarily, but if we don't go ahead and move our aggregates
up [into the ranges], the intensification of the recession here will
probably damage our trading partners to a considerable extent and
there will be feedback effects here. And those effects may even be
more serious so far as domestic activity is concerned. We also ought
to bear in mind that the real way to deal with the foreign exchange
problem is to deal with inflation rather than to worry about temporary
differences in interest rates. And I do think this policy will be the
best way to deal with inflation over the long run. So on these
grounds, we would favor approaching the adjusted midpoints--maybe I
should say asymptotically or rather slowly anyway--of the ranges for
M-1A and M-1B and we would weigh M-1B considerably more heavily than
the others. We also would favor shorter-run specifications that would
be consistent with that kind of long-run policy.

For 1981 I think it's vital that we follow through and
announce that we have lowered our targets, as we have been promising
to do every time we have [testified]. I'd make an effort to lower
these gradually, but steadily. I think Frank Morris made a good point
in suggesting that we ought to avoid saying much about the technical
adjustments now. I would favor lowering all of the ranges about 1/2

-35-



7/9/80

percentage point but point out that we will have to make adjustments
later on. I know that's not going to eliminate all the confusion that
will emanate from this statement, but it might reduce it.

So far as the last question you asked, I would not favor a
tax cut but it seems inevitable given the political situation, so I am
assuming that one will take place. And I agree with Frank Morris that
jawboning is practically useless. I would say it might have a
marginally positive effect if monetary and fiscal policy are doing
what they are supposed to be doing. But a tax cut is probably
inevitable, so I imagine we will have it in some form.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I feel we ought to reduce the ranges for
1980. I realize it looks a little like base drift in fitting the
goals to suit the achievements, but the alternative of bringing the
achievements back within the ranges that were our goals could be very
damaging. That would mean a rapid [rate of] increase in the
aggregates. We'd have to go for a number of months at rates of growth
in M-1A, and M-1B even more so, that in the past have been regarded as
indicating inflation and perhaps a reversal of our policy. We would
have to drive interest rates down somewhat further to severely
negative rates. And then we would have to make a turnabout at some
point in order to get back on track; [with money growth] having
sharply risen back to track, we'd have to slow it down, thereby
suddenly raising interest rates after [previously] having driven them
down. I think all these gyrations would be damaging, and we are not
likely to do them [when needed]. We will find ourselves missing or
somehow avoiding the very painful issues involved in these interest
rate movements. So I would favor bringing down the M-1A and M-1B
ranges 1/2 point for 1980.

For the next year I share the philosophy that we ought to
announce a reduction. I am very apprehensive that we will be far out
of reach with regard to the development of nominal income on one side
and the reduced monetary aggregates targets are concerned. I see the
additional problem of M-1B. I, too, would be surprised if there
weren't a more rapid switch [to NOW accounts], causing M-1B to
increase more rapidly and M-1A to slow. It looks as though M-1A is
really a diminished, vanishing species as far as most people are
concerned. And I think perhaps Frank Morris' suggestion of focusing
on M2 and M3 for '81 and explaining that under these conditions we
cannot be very specific about M-1A and M-1B is a way out. We would do
what we should do--indicate a reduction; that is what I would
recommend. But we wouldn't quite trap ourselves in so difficult a
situation as we would if we named lower numbers for the M1 aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wages, prices, and taxes?

MR. WALLICH. My response there is that we ought to go to a
tax oriented incomes policy. I see in the Washington Post today that
they are revising--

MR. PARTEE. Last gasp.

-36-



7/9/80

MR. WALLICH. It just won't die because it's a reasonable
suggestion. As for a tax cut, if we had the choice, I would postpone
it into late '81.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I'm quite satisfied with the specifications of
the ranges at this point. Remember, they are ranges, and if we get
into the lower parts of them or the upper parts of them we've met our
targets. We don't have to hit the 4-1/2 percent or 4-3/4 percent
[midpoints] right on the nose. It seems to me that it would not be
wise to lower them, simply for credibility reasons, even if we say
it's a technical adjustment. Just leave them alone. I'd also point
out to you that I don't think there is an overwhelming need to change
the bank credit number because we know there has been a tremendous
substitution of commercial paper for bank credit. And if we take
[account of] the total sources of credit in [that measure], then the 6
to 9 percent range is one that is achievable. It's just a technical
development in the market rather than anything that should make us
change our targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can just interrupt, I meant to ask--
and maybe you already said this Steve, though you don't have it this
way in the table--if we keep the ranges unchanged, is the technical
case intellectually, in the sense of your best forecast, overwhelming
for changing bank credit or not?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, our forecast for bank credit is literally
4-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, December to December it's around 5
percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's consistent with these--

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's consistent with the 4-1/2 percent
[forecast for M-1A], etc.

MS. TEETERS. But if you add in commercial paper what happens
to it?

MR. AXILROD. I don't have that rate of growth in mind, but I
don't think it would be that low.

MS. TEETERS. It probably would bring growth within the
range, if we [took into account] the substitution in commercial paper.

MR. AXILROD. I'd have to calculate it.

MR. MORRIS. It has been several billion dollars in the last
couple--

MS. TEETERS. Yes. It strikes me as the same kind of animal.
[Issuers of commercial paper] have just shifted where they are getting
[funds]; and due to the technicalities of the prime rate relative to
market rates it's a reasonable thing to do. So, we could just explain

-37-



7/9/80

that there has been a shift in the way the market is [behaving] and
keep the same range.

For next year, I really am disturbed that everybody wants to
lower [the ranges]. Have you not looked at what the federal funds
rate would be if we lower them? The funds rate in the fourth quarter
of 1981, if we lower our targets, would be 15 percent. How much
mortgage activity do you expect to have if fed funds are at 15
percent? There's a limit to how far we can push down on money growth
and not just absolutely strangle this economy. And given the
uncertainties of the outlook at this point, I think the safest thing
to do is to say that we are going to stay within the same ranges next
year. We have wide enough ranges to lower the actual outcome, to come
in at the low end. But to set out now to push short-term rates up to
the 15 percent area seems to me outrageous, frankly. It would almost
completely negate any real growth that we are going to get over this
period. The housing market certainly won't come back. The thing to
do is to say that we will aim to get within the ranges and that we
aren't sure we are going to hit the midpoint of every one of them.
I'd stick to the bank credit range as modified, and then say at this
point that we simply plan to continue [those ranges] through next year
rather than that our total task in life is to reduce the rate of
increase in the money supply year after year. I don't think that's
what it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wages, prices, and taxes?

MS. TEETERS. On wages and prices, I don't see that we have a
hope of getting it through Congress. On taxes I think the most
beneficial tax cut we could get--this should sound familiar--is to cut
out the social security tax increases, which would probably do more to
lower unit costs than anything we could do at this point. That has a
direct impact on wages. They can take out the increase in January and
dress it up as a removal of health insurance [unintelligible]. And if
the accelerated depreciation were put in, we'd probably get the best
combination of tax reduction and one that goes directly into people's
incomes right away. It wouldn't get all tied up in a refund a year
later, in the way it has been done several times before. So, if we
state our preferences, I'd certainly go for social security relief.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Let me start with the tax issue first. I agree
with Frank that we ought to encourage the Congress not to consider
this until after the general election. I think the chances of getting
a well-structured tax cut would be much better if it could be
considered later this year rather than in the heat of election
politics. I would like to see a significant part of the tax reduction
go to a reduction in payroll taxes, but not all of it. We ought to
strongly encourage the Congress to allocate a substantial share of the
overall tax reduction to business investment incentives because I
think that's critically needed for the future. On wage-price policy,
the way wages and prices behave in a complex modern economy leaves
really no alternative but to try to use voluntary guidelines to
supplement monetary and fiscal policies. I wish I could agree with
Governor Wallich that a TIP would work, but I don't see any kind of
TIP that is feasible.

-38-



7/9/80

So far as the targets are concerned, I want to start with
1981 and work backwards. If I have understood correctly, the staff is
saying that if we want to keep the unemployment rate from going up
further, from roughly 9 percent at the end of 1980, we are going to
have to provide for an increase in Ml, however defined--not worrying
for the moment about NOW accounts and so on--of roughly 7 percent
unless we have a very favorable shift in money demand. And Steve is
saying that the chances of not getting that favorable shift in money
demand are not trivial. I would say that, indeed, they are not
trivial; it may not happen at all. So I think it would be a serious
mistake for us to decide at this juncture that we ought to lower the
target growth rates for the narrow monetary aggregates for next year.
I'm more pessimistic than the staff on the outlook for inflation next
year. But we can't possibly run a viable long-run monetary strategy
to reduce inflation if we follow a strategy that pushes the
unemployment rate well above 9 percent. I just don't think that's
viable. Now, the logic of my position for 1980 and my interpretation
of what has been happening recently says we ought to lower the growth
ranges; substantively I agree with Governor Wallich completely. But I
don't think we can lower them now for the rest of 1980 and then raise
them for 1981. So, I would be inclined to leave the targets where
they are for 1980; but I would be entirely happy, unless we have a
reverse shift of the money demand function, to see the actual growth
rate of the narrow monetary targets fall below the targets for this
year. I would be quite prepared to explain to the Congress that when
we have a shift in money demand to pump out enough money supply to
stay within those ranges is murder. It would just ruin any chances we
have for getting inflation under control over the long run. So far as
M2 is concerned, my feeling is that we have a range that looks
inconsistent with the M-1A range and that we ought to be prepared to
raise that. And if we are reluctant to raise the whole M2 range, then
I'd raise the upper end. It is a new kind of aggregate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you talking about '80 and '81?

MR. GRAMLEY. 1980. What I would do for 1981 is simply say
that at this juncture we have no basis for changing our views on the
appropriate growth rates and for now I'd leave them where they are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you, for M2 for 1980 you
would--

MR. GRAMLEY. I would be inclined to raise the range for M2
for 1980. One way to do it would be simply to raise the upper end and
say 6 to 10 percent.

MR. PARTEE. Or let it go a little over.

MR. GRAMLEY. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Chances are that M3 will be within [its range]
and we could be a little over on M2 and a little under on Ml.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd be prepared to [accept] that, too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

-39-



7/9/80

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, my posture would be to emphasize the
rapidity of change we've experienced and the likelihood that we may
encounter continued rapid changes down the road. I'd indicate the
kinds of changes that have taken place and that may take place in the
future. I would keep monetary policy unchanged but stress that
maintaining policy might involve some fluctuations in interest rates
ahead, some of which may be adverse. In view of the rapidity of
change and the many uncertainties, I would be extremely hesitant to be
very specific about next year. Inflation developments may go one way
or the other in the fall, which may influence [our decision]. We have
the technological changes with nationwide NOW accounts. We have the
uncertainty with respect to taxes and a whole set of [unintelligible].
So I would be more concerned [about making sure] that policy is
appropriate with respect to the changed circumstances, whatever they
might be. And I'd say that [ranges] will be announced in February,
with the thought of then being very specific.

With respect to taxes, I would be inclined to talk about tax
reform, not just the deficit side of the picture, and to stress the
importance of waiting until there is a chance to consider those moves
deliberately rather than hastily. I am very sympathetic to the social
security tax problem--what it means cost-wise, income return, and all
the impacts--and the need to do something on the investment incentive
side. That may require a cut in expenditures, depending on the
circumstances when [the Congress] starts to consider this. So I think
they are caught in that. As for wage-price policy, I don't feel that
does much good; I'd [rely once again on] market forces.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, earlier on you raised the question
of the Proxmire resolution and didn't get much of a response. I was
mulling over the opportunities as well as the risks of supporting that
resolution and I would come out recommending that you support it if
you're forced to take a position. If at some future date the Congress
goes down the road that you fear it might and begins talking about
setting interest rate levels, we could resist that kind of resolution
at the appropriate time. To resist the current proposed resolution I
think would be a mistake. Such a resolution would strengthen our hand
in terms of not following a usual vigorous countercyclical policy in
view of the ongoing very serious nature of inflation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just make clear my own position
at the moment, which is always subject to change, it is not to resist
it or to support it. In other words, if I get asked "Is this a good
resolution?" I'd say it's a fine resolution. But I'd try not to be
out there in front.

MR. BALLES. Yes, I think that would be wise. The dilemma
that you so well described earlier is going to come home to roost,
obviously, in your testimony. I agree with a number of other
observations made around the table a little earlier that the markets,
both domestic and international, are going to be extraordinarily
sensitive to all the nuances of what you have to say. And I think it
is quite important to separate policymaking from public perceptions at
this point because the impact of the announced ranges on inflation
psychology and what is assumed to be the course of actual growth is
going to be extraordinarily important. I certainly agree that we

-40-



7/9/80

ought to resist any narrowing of those ranges, if you get pushed into
speaking to that either in your testimony or in response to questions.
We should try to keep the maximum flexibility because of all the
changes going on both in the economy and in financial innovations;
with nationwide NOW accounts pending we are going to need that
flexibility I am sure.

You asked us to speak about assumptions on tax cuts and wage-
price policy. I am pretty cynical regarding the ability of wage-price
policy, if it's continued, to do anything realistic to change the way
the world runs. If I were a betting man, I'd bet that there will be a
tax cut sometime in '81. If we have an opportunity to speak to how it
ought to be structured, I would certainly support the statements
others on the Committee have made that we ought to aim for tax reform
designed to stimulate productivity and capital investment and take the
edge off the impact of high and rising payroll taxes. My own hunch is
that there is going to be little, if any, real restraint on the fiscal
policy side in terms of the actual budget or even the high employment
budget. That's because if you look back at what happened to the
unemployment rate during this period of expansion that ended last
January, we never even got close to getting down to a 5.1 percent
unemployment rate. So I think that rate is very unrealistic when
calculating the impact of a full employment budget. That leads me to
the conclusion that monetary policy is still about the only game in
town in terms of exerting any anti-inflation effect. But we are faced
with the usual dilemma that there is a long lag between the time we
move toward restraint and when it shows up on the price front, which
may not be until several years from now.

Having wrestled with whether or not to change the ranges, I
think we would be well-advised just to keep the present ranges and not
change their width either. There would be too many problems to
explain if we begin tinkering with the ranges for 1980; therefore, I
would [support] the views already expressed not to fuss with them.
But, of course, in terms of policymaking in future months, we want to
reserve for ourselves the right not to hit the present midpoints for
all the reasons that have been set forth.

With respect to 1981, I would also agree with the view
expressed earlier by many other speakers that we should avoid getting
overly specific and try to avoid getting pinned down to explicit
numbers, especially in view of all the uncertainties connected with
the impact of pending nationwide NOW accounts. I favor keeping [our
targets for] 1981 as much as possible in qualitative terms but I hope
on balance that your testimony would imply, if not make explicitly
plain, that in terms of longer-run strategy we are still working very
hard at getting the inflation rate down, even if that involves more
aggregate growth for next year than we may have for this year. That's
about all I have on that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, my point of view is strongly driven by
something that we haven't talked about yet, and that is that we are
still kind of on a honeymoon and that the tough times are ahead. The
technique that we are using implies that at some point in time, when
the economy begins to strengthen, unemployment will still be high and
probably rising and interest rates will begin to go up. And that is

-41-



7/9/80

when the moment of truth will arise. That is the period that Governor
Wallich is afraid of in that he thinks it will put us in the cowardly
camp. I don't believe that's correct. But it is important that we
follow a strategy that gives us the best opportunity to stick to our
guns in spite of what may be at that point considerably more pressure
than we are presently feeling. Therefore, my approach would be to
hold to the present targets and to ease toward them reasonably slowly,
which would mean aiming to reach them in December. I would not like
to see us [promote rapid growth] to reach them in September, which
would mean that the fourth quarter would be the period in which we
will start to see interest rates rising rapidly. It would put us in
that box quickly.

For 1981 I believe the 4-1/2 percent figure is sufficiently
restrictive for us to be using in our thinking at this time. However,
it's very important that we give ourselves as much leeway as we can.
I would like to suggest that for 1981 we comment along the lines that
the aggregates will be generally at or below the present targets. We
are all very uncertain about the state of the economy. We all
recognize how difficult forecasting is currently and it would not help
us much at this point to be specific. I would like to see us have the
opportunity to have a little more running room at the end of the year.
So far as the bank credit figures are concerned, I don't think they
are very critical. The monetary aggregates are much more important.
I certainly would not be opposed to Governor Teeters's approach that
we say [bank credit] is running below the target range but that's
because of a shift in the type of debt [being used] or something like
that.

So far as wage and price guidelines are concerned, I don't
think they make much difference at this point. There is a possibility
that somewhere down the road they may make some difference. There is
something to be said about rational expectations in terms of getting
inflation down over time and, although we can't have a social contract
like they have in other countries, I believe that some wage-price
guidelines together with a variety of other things can make a
difference. As far as the tax cut is concerned, I favor one; I favor
a tax cut that will help on inflation and help in terms of savings and
productivity. Therefore, I would agree that we ought to do something
about depreciation or investment tax credits or something in that
area. I agree the timing would be much better if it could be put off
until next year. If it can't, let's have it as late as possible.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I agree 100 percent with Nancy. I would use the
same ranges again, recognizing that for 1980 we expect--and to some
extent plan--to come in at the bottom end of the range on M1 and maybe
well up in the range on M2. I think that's probably better than
making any kind of technical adjustment. And I agree that we can
explain bank credit by emphasizing [commercial] paper, the way Nancy
did, rather than corporate debt generally because people understand
that paper is a direct substitute for bank borrowing, depending on
rate relationships.

For 1981, I agree with both Nancy and Lyle. I don't see any
chance of reducing these ranges without possibly having considerable
impacts on the economy. Now, a number of people have said they don't

-42-



7/9/80

know what to do with M1, so let's reduce M2. But M2, as somebody
pointed out earlier, is a source of housing credit in substantial part
and has the money market mutual funds in it, which are still growing
pretty rapidly. The top end of our range now is 9 percent. We can't
ignore the fact that nominal GNP is going to have to go up quite a bit
because, much as we dislike it, there's going to be quite a lot of
inflation. And [reducing the M2 range] isn't the way to stop that
inflation. Therefore, it seems to me that we'll be lucky if we can
keep M2 within that 9 percent [upper limit] next year. The strategy I
would follow would be to say that 1981 is a long time off but we
anticipate having something like the same kinds of ranges for 1981
that we have had this year and we would hope to reduce growth within
these ranges as inflationary pressures abate--assuming they do. You
can make that comment: We will do it as we are able to do it, as
inflationary pressures are reduced.

On wage-price control, I would get rid of that program as
soon as possible. I think it is totally discredited in the country
and it is best to get rid of [that bureaucracy] and let it rest for a
year or two and maybe try something better next time. We can say that
market forces are going to lead toward more moderate settlements in
labor [contracts] later. One of the difficulties in continuing the
program is that we have to recognize the cost of living. And if we
do, that's going to lead us as it did this year to raise the Reserve
Bank budgets rather than reduce them. The change in the wage-price
guidelines led us to increase Reserve Bank salaries and that's a very
fine example of a counterproductive effect from that [program]. It's
our own salaries that have to be limited--not somebody else's, but
everybody's in this room.

I don't see any sense in arguing the tax issue. There will
be a reduction next year. It needs to include some consumption tax
reduction because consumers are too hard pressed, but I like the idea
of making it a payroll rather than a general income tax reduction.

MR. RICE. I agree with everybody. It's obvious to me that
there is going to be a tax cut next year. I just hope it's a good
one--that is, one that consists in part of a reduction in payroll
taxes but also increases investment incentives. From my point of view
it should have at least these two objectives: To increase investment
incentives, and hopefully have the effect of increasing productivity,
and to reduce the payroll tax burden. I would also add that it's
terribly important to get people to start to think in terms of tax
reform as soon as possible. This is separate, of course, from the
immediate tax cut issue that is going to have to be dealt with. But
the sooner we begin to think in long-range terms about tax reform, the
better, because it has all kinds of implications for productivity and
stimulating investment, and so forth.

With respect to wage-price policies, I have a good deal of
sympathy for Henry's tax-based incomes policy. I don't think there is
much chance of getting it, but I certainly would have a good deal of
sympathy for it. Absent a high probability of getting it, I would
probably find myself agreeing with Governor Partee that we should just
forget about the wage-price guidelines. But, again, I don't know how
politically realistic that is at the present time.

-43-



7/9/80

With respect to the aggregates, I would favor maintaining the
current ranges for the reasons that have been given already. I think
the credibility problem--I'm speaking now about 1980--is a real one.
We ought not be in a position of having it said that when the
aggregates move in a way that's uncomfortable for us we adjust the
ranges. I don't think we ought to tamper with the ranges for 1980.
Therefore, I would support alternative I, maintaining the present
ranges, and not worry too much about where the aggregates come in
within those ranges.

With respect to 1981, I would favor strategy 1, again for
reasons that have already been given. We ought to say that we have no
reason at this point to adjust the ranges downward in 1981. I hasten
to add that six months or a year from now, when we are considering
them again, we might well want to adjust the ranges. But I see no
reason to commit ourselves now to reducing the rate of growth in the
aggregates. To do so would run the risk of reducing the rates of
growth in money at a time when unemployment is rising. That is a
realistic possibility, it seems to me, and I would not want to be in a
position of mechanically having to follow a policy which requires us
to reduce money growth at a time when unemployment is still rising.
So I would favor stating that we see no reason at the present time to
change the targets for 1981; however, if the situation unfolds in such
a way six months from now or a year from now that it seems necessary
or feasible, we will certainly consider it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It seems to me that the question is
not what assumption the Federal Reserve is making in regard to tax
policy, but how you will answer questions on policy recommendations
that the Committee will ask you. Substantively I certainly agree with
Lyle Gramley and a lot of others that the responsible thing to say--
and I hope you will say this, Mr. Chairman--is that the size and the
composition of the tax cut should be considered early in the year.
However, I'd like to make a point which I sometimes think the American
public doesn't quite understand [regarding] why, if everybody says a
tax cut is inevitable next year, it shouldn't be legislated now. So I
think you have to point out two factors: One, that the tax cut and
the composition of that cut can't significantly affect the course of
the economy for the rest of the year; and secondly, if you choose to,
and you may not choose to, that the politics involved in an election
year are not conducive to the kind of carefully studied and
deliberately planned tax cut that is appropriate.

I also feel that wage-price guidelines, even though they have
not been very effective in the last two years, are an absolute
essential. I think it's appropriate to point out that they worked in
periods during the '60s, that there will be an opportunity for
whichever Administration is in power to start with a fresh slate, and
that certainly if they can be made much more effective they will add
both to a better recovery and higher employment as well as a lower
inflation rate. And they should go hand-in-glove with consideration
of the tax-cut policy.

As far as the aggregates go, I also share the overwhelming
consensus [developing] here that we should not change the aggregates
for 1980. But I think it's important to point out at least that we

-44-



7/9/80

expect M-1A and M-1B to come in toward the lower end of their ranges.
If we don't say that, we may get a very adverse market impact.

As for 1981, I am similarly concerned about what the market
impact will be both in domestic markets--[that is], long-term market
rates--and the foreign exchange markets if we fail to say or at least
to imply that there will be some edging down of the targets. In a
certain sense, it has almost become widely expected of the Federal
Reserve. I'm not disregarding the substantive problem that Nancy and
Chuck pointed out, and I realize that we shouldn't lock ourselves into
anything. Certainly we should not be specific, but I am a little
concerned about the market impact. If we were to fail to [say
something of that nature], that would be a noticeable omission, and I
would hope that with your usual skill you will be able to waffle. I
hope you will bear in mind that we are talking with one eye on the
market. I guess that pretty much summarizes [my views].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would just note in connection with that
last comment that it is not a question of my dancing around and
answering the questions. That is one thing. But in our lovely staff
report we have to put in black and white what we believe the prospects
are for next year, however vaguely that is stated. The official
distillation of our intentions for next year is going to be there in a
sentence or two or three sentences or whatever. It's a little harder
to waffle without being obvious about it.

MR. PARTEE. Perhaps we could invent a typo for this and
scramble the sentence--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we heard from everybody except our
First Vice Presidential associates?

MR. ALTMANN. That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Perhaps I should
begin by saying that when Governor Partee talks about Federal Reserve
salaries I would take some exception, but perhaps I'll save that for
another forum.

MR. PARTEE. That's what everybody always does when they talk
about their own salary.

MR. FORRESTAL. With respect to the longer-term targets for
1980, Mr. Chairman, I think the choice is a difficult one between
maintaining the status quo and lowering them. I have some sympathy
for the view Governor Wallich has expressed, but on balance I would
prefer to see the targets remain unchanged for 1980. Having said
that, I do think we ought to strive to come in at the lower end and
certainly not exceed the midpoint of those ranges. And we should
state publicly that we will be coming in at the lower end so as to
avoid any market misinterpretation of our ultimate motives.

With respect to 1981, my present feeling is that we should
probably reduce the ranges, but I think it's premature to be very
specific about our intentions because of the uncertainties that
everyone else has [mentioned]. I think a tax cut is inevitable in

-45-



7/9/80

1981. My own preference would be to have it in the form of tax reform
and be later rather than sooner, but in the present political
environment I expect a tax cut will come at least in 1981 if not
sooner. On wage and price policy, I don't have much to say except
that I don't think that policy has been very effective and the sooner
we dismantle the bureaucracy that's administering those programs the
better off we'll be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gainor.

MR. GAINOR. With respect to wages and prices, I agree
entirely with Bob Forrestal that the best thing we could do is
dismantle the program as soon as possible and I'd recommend that. On
the issue of a tax cut, we assume a cut of the magnitude projected,
around $28 billion. We'd prefer that we not have it. If we have to
have it, though, we'd like it to be deferred, preferably until after
the election.

With respect to 1980, we favor continuation of the existing
ranges, alternative I. I think that's consistent with what we told
Congress and everyone else earlier in the year and we should follow
through on that commitment. As to 1981, we favor strategy 2, which
supports the concept of an orderly reduction over time in the ranges
that we're aiming toward. In deference to the point that Ernie made
about legislative uncertainty and so on, it's probably better to
waffle on how we state our plans for 1981 but I definitely think
strategy 2 is the right one.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Czerwinski.

MR. CZERWINSKI. Mr. Chairman, there is little that I can add
to what has already been said. Our position with respect to wage and
price policy would be identical to what Bob Forrestal has enunciated.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the First Vice Presidents'
position on wage-price policy is related to their dislike of wage-
price policies by the Federal Reserve Board.

MR. RICE. I don't understand the implications. We don't
have to raise them as much.

MR. CZERWINSKI. With respect to taxes we, too, think that a
cut is inevitable and would prefer to see it come late in 1981 if
possible. On the long-run targets for 1980, our preference would be
to maintain the existing [ranges]. For 1981, we would favor some
slight reduction.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, would you just record me--because
you hadn't asked the question on wage and price controls--as being
strongly opposed to them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a big surprise!

MR. BLACK. I think he understated his case, Mr. Chairman!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to summarize so we can
conclude, if feasible, before lunch. On taxes, first of all, let me
just say that I [expect] to be asked to testify formally on taxes, as

-46-



7/9/80

it will be coming up before other committees. In a sense, what I say
would be my personal testimony, but the question is to what extent I
can speak for a wider group if asked. There seems to be a consensus,
though not everybody spoke to the point of what we want as opposed to
what we expect, that there is no eagerness for moving on taxes
immediately in a broad-brush way. There may be differing degrees of
sympathy for a tax cut eventually. I think everybody would say it
depends partly on conditions. But the idea of trying to [delay its
enactment] is certainly widely accepted [by this group] as nearly as I
can see [as is the view that] the cuts ought to be gauged as much as
possible in terms of their direct impact on prices and costs and
productivity. There is considerable sentiment--I don't know what I
think about this frankly--[for reducing] the payroll tax. I recognize
the benefits but I also worry about the future of the social security
discipline if payroll taxes are [not imposed] directly. But I
recognize that it is a major avenue to look at in connection with the
tax cut program. I could probably speak pretty broadly by saying that
there is a desire for this to be looked at later and not right now and
not be too definite about the later. The later could conceivably mean
at least September but preferably after the election.

On the wage-price issue, there's a greater difference of
opinion, obviously. I don't have any set view on this at the moment
but I have a feeling that the pessimism [about the effectiveness of
the program] that has been expressed by the staff is widely accepted
in our thinking in terms of the difficulty of [making progress on] the
wage side of the [equation]. I'm not sure there's anything to be
lost, frankly, by saying that if you people in the Congress are
talking about a tax cut, a pre-requisite you ought to think about
among other things, is a concord between labor, business and
government on a guideline that's substantially below the present
guideline. [This has to be done] in the context of all the problems
we have, including the potentially inflationary implications and all
the rest. I don't think it does much good to talk about guidelines in
the present area. But I'm not sure there's anything the matter with
stating that as an objective at the moment. And to the extent we
raise the issue, it may even slow down the immediate drive for a tax
cut until we all see how things develop over the remainder of the
year. Now, that's purely a personal reaction at this stage, but I'm
not sure there's anything to be lost by it. I'd go all the way by
somehow relating it more specifically to wage increases but I don't
know how to do it. If anybody had a bright idea on that score, it
probably would have been thought of already. Not that your idea
wasn't bright, Henry. I don't suppose I could speak more broadly
about that approach but I have some sympathy for putting it that way
as part of an argument for deferring consideration of the tax cut at
the moment.

On monetary policy itself, the consensus is pretty clearly to
keep the ranges unchanged for 1980. I basically agree with that in
terms of simplicity in presentation. It bothers me a little because
some things are going on that would justify a change, and in ordinary
circumstances they ought to be recognized. Even on a technical level,
on the relationship between M-1A and M-1B--which is a pretty darn
technical matter due to the NOW accounts--ordinarily we would say we
[now] have more experience and we ought to adjust that relationship.
But I recognize the arguments that were presented pretty fully around
the table for taking the simple approach. Most people suggested, and

-47-



7/9/80

I would certainly agree, that consistent with that approach we would
not be disturbed if, as is likely, the M1s came in at the low end of
the ranges. We might also say that it's possible M2 will come in at
the upper end of its range and that M3 will be in the middle or lower
part of its range. But the ranges are there and we are not changing
them partly because they are ranges. Nevetheless, we don't consider
it undesirable or inconsistent with our intentions if we have that
kind of pattern among the ranges. In fact, if we don't say that,
we're almost forced to change the ranges because of the apparent
inconsistency in the relationships among the different Ms. On bank
credit we may be able to finesse along the lines that have been
suggested. That's a little harder to do than if we hadn't put so much
emphasis on that measure in connection with the credit control
program, but let's suggest that bank credit may come in even below the
lower end of its range. However, due to the rise in commercial paper
and so forth that does not disturb us so greatly that we have to take
it into account.

Let me just stop there. Does all that express the consensus
for 1980 clearly enough? We don't change the ranges, but explicitly
in my comments we say that we are satisfied with a low M-1A and also
recognize that M-1A probably should be low relative to M-1B in terms
of the ranges but that this is a technical matter. Thus the M1s
generally might well come in quite low in their ranges and that would
not disturb us. M2 similarly could come in high in its range and that
would not disturb us, and M3 may be near the middle of its range. And
that is the basis upon which we are reaffirming the ranges this year.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we are satisfied that M-1B will
come in fairly low in its range, are we going to be willing to have it
come in higher in '81?

MR. PARTEE. It's going to have to.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can reopen the question of '80, but at
this stage before considering '81, have I captured the consensus for
the staff and the writing they have to do for the testimony? In a
very formal sense the numbers are the same, but the interpretation is
of some considerable importance here.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that captures it exactly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. For '81 I think we are in much more
difficulty, frankly. We have a real dilemma, inconsistency, tension,
or whatever you want to call it between the projections and what we'd
like to see happen in the economy. If the staff estimates mean
anything, in a very straightforward way what they imply for the
aggregates--I'm not saying we should accept it--is higher [rates of
growth]. On the other hand, we can express the conflict very directly
by looking at this resolution that Mr. Proxmire has prepared, which I
was urged to accept and I'm prepared to accept. The final clause of
that resolution says we are going to gradually reduce the rates of
growth in monetary and credit aggregates in a firm and stable manner.
If we accept that resolution one day, that presumably means we should
be reducing the monetary and credit aggregates in a firm and stable
manner, including in 1981. I take it that virtually everybody--there
were one or two contrary opinions--in resolving this dilemma said [we
should express our targets for] 1981 in qualitative terms and in

-48-



7/9/80

effect waffle a bit. I think I agree with that. I will just tell you
that it's easier to say it around this table. When we say that in
public, people will ask: "You've been putting more emphasis on
numbers and you've said you were going to reduce the ranges, so why do
you now refuse to say more straightforwardly that you are going to
reduce them even by 1/2 or 1 percentage point or something? You
couldn't possibly have been suggesting that you were going to go more
slowly than that." I attach great significance to that [argument] and
I think there will be a market reaction, too. The market will attach
some significance to the fact that we are not willing to go up [to the
Congressional hearing] and say we are putting forth a lower number.
It's not that I really disagree with the fact that we had better be
qualitative. But it's not as easy [to carry out] as the comments
around here suggested; that in itself will have some implications for
how our actions are interpreted. Dave?

MR. EASTBURN. I think you're entirely right. It's not easy.
On the other hand, if you surround your discussion of 1980 with a good
deal of qualitative explanation about the uncertainties regarding the
shifts in demand for money, and so forth--and extend that into 1981--
you will have provided the background for a good deal of waffling.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that avoids the problem,
but I agree with what you are saying. Whatever else we say about '81
we ought to say that there is a lot of uncertainty about the M1s and
particularly about the relationship between M-1A and M-1B. Somebody
here put it very dramatically with zero on one and 7 percent on the
other or something like that. I don't know where we will come out at
the end of the year when we have to make those projections, but there
ought to be some discussion of that problem and the fact that those
particular numbers may look quite different but in a meaningless way
in a sense. When we actually put forward the numbers they might look
different--both of them--from what we had in '80. One may be
significantly lower and the other may be significantly higher.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One possibility would be to say that
our presumption at this very early stage is that the Committee will
wish to continue its long-run fight against inflation by some gradual
reduction of the aggregate targets but, given the uncertainties on all
these technical aspects such as the shift in the demand for money and
a few other things, we feel it's definitely premature to come up with
even tentative or preliminary [numbers].

MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible.]

MR. SCHULTZ. Either that Nancy, or leave the top where it is
and drop the bottom a little and that will make it look as if we're
cutting it down some.

MS. TEETERS. Look, one of the problems we are likely to face
next year is that we will be tempted to set a target that is too low
and we will exceed it. And it seems to me that our credibility in the
long run is going to be worse off if we exceed it than if we are
realistic about what we can accomplish. Given the fact that it's 12
to 18 months off, it seems to me very reasonable to widen the ranges
at both ends at this point.

-49-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do we have to say in the directive,
Mr. Secretary, about 1981? Nothing, do we? This isn't a directive
question, is it?

MR. ALTMANN. I can answer that perhaps by telling you what
we said at this time last year. After citing the ranges for 1979, the
directive said: "The Committee anticipates that for the period from
the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 growth may be
within the same ranges, depending upon emerging economic conditions
and appropriate adjustments that may be required by legislation or
judicial developments affecting interest bearing transaction
accounts." That language was in the directive adopted [in July 1979]
and was repeated each month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In what [part of the] directive does that
appear--in the operating [paragraphs]?

MR. PARTEE. It's in the longer-term paragraph, isn't it?

MR. ALTMANN. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do we need it in there now?

MR. ALTMANN. That was the decision made at the time that the
Committee considered it.

MR. PARTEE. I thought that's what the Humphrey-Hawkins Act
called for.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It calls for a decision, but I don't know
that it says how it has to go in [the directive]. We have to put down
some language in the report anyway, but I don't quite see why it has
to be in the directive.

Steve has some [suggested] language. Let me just try it out
in terms of the tenor of it. "Looking ahead to 1981, the Committee
decided to work toward a further slowing in monetary growth rates that
is consistent with an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation,
while taking into account the impact on individual aggregates of the
introduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis, a change in public
preference for deposits and closely-related assets and emerging
economic conditions." I suppose it's that last phrase that--

MR. PARTEE. And of the need to keep some of our [citizens]
employed.

MR. MAYO. I think you forgot to include the international
considerations.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'm not sure I would want that first sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just looked at this language a minute
ago. It takes the approach of saying we would like to get them lower
but then putting a caveat on it. I suppose the question is whether we
want to say--

-50-



7/9/80

MR. GRAMLEY. Suppose M-1A comes in at 3.55 percent for 1980,
just within the lower end of the band. Would we really want to say
that for 1981 our objective is to get a lower figure?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it probably will be for M-1A; M-1B
is going to give us the trouble, I think.

MR. GRAMLEY. M-1A would come in better only because of what
happens to NOW accounts.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, only because of what is--

MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] talk about ranges. We might
want to have somewhat [narrower] ranges but even that is too risky, I
think. But certainly we wouldn't want to say that in 1981 growth is
going to be lower than the point estimates that we have for 1980.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can get a certain amount of
leeway in the M1s because of the technical problem. I think we just
ought to say flatly that in the case of M-1A and M-1B, NOW accounts
are likely to have a big influence. So M-1B could well be above what
it was this year and M-1A might be below. But that's just taking
account of the shift between the two categories; it somewhat obscures
whether in fact it's lower on the average, if we want to take that
approach.

MR. BLACK. If we have the maximum shift on M-1B of 5
percentage points, with a midpoint of 5-3/4 percent the midpoint could
be 10-3/4 percent. If we have the maximum shift on M-1A, the midpoint
would be 1-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because of that complication for next
year, which we can explain without quantifying, we in a sense get off
the hook. The real bind is M2, which isn't changing in concept, isn't
subject to these distortions, and isn't subject to the same so-called
demand shift as M1. I'm not sure we can say this, but at one point I
thought we might say that in general we are moving these ranges lower
and we are going to move as fast as we can but it may not be possible
to do that next year for M2. That implies it's possible for M1, but
nobody will ever know what M1 is because of all these shifts. But it
gives some warning that we may not reduce the M2 range.

MR. MAYO. We still have the housing market out on M2. We
wouldn't want to emphasize reducing that on a long--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm saying we would tell them we may
not reduce M2 and leave every implication that we're reducing M1.
Then when they ask by how much and we have to give them some figures
that are affected by NOW accounts and one can't tell--

MR. MORRIS. M-1B is going to be increased.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will be. We would explain that M-1B
will go up because of [the NOW accounts], but it's not a real
increase; it's only a statistical increase.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think the markets would like that even less
than if we were more general. That may get us in trouble.

-51-



7/9/80

MS. TEETERS. May I ask a technical question? Is it possible
to target on M2?

MR. AXILROD. Oh, sure. We were giving some consideration to
elevating M2 in emphasis in our targeting procedures this time. In
the end that seemed [unlikely to] solve the Committee's problem and it
involved a little more difficulty in terms of the continuity of the
presentation. As you say, next year there's an obvious case for it.
But, again, I would stress that money market funds are in M2 and RPs
are in M2, and we don't have a lot of experience with how those
components are going to behave.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can target on M2 but of all the
aggregates it's the least easily controlled, and we're going to have
more misses.

MS. TEETERS. We have enough trouble with the M1s. Why go to
M2 when it includes two things we have absolutely no control over?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way we can resolve this target for
next year is the way Fred suggested. I don't know whether we want [to
or not]. It's fairly straightforward to say the [1981] targets are
going to be at or below [the 1980 targets]. I think it's a [choice]
between saying that and saying in effect what this other statement
says, which is that we'd like to be a little below [1980] but we are
not sure we can be.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to emphasize what
Governor Teeters said. There's a real trap in setting M2 targets that
we think we can achieve because, with these new monetary instruments,
we can't. As Steve just pointed out, M2 is loaded with [components]
over which we don't have even indirect control--the money market
funds, overnight Eurodollars, RPs, and what have you. I think that's
a real snare that we ought to be very cautious about.

MR. MORRIS. I question that proposition. I don't think M2
is going to be any more difficult to control than M1.

MR. BALLES. Well, we have a difference of opinion. That's
what makes horse races and stock markets.

MR. WALLICH. Well, M2 is getting more stable. In the past
it has slowed when interest rates went up. Money market mutual funds
are likely to go up when [rates rise] so that's a stabilizing element.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are two conflicting forces working.
It's less directly controllable in one sense, but it has a much more
stable relationship with the economy than--

MR. MORRIS. And these shifts in balances tend to take place
within M2 rather than out of it into something else.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for '81 the consensus [though we're
not unanimous] is that we have to be qualitative rather than precisely
quantitative about it. Nobody wants to propose an increase. I would
suggest, and it seems to capture the majority but not the full
consensus, that we make subtle noises about how we'd like to get [the
ranges] down but heavily qualify it. The alternative is to be more

-52-



7/9/80

neutral about it and say we're either going to have [the ranges] the
same or lower.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I make an observation? On M-
1B, if we had known when we set these long-run targets that we would
hit the midpoint or the revised midpoint of 5-3/4 percent, I think we
would have been reasonably happy with that. We had expansion of M-1B
in 1978 of 8.2 percent and in 1979 of 7.6 percent. And if we get it
down to 5-3/4 percent [this year], that degree of deceleration seems
plenty rapid to me. If we do that, then I don't have any problem with
decelerating further in 1981. But if it comes in at 2 or 3 percent or
something like that [in 1980], we have a problem for 1981. I would
like to see us push that [growth rate] up toward the midpoint [while]
we're in a recession which I think is probably going to be as serious
or more serious than any postwar recession. And then next year, I
think we can do what we said we would do.

MR. ROOS. I agree with you totally, Bob.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you ever formulate the preliminary
targets for [the year ahead] in relation to the targets rather than
the performance?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we are relating it now to the
targets, which I think is part of the difficulty. Where we would want
to come out in terms of changing [the ranges] and the actual number we
would want next year does depend upon where we come out this year. If
growth in the M1s comes in very low this year, as is possible,
certainly we might want [their growth] to be higher next year. And it
would not be inconsistent with this gradual deceleration notice. But
we really are talking now about the imagery of target against target
rather than target against actuality.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That was my presumption until I heard
Bob's comments just now. Of the two choices you've put to us--hope to
get [growth] down but heavily qualified as against being neutral--I
prefer the [former]. My reason is that if it's heavily and
sufficiently qualified, it's not a constraint on our flexibility to do
what we decide later on has to be done in view of the situation at
that time. But I think it will come as a bit of a shock to the market
if we are neutral, for the reasons I [mentioned] earlier. So it seems
to me that in this imperfect world we live in, we're better off making
a bound in the right direction even though it's qualified enough so
that we reserve the flexibility of the Committee to do what it thinks
best--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest that whatever we decide we
put a footnote, in effect, in the report--I don't know that it
literally would be a footnote--noting that we are talking about a
target here. We don't know where 1980 will come out but if M1 did in
fact come out very low in 1980, [our] target in 1981 may in fact [be
consistent with] a higher M1 in 1981 than in 1980. So we would
encompass that possibility, which I think is very likely to happen.

MR. PARTEE. I think we're better off just talking about the
ranges, Paul. It will exacerbate Tony's problem if we have a footnote
that says we may have a higher M1 and we may not.

-53-



7/9/80

MR. ROOS. Why don't we do what is necessary to keep M1 where
we want it, in the middle of the range? Why do we feel that we have
to wait and see where it comes in when, indeed, through open market
operations we have it within our ability to have it come in, at least
over a period [of time], roughly where we want it?

MR. WALLICH. Would you do that even if the last two months
required us to go to some fantastic growth rate, say, 20 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can resume with that as the
subject of our agenda immediately after lunch. I think we agree, at
least tentatively, on an unchanged range [for M-1A] this year and for
expressing the view that it might come out in the lower part of that
range.

MR. WALLICH. But I understood the consensus to imply that we
wouldn't do anything extreme to force M-1A into the range if it
happens to grow slowly all the rest of the year except the last couple
of months.

MR. PARTEE. By "anything extreme" what do you mean other
than to reduce interest rates?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can only answer that question with a
subsequent discussion [in which we characterize our views] with
precision. It's a little difficult because we don't have precise
words in front of us. I suppose Steve's formulation of words, hastily
done, is one option in which we express a hope but not a commitment to
get [growth in the aggregates] down next year. But the approach that
Tony just supported seems to be consistent with what a lot of people
said. Let me ask: How many people would rather do it that way?

SPEAKER(?). Which way?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That we say in general terms that we'd
like to see the aggregates lower but whether it's possible or not
depends upon a reassessment at the end of this year in the light of
all the circumstances, and we are going to look at it [then].

SPEAKER(?). That's really the point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. ALTMANN. Now [the question is] whether we put it in the
directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me worry later about whether we
put anything in the directive. The [policy record] is going to
include a discussion of the difficulties surrounding M1 next year
anyway because of the NOW accounts problem. All that should be in
there in qualitative terms in any event. But just in terms of giving
the thrust, our basic policy over a period of years is to reduce these
[ranges]. We're not exempting '81 from that approach, but we're not
committing now to saying that it can be done. We'll decide more
precisely six months from now in the light of all the circumstances at
that time.

-54-



7/9/80

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, how does that differ from four years
ago when Arthur Burns said in commencement addresses that we're going
to gradually reduce the rate of money growth and we equivocated and
procrastinated and that's why we're in this pickle today?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that particular respect, it does not
differ. It's the same as what he used to say four years ago. But I
am assuming that the Committee is not prepared, which I think is the
question you asked, to say right now that tentatively the ranges [for
1981] will be X, Y, and Z and that those ranges are lower than the
ones for this year. I excluded that [option] because there wasn't
much support in the Committee for it.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, don't the facts indicate that the
Committee has not equivocated in that respect? If I remember the
numbers right, in 1977 the growth rate of M-1A was 7.7 percent; in
1978 it was 7.4 percent; in 1979 it was 5.1 percent; and in 1980 it
will undoubtedly be less yet. The problem is, Larry, that money and
prices do not track closely together. And while that deceleration in
monetary growth was taking place, the rate of increase in prices
accelerated. That's what we have to live with, whether we like it or
not.

MR. ROOS. But, Lyle, we believe that there is a direct
tracking of the rate of growth of money and prices and also the rate
of growth of money and output.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have lunch approaching.

MR. SCHULTZ. Before we got into that discussion, what you
said just prior to that sounded pretty good to me. It was somewhat in
accordance with your talents: It was even more waffling than what
Steve had to say!

MR. PARTEE. Steve is not waffling enough for me.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would like to waffle a bit more than what
Steve said, and I thought you had done that very effectively.

MR. GRAMLEY. I could certainly agree with your waffle. Your
waffle I like.

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has my waffle been recorded?

SPEAKER(?). Just put a little syrup on it and we'll--

MR. PARTEE. That's what you're likely to do!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was somebody listening to that [closely]
enough to try to [put some wording together] after lunch?

MR. AXILROD. I would suggest that your waffle, Mr. Chairman,
is probably one that would fit better in the policy record. And the
Committee could be silent in the directive.

-55-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure why we need anything in
the directive. It's not a decision. This kind of vague statement
isn't going to affect what we do before the next meeting anyway.

MR. PARTEE. I'm told that my subommittee, of which you were
a member at the time, proposed that it be in the directive. I can't
remember why.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't remember why either. Unless
somebody can think of a reason, let me propose that it be in the
report but not in the directive. I don't see off-hand what purpose it
serves in the directive since it's a vague statement anyway.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Coming back to this proposed waffle:
Before you ask for a show of hands you ought to make people understand
what the alternative is--the second thing they're going to be asked to
show their hands on--which I gather is a completely neutral statement.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Completely neutral? It's not neutral in
the sense of raising the range, but neutral as between changing it or
not changing it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. Even though I welcome the
adherence of Chuck and Lyle, I'd like to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That makes you suspicious of it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what you said in your
reformulation of Steve's [wording] is that consistent with our long-
run policy, we would like to see the aggregates lower in '81 as well,
but we don't know if we can make it for such and such reasons. What I
would like to suggest we say--again because I'm thinking of the market
impact, which could be very damaging to all of us--is that consistent
with [our long-run policy], it is too early for us to indicate
anything specific because there are too many caveats and we just don't
know where we are going to come out. In other words, to say to the
market that we don't know if we can make it--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is not the language that I
would use. I would suggest, particularly since it's 2 o'clock, if
there is a willingness to work in this direction--and that seems to be
the consensus--that we see if our staff can come up with a formulation
before the end of the meeting that incorporates words that we can look
at a little more specifically. We can't resolve it just--

MR. ROOS. We're not committing to the waffle, though, by
doing this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not at this stage, no. Why don't we have
a few sandwiches for the time being.

MR. SCHULTZ. We're suggesting that the staff, rather than
have lunch, eat their work!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have sandwiches right next door,
I believe.

-56-



7/9/80

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, with regard to President
Solomon's point on--

MR. PARTEE. If we work on this waffle, it finally will be a
pancake.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have waffles for lunch!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Open Market Committee will be
known as the International House of Pancakes!

MR. AXILROD. Tony, the law says the Committee has to say
something about it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does? In the directive?

MR. AXILROD. No, not in the directive, but in the report.

[Lunch recess]

[Secretary's note: Typically, after lunch the Chairman would have
called the meeting to order and made some opening comments. No such
remarks by the Chairman were captured on the tape and included in the
raw transcript.]

MR. ROOS. I don't want to get there by September; that's
what has me--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, growth may [not] even be to the
midpoint in September [but] then it would have to slow down after
September.

SPEAKER(?). Is that what it says? I didn't recall that.

MR. PARTEE. You made me think that this [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, at least to the midpoint [by the] end
of the year. But [alternative B] brings us to the midpoint at the end
of year. If you're satisfied with [ending] up below the midpoint--

SPEAKER(?). Then you are between "B" and "C."

MR. SCHULTZ. I don't mind that much, but I don't want
[growth] to get too high in September. That makes me nervous.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't make a subtle [technical]
statement without you here, Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. We've been waffling.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume you've been waffling. But
let's leave the waffling until a little later and go to the short-run
decision, which may confirm or not confirm the decision on the long-
run for 1980. When I look at the alternatives put down for us [in the
Bluebook] for these ranges on the monetary aggregates, I would reject
alternative A on a number of grounds, including the immediate
implications it may have for the market. But perhaps even equally
important is the consideration that Governor Schultz and others

-57-



7/9/80

mentioned about going full speed ahead with a high aggregate figure at
the moment and a low interest rate only to have to screech in the
opposite direction in a relatively short period of time. I have some
of the same reservations about "B." But "B" brings us, if I
understand this correctly, arithmetically to the midpoint of the
existing M-1A range--

MR. AXILROD. Well, to 4-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --or just a hair below the midpoint of the
existing M-1A range by December. It's not much, if at all, above the
July figure, I guess. It would surround the July estimate, so that
doesn't change it much. Alternative C would bring us inside the range
but not to the midpoint by the end of the year, if I am correct.

MR. AXILROD. Under "C" [growth for the year] would be 3-1/2
percent.

MS. TEETERS. "C" is below.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not below the range.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, it is.

MR. PARTEE. By the end of year, he said. You'd have to
extend [that growth rate for the period from] September to December.

MS. TEETERS. If I read that chart right, "A" gets us to the
middle of the range by the end of the year, "B" gets us just barely
[in] it, and "C" gets us below [the range].

MR. AXILROD. No, by year-end--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The chart shows a September plot.

MR. AXILROD. By year-end "C" gets M-1A to the bottom of the
range, 3-1/2 percent. Continuation of that 6 percent [growth rate
results in] 3-1/2 percent growth for the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would reject "A" myself. If I do that,
I can see two ways of proceeding, though I would have a rather strong
preference for one of them, that seem consistent with what we've just
said about the longer-term ranges--namely, that we won't change the
ranges this year, but we would not be disturbed by being in the lower
part for M1, particularly for the M-1A number. Consistent with that
approach toward the longer-term ranges, it seems to me we could
theoretically operate on "B." And if we didn't like the results we
were getting in one direction or another, we'd accept the shortfall.
I say in one direction or another, which operationally in the short
run might mean running into the lower federal funds rate constraint.
Alternatively, we could adopt "C" for the initial path-making
exercise, [using] the same approach as we did in June when it worked
out, maybe by coincidence, to everybody's satisfaction. That involves
setting a minimum growth path, which is again consistent with what we
just said about the long-term, but if the number comes up higher--
consistent with both the growth path and the federal funds rate
constraint we set for ourselves--we'd accept the higher growth, for
awhile anyway. Presumably we wouldn't accept it forever if it gets

-58-



7/9/80

too high. But in the short run, presumably until the next meeting,
we'd accept it unless it was very violently high. If we look at the
period since May, that's what we did. It happened to come up,
although we may have had some recent [revisions] so it's a bit higher
than what we were projecting at the time. It certainly came up higher
than we projected it for June. Essentially we did not permit the
federal funds rate to rebound up to the point it would have rebounded
had we held June to the number we notionally had in mind for that
month. The results that were achieved, both in terms of the interest
rate pattern and the aggregates pattern, seemed to me to put us
further toward our ultimate objectives than we might otherwise have
been. It worked out very well.

I would interpret "C" in a modified way as a kind of minimum
growth path we'd set, should we adopt that. It's not really "C" in a
sense; it's an indication of the minimum growth path, and we'd accept
in the short run any upward deviation in that--within some reasonable
bound--by readjusting the path consistent with the interest rate
constraints of the type we now have. That's what I would feel most
comfortable with. We may achieve the same result, but with different
kinds of risks, by starting with "B" and saying in effect that we
would undercut "B" if we ran into the interest rate constraint on the
down side. We would be more likely to run into the interest rate
constraint on "B," assuming we have a constraint in the general
neighborhood of where we now have it. It seems to me that those are
the two practical choices to focus on, consistent with our present
stand on the long-run ranges. Let me put them on the table and see
what your reactions are.

MS. TEETERS. Well, when we were talking about getting into
the lower [part of the] range, I didn't mean the bottom. We don't
have to slide around the bottom of that to say we're still in it. I'd
rather go with "B" and make sure that we're approaching it. I don't
think it would hurt us to have an 8 percent rate of increase in money
supply over the next several months.

MR. WALLICH. I think it would look terrible. Nobody would
remember that we had a shortfall before. Besides, they'd say that was
just the way things should be. It's like somebody who is dieting and
has missed a few meals and therefore feels he has to catch up on the
caloric quota by eating something extra.

MS. TEETERS. But, Henry, that is just the reverse of what
you used to argue. You always had to offset the overshoots.

MR. WALLICH. In this particular case I think we have had a
shift in the demand function.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say what I think is going to be
relevant here, whatever [route] we take: The proposal I made for "C"
suggests we'll probably exceed the 6 percent [shown in the Bluebook
for "C"]; the suggestion I made with "B" is that we wouldn't be above
the 8-1/4 percent [shown] so, therefore, we might be below it.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think it means we would exceed [the 6
percent]. We would target on that and if we went over it, as we did
last time--I agree with you that it worked out very well even though I
voted against it--



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just mean in terms of a frequency
distribution. I don't know whether we would exceed it but presumably
we bias [the outcome] in that direction. Let me just say that in
either event, I think it's crucial where we put the federal funds
constraint, if [we have one] at all. That is a variable that will be
prominent in our discussion for the next few meetings, I suspect.

MR. WALLICH. I have one problem with the approach. "C" is
what I'd like in principle; but the technique of accepting, by raising
the path, whatever actual level of reserves is realized does get us
back into a federal funds rate target with a very narrow range. The
market thinks [we're doing] that already, and they're going to have it
confirmed if we do it for a second period.

MR. MORRIS. It's not likely to recur in this period, though,
Henry. That occurred because we gave the manager specific
instructions that if [money growth] was coming in on the high side to
let it go. I don't think we want to give him those instructions
today.

MR. WALLICH. Well, if we were to limit the excess over "C"
in a plausible way, I could see it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to imply--maybe I did--that
wherever [growth] goes above "C" we would accept; I just meant within
some reasonable range. If we had a 10 percent growth rate in one
month, we might well accept that. Ten percent in two months we might
not. At least it would raise a question; we'd have to decide that.

MR. GRAMLEY. What would this mean if the Board staff's
projections on M-1A in July turned out to be correct? They're now
projecting 8.7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd accept it.

MR. GRAMLEY. We'd accept it?

MR. PARTEE. That's what [Henry] means--that it really does
mean sort of running on the funds rate so long as the aggregate is
reasonably--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I cannot deny that we'd begin running to
some degree on the funds rate.

MR. GRAMLEY. That doesn't bother me when we're looking at an
unstable money demand function. For a month or two, or maybe for the
whole quarter, we may have to do that until we see how this goes.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, we could accept the logic you're
propounding here and come up with [a set of targets] halfway between
"B" and "C" but keep the 8-1/2 to 14 percent [funds rate range of
"B"]. That's the way I would lean. I'd say 7, 8, and 8 percent--to
the extent that we like point targets [for M-1A, M-1B, and M2] and we
seem to have gone toward point targets in the short run for
simplicity--as long as we understand what we are doing.

MR. PARTEE. That was my inclination, too; I would go along
with Bob on that.

-60-



7/9/80

MS. TEETERS. Are you sure you don't want to drop the funds
rate range on that one?

MR. MAYO. I don't want to change it.

MR. PARTEE. I'd leave it at 8-1/2 to 14 percent. That's
what it is now, isn't it?

MS. TEETERS. An alternative is to go to 8 to 14 percent.

MR. PARTEE. The funds rate is well above 8-1/2 percent now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a blended proposal here. I just
want to make sure I understand you. You're clear on the funds range
at 8-1/2 to 14 percent and clear on the numbers, which are basically
halfway between the numbers [shown in the Bluebook for alternatives B
and C]. What is not clear, for instance, is whether you would accept
right now that 8.7 percent or whatever is projected for July. In
other words, would you allow a little tolerance on the up side should
the figures come out that way? What we're talking about is from now
until August--when is the next meeting scheduled?

MR. ALTMANN. It's August 12, in five weeks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. August 12. We are talking about the next
five weeks literally.

MR. MAYO. I don't see any problem in accepting the 8.7
percent for July if it turns out that way.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm trying to refresh my memory--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the latest data tend to shade
that down, don't they? The data ordinarily are not very good but they
are worse than usual today because of July 4th, as I understand it.
But [the recent information seems] consistent with a somewhat lower
estimate for July, I take it.

MR. AXILROD. That's right, and [money supply growth] has
even weakened a bit more since I had a first report earlier today.
It's in such a state of flux I hesitate to mention it at all.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the operational paragraph do you
have to give pinpoint percentages for the third quarter or could you
give a range? The way I read the language for the third quarter it
says at annual rates of _ percent, __ percent and _ percent [for
M-1A, M-1B, amd M2].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do what we want to do, but
the [practice] has been to give a single point. We've often said
"about" or "around" or we've given a percentage rate and said "or
above." Consistent with what I said, certainly if we took "C" we
would say at that rate or above, which we've said on a number of
occasions. I don't think we've ever given a range.

MR. AXILROD. We need a number to construct a path.

-61-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we need a number to construct a path.
And in a way a range sounds as if we're being very precise in that
we're not going to accept anything below or anything above. So I
react a little adversely to a range. But we have often used words
like "about" or "above" to convey some [sense] of that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'd go along with Bob Mayo's
suggestion, which Chuck supported, about taking the arithmetic average
between "B" and "C."

MR. MAYO. I'd round them off, too. [Using] quarters on the
growth rate percentages strikes me as silly.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do we do about M2, though?
That's all right for M-1A and M-1B.

MR. MAYO. We could use 8 percent for M2, couldn't we?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just presumed that if this table was
logically put together and we compromised on the others, we'd end up
compromising on M2, too.

MS. TEETERS. But M2 is running high; if anything, we'd have
to make it a little higher.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this is the staff's projection of
where it will run. The projection may be wrong, but I assume this
takes account of the staff's best judgment of what is consistent
between these numbers, looking ahead.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.

MR. ROOS. What are the figures, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Bob proposed 7, 8, and 8 percent. I
suppose we would say "about" 7, 8, and 8 percent consistent with that.
I take it that doesn't give us any great problem in July; if anything,
those July projections are going to be reduced at the moment you have
to go make up a path.

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

MR. BLACK. That suggests to me, Mr. Chairman, that we ought
to take a look at the low end of that funds rate range. We may not be
getting the shift in demand that we thought; we may have our equations
misspecified.

MR. PARTEE. Undoubtedly we do; it's just a question of how
much.

MR. MORRIS. We can change that during the month if we find
that to be the case.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would suggest that we have a real
problem in lowering that at all significantly now, in view of both the
domestic uncertainty but more precisely the exchange market
uncertainty at the moment. My own feel for this situation, though one
never knows, is that if the exchange market begins running--and it's

-62-



7/9/80

on the verge of it now--that will raise the question and force it to
our minds. I'm sure we'd have differing opinions about whether we
have to make some overt "tightening" move to deal with the exchange
market situation; I think that would be more inconsistent with what
we're trying to do than accepting this delicate business of trying to
skate through this period without getting the psychological screws
loose. And they're very close to being loose.

MR. SCHULTZ. At some point it would be very nice if we could
get the discount rate down a little more. I think we need to be so
careful that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say a word about the discount
rate, too, because I think it's relevant here. The logic is to get it
down for basically two reasons. I don't see any reason why we should
in concept have the discount rate impede reductions in the prime rate,
which at some point it may do psychologically. Beyond that, as
somebody alluded to this morning, if and when we get a reversal in
interest rates, the question is [whether] that might occur in a time
period we are worried about. The discount rate then does have
operational significance because it tends to put a ceiling on the
funds rate or at least slow down any increase in the funds rate. And
since presumably we don't want a big reaction upward in the funds rate
from a fairly technical and maybe passing change in the money supply
numbers, it would be nice to get the discount rate lower. It would be
more than nice; I think we ought to try to do it.

The problem we run into again involves domestic and
international psychological problems. We've done a little exploration
among the foreign central banks in the last few days to see what the
chances are for taking the curse off a further movement [down in
interest rates]. If [such a move] is interpreted as an easing,
whether it's the discount rate or something else, what are the
prospects that this would be hidden or submerged in other rate
changes? The answer, I think, is ambiguous at the least. It's
another dimension that can be thrown in here. It is not an irrelevant
consideration in the framework of the next week or so because I can't
say there is no possibility. If it doesn't happen pretty soon, I
think [our foreign colleagues] will all go away on vacation and it
probably won't happen until September. But it is a matter that is
under consideration in a number of countries--so far with a negative
answer. The situation is such that if one country moved, everybody
probably would move; but nobody wants to lead the parade.

SPEAKER(?). Would they follow us?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I think we're irrelevant to this.
We're not totally irrelevant, but they consider us off on a course of
our own and somewhat irresponsible anyway. Whether we move or not
doesn't have the same bearing as somebody important within Europe
moving, or even if the Japanese move. I don't think there's much
chance of the Japanese leading the parade, although they might.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The logical one to move would be
France because she's also at the top of the EMS.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are all sorts of conflicts involved.
They are in the same dilemma as we are basically. They'd like to move

-63-



7/9/80

in terms of the business outlook but they don't want to give any sense
to their own public, externally or internally, that they've given up
on inflation. They're very sensitive to that. And the Germans are in
a peculiar position because they're at the bottom of the EMS exchange
rate [band]. So they ask how they can go first when the DM is already
weak in their terms. The currency that is strong in the EMS is the
French franc. The trouble with the French [making a move] is that
they have a rising inflation rate at the moment. They're about the
only country left where inflation is still rising. And while they
have a sluggish business situation, they also say: How can we give a
signal about inflation when the inflation rate is still rising?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They have a correlation between money
supply and the rate of inflation. Both are running 13-1/2 percent.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, if we show a willingness to tolerate an 8
percent funds rate before we do anything on the discount rate, it
clearly limits our ability to move on the discount rate. So I would
think that we would want to keep the 8-1/2 percent [lower limit] at
this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My own feeling about the discount rate is
that we ought to move as soon as it's--I was going to say "safe."
It's not going to be safe; as it stands we can't be sure there's going
to be no reaction. But as soon as we feel there's enough protection
somehow and that the risks of setting off something in the exchange
market are minimized, we ought to go. I don't know when that will be.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we're so close to the logical
level of, say, 10 percent that it would make a lot of sense given the
enormous instability right now in the exchange markets. We've spent
$600 million [in exchange market intervention] in the last three days;
we ought to consider moving half a point, rather than a full point.
We don't have the kind of spread that we had before.

MR. PARTEE. Except that we're in great jeopardy that the
prime rate will be below the discount rate. I think we're 2 points
too high on the discount rate. It ought to be 9 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Two points?

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it would be nice to move a full point but
we just don't know whether we can or not at this point. We're arguing
in a vacuum here because we don't really know.

MS. TEETERS. Well, as long as we keep it above the market
rate, we've going to have no borrowings at all. That's going to
influence our paths and everything else that--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we get the discount rate down in
two moves, to 10 percent, they may very well be in the same range. We
don't know what the fed funds rate is going to be.

MR. MAYO. Well, I didn't mean to get us off the track.

-64-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we ought to debate that
precisely, but those are some of the background considerations to
where this federal funds limit is set. What we have on the table is
7, 8, and 8 percent [for the monetary aggregates] and 8-1/2 to 14
percent [for the funds rate range].

MR. GRAMLEY. Could we have some more explicit comment by the
proponents of this proposal as to what we would do if in fact the
aggregates exceed these amounts by 1 percentage point, 2 percentage
points, [etcetera]. I don't want to see the funds rate go below
8-1/2 percent, but I certainly wouldn't want to see it go to 14
percent between now and [our next meeting].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know about the proponents
but I would operate this [along the lines of] what I said on "C,"
which is that we would tolerate some increase over 7 percent--just to
look at that particular number--in the short run before the next
meeting without pushing the federal funds rate up to anything like 14
percent. Now, [the interval before] the next meeting is so short that
I really can't conceive of these numbers getting to the point where
we'd want to exert very strong restraint, but I suppose they could.
To try to be specific, suppose we got a fairly big July--significantly
bigger than this [projection]--and we were coming into August, but
[before the] meeting, and the August projection was for a 12 percent
increase. I suppose we'd let the federal funds rate begin to go up
and we wouldn't fully adjust the path to take care of a 12 percent
increase, say, on top of a 10 percent increase--just to pick two
numbers out of the air.

MR. BLACK. Steve, what does July look like?

MR. WALLICH. I think it would be helpful if the lower limit
were a little higher. We're going to be operating as if we were on a
funds rate target even though we're not. Then at least the market
should not get the signal that we've lowered these targets. I think
they suspect that 8-1/2 percent is the lower limit, so if we went to 9
to 14 percent--

MR. PARTEE. But they're going to read on Friday that 8-1/2
percent was the lower limit [set at the May meeting]. It has--

MR. WALLICH. Well, they will know it [for that meeting], but
they won't know [what it is] for the future.

MR. PARTEE. Will they think that we've raised the limit?

SPEAKER(?). They may think we've lowered it.

MR. WALLICH. I wouldn't want them to think we've lowered it
and I'd rather not have them think that it is 8-1/2 percent at this
point.

MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I understand the thrust
of this, if the Committee opts for 7 percent and we wake up tomorrow
and it looks as if our best projection is 8 percent, we'll set a path
that will achieve 8 percent but the funds market can behave pretty
much as it has been behaving. If [our projection] goes up to 9
percent, [the funds market] may still be behaving that way but we'll

-65-



7/9/80

be getting to the point where we'll have to consult with you to see if
we're getting outside the bounds.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we'd probably accept 9 percent--
I'm just giving a qualitative judgment--provided the federal funds
rate is behaving as expected. If growth began getting above 9
percent, I think we'd probably have to consult.

MR. AXILROD. The problem that might come to the Committee
more immediately is weakness because that would get reflected rather
more quickly in a drop in the funds rate, and we won't know where it
will stop.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we'd be operating at the constraint;
that's why the constraint is important.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. So the constraint could become
operational if there's any weakness right away, and we'd have to come
back to the Committee [almost immediately].

MS. TEETERS. Is July a particularly difficult month as far
as projections are concerned?

MR. AXILROD. We've done research on that and they all are
difficult! [Laughter]

MR. ROOS. I agree completely with the staff.

MR. MORRIS. None is as [difficult] as April, though.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we've talked about the impact on the
international scene, which I recognize. Is there any impact on fiscal
policy in terms of what we do in this period? For example, if [money
growth] comes in low and we don't lower the funds rate, are we really
pinning ourselves to the wall in terms of people saying we are not
going to support anything [to spur the economy], so it has to be done
with fiscal policy? Then we might get a bigger tax cut than we'd
otherwise get. I don't know the answer to that, but we don't want to
miss that side of the equation either.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My general answer would be that whatever
influence [our actions] have on that is going to be related more to
what happens to interest rates than to what happens to the money
supply in a very short-run perspective.

MR. WINN. Well, let's say the money supply falls short.

MS. TEETERS. I think it's going to be more influenced by
some of the other data. If we get another 8 to 10 percent [decline in
GNP and] an increase in the unemployment rate, we won't--

MR. WINN. That's right; I mean that whole area.

MS. TEETERS. And if we get a sharp revision in the second-
quarter number or something of that sort, that's going to put more
pressure on fiscal policy than a one-month miss on the money supply.

-66-



7/9/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't understand Henry's point. If
I understand you correctly, you feel that maintaining the 8-1/2
percent floor [on the funds rate range] would give the impression that
we've eased policy. Why?

MR. WALLICH. Well, it increases the perception, or the
misperception, that we're operating on a funds rate target.

MR. PARTEE. Then we ought to lower it, shouldn't we, to get
it away from where the money supply is?

MR. ROOS. Is that a misperception, Henry?

MR. WALLICH. Well, it depends on how one looks at it. I
share your doubts.

MR. ROOS. There's a fellow in Florida who always [proposes]
as a toast "Confusion to the enemy." Maybe we'll do that, Henry;
we'll confuse the enemy this time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the funds rate hasn't been at the
floor. After all, we're always looking at the weekly averages. The
weekly average has run 9 to 9-1/2 percent in the last few weeks. We
haven't been at the 8-1/2 percent floor even though we've been
following the reserve paths.

MS. TEETERS. I certainly wouldn't want the record to show
that we raised the floor after the second quarter we've had.

MR. ROOS. If we were to adopt "C" or anything like "C," the
record would show that we took action in terms of the monetary
aggregates that would definitely deepen and lengthen the recession.
We can be pinned on being too restrictive at this stage, too, which
worries me.

MR. WALLICH. If we are too easy now, we'll soon have to face
higher lower limits than we do now. Suppose the aggregates develop
some momentum and then we have to slow them down in the last few
months [of the year].

MR. PARTEE. We could then [let the funds rate] move up
through that range of 8-1/2 to 14 percent. We'd have to change the
lower limit [if we ease too much in the near term].

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If the staff is anywhere near right,
"B" assumes we get to 4-1/2 percent [M-1A growth] by December and "C"
assumes we get to 3-1/2 percent by December. If we're taking a middle
figure, we're definitely coming in somewhere along those lines, as
Paul said, consistent with the earlier statement we agreed on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the various considerations have
been pretty well laid out. Let me see what the sentiment is for 7, 8,
and 8 percent--using the word "about" in the directive--with these
numbers for the federal funds range, which are unchanged from a month
ago.

MR. ALTMANN. From May 20.

-67-



7/9/80

MR. GRAMLEY. In this 7, 8, and 8 percent, with 8 percent for
M2, is the M2 going to mean anything or is it going to be a throw-in
as I--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it means something. It doesn't
mean [anything for the path]; the path is not set on that number. But
for purposes of an example, suppose M2 came in very high relative to
this [8 percent] number and the M1 numbers came in significantly low.
I think that would affect our judgment as to how hard we pushed on M1
because we would be running high on the one and low on the others.

MR. GRAMLEY. Would we give these about equal weight?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say there's an approximation here.

MS. TEETERS. To me it would depend on why M2 was going up;
if it were money market funds going out the window, I'd say no.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if money market funds were going up
instead of people holding demand balances, I'm not at all sure the
implications of that are bad.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One might argue that if money market funds
were going up, that ought to be weighed because they have some of the
characteristics of a transactions balance.

MS. TEETERS. What are we going to do about it if [M2] goes
up?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Squeeze down harder on the others.

MS. TEETERS. Which may make the money market funds go up
even faster.

MR. PARTEE. What will look better will be the 2-1/2 year
certificate. Money market funds have been doing very well; they
probably won't do that much better. But the 2-1/2 year certificate
could improve and could give us expanded--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We haven't been this precise recently; we
used to be. But let me further amend the motion and say as an
approximation that we will put some weight on M2, maybe 50-50.

MR. PARTEE. Well, 50/50 is a lot. It's not consistent with
the reserve targeting process that we have.

MR. GRAMLEY. One thing we want to remember about giving M1
and M2 50/50 weight is that if M2 consists about half of M1, a 50/50
weight means we're giving independent components of M2 a 25 percent
weight.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's much less. M1 used to be half of M2;
it's not anymore.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that fraction has changed some.

MR. SCHULTZ. One of them is about $400 billion and the other
one is almost a trillion dollars.

-68-



7/9/80

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm using very rounded numbers.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the [tenor] of this discussion
means that when M2 is running a lot stronger than the targets--let's
say it's running 12 percent and the target is 8 percent and it's all
[caused by] money market funds--and everything else is running
stronger, the staff has not in such a situation in the past cut back
on reserves because the multiplier in M2 was off. If we did, as
Governor Teeters said, interest rates would go up faster. And as a
consequence of that, money market funds would go up faster and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then interest rates would go down more
slowly.

MR. AXILROD. Well, either way. But, for example, in the
last [intermeeting] interval we could have been cutting back on
reserves because the money market funds were growing very rapidly.
[Had we done so] interest rates would be higher and the MMFs would be
growing even more rapidly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we may be a bit inconsistent in
saying this. I have to amend this motion further. The conflict comes
between saying equal weight and saying we are going to tolerate an
overrun. And I guess I've said both. So in a sense we wouldn't
tighten up, even if consistent with tolerating an overrun the M1s
arithmetically came out on target. We'd let them go for--

MR. PARTEE. It's only five weeks until the next meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's an asymmetrical equal weighting.

SPEAKER(?). Sure! What is that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We probably ought to avoid trying to be
technical about equal weighting. But [M2] is a consideration. Let's
just end it there. So with these [nuances], the directive would say
about 7, 8, and 8 percent, 8-1/2 to 14 percent [for the funds rate]
and there's an understanding of some tolerance of being above [the
growth rates cited]. And we don't ignore M2--that is the way to put
it--when we're judging how much above to tolerate.

MR. WINN. Why don't we move the M2 rate up to 9 percent and
make it 7, 8, and 9 percent?

MR. BLACK. It's easier to remember!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have no basis for doing that. The
staff tells me that this is the most likely relationship, and I don't
have any independent--

MR. WINN. But they tell us that M2 is going to be out of
line, so what the heck.

MS. TEETERS. We could move it to 8-1/2 percent.

-69-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think what the staff has said is that M2
has been rising relatively rapidly compared to these others, but they
don't expect that to be the case in the future.

MR. ROOS. Has the staff said that 8-1/2 to 14 percent on fed
funds is consistent with 7, 8, and 8 percent [which are] compromises?

MR. AXILROD. Well, at the time we wrote the Bluebook if we
had had to say something--it would have been fine-tuning of a silly
nature--we would have raised the lower limit from 8-1/2 to 8-3/4
percent or something like that. Given the data I now have on the
aggregates, I wouldn't have. The data are in a state of flux; that's
why it's better to have this meeting on a Tuesday.

MR. ROOS. What is the rationale, though, on preferring the
compromise over alternative B?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have to push so hard.

MR. PARTEE. It's a little lower number but it's a tolerable
number, Larry.

MR. ROOS. I'd prefer "A," obviously, beause it would get us
[there] theoretically. We know that. The question is how much--

MR. SCHULTZ. And then we'd need at least $40 billion to
support the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how many people find the proposal
that is on the table acceptable?

SPEAKER(?). Voting members?

MR. ROOS. This is an acceptance with a waffle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks nearly unanimous, doesn't it? I
think enough hands were raised that we can vote. We are voting now on
the short run.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich Yes
President Winn Yes
President Balles Yes

Unanimous, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, after that display of unanimity,
let's return to the long run. I would interpret that vote as
consistent with what I said earlier about the long-run targets for

-70-



7/9/80

1980, if we can call 1980 long run at this point. I don't know
whether I can repeat what I said [with regard to] keeping the ranges
unchanged numerically. We will explain that there are technical
problems with the M1 relationships, but that's not central. We're not
recognizing here that the ranges are [unintelligible]. We understand
and accept that and we even think it's likely that the M1 number will
come in toward the lower part of the range we have targeted. We think
M2 will probably come in toward the higher part of the targeted range
and that M3 will be someplace in the middle. We think bank credit may
come in low and we'll explain that. I think that's the substance for
1980. Since we're just reaffirming numbers, maybe we can have a vote
on this one part.

MR. WALLICH. This is a sort of [unintelligible]. The short
run wasn't very good but one goes along with it and now here comes the
second shoe.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's a Solomonic tactic. This is the Arabian
[Solomon] of the Arabian Nights.

MR. PARTEE. We will assert that these are consistent with
the Administration's targets?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's a very respectable
position.

MR. PARTEE. We have to do that. We have to say whether they
are consistent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a little discussion about
that whole issue. It's going to be even more relevant for '81. In
substance that is what we're saying.

MR. WALLICH. After all, these longer-run targets are mostly
for '80. We're not talking about '81 now?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm dividing it into two pieces just to
make it manageable, I hope. It's not really a Solomonic tactic; it's
a manageability tactic. Can we have a vote on '80? Do you understand
what it is? Numerically it's just where we are, but the discussion
implied [nuances] which will appear in the report.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
President Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich No
President Winn Yes
President Balles Yes

-71-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For 1981 we have a more difficult problem.
I don't know whether you have any language for us, Mr. Axilrod. Have
you had a chance--?

MR. AXILROD. I have around 15 lines of language, which I--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of language or anguish?

MR. AXILROD. Both! It might be worth my reading it to you
to see if it's even worth typing up and distributing.

SPEAKER(?). Humility.

MR. BALLES. It depends upon how many nuts you threw into
that waffle!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we get to the language, [let's
return to our earlier] discussion about what [needs to be] in the
directive. In substance--but the lawyers may want to talk to this--I
don't see why we need any [elaboration] in the directive. And
therefore, I would say we're talking about the language that will
provide the core of the report for talking about '81. But [the
directive] could be further elaborated with language, particularly
with some mention of NOW accounts and all that business and why we
arrived at this conclusion.

MR. MORRIS. Is this something we have to take a vote on?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we necessarily have to take
a vote on it, frankly. On the other hand, the argument for taking a
vote is that the law specifically asks us to state--I forget the
[precise wording of] what the law asks us to do. It asks for a
Committee judgment--

MR. PRELL. It asks for a statement of the Committee's plans
and objectives with respect to money and credit growth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We must give the Committee's statement of
its plans and objectives, so I lean slightly--but I don't think it's
compelling--toward having a vote on it as a Committee statement. But
we have to have some method of indicating it's a Committee consensus.
Maybe we can just indicate that this is the Committee's consensus
without arguing over it.

MR. PETERSEN. I think that would be legally acceptable as
far as the rules of procedure of the FOMC and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act
itself are concerned. Going back to the earlier point on the
directive, there is no requirement in the Humphrey-Hawkins legislation
[regarding what you include] in the directive. Nor is there such a
requirement under our rules of procedures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know why it was in there before.
I may have had some very persuasive reason myself; I don't even
remember the discussion. But it doesn't seem to be operative in terms
of anything we're doing now.

MR. BLACK. All I can conclude is that the other members of
that subcommittee were more influential than the two who are here!

-72-



7/9/80

MR. ROOS. What would happen though, Mr. Chairman, if you
were asked in your testimony whether this was unanimous? How would
you answer [if] we didn't take a vote? In other words, there is a
difference of opinion, I'm sure, on this '81 situation. How do we
resolve that in terms of reporting to Congress?

MR. MAYO. We talk in terms of consensus.

MR. SCHULTZ. Why don't we see how close we can come to a
consensus? If we can get a strong enough consensus, maybe we'll take
a vote; if not, we--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt that I have to be able to
say it's a consensus. Now, I don't know if we have to take a formal
vote to say it's a consensus.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, the very fact that it's a
fairly general statement and a very preliminary one makes it more
logical that it was a consensus view rather than a vote.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [not having] a vote doesn't say it
wasn't a consensus. [Whether or not] we're voting, that's what this
is.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it's not as [unintelligible].

MR. MAYO. If we try to sharpen this pencil too much, we're
going to be voting on what words you use in the testimony. I think
this is getting ridiculous.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I'd like to stop short of
that, frankly.

MR. MAYO. Yes, I think this is putting the Chairman in a
very peculiar position.

MR. GRAMLEY. I really thought we had enough agreement in
substance to leave the drafting of the words to you and the staff, Mr.
Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm happy to accept that view without even
introducing the complications that can be quibbled about. If it is
the consensus that it can be left to the staff and myself and the
understanding is that it's--

MS. TEETERS. As long as you don't commit us to lowering the
ranges.

MR. PARTEE. On that we want a vote.

MR. WALLICH. Do you accept that we will try to lower the
ranges but that the announced--

MS. TEETERS. No, I don't, Henry. I'm really not committed
to that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's not "committed." [The Chairman]
will use that earlier language that we talked about.

-73-



7/9/80

MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure I even want to try to lower them.

MR. ROOS. Obviously there are some, Nancy, who are committed
to a consistent lowering [of the ranges]. So how do we--

MS. TEETERS. No, we are not committed to a consistent
lowering.

MR. PARTEE. He said some of us are.

MR. ROOS. I said there are some.

MS. TEETERS. Some of you are, but I'm not, frankly.

MR. ROOS. And how is that difference--the fact that it isn't
unanimous one way or the other--described in the record?

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that we could say we will work
toward lowering the ranges. Whether this will be possible and to what
extent can only be determined in the light of the circumstances that
we meet then. That wouldn't be a commitment as far as you're
concerned.

MS. TEETERS. That's further than I want to go, Henry.

MR. GRAMLEY. Couldn't we put out a statement which said that
it's the consensus of this Committee that policy in 1981 is going to
aim toward contributing further to a reduction in inflation. With
that in mind, the Federal Reserve will adopt its specific targets for
the aggregates at the beginning of next year, but the objective will
be to follow a policy which extends money and credit at rates that are
consistent with a further reduction of inflation. We could all agree
[on that] and make the specific decision later on. I think that
[squares] with what everybody is saying.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's saying almost nothing.

MR. GRAMLEY. I agree, but I think maybe we can get away with
that.

MR. WALLICH. Inflation would probably rise next year.

MR. BAUGHMAN. He will be asked the question of whether that
means lower numbers.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, then he can talk about the technicalities
of M-1A and M-1B and so on during periods of--

MR. RICE. Do we have to reflect unanimity on this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so. We'd like to have
it all the time but if there's a real difference of opinion, I think
we're stuck and we just don't reflect unanimity.

MR. RICE. Well, I'm afraid there is [a difference of
opinion].

-74-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [suspect so], too. I don't think this
[draft language] quite does it, Steve. It talks a lot about the
technological complications, which I think should be in the statement
someplace, but it doesn't seem to me to reflect adequately the views
of all the members of the Committee in that there is a real
uncertainty involved in the economic outlook itself. And that's going
to affect--

MR. AXILROD. I was a little afraid that would argue strongly
against lowering [the ranges]. It makes it very clear.

MR. GRAMLEY. Couldn't we adopt Governor Schultz's earlier
suggestion? Could we agree on that--that we all want aggregate
targets for 1981 at or below the 1980 ranges?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would hope that that's a minimum
we could agree upon. The real [problem] is that I am not sure that's
right. I'm not sure that goes far enough for some people. I admit
the difference isn't very large but I suspect it's real. And the only
way I can see going further--just to try again out loud--is to say it
is the general policy and intention of the Committee to seek lower
growth rates over a period of time consistent with countering
inflationary forces. The Committee will be examining 1981 in that
light specifically, but the extent to which progress toward that
objective can be made in 1981 will have to be evaluated in the light
of all the circumstances at the time.

MR. ROOS. Doesn't this get us to the nub of the whole
philosophical issue of whether we put a greater priority on reducing
inflation and enduring a certain amount of pain or bitter medicine--
which are words we've all used regarding that process--or whether we
will opt, if push comes to shove, for bringing relief to the economy
at the risk of perpetuating inflation? It's very fundamental it seems
to me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is part of it. The other part
is how much one is persuaded about monetarist doctrine in general. I
think those two considerations are entering in here, which makes it
difficult.

MR. ROOS. I don't know if you hear this, Mr. Chairman, or if
it is just a product of where I live and work. But we hear constantly
the overpowering, almost pleading, request from the groups we bring
in, including labor leaders: "For heaven sakes, do what is necessary
to bring down inflation, even if it means high unemployment for a
while." There is a passionate pleading of that sort, and I really
don't exaggerate when I say that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's easy to be influenced by the
short run, and I recognize the trap that we can conceivably get into
next year. But I feel uncomfortable right at this stage. It seems to
me that it's perfectly illustrated by this [Proxmire] resolution,
which presumably I have to support, however lukewarmly. If we come
out with a statement for '81 that somehow seems inconsistent with
that, there will be a lot of explaining to do that seems troublesome
to me in terms of questioning our whole outlook [and] modus operandi.

-75-



7/9/80

MS. TEETERS. Can't we put it in terms of not really knowing
what is going to happen in the next six months?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm willing to go so far [and make]
the kind of statement I just made: That while this is our general
intention, specifically how far or whether we can do it in 1981
remains to be seen. Nevertheless, our bias is in that direction.

MR. SCHULTZ. Can't we even say that the Committee is
committed to bringing the money supply growth down to non-inflationary
levels over time and that for 1981 we will have the monetary
aggregates generally at or somewhat below the figures for 1980
depending upon conditions in the economy?

MS. TEETERS. But you're getting yourself into a box, Fred.
We've been bringing the rate of the money supply growth down for the
past four years and inflation has been going up. What is a non-
inflationary rate of growth in the money supply?

MR. ROOS. There's a lag though, Nancy, isn't there?

MR. RICE. We don't know; we will keep bringing it down until
we find out.

MS. TEETERS. We don't know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must be lower than what we've had.

MR. PARTEE. Or we have to do it longer.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, if we don't at least hit that lower
part of the ranges--and in fact if we begin to report month by month
what the market is apt to perceive as pretty rapid [money growth]
rates--I think we will have an extremely severe credibility problem.

MR. SCHULTZ. Say that again.

MR. BLACK. I'm saying that during the next few months, if
[money] growth comes anywhere near what we're projecting, as we
approach the midpoint of the target range we're apt to have a problem
if we don't explain very carefully that we're just trying to get
growth back up within the target range. If we do that and then when
Paul testifies he doesn't say something about a lower range for next
year, we're going to be hit by both sides on the credibility problem,
I'm afraid. I'd really want to emphasize lower [ranges] if we could
possibly persuade everybody to do that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to get to the substance, whatever the
exact words are, my own feeling is pretty strong that we have to say
something about a bias toward lowering the ranges next year. I'm
willing to put in an escape hatch that says in the end it may not be
possible. But there has to be some minimal expression of a bias in
that direction--looking at both sentences in effect--or we will get
ourselves in a difficult problem in the short run. We will anyway, I
think, with the escape hatch, but it would be moderated. I recognize
that when one looks at these projections of the economy and all the
rest, one has to wonder how the hell we can do it. But I'm saying

-76-



7/9/80

we've got to face up to that question. Put off the problems of
tomorrow until tomorrow, right?

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but even with a 4-1/2 percent rate of
growth in the money supply we'd have a very anemic recovery.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know, but it's still all a projection
too, and--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I find it ironic that we've reached
agreement fairly quickly on 1980 and the next quarter and we're having
so much trouble on the longer term with very general language. We
basically have had three points of view expressed. There are those
who would like to say simply that we'll be reducing the aggregate
targets next year. There's the other extreme, which stays basically
neutral and says we don't know yet. And there's the middle one, which
you put forward, which shows some bias and some hope but not a
commitment [to reduce the targets] and says that the situation has to
be assessed at the time. It seems to me we ought to take a vote on
all three or get enough people to raise their hands in support of the
middle ground.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think that we're probably
going to have to--or maybe should--end up with a vote. What I would
propose is that we put together what you describe as the middle
ground, indicating a bias but with a caveat. I can circulate the
language and get a reaction to the precise language. If you don't
want to bias it in that direction and feel strongly that you want a
much more neutral statement, vote against it. And if asked whether
this was unanimous, I'd say "no;" some people were doubtful and enough
doubtful that we were going to make progress in that direction next
year that they wanted to allow themselves, in effect, a bigger escape
hatch. That may reflect the reality. I think we're better off doing
that than trying to waffle on the whole point of [consensus].

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, if we expressed the intention to
reduce the aggregates next year and conditions in February were such
that it was just unreasonable, couldn't we take our action at that
time instead of expressing the caveat and reluctance now? After all,
this is purely a projection. If conditions deteriorated to where we
wouldn't want to act on that projection in February, we'd still have
the option of not making the reduction, would we not? I don't know
what we accomplish by--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure. We can do anything in February we
want to do in the end. This obviously biases what we do in February.
I'd just like to get a showing of hands on this and maybe [consider]
some kind of voting procedure. We don't want to take a formal action,
or a final action anyway, right now. I will circulate some language
in any event. I will attempt to reach the widest area of agreement
[along the lines of] what was described as the middle course: Some
bias about [lower targets for] the long term, which encompasses 1981,
with a statement that whether that will be possible specifically in
'81 is going to depend upon an evaluation not only of all the
technical factors but also an evaluation of economic conditions and
the relationships between money and the economy when we have to make a
final judgment in February or January or whenever it is.

-77-



7/9/80

MS. TEETERS. You can try another caveat in that we really
don't know what fiscal policy is going to be; that's still a wide-open
area.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, that can be implied, too.

MR. BALLES. Paul, there's another phrase you might want to
use and that is: "It's the present intent of the Committee..."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me worry about the precise
language. It will be circulated. Do I capture a sufficiently wide
area of Committee opinion to make this the likely candidate to be
worked on, subject to fiddling around with the language?

MR. RICE. So long as it's not assumed that this is our
expectation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you'll have to judge that in itself
in the end. Some people may want to [express] a different opinion.
I'm trying to say something here, though not very much. I'm trying to
express a bias without locking us into it. That's the intention.

MS. TEETERS. Yes. I don't want to be faced in February with
having it said that in July I promised to do this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that nobody is going to
be faced with something like "I promised to do it." But I still want
to maintain the bias. I sense that that's likely to capture the
biggest number and come as near to a consensus as we can get. It may
be a complete consensus. Is that right? Is that near a consensus?

MR. WALLICH. I can go with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That seems to be the case, so let's
operate [on that assumption]. We'll get some language out before the
end of the week and have some form of assent or vote or something so
that I can say that it's a consensus of the Committee. Okay. Does
that complete the meeting?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There's just one minor technical
presentational point, which I think is worth calling to your
attention. The way the operational paragraph has been drafted, by
putting M2 for the first time down at the bottom of the paragraph
instead of saying M-1A, M-1B, and M2, it will give the markets the
impression that we're downgrading M2. That's not the intention from
the discussion, I gather. What was the reason for that switch?

MR. ALTMANN. It's not the first time. This is a reversion
to what was the regular practice until the last meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was not intended to downgrade M2, I
take it?

MR. ALTMANN. No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Up until the last meeting it was done that
way?



7/9/80

MR. ALTMANN. It was changed at the last meeting because
there were no numbers in the directive at the last meeting. We simply
have reverted to what has been the practice.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I had the same question Tony did when I
glanced at it. But if it was just a reversion to what was done in all
the meetings up until the last one, I don't think it's a--

MR. GRAMLEY. If in fact we're going to give M2 some weight
in the decisionmaking process, then I think Tony's suggestion ought to
be considered. Maybe we ought to put it in the body of the
operational paragraph instead of hanging it on the end.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to give it some weight, yes.
I can do it either way. I don't think it's important that we've
always done it the other way. I would go along with that; it's
probably slightly better. This is just a question of whether we list
M2 along with the M1s. Is that agreeable? Okay, the only other item
on the agenda is that the next meeting is August 12th.

MR. GRAMLEY. What about the forecasts?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh yes, thank you--the forecasts. Do you
want to hand those [tables] out? I don't know that we have to spend a
lot of time on this but we'll see.

SPEAKER(?). You're just trying to get the range, right?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll show you. Do you all have copies?

MR. KICHLINE. No, they're down at that end of the table.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we've done, as you will see, is to
take the numbers that you submitted and that the Board members talked
about. The Chairman exerted his prerogative of not putting down
precise numbers. But we've divided it up to give a little sense of
[the views of] the Board members, the voting Presidents, and the non-
voting Presidents. My overall impression is that, for some reason,
not voting may breed irresponsibility or something. But the ranges
are very similar and fall within the range of the Board staff's
projections for the major variables in both '80 and '81. There were a
couple of outliers among the non-voting Presidents. We are not
committed to any particular treatment of this in the report. What we
did in the last two reports, I believe, was to show a range for Board
members. I was asked the last time why we didn't include all
Committee members. I didn't commit myself [to a change], but I
acknowledged that that was a reasonable question. So my presumption
is that we might as well show the range for all Committee members this
time. I'm not sure there's any particular point in dividing it up
between Board members and others. We could include non-voting
Presidents or not, but the specific request was "Committee members" so
my [suggestion] would be to combine the Board members and the
Presidents and say this is the Committee's range. We've never tried
to narrow the range very far. We've had among the Board members some
discussion of whether the more outlying [views] couldn't converge
someplace. There were some problems that arose when we discussed this
among the Board, which relate to the problem that Chuck just raised,
and I think we ought to discuss this a bit. We decided on the ranges.

-79-



7/9/80

We're a little vague about next year, but we have to discuss their
consistency with the forecast of the Council [of Economic Advisors]
Mr. Kichline says on the basis of his scientific investigation that
they are consistent, with a low order of probability. What do we say
about that? How do you feel about the way we present these forecasts?
And do any of you want to change your mind about the numbers you've
already submitted very tentatively?

MS. TEETERS. Are you likely to be asked the question--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Excuse me, Nancy, but while I think of it,
the most important question presentationally seems to me whether we
present these forecasts with no tax cut, with a tax cut, or both. I
am afraid, frankly, of just presenting a projection which says "with a
tax cut" because I don't know how to avoid the implication that the
Federal Reserve takes it for granted that there will be a tax cut and
that it's desirable. The only argument against presenting it at least
both ways is that the numbers look so sour without [a tax cut].
There's the problem of presenting a very sour economic forecast. How
that gets resolved is beyond me. But that's the most important
presentational issue.

MR. PARTEE. Also, if we do it both ways, one can subtract
and see what the effect of a tax cut is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it both ways [the questions is]
why not have the tax cut. It's as if all these projections surely
show: Mirabile dictu! If we have a tax cut, we get more growth and
no more inflation, and anybody except a damn fool would have a tax
cut. In fact, instead of a $30 billion tax cut, why not make it $60
billion because then we'd get still more growth and--

MR. PARTEE. Yes, why not make it twice as big?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I would suggest that we present
projections assuming no tax cut and then go on to say that if there is
a tax cut of, let's say, $25 to $30 billion, then the picture would
change. How it would change depends upon the composition and the
timing of implementation because that makes an enormous difference as
to how much stimulus would occur in fiscal '81. I'd give them some
ranges. There is a good deal of uncertainty depending on the
composition of the tax cut, so I'd make that a little more general.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would prefer to approach it the
way you are approaching it. But how does one handle this question?
It sticks out even more sharply than it otherwise sticks out that our
projection is for an extremely sour business picture and a very high
unemployment picture for another 18 months, so why aren't we using
policy--?

MS. TEETERS. The question you're going to get on this,
regardless of how we present it, is how much of this is due to the
difference in our fiscal policy assumption and how much is still due
to the difference in our monetary policy assumption, because the CEA
has a much easier monetary policy assumption than we have. That could
be almost as embarrassing as whether we have [assumed] a tax cut.

-80-



7/9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is the CEA assuming an easier monetary
policy or do they have a different assumption as to that wonderful
demand shift that's--

MS. TEETERS. Oh, they have lower interest rates.

MR. PARTEE. 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have lower interest rates. How do
they get them?

MR. GRAMLEY. The public projection that goes up to Congress
has an interest rate forecast now that's purely fictitious. That is,
they are using a rule of thumb which says that for interest rate
projections we will adopt the rule that real interest rates are
unchanged. That [procedure] was adopted two years ago when they had
to discontinue using the old rule, which was that nominal interest
rates were unchanged. So to keep from having to forecast interest
rates they said: Let's switch to a rule of real interest rate
assumptions. And that's all that this monetary policy assumption
means. It isn't a real assumption; it's just a plug.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Another question that arises in our
projections, now that I think of it, is that they show very little
improvement on the inflation side--

MS. TEETERS. Very little improvement on anything.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --from year to year. In fact, for the
non-voting Presidents the range is exactly the same and for the voting
Presidents it's exactly the same.

MR. KICHLINE(?). We excluded some outliers like--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'm looking at the wrong comparisons
here. They're not exactly the same, but there's little difference;
they show a decline [in inflation] of a quarter percentage point from
year to year.

MR. BALLES. Well, it is an opportunity, Mr. Chairman, for
educating the [Congressional] Committee about the long run.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the wrong numbers again;
they show a difference of one half percentage point.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the unemployment figures don't
look that bad. This says without a tax cut the range is 8-1/2 to 9
percent but with a tax cut--depending upon the composition--it
probably would be a percentage point lower than that for the fourth
quarter of 1981. So it's down to 7-1/2 to 8 percent.

MR. MAYO. But at the risk of more inflation in '82 and '83
perhaps. I think that has to be put in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look at the unemployment rate under any of
the projections for next year. I don't see how we can talk about a
tax cut without, in effect, saying we should have a tax cut.

-81-



7/9/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we're not saying that we
shouldn't have a tax cut. We're saying we should wait a while and see
what the numbers are going to be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [But their question would be]: Why do we
have to wait, if that's your--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why I said earlier that you
have to stress that the composition of it and possibly the magnitude
will be affected by events in the economy over the next few months.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is filled with booby traps, but
we can't avoid them all. Along the same line, we used the CPI the
last time. For technical reasons the CPI comparison from '80 to '81
will look less good than the other [measure], theoretically; I don't
know how it will come out. We just thought tentatively that we'd not
give the CPI [forecast] even though it's very good at the end of this
year in some people's opinions. Well, we don't have to resolve this
finally today but if anybody has great suggestions--and particularly
if anybody wants to change his or her projection in a way that would
affect any of this--let Mr. Kichline know in the next day or two. I
suppose you just have to leave it to us as to how they're presented.
Also, please convey any bright ideas on what we should say about the
consistency of our whole approach to the CEA's [projections]. They
say our computer tells us it's inconsistent, but we know it's
consistent.

MR. KICHLINE. Certainly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take this silence as assent that we will
work out the problem.

SPEAKER(?). It seems it's late in the day.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now where are we?

MR. WINN. I think it's time for a compliment. I'd like to
compliment the Bluebook this time. I thought it was very helpful and
very good.

MR. SCHULTZ. On that note, I move we adjourn.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me say in that connection that I
thought the presentations this morning were very good. The Bluebook
was well developed. I shudder, as I do every time, when I look at
that Bluebook and all that stuff coming out of these computers about
the more increase in money supply we have and the more tax cut we have
the better everything looks!

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, that is not, I insist, what the
Bluebook says.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may not be what the language says, but
if one looks at those pages with all the alternatives, that's the
conclusion--

MR. AXILROD. Well. I don't think that's what the numbers say
either. We'd say it even more obviously if we had put '83 in there.



7/9/80

But we tried to compare a tax cut strategy with a no tax cut strategy
and to look at that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that [the outlook is worse]
if one looks at a long enough period and all the rest, but I still
would hate to see that Bluebook get into the press.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Shouldn't the Bluebook have a
paragraph in it about the fact that the reaction of the financial
markets may throw this whole scenario off?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Bluebook always should have a
paragraph in it saying that there are those who think this is all a
lot of baloney and that everything is going to work out much better
with the more restrictive policy.

MR. BLACK. They called us outliers and then took our
[projections] out of the figures.

MR. SCHULTZ. While we're on the subject of the books, what
about the Redbook?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've had a little discussion about
that. I asked Carl Scheld to look at that. Frankly, I find the
Redbook less useful than it might be--not in the sense that it's not a
very good idea to get these kinds of comments fresh from the market,
but in its organization. It goes District by District and it's
awfully hard for me--I never get through it, frankly--to get some
sense of what is happening in a particular sector of the economy or
what the latest feel is, which is what the Redbook is supposed to
give, because the information is so dispersed. I'd like to see some
reorganization, maybe only in the summary, so that it comes through a
little more clearly. What should be clear, looking at all these
reports, is that this is the latest feel we have for residential
construction or for business investment and that these are the nuances
in different areas or sectors of the economy. It's just a matter of
organizing the material.

MR. GRAMLEY. I would hope that would be done just in the
[summary], because I wouldn't like to lose that District [by District
information].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's pick up these papers with the
projections; people are worried about these [getting out]. I worry a
lot more about the Bluebook, frankly, than these wide ranges but--

MR. PARTEE. These ranges are so wide that a reader would
have to conclude that the Committee didn't know--

MR. SCHULTZ. And that is an entirely reasonable conclusion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it's all right, I don't think we need a
break unless people want to break just for a minute or two. We want
to discuss the Monetary Control Act a little and questions that arise
with respect to that.

MS. TEETERS. Couldn't we have a seventh inning stretch?

-83-



7/9/80 -84-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can have a seventh inning stretch.
We'll have a 5 minute break and come back for other [non-FOMC]
matters.

END OF MEETING




