









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

January 8-9, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

in Washington, D. C., starting on Tuesday, January 8, 1980, at 3:30 p.m.

and continuing on Wednesday, January 9, 1980, at 9:15 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Coldwell
Mr. Kimbrel
Mr. Mayo
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee

Messrs. Baughman, Eastburn, and Willes, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,
Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively

Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Petersen, 1/ General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Axilrod, Economist
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Brandt, Ettin, Henry, Keir, Keran,
Kichline, Parthemos, Scheld, and Truman,
Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to adopt the domestic
policy directive.



1/8-9/80

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate

Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors

Messrs. Beck and Simpson, 2/ Senior Economists,
Banking Section, Division of Research and

Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,

Board of Governors
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,

Board of Governors

Mr. McIntosh, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston

Messrs. Balbach, Burns, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis,
Eisenmenger, and Fousek, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, New
York, Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, and New York,

respectively

Messrs. Danforth and Mullineaux, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and
Philadelphia, respectively

Mr. Meek, Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York

2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
January 8-9, 1980

January 8, 1980--Afternoon Session

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [That was the change in System holdings of
securities] since when?

MR. STERNLIGHT. That was for all of '79.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, if you want to add something that
bears upon the nature of the operations, this is probably as good a
time as any to do it.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have some tables we could pass
out, which are somewhat similar to the ones that we made available to
the Committee at the last meeting and which might be helpful in
considering how and whether to proceed with these techniques. These
tables are designed to elaborate the numbers that underlie Mr.
Sternlight's operations. As you can see, they are divided into two
columns. On the thought that the Committee wouldn't want to get too
far off its path for any sustained period, we divided this period--the
seven-week intermeeting period--into a four-week interval and a three-
week interval. The three-week period ends tomorrow. The tables
[exhibit] all the perils of lagged reserve accounting, which makes the
relation between reserves and money in the short run not as close as
one might hope. [Operations] were designed to attempt to attain a
growth rate in M1 in the September-to-December period of a little over
4 percent and in the November-to-December period of something like 5
percent. In the event, as you saw in the Bluebook, we were a bit
short on the growth rate in M1 and also in M2; but I think within any
reasonable margin of error we were not really very far short.

If you focus on the last column, which [covers] the most
recent three-week period, you can see that the monetary base turned
out about $379 million short of the original path we set. And you can
see that total reserves turned out about $218 million short of the
adjusted path. As will be clear shortly, the adjustments were only $4
million. So it really is about $220 million short of the original
path; there was a currency shortfall involved. With total reserves
running short, the Manager added roughly $150 million to the original
nonborrowed path. That is shown in the third panel, where you see
adjustments of $146 million. That simply is the $150 million added
minus the $4 million, which was a decline in the original total
reserve path. So that is the added adjustment to nonborrowed reserves
because total reserves were running short of what seemed consistent
with this money stock figure, again recognizing the looseness in
linkages because of lagged reserve accounting. Thus, to translate
that into borrowings, you can see that the original path based on the
Committee's decision in November, which was to assume borrowings at
$1.7 billion, would be subtracted from total reserves to give [the
level of nonborrowed reserves] the Manager would aim for initially.
After the $150 million adjustment, that would get us down to $1,550
million in borrowings; and given the weakness in total reserves
demanded relative to what was projected as needed to get the [desired
growth in the] aggregates, actual borrowings, of course, fell short



1/8-9/80

even of that. So the deviation of $218 million from the [assumed
level of] borrowing turned out to be exactly the same as the deviation
from the adjusted total reserve path of $218 million. That's just
simply arithmetic.

The source of some of the problems we were having is shown on
the next page; they are inherent in this kind of targeting procedure.
Again, I'd say that thus far I think we've been fairly lucky in coming
up with growth in money that was pretty consistent with what the
Committee wanted. As you can see, on the original total reserve path
we were off $222 million from [the path] we first constructed.
Adjustments came later. They really involved two components, and they
went in opposite directions. One was excess reserves, which actually
turned out to be $166 million higher than we had built into the
original path; that is line B in the last column. And in terms of the
uses of total reserves, required reserves were running $388 million
weaker. So, simply taking total reserves as the sum of excess and
required reserves, total reserves were running [below by] $222
million. Thinking of it from the sources side, we just didn't supply
that much reserves. With lagged reserve accounting, to do so we would
have had to pile in a lot more excess reserves than even the banks
were willing to hold. I don't know how much that would have amounted
to because we would have had to run down borrowings to begin with.

Now, the bulk of the shortfall in required reserves was in
the type of liabilities requiring reserves that didn't enter into
either M1 or M2. As you can see, there were shortfalls relative to
expectations of $80 million in large CDs, $90 million in U.S.
government deposits, and $167 million in the marginal reserves, which
are connected with the shortfall in large CDs. That's essentially
because bank credit ran a lot weaker than we expected and banks simply
were not borrowing in the market in order to meet those credit
demands. Thus, we adjusted the path, really, so that the Manager
wouldn't supply those reserves. We hadn't made any adjustments to
path since October 6th until this past three weeks. And we had such
large consistent shortfalls in these items that it seemed that we
would get too much money unless we adjusted the path, so the Manager
in effect absorbed the reserves released by the decline in these
deposits. Of course there was a shortfall in currency relative to
expectations, as shown in the third line, line E. And in terms of
reserve requirements, that meant we would have had to add $30 million
to total reserves to compensate for the shortfall in currency.
However, that was more than made up, as you can see, by the sharp drop
in required reserves behind large negotiable CDs, U.S. government
deposits, and marginal reserves. Those minuses much more than
compensated for the added reserves needed for the shortfall in
currency. That is, simply put, the drop in negotiable CDs released
reserves that could be used to expand the deposits needed to make up
for the shortfall in currency. So, netting through all those things,
we ended up reducing the total reserve path by $175 million, as you
can see in line F, to reflect changes in deposit mix and in currency
flows. It's a rather rough net that won't add up exactly, but it goes
in the direction that all items listed under D and E would suggest on
[balance]. On the other hand, because excess reserves were running
extremely [high], we felt we had to add reserves because banks'
behavior with regard to excess reserves was totally different in terms
of magnitude from what we had expected. So in the end, as Peter
mentioned, because banks kept holding more excess reserves than we



1/8-9/80

were expecting every week, somewhat belatedly we added $171 million.
So, those adjustments net out to virtually nothing. If you took that
minus $4 million and related it to the $222 million, you get this $218
million, which is the deviation from the adjusted path. In general,
this time it seemed very reasonable to make these adjustments to the
path. In the previous periods we did not because we didn't see
extremely large sustained movements; the movements we did see in the
earlier periods were more toward rapid expansion in CDs and in bank
credit, things that we assumed the Committee wanted to hold down.
However, this time it was toward very weak bank credit; and we assumed
that the Committee did not want that very weak bank credit to be
reflected in excessive expansion in Ml, so we made some offsetting
adjustments. Of course, with lagged reserve accounting, the impacts
on Ml are not related one-for-one to what we do this week. One has to
wait for some time to come. But in any event, by the time all this
was done, we still ended up with weak total reserves because we
couldn't provide enough nonborrowed reserves to bring total reserves
up to path within this three-week period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sure that's crystal clear! So, I
think it's time to raise questions--not just on the details of Peter's
operations, but questions that bear upon the operating techniques
generally. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, just a comment. I think I understood the
direction of your adjustments, Steve, as you went through this. But I
certainly don't understand it from this table on the second page. I
can't make out the magnitude of the adjustments. The arithmetic just
doesn't work very well, at least as I was trying to follow what you
said, although I understand the direction of change. The other
question I have is on the very last comment you made, which was that
even after these adjustments you fell short of the desired adjusted
reserve path because you just couldn't supply the nonborrowed
reserves. Would you explain why it is that you couldn't get in the
nonborrowed reserves?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He couldn't get in the total reserves.

MR. AXILROD. We fell short on total reserves, not on the
nonborrowed.

MR. PARTEE. Well, one of the things that is disturbing me--
about the whole period really but particularly the last month or so--
is that we don't seem to be getting any market impact. We have to
have feed-through if this process is going to work. And yet,
regardless of the shortfall in reserves and the shortfall in money and
the fact that borrowings were coming down, we held the funds rate at
about 14 percent all the way through. It looks as if somebody else is
determining the funds rate. My question is: Under those
circumstances, since we weren't anywhere close to the bottom level of
the funds rate range that was specified, why didn't you put in more
nonborrowed reserves in order to try to get this process of adjustment
in the market going more strongly than it did?

MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Partee, that's certainly a very
fair question. It has always been an issue, so far as I understand
the procedures. My understanding of the original Committee decision
was that we would put more weight on nonborrowed reserves than on



1/8-9/80

total reserves, but still the Manager would have freedom when there
was clear cause. The staff would have the freedom to adjust the total
reserves but the Manager would have the freedom to adjust the
nonborrowed reserves when there was clear cause for there being a
shortfall. So, early in the three-week period, we did add $150
million to nonborrowed when it appeared that the gap between the total
reserves path and total reserves demanded was something on the order
of $450 million. And then in each successive week that gap of $450
million kept getting narrower as required reserves began revising up
from what we had [projected]. The money supply [growth] estimate for
December when we made this adjustment was on the order of 3-1/2
percent or so, I think; it has now ended up at 5-1/2 percent. So as
that gap narrowed, I think--Peter can speak for himself--we were a
little reluctant to make any further adjustment because we were going
in the right direction and we were on the nonborrowed path. Now, it
did seem to us that the funds rate ought to drop as member bank
borrowing dropped from $1.7 billion to the $1.2 to $1.3 billion area.
In the event, now that bank borrowings in the last past three days
have been running $600 or $700 million and the funds rate still has
not dropped, there seems to have been a change in the demand for
borrowing function, so to speak. That is, member banks, who had been
very willing borrowers in late October and over the course of
November--they had high borrowing at a funds rate that's lower than it
is now--have backed away from the window. It's quite possible that we
have been late in catching up with that and that in some sense the
nonborrowed path ought to have been set higher because of this change
in member banks' borrowing patterns. And as Mr. Sternlight mentioned
in his briefing, this week in effect he's adding more to the
nonborrowed path than is indicated even in this table because
borrowing is running so low. If that's the case, then the $1.7
billion of borrowing that was set originally was way too high to
achieve those particular targets, and the downward adjustments in them
are coming, in a sense, with a lag.

MR. PARTEE. There may be a fair [amount of] instability in
that demand. You may remember a month ago, or seven weeks ago or
whenever [the meeting] was, we thought there had been an increase in
the demand for borrowings compared with earlier in the experience when
there wasn't.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What plausible reason do you have for the
funds rate staying as high as it has with borrowings as low as they
are?

MR. AXILROD. I don't have any very good reason at $600 or
$700 million, but at $1.2 and $1.3 billion I think that's returning
more to the historical pattern. When we evaluate the spread of the
funds rate over the discount rate, $1.2 or $1.3 billion of borrowing
isn't unreasonable. What was out of the historical pattern was
November and late October when we had much higher borrowing at a
spread that was even less than we have now. That was what was [off]
the historical pattern. What we had up until three days ago is closer
to the historical pattern. Now we have much less borrowing than one
would expect historically, and I would assume borrowing is going to
jump back up.

MR. STERNLIGHT. If I can interject, these last few days seem
difficult to explain; the rather low level of borrowing is just not



1/8-9/80

what one would associate with a funds rate of around 2 percent over
the discount rate. And, as Steve mentioned, because of that we made
an interim adjustment in what we were aiming for in nonborrowed
reserves, feeling that to try to press nonborrowed reserves down to
the path level in this current week would have meant going into the
market and extracting reserves when the funds rate was around 13-3/4
or 14 percent. That obviously didn't make sense; and in effect we've
been running this week with an assumption that an adjustment of about
$500 to $600 million should be added to the nonborrowed or taken away
from the [borrowed] reserves.

MR. PARTEE. I know it's awfully early, but what bothers me
about this whole experiment so far, Paul, is that I don't get any
sense of dynamics working. That is, we had a very nice outcome taking
the quarter as a whole. I think everybody around the table would
agree that the money number calmed down and the markets have been
better and all that. But that all could have been an adjustment to
the one-time change in conditions that occurred early in October, with
much higher rates and the availability constraint and that kind of
thing. Since then I haven't had much sense of dynamics in the process
that would lead to, say, restoration of a higher growth rate in money
if it were lower than what we wanted. And it has tended to be lower
than we wanted. Perhaps it's just too early, but I don't see it.
That's what bothers me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have seen what you are talking
about if the funds rate had seemed to reflect this low level of
borrowing.

MR. PARTEE. I think that's probably right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. Steve, for my simple-minded, poor mathematical
abilities, tell me if I can make this statement and say it's
reasonably accurate: That the things that threw you off were the
demand for excess reserves and the shortfall in borrowing. The latter
was being made up by an enlarged nonborrowed path and the former--
coupled with a currency shortfall, I guess--brought you to the
shortfall in the total required reserves path. Is that reasonably
close or not?

MR. AXILROD. [Yes], in looking at the uses of total
reserves. But if you really make it tough for yourself and analyze
this by looking at the sources of total reserves, as I think one
should--if you think you're on a total reserve target, which the
Committee has not clearly said it's on, having said it's much more on
a nonborrowed target--you would say that we fell short on the total
reserves in this three-week period simply because we didn't put in
enough nonborrowed reserves to push up the total reserves to target.
Of course, if we had put in nonborrowed reserves--given the required
reserves, which aren't going to change that fast--borrowings would
have dropped, one for one. Then eventually we would have had to add
to the excess reserves, which were running [about] $400 or $500
million, and we would have ended up with $700 million or so in excess
reserves--that would have been the mechanism--and very close to zero
borrowing to attain this. The funds rate very likely would have
dropped well below the bottom of the range. I would say--and I don't

-5-



1/8-9/80

know if Mr. Sternlight would put it in the same way--that if you
thought we were on a total reserve target, the reason we fell short
was that we didn't push out the nonborrowed reserves aggressively
enough and push up excess reserves--which is all we can push around
with required reserves fixed--sufficiently to get the total reserves.
And what would have stopped us would have been the bottom of the funds
rate range. We'd clearly have gone below that.

What in practice stopped us, I think, was that the pattern we
saw developing was not out of keeping with what in effect had been
planned at the time of the Committee meeting and, judging from the
Committee's discussion, what the Committee would have found
acceptable. That is, at the time of the Committee meeting we had a
November rate of growth in M1 of 1.9 percent, and for December--it was
just after the meeting when we had the revisions--Ml growth of 7.9
percent. Midway through the period we were looking at growth in
November of 1 percent and in December of 3.8 percent. That was around
mid-December. Then [our estimates changed] as we got to the end of
December, and now we are looking at [M1 growth in] November of 1
percent and in December of 5.7 percent. So it began to look to us
that growth was moving up. That's what I was explaining to Governor
Partee. Required reserves were coming up and as the period went on--
in the last two or three weeks--our shortfall against total reserves
was becoming less; it appeared that we were moving in the proper
direction. And since we were right on the nonborrowed adjusted path,
which was already $150 million above what was originally set, it
didn't seem reasonable in that context to take a more aggressive
action to chase the total reserves in this very short period. I don't
know whether I'm being extremely clear, but I think that's the true
answer.

MR. WALLICH. We're back in 1937.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we still haven't found out whether there
are any dynamics here that will work or not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's true. But I also think
we're giving this an unfair test in assuming that we can be within 1
percent of whatever the money supply [target] is.

MR. AXILROD. I was going to say, Mr. Chairman, if I may,
that I don't know what the test of success is, but if the Committee
was aiming at 4.2 percent in M1 and achieved 3 percent, by my measure
that's success.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By all past [measures]. Governor Wallich.

SPEAKER(?). If it wasn't a coincidence, it's wonderful.

[CHAIRMAN VOLCKER]. If it was far off, the staff would say
it was a coincidence!

MR. SCHULTZ. The Chairman giveth and the Chairman taketh
away!

MR. WALLICH. The mechanism described just now must have some
similarity with what went on during the '30s when [the FOMC] found
that it could not generate the money supply it wanted. Well, I don't



1/8-9/80

know what [the FOMC at the time] wanted, but at any rate most of the
expansion they did engage in, mostly through gold purchases not
security purchases, went into excess reserves. But this is a very
faint effect here, which would not worry me a great deal. What does
worry me is that I now encounter, not only here but abroad, a
criticism of our procedures that in effect says we're back to the
procedures of the 1920s when borrowing was regarded as contractionary;
the more borrowed reserves you had, the more contractionary effect you
were setting up. Banks were trying to get out of debt, so to push the
banks into debt was the way to tighten credit; that is sometimes
associated with Riefler's name. As I say, I have heard this comment
that our procedures now are very similar to that. We push the banks
into rediscount, by operating on nonborrowed reserves; the less
nonborrowed reserves we supply, the more they have to borrow; and
that, we say, lowers monetary expansion. It does so presumably by
driving up the funds rate and driving up other rates, and that reduces
the demand for money. Now, I wouldn't say that this is a bad
mechanism. And I wouldn't say that borrowing is expansionary as some
of our critics say in the sense that more reserves, of course, is more
expansionary than less reserves. I would say that we aim at a given
volume of reserves and that the composition of that volume of reserves
makes a difference. If they're all nonborrowed, it's more
expansionary than if a higher percentage of them is borrowed. That
seems to me a reasonable approach.

In support of a rejection of this criticism I would argue
that some of the things we experienced here all do point in somewhat
the same direction. We got low borrowing at a given interest rate.
That would suggest that there is greater reluctance to be in debt now
than there was in the past and that there is a true reluctance to be
in debt that causes banks to restrain their [credit] expansion.
Second, we get high excess reserves. Well, that seems to be the same
phenomenon of caution on the part of the banks. They don't want to
get into debt; they'd rather have excess reserves. And, finally, the
funds rate remains high and doesn't go down as one would expect.
Well, again, they're bidding for funds in order to have liquidity, in
order to be safe. I could visualize that this is simply happening
because we're in a transition period and they are learning the ropes.
And after a while the willingness [to hold] excess reserves will wear
off and the reluctance to borrow may wear off. But for the time
being, it seems to me that this criticism that I hear--and as I say I
was surprised to hear it in Switzerland--is not justified. I'd like
to hear what Peter and Steve have to say about this.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think you sorted out those points
very well, Governor Wallich. Borrowing has always had this kind of
dual role. It's a source of reserves, but it's a source of reserves
with a string on it and is certainly less expansionary than if those
reserves came from open market purchases or even from float or some
other factor beyond our control. We've found ourselves having to make
adjustments for the possible change in attitudes of banks toward the
window. I alluded to one just now. We are not sure--and any
conclusion drawn from the last few days would be very preliminary--but
to the extent that there may be something to it, we have made an
interim adjustment to allow for that greater reluctance to use the
window these last few days and have been willing to provide more
nonborrowed reserves accordingly.



1/8-9/80

MR. SCHULTZ. They differentiate that much between buying
money and borrowing it?

MS. TEETERS. But why would they change in mid-course? You
seemed to be right on track in the first four-week period and then
something changed and they became more reluctant [to borrow] in the
past three weeks.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we're puzzled, particularly because
during the first two weeks of this last [period], as Steve said, it
looked as if banks might be getting back to a more normal relationship
of borrowing and the discount rate. And this current week just seems
to be a little world of its own; I think it is really too [early] to
draw any conclusion from it.

MR. PARTEE. You didn't comment on the excess reserves, but I
don't suppose that can go all that far.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I tend to associate that with the year-end
pressures to a considerable extent, perhaps more than the new
operating techniques because, after all, they didn't jump to hold high
excess reserves right after October 6th.

MS. TEETERS. The funds rate was also volatile in the earlier
period. It just seems to have been almost cemented in the last two or
three weeks.

MR. STERNLIGHT. It has been surprisingly stable, yes.

MS. TEETERS. It seems to me that they would have been more
cautious at first--in the post-October 6th period--than currently.

MR. AXILROD. Exactly. That's what's so puzzling, Governor
Teeters. One would have expected a response of a bigger demand for
reserves--that is, wanting less borrowing and more excess reserves--
earlier and then getting used to it later. And what we're seeing now
is an increased demand for free reserves in the last three or four
weeks relative to what was the case earlier. In some sense for any
given amount of nonborrowed that we provide, if there's a bigger
demand for free reserves, we're going to get less expansion for them
[as they] go into excess or into reduced borrowing.

MS. TEETERS. And much less volatility in the funds rate.

MR. AXILROD. Well, that may depend on certain other factors
like the attitudes of people in the funds market and how [they react]
to the volatility.

[CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.]

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll just make two
brief comments. I'll start out by saying that I don't pretend to
understand the procedures, so my comments are probably way off the
mark. But the discussion fascinates me. It strikes me very much like
the discussion one reads in the paper each morning where people are
explaining what happened in the stock market. They always have some
specific reason for why the stock market did what it did. I don't
think we really know how all these demand functions--for excess



1/8-9/80

reserves, borrowed reserves, nonborrowed reserves--are changing in the
short run. I just don't think [we know] anything that can make us
reach very comfortable judgments on why things are doing what they're
doing. Going back to Henry's comments, at times borrowings are in
some sense restrictive and at times they're not; it all depends. I
think the banking system can have a net borrowed position for a long
time and not feel constrained at all, depending on an array of various
factors. So, I just feel very uncomfortable with the procedure that
we seem to be getting into where we're modifying paths and making
adjustments and so on because presumably we are able to identify
shifts of a kind that I don't see how we can identify. Now, I don't
know what the alternative to that is. But somehow it seems to me that
we've got to work our way to a position where we figure out which of
these things really matters most--nonborrowed reserves, total
reserves, the base, or whatever it is--and set the dial on that and
then just let it run for a while. And if we see the dynamics that we
ought to see, that's fine; if we don't, then we have to go back and
find something else. I feel very [un]comfortable with the situation
where we think we can operate on a reserves basis the same way we were
operating on a federal funds rate basis. I think the two are very
different kinds of procedures; we can't move from a federal funds
target to a reserves target and make all these very refined
calculations and adjustments.

MR. AXILROD. If I may, Mr. Chairman, the staff feels the
same reluctance you do about modifying any paths, President Willes.
In this three-week period it was the first time we did it in any
consistent way during the twelve weeks this experiment has been
running. And it was only, of course, because it seemed that we had a
very clear movement of factors. That's a partial answer to Governor
Partee. We did [the adjustment of] $175 million early in the period,
and as these factors got bigger or smaller we didn't want to adjust
for small changes because, after all, then we would end up chasing it
--going up one week, down the next, and we wouldn't know. So we try
to [adjust] as infrequently as possible just on the grounds that you
mentioned, because things would tend to average out. However, when
there was a very clear change, it began to look as if we had very
little alternative. But it was only because of very, very clear
changes, we thought.

MR. ROOS. I wonder if some of the lack of dynamism or some
of the sluggishness in this whole process might not be a reflection of
the fact that large segments of the markets aren't quite sure exactly
what we're doing. That leads me to the question that I would direct
to Steve or Peter: What would happen if we specifically and publicly
described what our paths are--or at least some of our paths--so that
the markets could adjust to what they know our game plan really is
instead of feeling that there's some vague thing going on that they're
not sure of. Their reluctance or lack of reaction may be due in part
to the fact that people don't want to stick their necks out in the
markets until they really know what our reserve path is or what our
monetary base path is. What are the negatives to defining those
things publicly?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there is some appeal to that,
President Roos, except that in a period like this where we felt there
was an overriding reason for making these adjustments in the path, I
would wonder if in this whole dialogue to the public announcing a path

-9-



1/8-9/80

and then having to modify it could lead to considerably more
uncertainty and confusion than if we could have some understanding
that we have to exercise some flexibility as we apply this procedure.

MR. ROOS. As this process goes on, Peter, and as we become a
little more comfortable and confident in the process, would you
anticipate that we would describe more publicly and more specifically
what we're doing? Obviously, if unforeseen circumstances cause us to
change, we could certainly explain why we're changing.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I would certainly hope that we can get
to the point where we can explain more to the public about the general
methodology and how we formulate these paths and carry them out. At
what point we might want to or be able to post the path on the wall
while we're going through a period, I don't know. I feel it's too
early to reach a judgment on that.

MR. AXILROD. [I'd make] two other points regarding [the
issue] you raised, President Roos. I don't think publishing a reserve
path will make the relationship between reserves and deposits any more
predictable. I doubt that public relations [efforts] would work in
the direction of making that relationship more predictable because I
think that depends on other things. We may want to publish a long-run
reserve path, but I think it would have to be for other reasons.
Secondly, though, if we [publish] a short-run reserve path--say for
three months--I think we're going to generate in the markets the same
effect that is generated by the money supply publication. Every time
we come out with our reserves number, which we publish once a week,
markets are going to see [where it is] in relation to the path and
then start arguing with themselves [about what] that means. They
might say it means that we're going to lower reserves next week and
that means the funds rate is going to go up next week, which may or
may not be true because we may have a pattern in mind very different
from theirs. And it might generate unnecessary movements in the
market. While that's not fatal to anything, it's an unnecessary
impediment to the smooth carrying out of operations. Those are the
other two points I would add to what Mr. Sternlight said.

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I must say that as a former
discount officer I find my views very sympathetic to those of Governor
Wallich. I'm reminded of the fall of either 1966 or 1969, when there
was a good deal of discussion as to why the funds rate was so low. In
my mind the explanation that fall was that under some program of easy
access to the discount window related to business loan restraint,

was borrowing $1 billion for about three or four
straight weeks. And the funds rate slipped, much to the consternation
of the people at the Desk. But [the reason] was rather simple: There
was an additional supply there against a rather constant demand.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You didn't talk to the people at the Desk,
did you?

MR. TIMLEN. Yes, I did. Spence Marsh and I went through
that; I think it was in 1966. Yes, we have had some problems.

MR. PARTEE. They got an extra billion dollars?

-10-



1/8-9/80

MR. TIMLEN. Yes, they did. I think Governor Mitchell had
some kind of program involving access to the window if a bank promised
to be a good fellow in terms of not being aggressive and making
business loans. I think the rate may have stayed high this past week
because banks for some reason or other--maybe the reason Henry cited--
have not borrowed. So there was a supply/demand factor here; the
supply of reserves in totality was less, so the demand in the funds
market was proportionally great and the rate stayed where it was.
It's a question of the chicken and the egg every once in a while. I'm
not sure which is the chicken and which is the egg in this precise
period of two or three weeks.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, going back to October 6th, I think
you wisely recommended to us that we not put all our eggs in one
basket in terms of operating on a reserves target but that we
experiment for a while with multiple targets. Now we not only have
multiple operating targets, we have multiple intermediate targets in
the various Ms. I wonder after three months of experience how the
staff feels--I guess I would like to ask both Steve and Peter--about
whether it's now time to make some provisional judgments on whether
this three-pronged set of reserves that you're tracking is proving to
be useful or if you'd rather have one single target. Another part of
the question, going back to your remarks on lagged reserve accounting,
Steve, and how it is complicating--I guess that's the word for it--
your job, is whether in your mind any case is shaping up for a move
toward contemporaneous reserve accounting to make the monetary policy
implementation more expeditious.

MR. AXILROD. Well, there may be some differences [of view]
among the staff on the issues you raised, President Balles. I'll
respond to two of your points. I have not thought for the ten to
fifteen years I've thought about it that there was ever any use to
lagged reserve accounting, and this experience of the past three
months reinforces me in that judgment. However, I also have not
thought that doing away with a two-week lag is miraculously going to
make it easy to achieve the monetary aggregates targets. So, while I
think lagged reserve accounting is not a plus in targeting monetary
aggregates through reserves, doing away with it isn't going to mean
that we're going to do better than hitting 3 percent when we're aiming
at 4.2 percent. We could continue, in an unbiased way, sometimes
hitting 5.4 percent when we're aiming at 4.2 percent--getting within
plus or minus a percentage point [or so] over a three-month period.
In my own mind, and maybe I'm wrong on it, I think that was a fairly
good result from the Committee's point of view.

Secondly, I've become more convinced--this goes back for
years because I remember I spent some [time] years [ago] trying to
talk President Morris out of total reserves--that in practice total
reserves is the more appropriate guide in the short run, namely
because of this fatal flaw of trying to decide what is the proper
level of borrowing. It's very hard to decide that. And, therefore,
while I know we can't hit a total reserve [target] even without lagged
reserve accounting in the short run--because the banks can repay
borrowing faster or things like that--this experience indicates to me
that it's a somewhat better guide. But using [total reserves] more as
a guide automatically introduces even more interest rate volatility
than putting emphasis on nonborrowed reserves. So there's something
of a tradeoff. Those are the two things--

-11-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How are you going to use total reserves as
a guide without making some judgments about borrowing?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we're inevitably going to have to make
the judgments one way or another. But, for example, if banks aren't
borrowing and we're on a nonborrowed target, we're going to fall short
on total. If we're on a total reserves target and they are not
borrowing, we automatically sort of have to put in more nonborrowed
reserves and we would come up to our total target.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they are not borrowing.

MR. AXILROD. If they are not borrowing. It's simply like
that. We, of course, will always have these kinds of judgments to
make.

MR. BALLES. Steve, do I assume your absence of any comments
on the base to mean that you haven't really been paying all that much
attention to it?

MR. AXILROD. To be perfectly frank, we've paid no attention
to the base in the process but we've paid attention to currency.
That's because if currency were falling short persistently as it did
last time--if it fell short $500 million, then that would mean to me
not to put in $500 million more of reserves because doing so would
produce a multiple in deposits and way too much money. The way we
would do it is that we'd say currency is falling short $500 million,
16 percent is the marginal reserve requirement on demand deposits, and
that means to make up for that we would have to put in $80 million
more total reserves. If that were happening persistently, we'd have
to adjust our path for total reserves up by $80 million to make up for
it. So, while not really paying any attention to the base in an
operating sense, we are trying to pay attention to currency as well as
non-member deposits to see that our total reserve path is properly
adjusted to come close to what the Committee wants for money growth.

MR. PARTEE. You'd want to substitute $500 million in
deposits for the $500 million shortfall in currency.

MR. AXILROD. Right, so we'd use a fraction of the reserves.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I'd point out that our debate about total
reserves dates back to 1969, which tells you how long we've been
thrashing around this problem. But we shouldn't be too impatient with
this. We have a lot to learn about how to run this system. I
certainly don't feel the way Mark does that the adjustments to the
nonborrowed path were wrong. I think it would have been wrong to have
permitted an even greater deviation of total reserves from the path
needed to produce [the desired growth in] the aggregates. And just as
we are learning, the commercial banks are going through a learning
phase now. I think that $600 million of borrowing is an aberration,
which we are not going to find in future periods once the money
managers of the banks have adapted themselves to this new operating
procedure. I met with a group of them a couple of weeks ago and I
found them in a great state of confusion as to how they ought to
manage their affairs in this new regime. So we're both in a learning
phase; and I think we can get back to more predictable commercial bank

-12-



1/8-9/80

behavior once the money managers begin to learn how others behave in
this new regime.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to make some decision and we
might as well dispose of it now, if we can, as to how to proceed at
least until the next meeting, but I would presume it is going to be
for beyond the next meeting. We are clearly open to modifications of
the precise technique. Unless we want to argue otherwise, I think
implicitly we will proceed with something like the present technique
until [we decide to] change, assuming the general technique has
support. There are certainly aspects of it that have to be looked at.
I think it's literally true that only in the last week or so can we
really begin questioning why the market didn't respond in a way one
might have expected. And that's much too short a period to have any
very [strong] judgments. I also think there must be some element of
coincidence in our coming as close as we came [to our money supply
objectives] in the sense that even if these techniques are better than
I think they are, I doubt that each quarter we're going to be within 1
percent or even, as with the December figure, off by not much more
than 1 percent of what we finally--

MR. AXILROD. That's right. Well, maybe lagged reserve
accounting isn't the impediment I think it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we hadn't had a nice little bulge in
the money supply in the last published figure, December would have
been a lot below [our objective], but I don't think it was entirely
our good management that produced that bulge at that particular time.

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't have any problems with
continuing on the procedure. I do think there's some question as to
whether the Committee would wish to leave with the Manager and whoever
else is guiding this the right to change the nonborrowed path by
exceptionally large amounts. The amount it was changed this time
doesn't bother me, but I can see a possibility where the shortfall
might be a half billion to a billion dollars. It seems to me that
should be the Committee's decision, not a Desk decision.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me return to that. On the very
general question, leaving aside modifications of the kind you're
proposing, I just want to be explicit about whether we want to
continue this general type of procedure. Obviously, we're on it and
it has worked; on the surface, anyway, it has worked. The results are
more or less in line with what was intended. And I think it continues
to have some of the advantages that were foreseen originally. While
we still worry about what the federal funds rate is doing when it
doesn't go according to our preconception, we at least avoid making a
concrete decision--

MR. PARTEE. We haven't [moved the funds rate], anyway.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. We haven't done it in any
direct way. I'm not sure how many people are convinced they know just
where the federal funds rate should be now. Anyway, we avoid that
explicitly. On the other hand, I would remind you that nothing that
has happened--or that I've observed recently--makes the money/GNP
relationship any clearer or more stable than before. Having gone
through all these redefinition problems, one recognizes how arbitrary

-13-



1/8-9/80

some of this is. It depends upon how you define [money]. And the
technique does, I think, make it a little more difficult in some ways,
to say the least, to reconcile some conflicting short-run objectives
we have regarding the domestic or international [economy] or money
supply against interest rates, or whatever. There may be a time when
we really want to see interest rates lower or higher and they may not
be behaving that way, and they may continue not to do so for weeks and
weeks and months on end with this technique. So, there are arguments
on both sides. I just want to see whether we have a consensus that we
will continue on this until further notice anyway. We need to make
that explicit judgment.

MR. MAYO. I don't see that we have any alternative. Nothing
seems to have been suggested as a clear alternative to continuing this
and monitoring it awfully closely.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at the extreme, obviously we can go
right back to what we were doing before. But I think it's fair to
say, and I don't want to push it that cleanly, that there's a
compromise every place along the line--on where we set the interest
rate limits, on where we're operating, and on how much exercise of
judgment we put into this even in making the kinds of adjustments that
were made in the most recent period, which obviously were influenced
by the fact that the money supply and interest rates weren't going
exactly the way we might have expected. So, there is not absolute
purity on either side of this, and we can make various compromises.
But as a broad thrust, I think the question is whether or not to
continue basically what we've been doing.

MR. PARTEE. Shifting back from a very successful experiment
certainly would be hard to explain.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question.

MR. MORRIS. The reaction would be devastating.

MR. PARTEE. It surely would.

MR. BALLES. Unthinkable.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I'd like to make one general comment.
The experiment in terms of results has worked very well. I have no
quarrel with that, certainly. But I think it continues to lay us open
to the risks of unexpected and unexplainable declines in interest
rates that can give us great trouble internationally. Now, we can
always say that that is appropriate--that we're going into a
recession, inflation is coming down, and it is fully appropriate.
Nevertheless, as the Chairman has pointed out--he gets this question
again and again and we get the same thing in the press and in
criticisms at home and abroad--that by sticking to a firm money growth
path and therefore a firm reserve path we can get unpredictable
interest rate results. In fact, they may even be predictable in the
sense that rates become very low when the demand for money lets up.
And we may or may not want that. So, I do think we need to build in
something at the lower end.

MR. MORRIS. The alternative is that we go back to
unpredictable changes in the money supply.

-14-



1/8-9/80

MR. WALLICH. Well, that bothers me less.

MR. MORRIS. I think one of the two has to be unpredictable.

MR. WALLICH. That is very true. But the greater danger is
on the interest rate side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both would be [unpredictable] in
varying combinations.

MS. TEETERS. But, Henry, when we adopted this procedure we
were all perfectly aware of the fact that interest rates could decline
under it and that they would be determined by market factors. I think
it's more a problem of your educating your foreign compatriots about
the procedure.

MR. WALLICH. Well, we're working hard at that. Every speech
contains the same things that I said just now. And sometimes I almost
believe them! [Laughter]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is absolutely
black and white. For purposes of moving ahead at the moment, [let's
assume we will do] something like what we've been doing and let's get
to Phil's question and maybe some others. But in the broader sense, I
take it there's a consensus at the moment.

SEVERAL. Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, I don't know whether we want to deal
with Phil's particular question. It's a matter of judgment as to
whether or not a big enough adjustment is being made that it should be
brought back to the Committee. I wouldn't anticipate adjustments as
big as you're suggesting. If we're going to meet as frequently as
we've been meeting, because the Committee is [conversant] with the
precise techniques we've been using, we can express some judgment when
we're meeting. I suppose it's theoretically possible--and I don't
know whether you have any answer other than to leave it to my judgment
essentially--to say that when the confusion gets great enough we would
want a Committee meeting.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we could have limits similar to what we do
on foreign currency [operations].

MR. COLDWELL. Similar to the international.

MR. PARTEE. The only trouble is that I don't have any sense
at this point of what those limits ought to be; and I think it would
take a staff paper to indicate what might be the tendencies.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could be very arbitrary and say
that in some basic sense we are interested in something like total
reserves now but the operating [variable] tends to be nonborrowed
reserves. We can make a path for nonborrowed reserves at the time of
the Committee meeting and say we can't deviate from it by more than
"x" without [further consultation]. I don't know whether you want to
do that.

MR. PARTEE. What's a reasonable "x"?

-15-



1/8-9/80

MS. TEETERS. But with nonborrowed it's zero. The big
deviation is in borrowing and--

MR. COLDWELL. No, nonborrowed is zero after they've made an
adjustment.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think the solution is that the
Committee's directive should be on the basis of total reserves, and
the Manager should be allowed to vary the nonborrowed objective in
order to achieve the total reserves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's basically the way I interpret it
now. That is the presumption under which we're operating but, of
course, the total reserves are not very controllable and the
nonborrowed reserves are. The question is how much we should change
the nonborrowed to try to produce the total, which is the basic
variable that affects the money supply.

MR. COLDWELL. We could have a situation in which the
borrowing reverses its present course and jumps up to $1.8 billion.
Then would you cut back on the net borrowed path by $1 billion? I
strongly doubt that the Committee would want to do that right away,
but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're making an assumption that the
borrowings go up, the reverse of the present [situation], and that
they go up without interest rates increasing particularly in the
process. Now they are going down without interest rates decreasing.
If borrowings go way up without rates increasing, just reverse the
staff's judgment: They presumably would be moving in the opposite
direction if that literally happened. If we have a big expansion in
borrowing, it would decrease pressure on the market; and if the money
supply were running high, the Desk presumably would make the opposite
adjustment.

MR. COLDWELL. I guess you're crossing the bridge that there
is a good explanation as to why the borrowings dropped from $1.7
billion down to $800 million. That's a $1 billion drop and I'm not at
all sure that the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's not the drop in borrowings
itself. The borrowings would come out where they estimated, assuming
they have a correct estimate of total reserves with lagged reserve
accounting; and [if] they got on the path of nonborrowed reserves,
eventually the borrowings would be forced up. But the borrowings were
running low with a high federal funds rate. That's the confusing--

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, we've gone three months and only
had problems in the last month. Like Governor Partee, I have no idea
what the limit should be. I suggest we go another month, to the next
FOMC meeting, see what we encounter and get some idea of how much the
variation is going to be.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, I'd do that too, but we still don't know
what the limits are. I don't think we know the magnitude of the
problems yet and at what point the problems become a policy decision
rather than a technical adjustment.

-16-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with you. Well, is that a
satisfactory way to proceed? I do think that we ought to put on the
table, if not now--and this is under continuing review--any ideas
about it. It's all within the present technique, but we might change
the technique a bit. It's quite possible.

MR. AXILROD. I would point out, Mr. Chairman, that the
element of luck and coincidence in here has a lot to do with lagged
reserve accounting. I may be safeguarding the staff's view because
what happens to deposits this week does not have an awful lot to do
with what we do with reserves this week. It has something to do with
interest rates this week, so there is that element of luck and
coincidence. If we didn't have lagged reserve accounting, we'd have
more real problems that might emerge.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably the staff, despite Mr.
Axilrod's predilections, is busily working in a neutral and unbiased
way to present us with some recommendations on lagged reserve
accounting. That will be before the next meeting or about the time of
the next meeting.

MR. AXILROD. [The issue] will be before the Board before
this month is out.

MR. WILLES. I'd just like to indicate that I have a lot of
sympathy for what Governor Coldwell was saying. I think we need to
try to get a feel for what the limits are; and the only way to do that
is somehow to decide which of the reserve targets is really relevant.
If you think total reserves is the relevant reserve target, then the
tolerance limit on that ought to be essentially zero and we can adjust
the others however we want to in order to get--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it can't be. The dilemma is that the
relevant target is total reserves but it's not operational.

MR. MORRIS. It is operational, but it's not--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not in the short run. It's operational in
a larger sense, but we can't make that zero because we don't control
it to zero.

MR. WILLES. Well, we don't control it because of the way
things are apparently set up. We can change things and set it up so
we can control it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd have to shut the discount window;
then it's controllable.

MR. WILLES. Well, I don't think that's right at all. All
I'm trying to say, though, is that there is no arithmetic exercise
that one can go through to figure out these limits. One has to
[understand] the dynamics of the system and what we really want to try
to fix and what we're willing to adjust in order to keep the other
things fixed. That's all I'm trying to say.

MR. WALLICH. Even if we did close the window, we still could
be thrown off by currency or by float.

-17-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's operational factors plus
closing the window that make reserves--

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, but it makes a whole lot of difference in
terms of where we come out, not just in the period between [meetings
of] the Open Market Committee but beyond, how much nonborrowed is
thrown into that package. And if the staff, or you, or whoever else
is guiding this operation is throwing an extra billion dollars in the
path, the Committee is faced with a fait accompli at the next meeting.
That's all I'm saying. If the Committee wishes to concede that to you
and the staff, it ought to do so; otherwise it's wide open.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, it simply implies, does it not, that
total reserves is our overriding target? And if that's true, then it
seems to me that it doesn't present any great problem to accept a
response by the staff on nonborrowed for the purpose of trying to move
toward what we want on total reserves.

MR. COLDWELL. But I'm saying that if [the staff is] going to
enlarge the nonborrowed path because of a shortfall on the borrowing
side, some money will have been put in that at the next Open Market
Committee meeting we're not likely to get out.

MR. AXILROD. Governor Coldwell, the effective constraint on
that--the way it's structured now--is the funds rate. That is, the
funds rate constraint stops us. In my view Mr. Sternlight probably
couldn't have raised the total reserves in this last [period beyond]
that $400 million [in] nonborrowed because he would have been stopped
by the funds rate constraint. So the Committee--

MR. COLDWELL. In the sense of the bottom end of the
constraint?

MR. AXILROD. Or the top, either way. You could interpret
the present directive as the Committee's saying: "Here's where the
constraint is; it's on the funds rate." Now, that might [not] be
sufficient for you. But that is how it is at the moment.

MR. COLDWELL. I would doubt strongly that Peter couldn't
have put in another $400 million in this period if he had fed it in
slowly.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I don't know if you're speaking of the
whole period or just this current week.

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, I'm talking about the whole period, an
intermeeting period of a month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't know because Steve is
saying that if he had, slowly or fast, the funds rate would have been
down at the lower limit.

MR. COLDWELL. I doubt that.

MR. AXILROD. Well, that may or may not [have happened] but
that is the effective constraint that stops us at some point.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, it stops you at some point, but [where]?

-18-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. I assume that expresses the Committee's will.
If the Committee wants to express itself in another way, that is of
course its privilege. But at the moment that seems to me how the
Committee expresses its will with regard to how much the Manager is
free to do.

MR. PARTEE. I don't mean to disagree with you, Phil; I think
it's something that has to be looked into. I would disagree with you,
Ernie, in that I think we are concerned about nonborrowed as well as
total because we have preconditions [bearing on how the operations
affect] the circumstances for the next meeting. But that all has to
be worked out.

MR. MAYO. Peter, would you have done anything differently if
we had had a 10 to 17 percent funds rate range for this past week?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Not in this recent period.

MR. MAYO. I thought that would be your answer.

MR. AXILROD. I guess there are always divergent views among
the staff; I would have given a somewhat different answer to be frank
about it. We discuss these things all the time. And [my] answer
would be that if the Committee were willing to see the funds rate drop
as much as that, I woud have been tempted to put in even more
nonborrowed reserves. On the other hand, once I saw that the required
reserves were rising against that, I don't think I would have made any
further adjustments, because I realize the Committee wasn't intent on
really forcing money out like mad to get a 3 percent growth rate.
Chances are you might get more later. It's that kind of judgment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the physicists have always had a
rather neat way of dealing with problems such as this by saying:
Well, that's an engineering problem. In a sense, I think there's a
good parallel here in that the Committee decides what rate of growth
it wants in the aggregates--that's the problem for the physicists--and
then it's an engineering problem to translate that it into the volume
of reserves. So, I would come out very close to where Frank Morris
did on that in suggesting that the staff ought to allow for these
things in absorbing the least reserves to make their best estimate of
what volume we need out there to support the rates of growth in the
aggregates that we have chosen.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously will be returning to
the engineering problems as well as those of the physicists from time
to time. I think we have an understanding on how to proceed in the
rest of the discussion.

MR. BLACK. Well, our engineers will be working on the
problem continously, and I didn't mean to suggest otherwise.

MR. SCHULTZ. I thought you were going to quote the
Heisenberg [uncertainty] principle. That merely states that if you
observe it, you automatically change it by the act of observation and,
therefore, you can't possibly know what it actually is.

-19-



1/8-9/80

MR. BALLES. Catch-22.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Let's turn] to the question of the new
monetary aggregates, on which a memorandum has been distributed. Mr.
Axilrod, I presume, is prepared to make a few summary remarks on the
subject, including telling us why the different measures have more
substantial deviations from each other in the past than in the
projections for the future.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I might add that Mr. Simpson, who
is well versed in these measures, is here and is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You probably were going to say this, but
let me just make one introductory comment. We ended up with the M-1A
and M-1B [measures] to allow for [negotiable order of withdrawal] NOW
accounts and [automatic transfer services] ATS. As it turns out, in
the current estimates there isn't very much difference. But we still
anticipate that there will be substantially more difference if
Congress goes ahead and straightforwardly authorizes NOW accounts.
The theory here is that ATS, which has been legal for a year, has kind
of run out of steam in terms of making any difference, but NOW
accounts may well not have. So, whatever we decide upon for the long-
range targets next month, we probably are going to have to go back and
readjust if Congress does permit nationwide NOW accounts. We'll have
to adjust both M-1A and M-1B, presumably in opposite directions. We
can do that, I think, consistent with the substance of whatever we
decide. By the time we announce them, Congress probably will have
acted anyway.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that I have anything
extremely helpful to add to this statistical material before the
Committee. I was going to point out particularly tables 4 and 5 on
pages 6 and 7 of the material that we sent out earlier. The
remarkable thing to me was that the numbers for the new aggregates
came out within reasonable ranges. That is, they are not numbers that
are going to appear strange to the public; once the Committee begins
targeting on the new definitions, the rates of growth that are going
to have to be adopted will be reasonable relative to the current
aggregates. For example, on page 4, looking over the recent 10-year
period from 1970 to 1979, the rate of growth of the new M2 of 9.95, or
almost 10 percent, is very close to the current M3 growth of 10.28
percent, which is its nearest counterpart. And the rate of growth in
the new M3 of 11.08 percent is very close to the 10.64 percent rate of
growth in M5, which is its nearest counterpart. Now, the new M3 is
running faster than the current M3 because it has in it relative to
the current M3 large negotiable CDs, money market funds, and RPs. But
that higher rate of growth for a new concept is not so out of keeping
with the rates of growth of the current M3 as to make for considerable
confusion on the part of the public.

Similarly, on table 5 on velocity, you can see that the
current and new measures are not behaving very strangely vis-a-vis
each other. That is, if you look at the Mls, for the new M-1B, which
is again a somewhat different concept than the current M1, the trend
of velocity is the same. That is, there appears to be a consistent
upward trend in velocity in the current Ml; if you compare the peak-
to-trough numbers in the middle panel for the current M1, they get
larger in each one [unintelligible], so the trend is toward higher

-20-



1/8-9/80

rates of growth in velocity. We see a similar development in the new
M-1B, even though savings accounts are in there. That may change a
bit for the new M-1B if we get nationwide NOWs because we may get a
lot of savings in there and that would involve a temporary drop in the
velocity of that measure as we get a one-time transfer of savings as
well as checking account funds into the NOW accounts. But, again, I
don't think these numbers are strange relative to the old numbers.
So, [I've come to the view] that the transition to the new numbers is
not going to be as difficult a public [perception] problem as I
originally thought it might be before I saw all these numbers laid
out.

Another problem the Committee may want to consider, when the
transition is made, is to what extent it wishes to operate on M-1A,
M-1B, M2, and M3 on the new definitions. At least until there are
nationwide NOW accounts, I would think you would want to keep
operations most focused on the aggregate that is most controllable
through the reserve technique, if the Committee's going to continue
using the reserve technique. That seems to me to argue mostly for
M-1A or M-1B. But when NOW accounts become very important, M-1B will
be distorted as will M-1A. And in that case one might have to fall
back to a degree more on M2 and possibly M3. But I would assume at
least starting in Feruary that M-1A and M-1B would tend to be an
index, unless the Committee really wants to change how we've been
doing it.

MR. COLDWELL. Will you weigh the two of them equally?

MR. AXILROD. Well, under the current system, I think M-1A
would get the same weight that M1 now gets. That's how I would tend
to interpret it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Every time we discuss this, I get very
nervous about this great targeting. Is this all comprehensible? Do
we have comments or [questions]?

MR. MORRIS. I have one question on M2. I presume, Steve,
that in setting your compatible ranges for M2 for 1980, you're
assuming that short-term rates will not get down low enough to produce
any great reflow of funds into the thrifts?

MR. AXILROD. Exactly. That's right.

MR. MORRIS. If you look at 1975, say, which was a year of
recession, a year comparable to 1980 [as projected], M2 went up by
12.3 percent even though I think our 1975 policy was not too
expansionary.

MR. AXILROD. I think we still have short rates and even
short coupons high relative to the fixed rate ceilings on deposits, so
we'll still be getting the funds into these alternatives mainly in the
fluctuating rate ceiling deposits. We're not assuming substantially
different behavior for now--some increase, but it would be very
modest.

MR. PARTEE. But of course in '75 [rates] fell below the
fixed rate ceilings. So even the passbook rate was affected. That
obviously is not in the projection; it couldn't be.

-21-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I just wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, since I was
one of those who was rather unhappy with the then-proposed M2 the last
time we met and discussed this subject, that I think the newly adopted
M2 is a great improvement. Certainly, the inclusion of small time
deposits, which are now incorporated into the new M2, is going to have
a great advantage, as I see it, of reducing the interest rate
sensitivity [of M2] over the business cycle. That's largely because
the money market certificates that are included have offset the
reduction that otherwise has been occurring in small time deposits.
And I feel pretty optimistic, as a matter of fact, because if we look
down the road I think at some point we're going to get a further
relaxation or abandonment--the sooner the better as far as I'm
concerned--of the Regulation Q ceilings. That ought to make the
redefined M2 even less interest sensitive than it is now. So, I for
one am quite happy with the outcome and I thought I ought to make that
clear, having raised objections to the earlier proposal.

MR. BLACK. For similar reasons you would object very
strenuously to M3.

MR. BALLES. That's right.

MR. MAYO. Well, Mr. Chairman, just to start this part of the
discussion going, it seems to me--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it was just finishing!

MR. MAYO. --that we're better advised this time around with
these new measures coming out to settle on, say, M-1B and adjust it if
necessary later on rather than try to straddle an average of M-1B and
M2 because we don't know about nationwide NOW accounts. I think it
would be cleaner and easier to explain if we just settled on one
[measure], even though we recognize that we might have to make some
adjustments to it later on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that is the reason that
we're straddling. We're not looking at an average. It's just that we
presumed at the time that NOW accounts would be enacted and that that
would produce a strikingly high M-1B figure as it's now defined, which
would have been very difficult to explain. Indeed, from our own
standpoint, we didn't know quite what its significance would be
because a lot of [the NOW account funds] will come out of savings
accounts. So it provides us with both an easier explanation publicly,
although it looks more confusing, and lets us know a little more about
what's going on ourselves.

MR. MAYO. Well, I think that's true. But I'm arguing a
little different point: That if we get into placing a lot of reliance
on M2, a considerable part of which we would have no control over, it
will give the wrong public image, too.

MR. PARTEE. I think it's more M-1A and M-1B that we're
comparing, Bob. The bigger the growth of NOW account-type deposits,
some of which will be drained from M-1A and some from M2--maybe
something like 50-50--the bigger the divergence between M-1A and M-1B,
so we thought we needed both. The one, M-1A, will be running too low

-22-



1/8-9/80

to reflect reality; and the other, M-1B, will be running too high to
reflect reality until this stock adjustment process is over.

MR. MAYO. That may be all right. Certainly no one in the
preceding discussion has suggested that we average nonborrowed
reserves with total reserves. I'm just arguing that we ought to get
away from this averaging regardless of which--

MR. PARTEE. Old M1 with M2?

MR. MAYO. Or M-lA with M-1B. What does that mean?

MR. COLDWELL. Do we even have all the data now to
[calculate] M-1B?

MR. AXILROD. I'd like Mr. Darwin Beck to answer that.

MR. BECK. M-1B? We have [some of the data] in process; they
are not yet flowing in. We have the historical monthly data but we
are in the process [of putting together] quarterly data and weekly
data.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will have them at the end of the month,
right?

MR. BECK. That is the schedule. As far as we know we will
have them at the end of the month, yes.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I was just pointing out that there is a
problem knowing what M-1B is going to be. If we have a shortfall of
data, we may be sitting here next month wondering what M-1B was.

MR. PARTEE. You won't have M-1B as quickly for Desk
operations, will you, Darwin? M-1B will not become available as
speedily as M-1A.

MR. BECK. There may be a somewhat greater delay, hopefuly
not too much greater.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when the stock adjustment falls out,
presumably we will drop M-1A.

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. AXILROD. When we start publishing this, which presumably
will be shortly after the next meeting, we are planning to publish
M-1A and M-1B weekly but not M2 and M3. They will be monthly [data].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M-1A and M-1B will be published on the
same time schedule.

MR. ROOS. Are we planning to go public with the nomenclature
M-lA and M-1B? Isn't that going to get us some laughs? In other
words, I think either M-1A or M-1B would be a very acceptable
aggregate, but can't we rename the baby M1 again and explain it? I
think every columnist in the world is going to write that you
economists are fuzzing this up again. Is that a problem or not?

-23-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It probably is a problem, and our only
defense is that reality is complicated.

MR. COLDWELL. If you had your druthers, Steve, M-1B is what
you'd focus on now?

MR. AXILROD. It doesn't really much matter, Governor
Coldwell, because NOW accounts are such a small proportion. But I
have a feeling--don't make the obvious retort, please--that I know
more about M-1A than I do about M-1B. And until M-1A declines into a
much smaller proportion of the world than it now is, I would tend to
prefer M-1A. All our models, such as they are, are built on M-1A and
historical experience; I just know more about it and feel a little
more comfortable with it myself. So, I really thought it was a good
solution, which emerged out of the Board discussions, [to use both
measures for a while].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd get a very funny M-1B if we got a big
nationwide movement to convert savings accounts into NOW accounts.

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, but that's down the road.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, down the road 3 months from now.

MR. COLDWELL. It may not be very far, but we don't know--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't enact that [legislation],
then there's no difference between them, basically.

MS. TEETERS. Don't you have a problem of not being able to
seasonally adjust these measures because you don't have the data [on
the components that account for] the difference between M-1A and M-1B?

MR. SIMPSON. That's right. Thus far we feel that we don't
have enough historical experience to seasonally adjust the other
transactions balances that go into M-1B.

MS. TEETERS. Basically, the quality of M-1B is going to be
somewhat uncertain for a while until we have more experience with it.

MR. MORRIS. Well, we've had a number of years of NOW account
experience in New England; I doubt that our seasonal is that much
different from the rest of the country.

MR. PARTEE. It's much colder! [Laughter]

MR. BLACK. But lately they don't get as much snow.

MR. AXILROD. When there are nationwide NOW accounts, what we
won't know about M-lB is the extent to which and how fast its velocity
is going to revise downward, as people shift savings into NOWs rather
than just demand deposits. We simply aren't going to know that.
Similarly, we're not going to know very much about how much is going
to go out of M-1A. But I feel more comfortable in the sense that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think a proportion of savings deposits
moved in the present Ml--after M1 got squeezed so much.

-24-



1/8-9/80

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to argue for
focusing on M-1A until we get a nationwide NOW account bill.

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, no. I think the way it's going to
work out may be slightly different. If we don't have a nationwide NOW
account bill, it's not going to make much difference. As the staff
shows in its estimate here, [growth in M-1A and M-1B] are within 1/2
percentage point. If we get the nationwide NOW account bill, there
may be a period of a year when M-1B is a little tough to interpret
because we won't know how much is coming out of saving accounts.

MS. TEETERS. So will M-1A.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So will M-1A, but I would guess to a
lesser extent.

MR. BLACK. Until [the shifting] disappears.

MR. COLDWELL. But we can't seasonally adjust M-1B. How can
we use that right now?

MR. AXILROD. I don't think the seasonal factor is that bad
because NOW accounts are a fairly small proportion of the total. Now,
if they were 1/2 or 1/3 of the total--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The more we discuss this, the more I hate
to say we have a target for either one of them. Maybe that is a note
upon which to stop.

MR. GUFFEY. Maybe I shouldn't say anything, but would it be
possible in this transition period to publish M-lA and to use M-1B as
a memorandum item with a notation that, indeed, M-1A will be replaced
by M-1B when the transition period is completed?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we were planning to publish M-1A and M-1B
right next to each other. I really don't believe large problems will
come from that. Then we'd show a couple of other items, the RPs and
the money market funds and go on to M2, which will include the RPs and
money market funds. The difference in level between M-1A and M-1B is
not going to be vast until we get the nationwide NOWs. And I really
wouldn't anticipate any--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't anticipate that there will be too
much trouble with that. But it is complex. I think the complexity of
this is inherent in the facts and the circumstances.

MR. GUFFEY. But it's particularly important when the
Committee expresses its view in the directive to the Desk as to
whether or not equal weight is to be given or what we're focusing on.
Thus, it would [reasonable] to put M-1B in the public domain but as a
memorandum item, initially at least, so that the public and the
markets can track it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just don't know how worthwhile it is to
try to guess whether it's better in a memorandum item or the table.
We may have the problem that M-1A will look very low. And would we

-25-



1/8-9/80

want to keep publishing a figure that looks very low without having a
figure along side it that looks relatively high? I don't know how we
can outguess all this.

MR. PARTEE. Besides, Paul, it's additive. M-1A plus the
components make M-1B, which then goes into M2. So it's logical just
to extend it along the columns.

MR. WILLES. I'm fascinated by what Steve just said in terms
of the table for publication. Can you go through that again?

MR. AXILROD. As I understand it, the first column would be
M-1A, the second column M-1B, the third column overnight RPs and
overnight Eurodollars, which would just be Cayman Islands Eurodollars,
and the fourth column would be money market funds. The fifth column
would be M2, which would include the first, third, and fourth columns
as components.

MR. WILLES. So people could construct any M they want?

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other two are kind of memorandum items
in a column because they have some characteristics of a payments--

MR. ROOS. But you're not going to publish the difference
between M-1A and M-1B as such.

MR. AXILROD. But we'll have all the components. We'll have
a separate table with all the components of all the aggregates as
well. So, that will all be available.

MR. GUFFEY. This table that you just described will be
published monthly and then there will be weekly publications of M-1A
and M-1B?

MR. AXILROD. We'll be publishing that table weekly. There
will be weekly estimates of M-1A and M-1B and of all the commercial
bank components of all the Ms, including those in M2 and M3. M2 and
M3 will only have monthly figures, but the table will be published
weekly. M-1A and M-1B will have weekly figures, as will the
commercial bank components [of the broader aggregates].

MR. KIMBREL. This may be just a preference, but what were
the main reasons you were reluctant to include overnight RPs and
Eurodollars in the M1 measure?

MR. AXILROD. There was considerable Board discussion on
that; perhaps I should let the Chairman summarize it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd prefer that you do that! [Laughter]
Mr. Axilrod is being modest because I remember he was vehemently on
one side of the argment, the reasons for which escape me.

MR. AXILROD. Many members of the staff, including myself,
felt that there was a large investment component to RPs. That is, we
felt that money managers were not viewing RPs--to an extent of 100

-26-



1/8-9/80

percent or [even] 50 percent--as a substitute for demand deposits but
were viewing them as an alternative to investing in 3-month bills or
3-month CDs, depending in part on their interest rate expectations.
So, therefore, if RPs were somehow outlawed, we felt that only a small
fraction of the money in RPs would be going to demand deposits and the
rest would go into CDs or Treasury bills or commercial paper.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod felt that way. Governor Rice,
as I recall, felt the opposite. It's basically a question of whether
they are actively or passively managed, I think.

MR. AXILROD. Our econometric evidence, I believe, is quite
mixed. The staff is well divided on the subject. With the Board
divided and the staff divided, the Board came up with a very judicious
decision.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, does the Committee not feel that the
marketing or explanatory aspect of this is important? I'm talking
about the ability to relate to my friendly broker, who busted out of
school his sophomore year! I'm being facetious, but isn't it
important to make an effort to be as clear and as simple as possible
in describing this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's an important problem,
and one with which we anticipate some real difficulties. I take a
literal exception only to your final point. The effort to be as
simple as possible may be misleading. I come back [to my view that]
the reality is complex. That is the difficulty we are dealing with
during this transition period. But I think it is a major problem, and
we plan to have press briefings and so forth beforehand so that we
give as good an explanation as possible. Now, as you can see,
providing there is no change in the law--if the staff is right and I
don't know whether they are or not--there isn't much difference
between the two measures, which makes this all look rather
unnecessary. But if they are right and we have nationwide NOW
accounts [authorized by] Congress beginning in March, there's going to
be a significant difference between the two. Therein lies the
problem. We're preparing the way. If the law were going to remain
unchanged, I'd say dispense with M-1A or M-1B. We would go one way or
the other and make it simple. But we do anticipate a significant
difference if we have nationwide NOW accounts.

MR. ROOS. Would we drop the other if--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if they don't change the law, we
probably can. I'm just talking offhand. If they don't change the
law, I think that argues very strongly for dropping some of them.

MR. COLDWELL. If they change the law, we could drop M-1A.

MR. ROOS. Wouldn't you drop M-1A if they change the law?

MR. PARTEE. Yes, and we'd drop the M-1B components. But
we're certainly going to get share [drafts], which are developing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Two years from now we'll probably drop it
anyway, assuming they have a nice clean law and don't change it within
a 2-year period.

-27-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. I'd just assume, Mr. Chairman, that it would be
a useful explanatory device for the Committee, if there happens to be
a surge in M-1B, to be able to point to a drop in M-1A so that no one
reads too much [into the surge in M-1B].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One can reverse all this and say that by
exposing the problems that lie in these figures inherently, we're
going to be better off in the end and people will understand it
better. But there is a hump to get over yet. There's no question.

MR. COLDWELL. Wouldn't the real problem occur, Steve, if we
got a surge in M-1B and [the funds] didn't come out of demand
deposits? If we got a big jump in share drafts--

MR. AXILROD. If M-1B was surging and M-1A was strong, I
assume things would be read into that.

MS. TEETERS. But we might have a drop in M2?

MR. COLDWELL. Yes. We could have a drop in M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I say, the more we discuss this, the
more uneasy it makes me.

MR. COLDWELL. I know, but you didn't discuss the size of M2
here.

MR. BLACK. I think a few people will understand it much
better and a lot will undersand it much less.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe it's a net advantage if Larry
Roos' third grader--his broker--doesn't understand it!

MR. MAYO. Did you do well in the market last year, Larry?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we finished with this subject?

MR. BALLES. One more question or suggestion, Mr. Chairman,
if I may. I think there's a big difference between what we publish
and what we target. I certainly have no problems with what is
proposed to be published here, for those both inside and outside the
System who'd like to experiment with different versions or measures of
money. I believe we ought to think pretty hard, though, about whether
we want to continue to target four intermediate variables. In the
past we've had four targets: Ml, M2, M3, and bank credit pro forma.
But in practice [our targets] have turned out to be M1 and M2. In
practice we haven't really tried to control M3, and we have just
observed what goes on in bank credit. The Bluebook again sets forth
in the various alternatives four different intermediate targets. I
have a strong feeling that that's about two too many. I wish somehow
we could find a way of narrowing that down to about two that we really
use in practice, no fooling, as far as decisions of this Committee are
concerned. I'm not sure whether--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't have L on here do you, Mr.
Axilrod? Do you have another table where that appears?

-28-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not sure we're going to be up-to-date
on L by February.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we'll publish another [column] on
that table, which is L.

MR. BALLES. As an information variable, just like M3 is an
information variable. I would hope we could have some discussion of
this tomorrow before we make even provisional decisions on what the
ranges should be or what magnitude we ought to be talking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was hoping to have a little discussion
this afternoon on that subject--not necessarily on that aspect but--

MR. BALLES. Well, if I had to do it right now, I'd pick M2
for one of those versions. I think having two variables as
intermediate targets is really about all that is needed and all we can
meaningfully handle.

MR. BLACK. Could somebody tell me exactly what the
Humphrey-Hawkins Act says? I thought it indicated Ml, M2, M3, and
credit.

MR. AXILROD. It just says "monetary and credit aggregates."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But in practice, as we go along week by
week in the future we're going to be on M-lA and M-1B because we won't
have the data for M2 and M3. That doesn't mean we will get an
[overlap] at the end of the month. But when we're making some of
these weekly decisions I suspect we're going to be biased, just by the
availability of data, toward the Mls.

MR. WALLICH. Well, the purpose of these measures is not so
much to hit them all at once, which is impossible, but to be warned if
something is going off track. The purpose is to have a sense of the
relativeness of the things we're mainly aiming at.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that can come up in the later
discussion. Let's turn to the long-range targets, again not with the
intent of reaching any decisions but of having an informal exchange in
a preliminary way of what seems to make sense here. The first point I
had was that, in fact, there's going to be a lot of confusion with the
new numbers. That point has already been made. At a fairly technical
level, this alternative 1 in the Bluebook is based upon some broad
concept that 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent is supposed to be the same as the
current target, which is listed there as 3 to 6 percent. But that
makes a 1-1/2 percentage point adjustment for ATS and NOW accounts and
that would kind of reverse. In fact, these are not equivalent, if I
think it through correctly, [because] for reasons I won't attempt to
explain in too much detail the change is small.

I do want to raise the question of what we say--again we
don't have to decide now--[for the period] beyond 1980. There are
arguments on both sides of this. The extremes are quite clear: We
could say nothing about beyond 1980 at one extreme or we could lay
down a pattern beyond 1980 and say that cross our heart and hope to
die we really intend to make it, just like we intend to make the 1980
one. There is a strongly held body of opinion--perhaps in both

-29-



1/8-9/80

[Congressional] committees but I know particularly strongly in the
House Banking and Currency Committee--that we should not only say what
the targets are beyond 1980 but that they should legislate them. So,
I think it's an issue that will come up in testimony one way or
another. And if we say something, we should have some guidance as to
how much it's a hope or how much it's a real expectation or something
in between. My own feeling is that we probably have to say something;
but that leaves a lot of room between expressing it as a general hope
or a solid expectation and intent. We don't have to give an official
FOMC position, but it is an issue that we ought to discuss a bit.

Let me just mention a few considerations that occurred to me.
Given the position that we're in, for a variety of reasons, I think it
could be hard to come up with targets that are in fact or appear to be
higher than those we had for this past year. I'm thinking not
primarily of the fact that the staff, at least, is projecting a lower
nominal GNP but that given the psychological and expectational state
we are in, it would be a big decision to have a range of projections
that in substance was higher than we have been operating with.
Secondly, and I go back to the discussion about the targets we had
just 3 minutes ago, there is among other factors the arbitrary nature
of the targets. More importantly--well, it may not be more important
but equally important--given the uncertainty that I at least perceive
in the economic outlook for a variety of reasons, I think there is a
question as to how wide a range we want. We have been operating with
fairly wide ranges of 3 percent. We have to consider whether we want
to narrow those ranges. There are pretty persuasive reasons, given
the uncertainties regarding both the definitions and the outlook, why
it's wise to have a significant range. As a part of that issue, there
is a question of what we mean by the range: whether the middle of the
range does reflect some central tendency of what we think is
appropriate on the basis of what we know now. But there is a
difference between attaching some very great significance to the
middle of the range as opposed to saying that in the light of all the
uncertainties we may well feel, as the year progresses, that it would
be quite reasonable [for growth] to be toward the lower end of the
range. That's a decision, obviously, that can be reviewed as we go
along. But how we treat that is of some significance.

I did not intend to discuss the economic outlook extensively
right now, although logically [the agenda] may be in the reverse
order. That will be on the front of the agenda tomorrow when we
actually have to make a decision about the short-run ranges. As you
know, for what it's worth, the staff is projecting a 7 percent
increase in nominal GNP [for the year], but [the increase] is rather
small in the first quarter and then it rises progressively. That's
not a pejorative comment. [Laughter] I indicated my personal view.
There is a considerable amount of uncertainty about any economic
forecast. But it's interesting that there is in a sense a lull in
terms of nominal GNP. [GNP growth] is quite low in the first quarter;
it's less than 5 percent. And then it's projected to be about--in
fact precisely--double that for the fourth quarter; it goes from 4.7
to 9.4 percent. I'd just note that if we take that as an economic
forecast and we attribute importance to historical relationships
between velocity and interest rates and all the rest, if we have a
steady growth in money demand the year, it implies a very different
set of money market conditions early in the year as opposed to late in
the year, assuming that those relationships hold true. And there is a

-30-



1/8-9/80

question as to how we want to play any particular target during the
course of the year in the light of that or other possible patterns of
economic activity.

In that connection, the Bluebook does suggest--and of course
it bears very directly on the decision tomorrow about the short-run
ranges--some alternatives [regarding] the question of strategy, which
to some degree we do have to settle tomorrow, certainly for the next
month. It can worded in various ways. [The issue is] whether we
deliberately aim for a pattern of monetary growth [this] year that
deviates on the average--whether we take our risks in various
directions as the year proceeds--and how that meshes with anyone's
view on the economic outlook, the interest rate outlook, the
international side of the equation, and I think ultimately, too,
fiscal policy considerations. In other words, do we just want to set
a dial at one extreme and say aim at the average throughout the year
and see what happens? Or do we consciously want to take some of these
other things into consideration as we see them from month to month
within the ranges specified for the year? In terms of the particular
setting that we're dealing with now, to make just a few points, we
have had more strength in economic activity than we anticipated
throughout the second half of [last] year. Certainly it continued
through the fourth quarter as a whole. I don't know what you think
about this, Mr. Kichline, but I see that Ms. Courtney Slater, the
Commerce Department's chief economist, while she expects a recession
this year has now decided that GNP grew by 2 to 3 percent in the
fourth quarter instead of 1-1/2 percent. I guess she's getting ready
to publish a figure fairly soon and I don't know whether that's it.

MR. KICHLINE. She controls the staff that puts it together.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When is that preliminary figure due--in a
few days? Well, I guess it's due out in a week or more than a week.

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether that [statement by
Ms. Slater] reflects [the number they will publish] or not. They will
get some more information before they publish that number, won't they?
Do they get retail sales?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. They will have information later this
week on the employment situation, and they need inventory numbers.
Inventory is important and data are due [to come out] on January 18.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what that reflects, but
it's in the same direction we've been seeing of [the economy] having
more strength than was anticipated. When one looks at the business
picture one has to say, as reflected in the fact that the figures keep
coming out better than the projections, that in a sense we're pretty
clearly off econometric patterns and other patterns. That's
particularly clear in the saving rate, which has gone below the bottom
of anybody's ranges. And that's what makes things quite uncertain as
we look ahead. It seems to me that there are a number of explanations
of why we're off the pattern. It doesn't help much in projecting, but
part of it must be a response to inflationary expectations. And we've
surely had our share of international disturbances recently that
affect inflation and affect the dollar and are visible in the gold

-31-



1/8-9/80

price, the silver price, and commmodity prices. Obviously, that leads
into the oil situation, which has a very direct and pronounced effect
both on inflation and what we think about the business outlook. That
situation has been highly unstable and I have the feeling myself that
the next few months will give us--without overdramatizing it--a kind
of important last chance to see whether we will get some balance in
the oil market between consumption and production so that there isn't
continuing upward pressures on prices that are going to carry us to
some unknown level later this year. So long as the spot price remains
above whatever the OPEC official decisions are, which are rather mixed
in themselves, we will get a very unstable situation. And we don't
know how far this upward momentum in oil price numbers can go.

So far as fiscal policy is concerned, all that I know
indicates that the present Administration is going to hang tough, if
that's the right phrase, in terms of any sign of a tax [reduction]
program at the moment. On the expenditure side, I don't know anything
more than has been leaked, which is that the total is up around the
$615 billion level. We have a higher level of real defense spending.
We are projecting some real increase in federal government spending
which, if anything, I guess is a little low relative to what the
Administration may be projecting. It's either [about the same] or a
bit on the low side. But there is no proposal that I'm aware of for
any tax reduction. And I don't think there's all that much discussion
of it, although that's a little more doubtful given the spate of
reports that will come out on the federal budget and the Economic
Report in a few weeks. I don't think that means that the
Administration is not aware of the case for tax reduction or
necessarily would absolutely rule it out; it depends upon the
evolution of the business scene. But I think it does mean that
they're not going to push it; they're going to resist it and resist
discussion of it right now. While one has to make one's own judgments
about how Congress will respond, that certainly makes [a tax cut] less
likely at the very least in the short run than if the Administration
were pushing it.

Looking at the period since October: On the one hand, while
all the financial data are within our immediate objectives, I don't
think we've made as much expectational progress, if I can put it that
way, as conceivably might have been hoped. Indeed, in some sense we
have not made as much progress on interest rates; one might have hoped
that they would be coming down a little more clearly by this time.
Looked at from an October point of view, we haven't seen those
developments that might have been anticipated. It's fairly obvious
why not, given the international turmoil and the lack of more visible
progress on inflation. In that connection, I might say that if
there's anything I would feel relatively certain about in the near-
term economic and price outlook, it is that the price figures are
going to look worse rather than better for some months, particularly
in the consumer price index where we will get both the impact of oil
and the impact of interest rates from the last three months. The
mortgage rate has not been worked into that [set of rates] in anything
like a full way. So, when we look at expectational factors and
disturbances, whether here or abroad, psychological or real, I think
we have a hump to get over for probably three months anyway of higher
[rates of increase in the] consumer price index. And in one or two of
those months I suspect the increases could be significantly higher
than anything we have seen so far. That is the situation with which

-32-



1/8-9/80

we have to live whatever questions we have or whatever we think of the
longer-term prospects for inflation and business [activity].

With those general points, let me open the discussion to what
people think is relevant with respect to these longer-term targets
both on the one-year target and at least a little feeling, although
that's more of an open question, about what people think we should say
in presumably more general terms about the period beyond 1980. Mr.
Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. I'd like to respond in three points: One,
we've been talking for three years or so now about our basic strategy
being one of gradually reducing the [growth of the] aggregates. I
think your points about the business situation and inflationary
expectations and the image are exactly right. In view of that, it
seems to me that our strategy should be one of gradually reducing the
[growth of the] aggregates. Rather than alternative one or two, I
like the formulation on page 11 of the Bluebook, which has the four
strategies. And of those four, I like number four best because I
think we probably are going to get a tax cut and should plan a gradual
reduction [in the growth] of the aggregates in light of a likely tax
cut.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is strategy four?

MR. EASTBURN. Strategy four is a progressive reduction in M1
growth from 6 percent to 5 percent to 4 percent in successive years,
assuming a tax cut of $30 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word here and I'll shut
up about it. When I look at these different strategies, all of which
come off the econometric equation from the base forecast, I must say
that I have great doubts about these adjustments in the econometric
equations. I guess you're driven to strategy four because it looks
[good] on all the numbers.

MR. EASTBURN. I'm not arguing the numbers at all, Paul. I'm
arguing the basic philosophy of proceeding [with] a gradual reduction.
All right, that's the first point. The second point is that I feel
strongly that we should not announce that strategy and specifically
that we should not announce numbers. I think we have a credibility
problem and I believe expectations hinge basically on policy
performance and not what we say, because nobody will believe what we
say until we perform. So, I think we should have this as our
philosophy but should not announce any specific numbers. We can talk
about this being our intent.

Third, we should reserve flexibility for change in case we
want to change our strategy as circumstances develop. I was struck,
for example, at the precision that's incorporated later in the
Bluebook in the forecast of interest rates, assuming various
alternatives and combinations and permutations. That may be an
interesting exercise but I think its accuracy is greatly in question.
What we should do is remain flexible enough so that we can change and
depart from this strategy if and when circumstances require it. But
that should be the basic idea unless we see reason to change.

-33-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're now talking about 1980 and
beyond. From your last comment do I infer--I don't want to put words
in your mouth--that consistent with that you like the idea of not
narrowing the range, anyway, in the short run? By the short run, I
mean 1980.

MR. EASTBURN. Yes. I didn't address the question of the
range, but I think that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any feeling about where the
range should be in 1980 as a very tentative [view]?

MR. EASTBURN. Well, I think alternative 2 is too sharp a
reduction from where we are. But around 5 percent is what we ought to
have as a central tendency.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody should feel at all
wedded to what they tentatively say today. We have another whole
month before we [need to decide]. Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I would support what Dave was saying.
Announcing 3-year targets is an invitation to losing all our
credibility. We have enough problems projecting out 1 year let alone
3 years. To box ourselves in by saying we're going to come down to
certain levels by 1982 is an unnecessary restraint and an unnecessary
danger. We may have that intention, but there's enough variability in
this economy that we shouldn't go out on that limb; we should continue
to do it by performance. I'm not sure I even want to talk too much
about what we're going to do in the future--other than [to say we
want] to continue to restrain [money growth]--so that we have the
opportunity to change our mind as time goes on. I've probably done
more 5-year projections than anybody else at this table and I speak
from experience: They're all wrong. You don't come out where you
say you're going to if you go down that line. I strongly oppose any
publication or any commitment to a specific number for future years.
I wouldn't narrow the ranges. We have a difficult year ahead of us
and I think we will need all the space we can get. For the
alternatives, a midpoint somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent is
probably the appropriate way to go.

I would like to bring up one thing that bothers me a little.
A year ago we were in much the same position. We had the money supply
down--in fact, going negative--and I'm not sure any of us really
understands why the money supply did that between September and March.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was a demand shift! [Laughter]

MS. TEETERS. The econometric equations didn't fit. There's
a strong possibility that something is going on that has nothing to do
with our careful reserve management and all the rest. We just may be
in the period of the 6 months when the money supply goes down. And
[last year] we didn't really have a very good explanation as to why it
took off after the end of March. So, before we pat ourselves too
greatly on the back, let's remember that aspect of it and give
ourselves enough leeway to accommodate sudden spurts on a monthly or
weekly basis, if we do have them, and still not be outside our range.

-34-



1/8-9/80

MR. SCHULTZ. What would [your view be] if we say on the
long-range issue that we are not going to publish any figures but
merely say that we are on a long-range program to reduce inflation and
we're just going to set money supply [targets] each year that are
consistent with a continued reduction in inflation?

MS. TEETERS. Well, that would be fine, Fred, if we were the
sole source of the inflation. But it's like playing poker with the
other players always pulling all the wild cards. We're playing with
OPEC, and we really have no control over oil prices. To say that
we're consistently going to reduce inflation in a situation where we
don't have control over inflation is, to me, going out on a limb.
There may be a time, if this so-called recession turns very deep, when
we might want to reverse our policies completely. And the risks on
this recession, it seems to me, are basically on the down side. So, I
just find it very difficult to commit myself to any sort of long-term
position.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we're not
going to have the privilege of avoiding making some fairly definite
commitment as to what our policy posture will be beyond 1980. There's
also a possibility of getting some positive mileage from taking a
fairly specific posture as to our plans regarding the orientation of
monetary policy beyond 1980 because if we're going to be able to make
progress on the inflation front, we've got to begin to have an effect
on long-term contracts. Such contracts have become a fairly common
part of the economic environment, particularly in the wages sector.
So it seems to me that we should be serving up notice to those who
engage in the making of long-term contracts that insofar as the
monetary policy environment within which those contracts will be made
or lived through is concerned, it will be a changing part of the
[overall] environment. And it will be changing in the direction the
Vice Chairman has suggested of trying to work toward lower numbers.
And, as I believed you mentioned, if we don't say it, there's a fair
probability that the Congress will say it in harder terms than we
would be inclined to say it. So, I think the prospective benefits lie
rather clearly on the side of saying something [about the period]
beyond 1980. And what has to be said is that we will be moving
gradually to smaller growth rate numbers both for money and bank
credit, trying to make it sound as credible as possible.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're saying you wouldn't give numbers.

MR. BAUGHMAN. I would not give numbers unless in a final
showdown we have to give numbers to avoid numbers being legislated.
But I would go so far as to be rather unequivocal in terms of stating
that we have every intention of having diminishing magnitudes of
monetary growth rates and credit expansion in each of the succeeding 2
or 3 years. If it develops that it is simply not possible to live by
those plans, I think we still might have purchased something
beneficial rather than negative on balance. Furthermore, we have the
opportunity to make adjustments midstream; if developments come along
which are so persuasive that we need to make adjustments midstream,
the provision is there for that. But I'd be inclined not to make
adjustments midstream unless the case for doing so were very, very

-35-



1/8-9/80

persuasive--so persuasive that we would appear just not to be in touch
with the real world unless we did make adjustments.

Now, on where we come out for 1980, I find your observation
persuasive that we simply cannot appear to be giving higher targets
than our experience in 1979. With respect to a specific target or a
range, my own preference since we started setting targets has been to
set a specific target, recognizing that we will never hit a specific
target but nevertheless having something specific to shoot at. I
would feel in view of the great uncertainties we're looking at that
there may be some benefits to a range for 1980. But if we were to
give a wider range than we used in 1979, we would lose credibility. I
think it would be a mistake to widen the range of the target, whatever
target we select for 1980, from what we had in 1979. That's about all
I'll say right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You don't want to say anything about the
level of the target?

MR. BAUGHMAN. I had hoped we would take that up tomorrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not the annual.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, my inclination would be something on the
order of our experience in '79 with a downward tilt. In other words,
if we [adopt] a range, I'd put the midpoint of the range below the
experience in '79. If we pick a specific target, I'd say the highest
it should be is the absolute increase in '79.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I approach this from two
interesting bases. Number one, membership of the FOMC will not be the
same three to four years from now. In fact, if my count is correct,
we're going to lose at least one-third of the members. I doubt very
much if we're going to commit anybody out that long. I think it would
be a mistake to commit because we'd lose credibility; in fact we may
lose a bit this year in [adopting] a set of hard targets. There are
enough uncertainties and instabilities in this economy right now that
we'd better have about as much leeway as we can get. If we followed
Ernie's path of selecting a particular point, then my aim for a point
would be something like 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent; [if we set a range
that would be my] midpoint with a 2 percent margin on either side.
But that would obviously widen the range from the 3 percentage points
that we've had in the past.

As I look at the picture of the alternatives in front of us,
new definitions and current definitions, I'm not quite sure I
understand all of them, except that the first two seem to be identical
until you get to M2. It seems to me that we might fudge a bit here
and maybe use 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent or 3 to 6 percent. We had a
5-1/2 percent growth rate for 1979. If we're trying to hold down
inflation in 1980 and 1981, I don't see how we could aim for 5-1/2
percent; it seems to me that we have to aim for something lower.
We've been hitting the tops of the ranges or have been outside them on
some of these aggregates, so my preference would be to put the top of
the range very close to what I really want to shoot at and then scale
down from there and hope we are able to make some progress. And if

-36-



1/8-9/80

growth came out at the top of the range, we'd have an excuse of a
worsening economy or something that would clearly demand more credit
than we had planned. But I do think this economy is so unstable that
it's difficult to know which way to plan. We've already talked about
recession for months on end. It isn't here yet, except in the
automobile and housing sectors, and maybe 6 months from now it still
won't be here except for automobiles and housing. I don't know. It's
hard to see how the consumer can continue to fight this. Maybe he is
going into dissavings, but somehow or other he's keeping up his
expenditures and may continue to do so for a while. My preference
would be not to talk about 1981 because I think we're going to get
into a box. I'd like a range of 4 percentage points, but if the
Committee thinks 3 points is the most we can get away with, I'd take
the 3-point range and I'd shade alternative 2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Down?

MR. COLDWELL. Down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I start with the experience we've had of
hitting our target on M1 and getting as a result a severe acceleration
of inflation plus a much stronger economy. We've been waiting for
this recession now for a year. It was predicted for the early part of
'79. So, this leads me to think that there is something about our
numbers that just does not reflect the true concept of money. [I
don't know] whether we're going to capture that by our revisions. I
think we'll make improvements but not really capture everything that
is happening in the way of rising liquidity, and that makes me lean
toward low numbers. I also see that there are very ominous changes
going on in people's habits and expectations. In the last surge of
inflation, 1974-75, there was a worldwide tendency for saving rates to
increase. That was almost the same in all major countries. I haven't
checked out what happened in this period, but we see now what happens
to us. People have a different attitude. They are less afraid that
they'll lose their jobs, but they're more convinced that inflation
will go on. That is what the decline in the saving rate seems to me
to say.

Now, as to action, I share the view that we shouldn't make a
numerical commitment because the meaning of that commitment isn't
clear enough, particularly if we had to start with a commitment that
says 6 to 5 to 4 percent or 5 to 4 to 3 percent. I very much doubt
that we'd hit that because circumstances could force us into a pro-
cyclical pattern. We're not going to have the desire or ability to
cut off a strong economic expansion, and we'll find ourselves being
pro-cyclical. Therefore, I think we have to start with a low rate of
money growth right away. I would say that 3 to 6 percent is a good
starting point. If we went much higher than that, we'd be in
immediate danger of getting into negative real interest rates with
what they do to allocation of credit and inflation and the dollar. On
the other aggregates, I'd like to see more clearly how they are likely
to behave. But I think a fairly narrow [Ml] range like 3 to 6
percent, aiming at the midpoint of 4.5 percent and expecting that that
really is a symbol for much more liquidity than it seems to give us,
is the way to start.

-37-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, Governor Wallich's comment
reminded me of a fact that was inadvertently left out of the Bluebook.
We showed the actual growth rate of M1 for 1979 of 5.5 percent and I
meant to show also in parentheses, and did not, the growth of M1 as if
there had been no ATS accounts. One would have had to add 1.3
percentage points to that on our latest estimate. So, 6.8 percent
would be the growth if there were no ATS accounts. That same 1.3
would be added to M-1A, and its growth would be 6.3 percent if there
were no ATS accounts.

MR. WALLICH. Well, that explains a little more why we were
able to finance such a tremendous inflation, but the increase in
velocity still remains very large.

MR. AXILROD. Other demand shifts may also be occurring.

MR. MAYO. Do you consider the 6.3 percent consistent with
the range of 3 to 6 percent, though?

MR. AXILROD. No. That would go with a range of 4-1/2 to
7-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really don't want to prolong this, but
you say 6.8 percent [without ATS] accounts. Is the implication that
that's the part that came out of demand deposits?

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you have M-lB, which is the number
with all of the ATS and NOW accounts, at 7.3 percent. Are you saying
that most of the NOW accounts came out of demand deposits last year?

MR. AXILROD. No, I was referring to M-1A; that would add 1.3
to M-1A. I don't have at hand at the moment any additional M1 data.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll explore that another time.
Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There are two or three
points I would like to make. One, on the discussion of whether or not
to retain ranges, I think there is comfort in ranges and that we must
retain them for 1980. And I think a spread any narrower than the
spread of 3 points that we have had in the past would be ill advised.
Secondly, as to the projection of our intentions for 1981 and beyond,
I would agree with the comments that it would be perhaps more
destructive to credibility than helpful. If we project for 1981 and
beyond, we would have to do it either [by giving] a set figure of
where we project the money supply to be, which takes us out of the
range concept, or by saying that we are going to reduce money growth 1
percent from the year before, whatever that may be. There is real
danger in trying to project into 1981 and beyond. It seems to me
quite appropriate, however, to express what probably would be a
consensus of this Committee that our objective is to move the money
growth to a lower level [within] those ranges, [namely around] 5.5
percent. That's still a very restrictive monetary policy for 1980 as
opposed to 1979. That would be moving from growth of 7 percent in
1979 to 5.5 percent in 1980, which I consider to be a fairly
restrictive policy. I would like to recommend that we look at a range

-38-



1/8-9/80

for 1980 for M1 or M-1A, and I think they are both the same, of 4 to 7
percent rather than either alternative 1 or alternative 2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Well, I would take a somewhat different tack. You
talked about the complexity of reality as we view the Ms and reserves.
I think the complexity of the economy with respect to the outlook is
even greater. Second, I think we are boxed in because of the law
saying we have to do this and do that. If I were doing it, I would
indicate very clearly what my economic scenario is and then what my
recommendation is in [that context] rather than say that this is our
target irrespective of what happens. I suspect that the economic
outlook is going to be far more variable--and I'm not saying on which
side--than any of the projections would indicate, and that makes our
target setting even more important. And I would offer to go back to
Congress at an appropriate time because of my lack of confidence in my
long-range forecast on the economy. I would surely put my economic
scenario out there if I put out any kind of targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I don't quite understand, Willis, is
that you say you would put your scenario out first, but then you say
you don't know what the scenario is.

MR. WINN. Well, that's correct. But [I'd say: Given] this
hypothesis, this would be true. For example, Paul, go back to October
and look at what you would have projected on the international front
versus what you feel now. That can change far more dramatically in a
very short period of time. Let's assume we go to a military draft or
assume we get involved militarily; all of these [projections and
targets] would be out the window. On the other hand, if we just take
a look at our inflation rate and what that could do, [the recession]
may be far deeper than any projection we have if things started to
come unravelled on that score. Then we would have to adjust to the
reality as best we see it at the time, rather get into this longer
range kind of set up. You can take the President's economic outlook
or any one you want, and say: If that's true, then this would be our
goal. But because we are not certain about these things we are going
to have to adjust as time goes by and we are willing to come back and
report when we adjust. But to get caught in a longer-range [target],
even a year's target at the moment, is really buying ourselves another
trap. Or else we have to have a wide range because of our uncertainty
about the reality.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You dismiss entirely the argument that the
more firmly we set a range the more we might be influencing the
reality?

MR. WINN. At this time, yes.

MR. SCHULTZ. Do you think we have the luxury to do that,
Willis? It seems to me that we are charged with deeper responsbility
than that.

MR. PARTEE. Well, the Board has to [indicate] what
projection is consistent with the numbers it chooses [for the
aggregates]; and that is the scenario.

-39-



1/8-9/80

MR. WINN. That's right; that's what I mean.

MR. PARTEE. And that could be wrong.

MR. WINN. It could be very wrong. I think the reality is
that we have a much greater [chance] of being wrong this time than has
been true in a long time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where would you stick the number today,
subject to change tomorrow?

MR. WINN. Around 5 or 5-1/2 percent as a midpoint, Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I guess for different reasons I
would opt for not going to longer projections. Frankly, there are so
many uncertainties that there are enough difficulties with 1980. And
even there, I would hope that we could relate our longer-run look at
1980 to the actual targets that were in place for 1979 and not our
results or our experience for 1979. I would not be too much for
changing these during the year, even with the chances of recession or
OPEC influences. I think [any] changes we are going to make [in the
ranges] are going to have a rather minimum influence, and I'd be
inclined to stick to our longer-run targets. In doing that I have a
preference for looking at those associated with alternative 2.
Contrary to what some of the others have suggested, I'd be inclined to
narrow the target ranges, maybe still with 4-1/2 to 5 percent as the
midpoint, but certainly not wider than 4 to 6 percent if M-1B is what
we are going to be talking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I must say I am pleased that this
is only a preliminary discussion of our long-range targets be they for
1980 or 1980 and 1981. I am not sure whether I am distracted or
overwhelmed by major external political forces as well as external
financial forces. I have no idea how or when they may be wound down;
maybe we will have a better idea for the final discussion in February.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] proposing making it for
the last quarter.

MR. TIMLEN. Why not? At any rate, I think these external
developments all pose threats on the side of impeding our inflation
fighting efforts, and they pose a risk to the strength of the dollar
if there's a renewed reason for a flight from [other] currencies.
Finally, I would agree with some of the people to my immediate right
that a recession is upon us. I look at the auto situation and housing
and the cost of energy as we go into the winter and the impact on
consumers. For me inflation continues to be the overriding concern.
Inflationary expectations are as rampant as ever. The dollar
continues to be vulnerable in the foreign exchange markets to any
appearance of an easing in our policy, and [market participants] do
focus on interest rates. So my prescription as of this preliminary
discussion is not to compose another dramatic package like October 6
or November 1, but to restate our resolve on inflation and commit the
Federal Reserve to a reduced rate of growth in money and credit. I

-40-



1/8-9/80

would avoid any appearance of an easing when we go to the new
definitions. And we should make such a commitment not only for 1980
but also for 1981. I'd say if we need any countercyclical policy we
should look to the Treasury and the fiscal side. I haven't really
studied the numbers much yet. I would be inclined to go for something
very close to alternative 2 on page 8 of the Bluebook.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. First, I would use the 3-point ranges that we
have had. As a matter of fact, if I could, I might choose a 4-point
range as Phil [suggested]. [But] given the fact that we have had
ranges of 3 points, I just don't see us broadening them out. I would
remind you that we fully used the ranges this past year. In fact, we
more than used it in the case of Ml. Now, maybe our new procedures
will make the variations a little less, but I would guess that we may
use pretty much of the ranges this year. In addition, I think it
would be desirable to borrow a little from tomorrow to have [money
growth] on the low side in the first part of the year and on the high
side in the second part; therefore, we might want [wider] ranges just
for that purpose. So, I would have 3-point ranges.

Secondly, I would not make any 2- or 3-year statement
regarding specific reductions in our monetary growth rates because
it's unrealistic. For example, take this econometric projection. We
would be saying that after unemployment got to 8.1 percent we would
reduce the monetary growth rate again and then presumably after it got
to 10.5 percent we would reduce it again. I just don't think that's
[realistic]; we're not going to do that. Indeed, I don't think we are
going to reduce the monetary growth rate a great deal until some of
the things that are adding to inflation tend to fall off. For that
reason, it's important that we be pretty conservative with 1980
because I doubt that we will be able to reduce the ranges much beyond
the 1980 ranges that we set. In fact, I don't think 1980 will be much
of a problem in terms of [growth] being within the ranges because
there will be enough of a recession that we're probably just saying
how low we want interest rates to go when we set the ranges for the
year. So, I would say that we ought to center the range on 5 percent
for M1, which would be an improvement over what we experienced [last]
year, and that would mean about 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent, [with] a
little more on M-1B and the other ranges in accordance with that. And
then [we should] hold to it. I might remind you that not only do we
face the possibility of recession, but we may be in a semi-war
[status] and it will be important, I think, to have a range that is
quite explicitly stated to which we can hold.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when you say "hold to it," you mean
consistent with your first comments about using the range if
necessary.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's right. And, as I said, I'd drift a
little low in [the range] in the beginning with the view that growth
will be rising within it later on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. I don't know whether we will
get through with everybody today, consistent with getting out at a
reasonable time. But if it's agreeable, let's go on a little longer.

-41-



1/8-9/80

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out very close to Ernie
Baughman in feeling that we ought to stress our range in 1980 and not
indicate specifically what the ranges will be for future years but
indicate very clearly that we still hold our oft-stated intention to
reduce these ranges gradually over time until we get them down to what
we hope to be a noninflationary basis. So far as these new aggregates
are concerned, M3 is probably the worst because it seems to be the
most interest sensitive. I think M2 is going to be rather interest
sensitive, too, because we have taken out of it all the nonnegotiable
CDs at weekly reporting banks and all the large CDs--whether
negotiable or nonnegotiable--at the other banks. I would think, John,
that would probably more than offset the advantage from [including]
the money market funds, but I'm not sure about that. I believe M-1A
leaves out an increasingly important part of the transactions
balances, so I would settle on M-1B as the best one of all. I would
favor narrowing the width of the ranges. We have had 3 points
suggested at times in the past; we have had 2 points. I would favor 1
point for the two Ml ranges and probably 2 points for M2 and M3, which
I don't think we can control that precisely anyway. The main thing
that I want to do is to set these targets below what we achieved in
1979. In terms of M-1B, which is what I build all this around, we had
a 7.3 percent rate of growth in '79; I'd say 6 percent might be a
reasonable rate in '80, so [a range of] 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent would
look about right to me on that one. If we can explain satisfactorily
that M-1A really was not 5 percent as the figure shows but 6.3
percent, then maybe 5 to 6 percent would be reasonable for that. For
M2 I'd suggest 6 to 8 percent and for M3 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I find myself philosophically
interested in the idea of reducing the ranges, but I don't think this
is the time to do it. I think we need all of the flexibility we can
have here. I find myself at least at the moment utterly opposed to
going above 6 percent on the upper end of our range for whatever we
call [narrow money]--Ml, M-1A, M-lB--for psychological reasons. It
would give a wrong impression abroad regardless of how much we tried
to explain it, and to some extent that would be true at home as well.
So I come back to the 3 to 6 percent range that we had, not just
because we had it this [past] year but because I think we have
established some modicum of credibility in keeping [actual growth]
within the 3 to 6 percent. We're certainly very close to the upper
edge, but we still have established a credibility which I have the
impression at least was not achieved even by some of our more austere
partners, Germany included. I feel that this a restrictive policy.

Like Willis, I feel that the variability of the outlook is
even greater now than it has been, certainly in my memory as a member
of this Committee. That's one of the reasons I wouldn't narrow the
range. I would also urge that we keep our powder dry until we see how
things are moving along six months from now. As to whether we want to
change that range, I certainly wouldn't make [our intent] public, and
I certainly wouldn't stick to 3 to 6 percent through, shall we say,
hell or high water. I feel very strongly that to use a [number] of
any kind beyond 1980 is foolish. I feel, much as Ernie does, that if
we state our intention in the present environment as defined by the
President's messages and so forth and so on, our own analysis and
related intention to reduce the expansion of money supply further as

-42-



1/8-9/80

long as the inflationary forces rage as strongly as they do is as far
as we can go in talking about '81 and '82. I join Nancy [in her view
about long-term projections]. I'm not going to question whether she's
made even more 5-year projections than I have, but we made the first
one on the budget in the 1971 Economic Report. It was a fine paper
exercise, and the way to start is to start. But I would hate to go
back and review that now, even with all the adjustments, and realize
how shaky it was at the time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. My wife made me promise that I would be more
agreeable in the new year, so I would like to say that I agree with
everything that has been said. I'd like to say it, but the fact is
that I don't agree. But since the hour is late I will be very brief
in stating my disagreement. We all agree that the outlook is
uncertain. Where we disagree is whether that makes any difference or
not. If we really think that if we knew what the outlook was we could
affect it in a systematic way, then we end in one side of the
[corner]. But some of us have the view that even if we think we know
what is going to happen, there is no systematic, predictable,
effective way that we can have an impact on it. Because of that, one
can end up with quite different policy implications. I feel perfectly
comfortable in the abstract in saying that, yes, the outlook is
uncertain but that policy ought not to be uncertain. Policy ought to
be a given, and by making policy a given we can in fact reduce some of
the uncertainty of the outlook. The implication of that is that we
should not only decide but should specify in great detail what our
targets are for the next five years. Unfortunately, we have one minor
problem with that, which is that a change in technology is going on in
the financial markets that makes all the numbers, if not irrelevant,
at least highly uncertain. So, since you have given us an extra
month, I would like to wait another month and then be able to come
back and tell you what I think those numbers ought to be. It's clear
that we can't in the current environment spell out any M for the next
three years because the technology is bound to change in such a way
that it would make any number we specify obsolete. It may be that we
are going to have to move to some kind of reserve target and spell
that out for three years. But whatever we do, we need to find a way
to reduce the uncertainty of the outlook that is associated with
policy. We can't reduce the other uncertainties, but we can reduce
that uncertainty. I think that would be a substantial accomplishment
indeed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are not going to offer any numbers?

MR. PARTEE. Next month he will.

MR. WILLES. Next month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll stay in suspense. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Since the hour is late, Mr. Chairman, and since
I don't really have any convictions but only tentative leanings at the
moment, I'm not sure I will give a number either. But I would like to
refresh recollections by going back five years when we didn't have to
have publicly announced ranges. Subsequently, when we did announce
them, we had a very unhappy result [after] proclaiming a long-run

-43-



1/8-9/80

strategy of gradual diminution in monetary growth. That was about
four years ago. Psychologically, [targeting] gradual reductions in
the ranges year by year was probably good; the actual outcome was just
the reverse. Nearly every year the actual monetary growth kept
accelerating. Whatever we do, we have to avoid that kind of outcome
like poison, if we give any credibility to our actions of October 6.
I think we need to stick to that long-run strategy and really make it
work this time. We need to diminish gradually the rate of money
growth, however defined, and it's going to be more difficult as we get
into these new definitions.

So, with respect to the different alternatives that are
outlined here, with the risk of making a pest of myself, I'm going to
come back to the theme of whether we need all four [variables]. I
think we are getting the cart before the horse in a way, by trying to
set numbers for four [measures] when we haven't really decided whether
we need or in fact can control all four. When I think of the new
content of M2 and the huge amount of savings deposits at nonbank
depository institutions--deposits that really aren't under our reserve
influence--and when I think of the volume of money market mutual funds
shares and so forth, like you, I begin to have some doubts about
whether we really can control M2. It might be important information
for us on which to base our other actions. But if I were forced to
give a provisional number for M-1A or M-1B as of today, I would lean
to a midpoint of about 1 percent. I'd like to reserve for a more
definitive--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A midpoint of 1 percent?

MR. BALLES. I'm sorry. As you can see, I'm getting punchy;
the hour is late. Please don't record that. I agree with your
[suggestion of] a midpoint in the general area of 5 percent for either
M-1A or M-1B. I think the important thing is to demonstrate within
the context of how serious this recession may turn out to be that,
while we may have to depart temporarily from the reduction mode during
the depth of the recession, the minute we get beyond that it is our
longer-run plan to continue this gradual diminution [in money growth]
in view of the strength of inflationary pressures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm torn here between the hour and
having only three more names left. I'd rather like to get through the
three names if we can do it with great dispatch. Mr. Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't see how we can look
much beyond 1980. As a matter of fact, I would prefer not to look
beyond the next 3 months.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll have that opportunity tomorrow.

MR. RICE. But since we have to look at 1980, I would favor
some moderate reduction in the rate of monetary growth for 1980.
Since the M1 range we would be reducing from is 4-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent, [whose midpoint is] roughly equivalent to the rate of growth
in the target for 1979, 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent would be an acceptable
range to me. I think the range should be kept fairly narrow, at 3
points. So, 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent would be acceptable. I'd be
prepared to see perhaps a slightly higher range up to 7 percent, say,
4 to 7 percent. But I could certainly live with 3-1/2 to 6-1/2

-44-



1/8-9/80

percent with a midpoint of 5 percent. I know we are supposed to
discuss the 3-month target tomorrow, but what happens in the next 3
months is of great importance right now. And I think over the next 3
months is a good time to lean rather heavily on monetary growth as
compared to over the year as a whole. It would have good credibility
value and I think it can be done without much harm.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By "leaning on it," you mean down?

MR. RICE. Down. I think it can be done without much harm.
It will be a period when unemployment is still relatively low. So, I
would argue for more restraint, or a rate of growth toward the lower
end of the range over the next 3 months with the understanding as the
year unfolds that higher rates of growth would be tolerable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, are you feeling brief?

MR. MORRIS. Very brief, sir. I think we ought to be able to
show a substantial reduction in our guidelines for [this] year, simply
because it is [likely to be] a year of recession. It's a year when
the demand for money is going to be down. And it's only in recession
years, in my judgment, that we are going to be able to reduce the
guidelines. I can't see us reducing them in '81 from the levels we
set for [this] year if the economy is expanding. As a theoretical
proposition I'd like to see [growth] go from 5 percent to 4 to 3 to 2;
but it seems to me that if we don't cut the ranges back now for '80,
we are not likely to cut them back for '81 or '82. Therefore, I would
go for the 3 to 6 percent [M-1A] range and try to explain to the
market that it is a reduction. I think we are going to have a hard
time explaining that it is a substantial reduction because everybody
is so confused about the ATS add on and take off and so on that they
are not going to be as impressed with 3 to 6 percent as we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. First of all, if I may, let me commend the staff.
I think the form of this Bluebook is the best I have ever seen. Maybe
we will only keep it within our own family, but it enables us to make
these decisions in the context of economic implications instead of
just looking ahead for 2 or 3 weeks as we sometimes have in the past.
I would very much recommend that we announce--or that at least you
announce--as forcibly as possible our intention to lower our growth
rates over a 3-year period. I think it's important to recognize that
there is absolutely no way in the world other than by affecting
expectations to anticipate a reduction in inflation during the
calendar year 1980. The only possibility we have of accomplishing
anything along these lines is to make our longer-term intentions
sufficiently clear that anticipations and expectations would react
favorably. It's vitally important in the world in which we live that
our new--and I certainly feel proper--approach to monetary
policymaking not be pre-judged with the expectation that we will get
results in the year 1980. I think that would cause political
pressures that would be disastrous. Specifically, I would recommend a
5 percent [growth] rate, as shown under the alternative 2 description
on page 8, and strategy 3 on page 11 in terms of 1980, 1981, and 1982.
Possibly, if it's unpalatable to think of actually putting out
numerical [intentions] to the world--and I'd say in that regard that
our primary responsibility is not to protect our own flank but to come

-45-



1/8-9/80

to grips with inflation and to accomplish these other [objectives]--at
least our determination to reduce money growth over a 3-year period
should be announced and announced clearly. That's the only way we are
going to have any effect in anything like a short-term context.
That's all I have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz has promised me he can
pronounce an interim benediction in 30 seconds.

MR. SCHULTZ. It's an uncertain world so we need all the
flexibility we can get. We need at least a 3 percentage point range,
with a midpoint of 4-1/2 to 5 percent, which would argue for
alternative 2 or a half point higher. Longer range I agree that we'd
be absolutely foolish to set specifics. I do think it's necessary
that we say something that indicates some commitment or resolve of
some kind. We're the only group that has any credibility to do so. I
think that's absolutely essential for us if we are going to continue
to attack the inflationary expectations problems.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I very much appreciate your staying here
until 6:30 p.m. I didn't give you much choice, I guess, but nobody
vocally objected anyway. I think it was very useful to hear these
preliminary expressions and to get this part of our agenda out of the
way. We will proceed with Mr. Kichline's economic outlook when we all
return tomorrow morning.

[Meeting recessed]

-46-



1/8-9/80

January 9, 1980--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I, or we collectively, neglected
to ratify the domestic operations. Is there a motion to ratify the
domestic operations?

SEVERAL. So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified.
While we're in the process of ratifying, why don't we hear about
foreign currency operations.

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions? Comments?

MR. SCHULTZ. What in your opinion is likely to be the effect
of the announcement this morning that OPEC is seriously going to
pursue a basket of currencies?

MR. PARDEE. They've been discussing that off and on. Who
announced it? If it was the Saudis and there's a general agreement,
then it could lead to selling of dollars. But if it was the Kuwaitis
or some research economist in one of these areas or newspapermen, it's
unlikely to be [more than] a momentary blip in the market.

MR. TRUMAN. It was a story that came out yesterday
afternoon, I think, when you were probably still on the plane, Scott.
And the Desk reported at that time, although it was on the ticker in
the morning yesterday, that there had been no effect on the market.
The nature of the story, as I heard it, was that some Arabian official
had said that eventually they probably would have to go to [a basket
of currencies] or something along those lines, which would suggest a
change in the Saudi's position on that particular issue. But it is
probably fair to say that they have been talking about it for so long
that it has been fairly well discounted. Even the psychological
effect, in terms of diversification, may not have been a factor in the
market yesterday, according to the Desk.

MR. ROOS. According to page 4 of The Wall Street Journal, it
was a West German newspaper reporter quoting Saudi Arabia's oil
minister as saying that the currency basket appeared inevitable.

MR. TRUMAN. That's the story we got yesterday. We've heard
that before.

MR. COLDWELL. Scott, in your Desk operations and your
wanderings abroad, what's your sense of the direction of currency
management on the part of the multi-nationals? Are they making any
significant shifts?

MR. PARDEE. No, in fact they have been rather out of the
market. They were a major factor early in December as they
transferred some of their profits and earnings home. During the late
part of the month and early this month, in our conversations with
them, they said they just don't know which way to go. They're very
nervous [about the situation] politically as well as with respect to

-47-



1/8-9/80

other elements. But they haven't been moving funds very much. The
real problem for us in the exchange market, as far as dollar sales,
has come from the diversification by the Iranians and perhaps other
central banks. On the other hand, the risk of talking to corporate
treasurers is that they start warning us that if the dollar begins to
decline, they will sell dollars; it's that sort of thing. We have not
heard of major shifts by corporations. They're not very optimistic.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would you like to ratify the transactions?

MS. TEETERS. I move to ratify.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they will be ratified.
Do you have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?

MR. PARDEE. Well, we are now getting into the phase of
second renewals of swap drawings and I do need authorization. Some of
the drawings relate to our operations last summer, in July. We have
eight swap drawings in the amount of $335 million that are up for
second renewal between now and February 14. I would like to recommend
that we roll them over once again, if we haven't had the chance to pay
them off before then.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion? Do we have a motion to
that effect?

MR. MAYO. I'll move.

MR. RICE. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection we will approve that
proposal. We turn to Mr. Kichline who has the unenviable job amid all
of this uncertainty of giving us a prudent, considered, forceful,
accurate view of the economic outlook.

MR. BALLES. How about unambiguous? [Laughter]

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I understand you correctly that you're
projecting domestic energy prices up 60 percent?

MR. KICHLINE. That's correct. That refers to crude oil
prices--the wellhead prices--not the total energy component.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What were they up in 1979?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, substantially less. I think for the
year it was about 45 percent.

MR. MAYO. How much of your 8 percent [inflation forecast]
would be energy-related then?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, it varies. In 1981 it's a little over a
percentage point, about 1-1/2 percent, and in 1980 it's about 2
percentage points. Let me just say, as it turns out, that domestic
wellhead prices in 1979 are estimated to have been up 55 percent. The
price of domestic crude oil is estimated to have been at $14-1/2 a

-48-



1/8-9/80

barrel in the fourth quarter of last year. Given the decontrol
schedule and our OPEC price assumption, by the fourth quarter of 1980
the price of oil is expected to go to $23-1/4.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're just talking about domestic crude
oil prices?

MR. KICHLINE. Domestic wellhead prices for crude oil. But
the current decontrol schedule, which is obviously subject to change--
the President does have that authority--would by October of 1981 place
domestic crude oil prices at the world price level. So, we're going
in two years from $14-1/2 to $33-1/2 on the price of half our oil
supply.

MR. WALLICH. But this still would have very little impact on
the price of gasoline, wouldn't it, barring an increase in taxes?
What would be the price of gasoline, would you say, corresponding to a
world level price for crude oil?

MR. KICHLINE. We've got all these numbers. Let me just say
that lots of things intervene in getting to the retail price of
gasoline including importantly margins, which we have assumed will
shrink a bit. Gasoline prices are estimated to have increased 50
percent in 1979; [the estimate for] 1980 is 29 percent and for 1981,
15 percent. So the rate of increase is slowing.

MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, you have an inflation rate of about 15
percent this first quarter, don't you?

MR. KICHLINE. For the CPI.

MR. SCHULTZ. There was an announcement that the prices of
homes declined some in November. We've been wrestling with this
question of when we will start to see a leveling out of the housing
component in the CPI. Are we getting any better feel as to when we
will see some impact? Is it as early as March, or are we going to
have to wait until later before we see any impact?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, as you know, there are two important
influences on that housing component: One is the price and one is
mortgage interest costs. Mortgage interest costs tend to lag
commitment rates by about a quarter. So, what happened in the fourth
quarter in mortgage rates would appear in the CPI measure this
quarter. Given our expectations that mortgage rates have peaked and
will be drifting down, we think that by this spring the mortgage
interest component should not have an important influence in driving
[the CPI] up. In fact, late in the spring, in June or so, it could
begin to operate the other way. On house prices, some of the measures
of house prices recently have declined. Unfortunately, that's not the
information that is directly used in computing the CPI. Our best
guess is that house prices in the CPI will be shown to be rising
somewhat less rapidly through the next several months, but probably at
a rate that's still near 10 percent. So, we don't expect measured
inflation in the CPI due to the house price component to be a helpful
factor in the short run.

MR. SCHULTZ. You did mean to say it was multiplicative,
didn't you?

-49-



1/8-9/80

MR. KICHLINE. I get into so much trouble when I use that
term that I decided to avoid it today.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why is that different index used?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, as I understand it, the index used to
measure house prices is an FHA series. It's based in effect on FHA
loans, which as you know are a small part of the market. It's
designed to measure "a representative house." The series that come
out monthly are Census series, which are based upon the turnover of
new and existing homes. And in those I believe the average price of
homes declined a little in November. The question is: Was that
attributable to a change in the mix or in fact did "the representative
house" decline in price? It is assumed at this juncture that people
opted for lower priced homes and thus the turnover was concentrated in
such homes rather than that house prices were declining.

MR. BALLES. I was wondering whether the staff has had any
chance to [develop] even a preliminary view on the likely impact on
inflation rates of this morning's announcement of the upward
adjustment on the wage/price guidelines.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, that was pretty much in line with our
expectations. We have assumed in the forecast for some time now that
the wage/price restraint program would reduce compensation by perhaps
1/4 percent or so, or a couple of tenths, but not a great deal. In
effect, part of this is the notion of: Do you experience settlements
that are well above your guideline or do you move the guideline so
that few fall outside the program? And, that's a bit what is going on
here. It is a flexible guideline, as I understand it, with a 2-point
spread. We expect that the program in practice has been eased from
the restraints of a year ago and that at best it will have a small
damping influence, but not [much].

MR. PARTEE. Your projection of the average earnings increase
is up into that guideline, isn't it?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we have compensation in total running in
the 9-1/2 percent area, so it's at the top end of that program. I
might also note, though, that this is a fairly heavy bargaining year.
We face [labor negotiations by] the steel workers, communication
workers, some longshoremen, and the aluminum can industry; so 1980 is
not an easy year in terms of major collective bargaining settlements.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I see someplace that nonunion wages
are now rising faster than union wages?

MR. KICHLINE. I'm not aware of that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe I just picked up the idea.

MR. COLDWELL. In effect, Jim, what you've done by the
revisions this time is to push the recession into 1980; 1979 is no
longer a recession year. What are the chances of [a recession] being
deferred another six months?

MR. PARTEE. That's not his projection.

-50-



1/8-9/80

MR. KICHLINE. Well, as you know, [those chances] are clearly
there. If you look back, we had assumed in the staff forecast that a
recession or a downturn in economic activity would take place in the
third quarter of 1979. We were a bit late in coming to the recession
view and, as it turned out, obviously not late enough. It is possible
that we will be surprised. The outlook hinges importantly on consumer
behavior; that by no stretch of the imagination is the big surprise in
the fourth quarter, if the numbers hold up. I do believe that the
ability of consumers to rely on reducing their saving rate for a
couple of quarters to below, let's say, the 3-1/2 percent level begins
to be a possibility, but it's very unlikely. I also think that we
have in place now a clear downturn in the housing sector and weakness
in business fixed investment, and those factors will tend to drive up
the unemployment rate and provide somewhat less income growth. So, I
think the probability is now higher that economic activity is
declining, but I would not rule out the possibility that we will be
surprised.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Table I-10 in Part I of the Greenbook
seems to indicate that you're forecasting a six-quarter decline in
personal consumption expenditures, heavily concentrated in the goods
sector--in fact, all in the goods sector--with services continuing to
rise on a real basis. You're forecasting very heavy declines [in
total consumer spending] in the first three quarters, tapering off
until you get a positive figure finally in the fourth quarter of 1981.
What does history tell us about this kind of pattern? Is this
consistent with, say, the 1974-75 pattern?

MR. KICHLINE. No. What we have had often in the past is a
sharper slowdown, particularly in goods, but nothing that has
stretched out for six quarters. What is unusual about this is not so
much the size, but the duration--that is, six consecutive quarters of
declining real personal consumption expenditures. I would associate a
good deal of that with the fact that this expansion and projected
recession have very different characteristics than past history. For
the extended period ahead one of the key differences relates to policy
assumptions, both monetary policy and, very importantly, fiscal
policy. There are no discretionary fiscal actions in our forecast--in
fact there are tax increases--during the downturn. So we would
[attribute] a good deal of it to that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to ask a question later but
it's timely to ask [now]. You have a prolonged recession or sluggish
period here and you have no fiscal action assumed. You make some
assumptions about monetary policy. Would you like to comment about an
appropriate policy mix over this period, looking six to eighteen
months ahead?

MR. KICHLINE. Sure. In my own view, I think a posture of
monetary restraint indexed by a rate of growth of the Ms that is no
higher, and perhaps somewhat less, than we had in the last year would
be appropriate. I also believe, however, that action should be taken
on the fiscal side. [I'd note] two important aspects there. One
would be to roll back the social security tax increases scheduled in
1981. It seems to me, in some way or other, that is not consistent
with trying to gain control over inflation. However, something like
$18 billion in federal revenues are generated out of that, so that by
itself would mean about an $18 billion tax cut. I also think some tax



1/8-9/80

reduction that would affect the corporate sector by trying to provide
business investment incentives would be appropriate. Realistically,
it seems to me that such a package would be in the $30 billion area.
But when one thinks of having tax cuts in an election year period that
do nothing for the consumer sector, that seems to me rather unlikely.
So, probably when we are talking about a tax cut, we would be talking
about a bigger number rather than a smaller one.

MS. TEETERS. What about the timing on that, Jim? Just
rolling back the social security tax is no tax increase rather than an
actual tax cut. Isn't there a possibility that a tax cut in the
payroll tax, say in mid-1980, would be appropriate timing?

MR. KICHLINE. That's quite conceivable. That would mean we
could avoid part of the increase that would be coming along this year
because as of January 1 we did have about a $4,000 increase in the
social security tax base and effectively for consumers that will come
into play largely in the second half of this year. So, that's right.
If you are talking about this, you do not think in terms of doing
something eighteen months ahead but rather around mid-1980. That is
when one would want to have this [lower tax become] effective.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have given us a scenario here of an
$18 billion tax cut in social security taxes and something for
business and you say, realistically, something for consumers, too. So
I don't know how much above $30 billion you are.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I didn't recommend that. I said I think
that's one of the facts of life. The number may go higher.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would bother you if it were higher,
right?

MS. TEETERS. Don't forget the $18 billion so-called tax cut
is just not a tax increase. It's a funny tax cut.

MR. WALLICH. That should be offset or compensated for by a
rise in the personal income tax, shouldn't it?

MS. TEETERS. Pardon?

MR. WALLICH. We're talking about a shift of the social
security financing from the payroll tax to personal income tax. So we
would have to anticipate the rise in the personal income tax as we cut
back on the social security tax increase, if we didn't want to
increase the deficit.

MS. TEETERS. Well, given the size of the full employment
surplus as shown, it doesn't bother me at all to have an increase in
the deficit. By the end of '80 it's shown as being 4 percent of GNP.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your budget deficit for 1981 is what?

MR. KICHLINE. $30 billion. The Administration, we
understand, is trying to hold the number in its budget message to
around $15 billion. But we have a different economic situation. I
think that's right that [the deficit] is an upward constraint because

-52-



1/8-9/80

if we have a tax cut [this year], it seems to me that in fiscal year
1981 the deficit could easily be in the $60 to $70 billion range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does the 50 cent gasoline tax do to
the consumer presently?

MR. KICHLINE. It's about 2-1/2 percent under a direct
measure.

MR. PARTEE. On the level of the index or--?

MR. KICHLINE. No, if inflation were rising at 10 percent
before, it would rise at 12-1/2 percent for a year.

MR. PARTEE. For a year. So it raises the level of price
increases by 2-1/2 percent?

MR. KICHLINE. Right. The percentage change goes up by 2-1/2
points.

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to go back to this
forecast of personal consumption expenditures because I think it's an
important point. You have forecast an increase in unemployment of
roughly 1/2 point per quarter in this period ahead, at least for 1980,
and industrial production is only going down about 2.3 percent [in the
first quarter] and 6 or 7 percent, roughly, for the full year. So,
one wonders a little whether these are consistent with the decline you
have forecast in personal consumption. If the goods part of this
consumption is going down at more than 7 percent in the first two
quarters and 6 percent in the third quarter, isn't that likely to have
a greater impact on industrial production?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, one of the important points here is that
industrial production is only a part of this; what has been driving
the changes in industrial production recently has been autos. And we
expect that to spread. When you talk about the unemployment rate and
IP, you are talking about the bulk of employment outside the
manufacturing sector. The strong growth recently has been in trade
and services. We expect that employment in manufacturing will drop
but we also are going to get much slower employment growth in the
trade and services area. Combined, that is likely to drive up the
unemployment rate relative to changes in industrial production. I
don't think they're inconsistent. What we are talking about here is
our view that we will have employment adjustments in the short run
once businesses become convinced that their sales picture has changed.
And labor markets today are still quite tight in many areas,
particularly for skilled labor. Businesses are unwilling to give up
skilled labor resources unless they are convinced that, in fact, the
picture has changed for them.

MR. COLDWELL. Presumably they get convinced by the end of
the second quarter with a two percent reduction in goods sales.

MR. KICHLINE. I think that would be convincing evidence,
assuming that our forecast is right.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think the emphasis on the consumer is
certainly appropriate here. I would point out, Phil, that in nominal

-53-



1/8-9/80

terms goods expenditures rise every quarter, which I think makes the
point that consumers are being pressed not only by taxes but also by
inflation, particularly the inflation in oil prices which doesn't
really have a personal income counterpart in it. The saving rate
behavior is extraordinarily interesting. I calculate that in '78 and
the first half of '79 the personal saving rate averaged a bit above 5
percent, fluctuating up and down but never getting much below 5
percent and being above it in some quarters. That was a period of
rapid increases in installment debt, which reduces the saving rate of
course from what it would otherwise be since it's a reduction from
gross savings. Then in the third quarter of '79 it dropped to 4.3
percent with a lesser rise in installment debt; and in the fourth
quarter it apparently dropped below 4 percent to maybe 3-1/2 percent
or something like that with a still further decline in the rise in
installment debt. So the question is: In terms of components, what
is moving that saving rate so strongly downward? I suppose one could
argue that if people are moving from cash to goods, the financial
saving is falling off. That would be one indicator. If, on the other
hand, there is a generalized sort of squeeze so that people don't have
enough income to cover [their expenditures] and there's an attrition
in saving that results, that's a different kind of story. If it's the
first case, we could have a continued high level of consumption. But
that doesn't seem to me consistent with the reduction in installment
credit. If it's the second case, we would have a very substantial
decline in real consumption. You probably don't have much information
on the components of the saving change, but do you have a view on what
is happening there?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I have a view that in fact the economy
has not been generating much real disposable personal income. [Its
growth] peaked out in December of 1978. In terms of the monthly
figures, it bounced around but in the second half of last year, for
example, real disposable personal income is estimated to have gone up
less than 1/2 of one percent. And yet we are getting expenditures,
which we estimate, for example, in the final quarter of the year to
have been at 3 percent. Clearly, in our view, it's a strong attempt
by consumers to maintain their spending patterns despite adverse
factors in growth of real disposable personal income. So, it is that
sort of issue. It's true that the issue is wrapped up with whether or
not we are getting durable goods purchases [from] savings, and that
would tend to drive the [saving] rate down in a given quarter.

MR. PARTEE. There couldn't have been much of an increase in
car sales in that period; they probably declined. Were other durables
strong?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, some appliance sales had been strong,
but consumers were generating installment debt increases of around 10
percent.

MR. WALLICH. This change in consumer behavior, as I said
yesterday, strikes me as very significant. If, now, in a period of
accelerating inflation people don't save more but save less, there
must have been some change in their evaluation of the situation. The
most plausible guess, it seems to me, is that in '74 people were
genuinely scared. They didn't know where the economy was going and
whether they were going to have a job, so they cut back on average.
Now with a more moderate recession predicted, there seems to be less

-54-



1/8-9/80

of that fear. On the other hand, there's a more rational attitude
that if they buy now they save 13 percent. They are buying; they did
buy cars, which was perhaps the first wave of that. Now they are
buying something else. You are quite right that [consumer spending]
seems to go from one thing to another. But I would argue also in
looking at consumer debt, which has risen relative to income, that the
consumer probably looks at it in relation to future income. So, with
future nominal income rising, the debt ratio to him appears less than
it is.

My main comment is on the nature of our staff's forecast. It
is in a sense a formal exercise because you don't give weight to the
political probability of a tax cut. So this [forecast] is what would
happen if the things that are already planned and decided were to
happen. The Board staff's forecast is under those of forecasters who
are not bound by that constraint; I think those forecasters generally
accept and expect a substantial tax cut sometime this year.
Therefore, the shape of their recession is different. Their recession
is shorter than ours and its end is different; instead of saucering
out very flat, it comes up more V-shaped. And their inflation
expectations--although I don't know this for a fact, but it seems
logical from these differences in their view of the income pattern--
should be higher than ours. Can you say anything about outside
forecasts and the like?

MR. KICHLINE. I think your description of those forecasts is
quite correct; most major models do have a somewhat deeper or perhaps
the same decline, though shorter in duration, and a much stronger
recovery. DRI is one example and that's clearly their forecast. On
the inflation side, curiously enough, the Board staff's forecast would
be in the upper range of inflation rates of outside forecasts that
I've seen for 1981. In part that's attributable to the fact that many
of the outside forecasts with a stronger recovery generate more
productivity and they've incorporated a tax cut that removes the
social security [tax] aspects. But I think the conditional
assumptions here are very different from those being used by most
outside forecasters.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your assumption of the impact of that
social security tax increase on prices was what in 1981?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we think it will be close to 1 percent
without a constraint on the time horizon. We think it's probably
closer to 2/3 of a percentage point or something like that in 1981.
Compensation goes up by 3/4 of a percent because of that effect and we
assume it will be fairly quickly passed through in the form of higher
prices.

MS. TEETERS. What sort of a monetary interest rate
projection do you have underlying this forecast, Jim?

MR. KICHLINE. We have a moderate decline in rates beginning
in the spring and going on; the 3-month Treasury bill rate we assume
will [drop to] around 10 percent in the spring [and will drop a bit
more through] the third quarter and rise slightly thereafter to 11
percent in the second half of 1981.

-55-



1/8-9/80

MS. TEETERS. So it's basically a very restrictive monetary
and fiscal policy.

MR. KICHLINE. Oh, yes.

MR. PARTEE. That's based on what--6 percent Ml growth?

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

MR. PARTEE. Is that M-1A or M-1B?

MR. KICHLINE. It's M-1A, but I'm not sure we would want to
forecast a great deal of difference in interest rates on the basis of
M-1A and M-1B.

MR. BLACK. Jim, I was a little surprised about the magnitude
of the announced increase in real GNP for the fourth quarter. Where
would you guess that will end up after the final revisions are in?

MR. KICHLINE. We don't have any additional information; in
fact, I'm not sure that the Commerce Department has anything in the
way of hard evidence right now. All of the data for December are
essentially missing, including retail sales. The obvious assumption
would have to be that consumer expenditures are even stronger than we
have now in our forecast. [We have] a bit higher federal expenditures
than Commerce had, a little higher exports, and our inventories were a
little higher, I believe. So the major source of the difference is
consumer spending. Our information, for what it's worth, would
suggest to us that real consumer purchases in December were not that
strong. We had built into our forecast an increase of about one
percent in nominal retail sales increases in December, excluding
autos, so it's virtually no increase. And if [Christmas] turned out
to be a strong season, that 2 or 2-1/2 percent kind of number could
well come out. I would be very surprised if it were 3 percent or
higher. But a 2 percent number seems to me to be perfectly plausible
at this point.

MR. PARTEE. 2 percent for what?

MR. KICHLINE. Real GNP in the fourth quarter.

MR. PARTEE. Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Jim, first a question: I assume that these
projections were glued together before the President's grain embargo
statement was issued and therefore do not reflect either the
suspension of additional exports to Russia nor the promise by the
government for grain storage, whatever that may mean. Have you had a
chance to evaluate what adjustment there might be to your forecast
because of these twin factors?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we've looked at that. There are a number
of uncertainties at this point. We don't think it will have much of
an impact on real GNP. It will change the internal mechanics of
accounting for it, namely about $2-1/2 billion less in agricultural
exports. And that would show up in farm inventories or government

-56-



1/8-9/80

purchases. But, in fact, for real GNP we don't think it will have
much of an effect. The issue really is what price effect it might
have and whether over the longer run that does change domestic and
foreign exports as well as domestic production. And that's unclear.
It had seemed to us that it might well in the short run lead to higher
prices; but I notice prices seem to be falling, so we had that one
wrong. It seems to us that the price effect is more important and we
don't have a good fix on that right now.

MR. MAYO. Of course, there's also the question of what
happens to the grain. It can't be stored indefinitely.

MR. KICHLINE. That's right.

MR. MAYO. My other point is an observation. It seems to me
that one of the factors making consumers spend much more is that, for
better or for worse, they have had such an increase in the equity in
their homes that they consider that their kitty. That could be very
dangerous if there is a prolonged slowing in [housing prices]. But I
know of instances involving personal friends who feel much more
prosperous and are willing to spend more of their disposable income
just because they have a house that they think has gone up in value by
50 percent in the last couple of years.

MR. PARTEE. Although there was a decline in the saving rate
in the second half of the year, do you mean they suddenly recognized
their wealth?

MR. MAYO. Yes. Well, don't try to get me to predict the
timing of some of these things; it just comes in waves. As we said,
the product--whether they're buying automobiles or refrigerators or
whatever the composition is--is elusive here. But [the rise in home
prices] seems to me to be an important factor.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. Following along your question and Governor
Wallich's comments, I'd like to ask Jim a question and then reserve
the right to comment on what I think his answer will be. The Chairman
forced you into a policy recommendation on fiscal policy. Would you
indicate--you've got to have some idea in mind since you gave that
statement--what that would do to your own forecast? Would you be
willing to spell that out?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, in terms of price behavior, we have
performed some exercises with our quarterly econometric model to get
some notion of the impact of something like a mid-1980 tax cut in a
range of about $30 to $35 billion. We think that by 1981 that
probably would result in a reduction in the rate of increase in the
deflator by about 3/4 of a percentage point from what it otherwise
would have been, and [a larger decline] over a longer time horizon.
At the same time, it would have small impacts on real GNP; we think
real GNP might be up by 1/2 percentage point or so.

MR. WILLES. The tax cut would lead to a reduction in the
deflator?

-57-



1/8-9/80

MR. KICHLINE. That's because it's oriented toward social
security and business fixed investment and not toward generating
additional direct consumer expenditures. So, I gave you an answer
that was different than you thought.

MR. WILLES. But in a way even better.

MR. AXILROD. President Willes, that tax package is
essentially the difference between Strategy 3 and Strategy 4 on page
11 [of the Bluebook].

MR. WILLES. That's what I thought. Well, we've been having
a lot of discussion about tax cuts and responding to recession and so
on, which is a conversation that is similar to those we've been having
for the last 10 years. And the only comment I would make is that we
do that based on models that have proved to be off track almost every
year for the last 10 years. That suggests to me that we have
something misspecified. Of course, some of us think we know what that
is. And I just think now is a time when we're going to have to be
very cautious about what we think we really can do to try to have an
impact in a systematic way on real variables. I think we all agree
that we can have an impact on inflation; but it's not at all clear,
based on the Fed's model--or any other model--that we have had to
revise virtually every year because it went off track, [that we can
have an impact on real variables]. Our view is that the model has
gone off track because it's misspecified; and it's misspecified in
such a way that it does not make it a reliable tool to use to do these
kinds of exercises. I think we play a very dangerous game if we think
we can say with very much precision that we're going to have an impact
on these real variables by cutting taxes $30 billion or $50 billion or
whatever it is when the best guess at the moment, as far as I can
tell, is that all it will do is have an impact on inflation and have
practically no impact on unemployment or real GNP or any of these
other things that we really would like to get a handle on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just see if I understand what
you're saying. You're saying that a tax reduction of any sort will
have an adverse impact on inflation and not too much impact on the
real economy, you suspect.

MR. WILLES. I think at the moment that's the best guess.

MR. PARTEE. There's no impact on real activity through
government policy?

MR. WILLES. No, I didn't say that. Clearly tax policy,
monetary policy, and lots of things can have an impact on real
economic activity. But as far as we know it can't have a predictable
impact. We're going to change lots of things. Any time tax policy
changes it's going to change things. It changes incentives, it
changes functions, and so on. The question is: Can we predict in a
fairly reliable way what that impact will be? And I don't see
anything that suggests that we can because all the models that we have
used to try to make those predictions have proved to be misspecified.
And there's no reason to suppose that they are any better specified
now than they were ten years ago.

-58-



1/8-9/80

MR. WALLICH. Are you simply saying that the variance around
the forecast is wider? Or are you saying that the forecast is--?

MR. WILLES. It's not a question of variance. It's the fact
that the parameters are unstable and will respond, in our view of
course, to expectations. Therefore, by failing to factor expectations
in, we've completely misspecified the shape of the economy. Ten years
ago that would have sounded like an absolutely absurd assumption. I
think now the evidence is rather considerably on that side. I just
want to point out one thing. I think people as they've heard me talk
about it have said: Well, he was a monetarist and this is just one
mode of monetarism. The theories that we're talking about were
primarily developed by Keynesians. In fact, the people around our
place who have done the most work on it originally came to us to work
on optimal control theory and used a model like the Fed model to
develop optimal control techniques. So, it's not as if it's just the
monetarists who think they've found a new tool to play with. I think
it's a very serious challenge to the bases we've been looking for in
terms of making the kinds of decisions--

MR. SCHULTZ. But don't you think, even though one could view
this as very imprecise in terms of the numbers we come out with, that
we can predict the direction? Isn't that really the more crucial
question?

MR. WILLES. Well, the best guess that we can make, if we try
to make adjustments--and one can't do this in a very precise way, of
course, except in a very simple model--is that, yes, we can predict
the direction fairly precisely. But the extent we can predict what
would happen to real output is essentially zero.

MR. PARTEE. Then you are saying that we can't affect
aggregate activity through government policies.

MR. WILLES. Yes, on average.

MR. PARTEE. This is very, very [specific].

MR. WILLES. Yes, it is. There's no question about it. But
the evidence--I'm not sure I'm happy to say it but I will--is
increasingly consistent with that view.

MR. COLDWELL. Jim, in your forecast you said you used 6
percent monetary growth as a base. Did you play around with this to
take into account some alternatives to the Bluebook with the idea of
maybe 3 percent for the first half and 6 or 8 percent in the second
half?

MR. KICHLINE. No, we did not. The exercises that we did,
using the model, are presented in broad form in the Bluebook. We did
not for this meeting go into any other alternatives, of which there
are an infinite number of possibilities.

MR. COLDWELL. Could you say what, let us say, 4 percent
across the board would be?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we took 4-1/2 percent and 7-1/2 percent.
And the results for the year are shown in the Bluebook. We did not

-59-



1/8-9/80

use alternative paths that would have something like slow money growth
and then fast money growth within the years.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I get lost in the fiscal forest. For a number of
years we had budget results in which expenditures fell below
appropriations. To what extent is this going to be reversed? Plus
the fact is that there is no reason why one can't anticipate next
year's appropriations; orders [and] expenditures come later. And I
don't quite know what you assume on those off-balance sheet activities
such as Chrysler and other things. To what extent might we get a real
surprise on the expenditure side or the orders side, as contrasted
with this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just add to Willis' question. What
are you assuming about special government measures or Home Loan Bank
measures or whatever?

MR. KICHLINE. We have built into the forecast government
subsidized [housing] units of 300,000, which is pretty much in line
with what the Administration talked about. That's 50,000 more than in
the last fiscal year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It doesn't mean, then, that they are
cranking up the tandem plan?

MR. KICHLINE(?). Well, that's part of it, but it's not a
major cranking up of the tandem plan. As you know, the budgetary
impact there is quite variable; it depends on when the government
sells those mortgages. It's an interest [subsidy] that ultimately
shows up in the federal expenditures. On the authorizations, that's a
difficult question because we have built in a significant increase in
defense expenditures along the lines of the Administration's
proposals. That could well go higher. A good deal of what the
Administration is proposing we have assumed will result in
authorizations, but not expenditures, particularly not in the short
run. To the extent that the defense sector is geared up more rapidly,
there is a bigger increase in actual federal outlays. I think that's
conceivable, and it would obviously feed into the real side forecast,
particularly in 1981. So, we've assumed a good deal of lag between
authorizations and expenditures. I might note that defense ordering
has in fact picked up a good deal. And in the fourth quarter, one of
the factors--not the main one--leading to a significant increase in
federal outlays was a pickup in real defense expenditures.

MR. WINN. I'm somewhat amazed at the amount of money that's
suddenly showing up in Cleveland. I don't know if that's the subject
of charity coming home or what but the money seems to be coming out of
the woodwork for that sort of thing. I'm gathering that this is
really going to mean that this year we're not going to have any
appropriations that weren't spent.

SPEAKER(?). That could [mean] a very big difference in the
federal spending.

MR. MAYO. One of the aspects of this that is important, too,
is the extent to which there is excess capacity in the defense

-60-



1/8-9/80

industry that could take up a significant increase in defense
spending. We learned again in the Vietnam conflict that we couldn't
spend as fast as was budgeted because the factory wasn't there; they
had to tool up and so forth. It takes a much longer time to acquire a
sophisticated product. But that is one of the considerations that
perhaps--

MR. WINN. Related to that is the fact that inventories are
rather tight and [are being carefully] watched in most of these
special sectors. If we get any change in that area, we're going to
see explosive prices and people scrambling for the short supply.

My final comment is that I'm struck by the number of people
who tell me they're now pricing for inflation. They tell me they
tried a price increase in midyear but it didn't go because their
competitors didn't meet it. They tried a price increase in December
and not only did their competitors meet it within 48 hours but they
[moved] ahead of them in terms of the prices themselves. There seems
to be an explosive development related to the inventory shortage in
this area.

MR. KICHLINE. I'd like to correct the response I gave
Governor Coldwell. We did not assume a flat 6 percent quarterly money
path. It's 6 percent QIV 1979 to QIV 1980; but in fact we have built
into our current forecast about 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent growth in Ml in
the first half of '80 and about 6-1/2 percent or so in the second
half.

MR. COLDWELL. But you didn't do any alternative scenarios?

MR. KICHLINE. No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any further comments on the
business situation? If not, we'll turn to the decision we have to
make. Just by way of background, and summarizing yesterday's
discussion, I thought there was a good deal of skepticism expressed
around the table about the idea of seeming too precise much beyond
1980. I do have some concern myself about the point Mr. Baughman made
that it may be a little hard to escape when [we are pressed for] some
notion of what we're going to do after 1980. But the advice in sum
seemed to me to be cautious on that side. There seems to be a pretty
strong consensus that a range of a few percentage points [for the
growth of the aggregates] is about right. As to possibilities within
that kind of range, I don't want to prejudge where people are coming
out on annual policy itself. There was a fair amount of [sentiment]
for [growth] between 4-1/2 and 5 percent; there were some for a little
above 5 up to 5-1/2 percent. I think virtually everybody was saying
growth probably ought to be lower than what it was last year by some
definition of what it was last year. So I think we are in that
general area; it does affect what we do in the short range to some
extent. It may be graduated in our individual minds anyway. It
should be. That kind of background is useful to our short-run
discussion. Why don't you introduce that subject, Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In turning to this matter, let me just
mention a couple of things. As Mr. Roos said yesterday, given the new

-61-



1/8-9/80

technique we are using and all the complications of an annual and a
short-term horizon, the Bluebook was put together admirably in my
view. It does take a quarter's time horizon for this particular
decision. That's arbitrary, and we debated as to what the right time
perspective was. If anybody has any comment on that, they could offer
it.

MR. PARTEE. The Committee on the Directive tried valiantly
to get that put in a year ago without success. So we're happy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it could be longer or it could be
shorter, but it seems to be a tentative compromise anyway.

MS. TEETERS. Is it going to roll forward?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, presumably. I don't know whether we
thought this all through, but I guess the presumption would be that in
February we will have the next three months, if we continue in this
framework. Now, that's--

MR. AXILROD. But it would be related to the path. You
wouldn't lose sight of the longer-run path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will always be related against the--

MR. AXILROD. We would continue to present the growth rates
for the whole year as we go on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We thought of doing it for six months, but
it's an arbitrary decision.

MR. COLDWELL. The three months is starting January 1st
through March 31st?

MR. PARTEE. December.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. December to March is the way you calculate
it.

MR. AXILROD. I presented December to March, and we have in
the text the quarterly average growth rates that are roughly
consistent with it.

MR. COLDWELL. Does it include December or does it not?

MR. AXILROD. December is the base. It's essentially the
growth rates in January and February and March averaged.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the difference? I didn't pick up
on that. All these numbers you were giving here are the December-to-
March figures. If you have 5 percent growth December to March, what
does that make the quarterly average?

MR. AXILROD. The quarterly average is 4-1/2 percent.
They're running about--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little lower.

-62-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. Just a little lower this time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Steve's comments he raised the question
repeatedly about whether the Committee, in effect, has any preference
as to how interest rates evolve during this period. You can have
different points of view on that: That you don't care or that it's a
very important question. I would think comments on that point are
relevant, if you think they're relevant. The only other point--I put
these points down here earlier--is that I think the most certain thing
about the economic forecast is that during this particular 3-month
period we are very likely to have a higher consumer price index, for
all that means in terms of expectations and problems of various sorts.
So with that, we'll proceed. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about what you
alluded to as a thread that ran throughout Steve's comments indicating
a continued concern about interest rates because interest rate
movements would affect output one way or another. It seems to me--and
I don't say this critically in your direction, Steve--that we did
adopt and publicly announce a new program whereby, within broad
limits, we were going to permit interest rates to fluctuate freely in
order to concentrate on the control and gradual reduction of money
growth. I think we will frustrate our whole purpose and the
possibility of succeeding in this new approach if we have tucked
behind in our minds all the time the view that a primary, or at least
very important, aspect of what we're doing is somehow continuing along
the path that we were on of trying to control interest rates and hope
that in this process we can achieve some [reduction of] money growth.
I don't think we can have it both ways. I would ask Steve: Is the
staff still imbued with a real concern about interest rates?

MR. AXILROD. The staff believes, I think--and I can't talk
for everyone--that decisionmaking in the economy is affected by the
level of interest rates and credit availability. On the other hand,
the staff believes, or at least I do, that it's difficult for the
Committee to make a priori decisions about the proper level of
interest rates. That's why a money supply target is important because
then those decisions come out of the market to a great extent.
However, because we believe that decisionmaking by businessmen takes
into account credit costs and availability, it seems important to try
to suggest what the pattern of interest rates might be in the course
of the year, and that's what I was trying to say. If the Committee
adopted a pattern of money growth in the course of the year because it
was chasing a long-run target and got way ahead of it early in the
year and then wanted to catch up for credibility reasons late in the
year, that might imply a very high interest rate. You may not want
that, so you may want to give up on your long-run target, which could
be one credibility problem. If we have very high interest rates, I
believe it would have effects on economic activity in 1981. If we
entered the year with 15 percent, I think economic activity in 1981
would be slower than we've been projecting. I've asked Mr. Kichline
for verification of that.

MR. ROOS. Let me just ask this. There has been reference
made to the possibility that interest rates would drop. I noted with
interest and with admiration the fact that the Chairman in a recent
speech said publicly to the world: Don't be concerned if interest
rates drop because under our new practices interest rates could

-63-



1/8-9/80

conceivably drop and not signal any easing of policy. Now, isn't it
possible, through the utterances of the Chairman and others, to say
that we have somewhat of a new ball game? We're doing this
differently and people should stop thinking along the lines they have
been accustomed to thinking over the last 10 years because the last 10
years certainly didn't bring the desired results. I'm fearful that
we're just letting ourselves be a little bit pregnant and running all
over the lot.

MR. AXILROD. But, President Roos, to be very brief, I was
simply addressing myself to the question--raising it for the Committee
--of whether you want low growth of M1 in the first half and high
growth in the second half or [vice versa] because the Committee has to
make that decision, and there are certain implications. That's what I
was trying to get to.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may say in this connection, Mr. Roos,
I think we've got a spectrum over which we can operate. We used to
operate with very tiny changes in federal funds rates from time to
time, or between meetings certainly, and not very large ones even at a
meeting. There is no doubt that we have changed; in my opinion, the
emphasis is quite different now. But in some people's minds it may be
different than in other people's minds. That does not exclude
necessarily some predilection about which way to bias this in the
short run. People may have some druthers one way or another without
at all implying that we're controlling the federal funds rate the way
we did before. But one might want to lean in one direction or
another. Maybe other people wouldn't want to lean in one direction or
another. But we don't have to make it a choice between dismissing
from the minds of everybody around this table any concern about
interest rates and going back to what we were doing before, which was
a very close focus on the federal funds rate within a quarter
percentage point. It's just that we've got to make some decision.
The decision is made in terms of the money supply, but that decision
at any particular meeting may be biased in some people's minds by some
guess, anyway, as to where they would prefer the interest rate music
to accompany it--the treble to accompany the base or whatever that
[expression] is.

MR. PARTEE. You don't have to recant in the presence of--

MR. WALLICH. If I may follow up on this. The purpose of a
money supply target presumably is to force wider swings in interest
rates. If we stick to the same rate of money growth through expansion
and recession, we'll get very wide swings of rates, wider than we've
been willing to impose by acting a priori, as Steve said, on the
interest rate. But to me that doesn't mean that it is logical to move
to severely negative real interest rates because we have a recession.
There are considerations of having a positive or a negative real
interest rate, and to my view the ability to swing widely toward a low
interest rate is limited by that. It should not become severely
negative.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Perhaps we could combine comments on this
conceptual and theoretical point with practical comments on where we
should put the money supply target in the next month. Mr. Eastburn.

-64-



1/8-9/80

MR. EASTBURN. Well, I would like to respond to Steve's
comments about the path of money growth. I think where we go on this
depends on how smart we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not assuming too much on that?

MR. EASTBURN. My conclusion from listening to the discussion
before is that we're really not all that smart as to be able to do
that. And that forces me into the position that if we have as a long-
range strategy a gradual reduction of money growth, we ought to figure
out where we want to start and pretty well stick to that. That puts
me, since I came out yesterday at about 5 percent for 1980, with
alternative B. I don't mean hold to that inflexibly if unexpected
things develop, but I just don't think we're able to do the kind of
fine-tuning that is suggested by the Bluebook in terms of front
loading or rear end loading or whatever. I'd just put down 5 percent
and stick to it until we decide we have to make some kind of a change.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the
direction we're working on here is to lower the [growth in the]
monetary aggregates. I would accept alternative C, for which you have
growth of 4 percent. I'd be willing to accept a range around that,
although I'm not sure how this is all working out with single points
versus ranges in the short run. But I'd be perfectly willing to
accept, say, 3-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent or something like that. My
present predilection would be to accept a lower level in the first
half and see what the second half brings. Because my primary
objective is to try to get some impact on the price level, I'm not
sure that I totally agree--in fact, I'm fairly sure I don't agree--
with what the staff is saying, which is that we can't have some impact
on prices here. I doubt very much if this long-range low growth
saucer forecast is really a reasonable one over a long period of time;
things will change. A recession is likely in the next year; it's
timing is uncertain. And I'm reasonably sure that something will come
up and destroy that lovely little package over the next 8 quarters.
The complex of political as well as economic and foreign factors is
such that I would opt for a lower level in the range, particularly
since we got something in the 3-1/2 to 4 percent area in the fourth
quarter, as I recall, Steve, rather than the 4-1/2 percent we were
[expecting].

MR. AXILROD. We got 3 percent from September to December and
4.9 percent, I think, for the quarterly average.

MR. COLDWELL. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for purposes of clarification,
Governor Coldwell, when you began talking about a range, is that
merely a reflection of our frailties in achieving the number or do you
have something in your mind about interest rates, let's say?

MR. COLDWELL. Well, I was coming to that, Mr. Chairman. The
range I put down was partly because of our frailties in achieving a
number, and I'd give the Desk a little guidance rather than just leave
it to the Manager to make some ad hoc decisions on it. But it also
reflects some interest in the interest rate package. Contrary to Mr.

-65-



1/8-9/80

Roos, I think interest rates are an important element of the impact
both on expectations and on consumer and capital expenditures. So,
I'm unwilling just to wash my hands of interest rates and say "Go
where you want to go." I don't think it's likely [to have no impact]
internally, and I think it's even less likely to have no impact
externally in our relationships with other countries.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. As I indicated yesterday, Mr. Chairman, my
preference on the long-run targets would be to go mainly with M-1B.
It increased at a 7.3 percent rate last year and I think 6 percent is
a reasonable rate for [this year]. If the relationships set forth
over the next year between the old M1 and M-1B hold in the future,
this would suggest that the appropriate long-run range for M1 would be
about 5-1/2 percent. Against this background, I think we ought to be
working down our target growth rates and I would favor alternative B.
Now, that does specify rates that are below what I've indicated I
thought was probable for M1 and M-1B, but I would be prepared to
support that for three reasons. One is that I think we still have a
very serious credibility gap. I find few people in the financial
markets who really believe that we're going to stick with the policy
we announced October 6th. So, I think we need some low growth rates
very quickly in order to better establish our credibility. The second
reason why I would favor being somewhat lower in the beginning is the
point that Frank Morris made yesterday: This seems to be about the
only time we can get the growth rates down. That may be in part
because the market used to determine to a greater degree how much
money it got than it presumably will under this new system, but
there's still an element of that in there. And then, third, past
experience has shown that we usually get bursts in the aggregates in
the second and third quarters. While that may have stemmed from bad
seasonal adjustments or the old methodology, I'm still suspicious that
it might happen [again]; so I would like to get some pretty low
figures under our belt before it does happen, if in fact it does. So
far as the range for federal funds is concerned, philosophically I'd
like very wide ranges and would be tempted on purely philosophical
grounds to widen that range, particularly at the low end. But this is
not a time to stand on pure philosophical preferences because it's
undoubtedly true that foreigners and people in this market, too, are
paying a great deal of attention to what interest rates are doing.
So, I think it's important that we not let the rate go below 11-1/2
percent, and I would put that as a floor until such time as we have
better credibility than I think we now have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I'm pretty sympathetic with Dave Eastburn's
comments. I think fine-tuning is difficult in practice, and I would
point out that the main misses that we've had have been large misses.
That is, it really isn't that we expect 5 percent and get 4 percent.
We expect 5 percent in a month and get zero or a minus; or we expect 5
percent and get 10. That has been the nature of the chunkiness of
that demand function for money, and I think that demand function is
there just as it always was. The question now is: What kind of
response will a sudden change in the growth rate of money bring in
terms of policy? I guess I would say that under our new procedures it
would bring a very abrupt and considerable change in interest rates,

-66-



1/8-9/80

either up or down. So, without fine-tuning I rather like the 5
percent on the old definition. I guess we're talking about current
definitions, aren't we?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. We would specify it in current terms. I like
the 5 percent of alternative B, partly because that would give us
4-1/2 percent for the quarter which, if we get it, will be on the
moderate side from the standpoint of the ranges that we choose for the
year. I would be willing to tolerate a little shortfall from that 5
percent, say, to 4 percent. But if it comes in significantly weaker
than that, I think we would want to be supplying the reserves and we
would want to be seeing interest rates move. There is something to
what Larry says, although he perhaps overstated it a little, that we
have to be prepared to see interest rates move in response to a need.
I would like to see us take the alternative A specifications of 7-1/2
and 8 percent for M2 and M3 rather than those in alternative B. We
don't really know what success that new [floating rate] certificate is
going to have. It's being advertised very strongly by the thrift
institutions and I wouldn't want to see us tighten up because it
happened that the thrift institutions had a good inflow from the
promotion of the 2-1/2 year certificate. [On the funds rate,] I think
we're a long way from either 11-1/2 or 15-1/2 percent and I don't see
how we could get to 11-1/2 percent without taking action on the
discount rate. So I would leave that range right where it is at
11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, I continue to be concerned about
the expectations and realities of our price level and about the
possibility of the influence we can have on our exchange rate
frailties at the moment. I'd be very anxious to reaffirm our posture,
a posture that would indicate a continuing steady move to a general
reduction of the growth rate [of money]. I recognize that this might
very well contribute to interest rate changes, but [with] some more
flexibility. But in the real world we simply have to be a little
attentive to the level of [unintelligible]. I think we cannot move
quite that abruptly. All of that leads me to feel that I'd be rather
comfortable with the numbers associated with alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I want to make a couple of points.
First of all, I want to agree with Dave Eastburn's philosophy of not
monkeying around with fine-tuning among the quarters. This makes us
think we are smarter than we are, among other things, to use his
language. The purpose here is to set a long-term range and, unless we
see some rather dramatic reason for changing it, to make our quarterly
[objectives] basically consistent with that, subject to some small
variations--and I mean small--that Steve may feel he has to introduce
into the staff projection. I feel also, although we have made a giant
step forward in moving [from 2-month horizons] to September-to-
December and now December-to-March [time periods], that we need to
make one more refinement of that in the interest of not being too
overwhelmed by monthly changes [in the growth of money]. It would be
much better if for the current quarter, or the decision which is being

-67-



1/8-9/80

made today, on January 9, to use the month of January as our center
month and in effect take the fourth quarter of 1979 and go to the
quarter centered on the current date. That means comparing the
average for the fourth quarter with the average for December, January,
February. Next month we would do January, February, March; in other
words, it would be literally fourth quarter-to-first quarter. I think
that makes a lot more sense and gets us over part of our hangup where
we spend, it seems on occasion, an interminable amount of time trying
to explore the seasonal adjustment deficiencies of a given month.
Granted that going to three months is in the right direction, I would
urge strongly that the Committee consider going from quarter to
quarter. It may look awkward because in the first instance in effect
we have to have December at both ends of our equation. But as we move
on out, of course, that overlap would not occur. It's just a neater
proposition and would help in the smoothing of this. Again, the point
is--and I think Dave made it effectively--that we can do a better job
that way.

I would add that I prefer alternative B partly because I like
the 3 to 6 percent long range and the 3 to 6 percent short range,
which yields a midpoint--whether by coincidence or not--of 4-1/2
percent for the quarter-to-quarter change. I guess that is for the
fourth quarter to the first quarter literally, Steve. I don't know
what it would be for December, January, February; maybe it doesn't
make much difference. I feel very strongly that the answer to the
question of "Do we pay attention to interest rates?" is that, of
course, we pay attention to interest rates. We pay attention to
interest rates just like we pay attention to real GNP, unemployment,
and an awful lot of factors. In my mind we shifted in the October 6th
package from a primary public emphasis on interest rates to a primary
public emphasis on the aggregates, with the targets going through
reserves. We have not abandoned all of our secondary emphases. We
emphasize plenty of things, one of which has to be interest rates
because we live in the real world and the execution of monetary policy
must be through a market that pays attention to interest rates.
There's no substitute for that; at least I've never heard of one in
our type of society.

One other point: I think the Federal Reserve System would be
making a serious mistake to publish M-1A and M-1B and M2 and M3 and L
and say to the world, in effect: We don't know which of these is
right; take your choice. Now, I'm perhaps overstating. I would pick
M-1B myself and call it Ml, drop the B. And if we have to qualify the
description of it because of NOW accounts or other changes, we should
qualify it. But we are being almost too research oriented, too much
students of this rather than decisive leaders. If we can't determine
which one we think is better, with some qualifications and so forth,
nobody can. And I think our leadership role depends in large part on
our ability to go through this whole redefinition of the aggregates
and to avoid coming out with a definition that looks like the mouse
has really squeaked by coming up with M-1A. I would recommend
strongly that we publicize M-lB as Ml. We can handle the
consequences. End of speech.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the targets
set out in alternative C have a good probability of coming pretty

-68-



1/8-9/80

close to serving the needs of the environment as they unfold in the
next couple of months or so. I've been rather impressed with the
observation through time and in conversations here that we can't have
much influence on how the expansion in money and credit is allocated
between production and prices. The indication is that the structure
of the economy and expectations are tending to allocate it more and
more to prices and less and less to production, which leaves us in an
awkward situation of simply embracing or accepting it or seeking
greater slack in the economy--and probably for a fairly long period of
time--in order to make some increased impact on the inflation problem.
But it seems to me that the inflation problem must be given priority
in part because the darn thing just keeps getting worse and worse.
I'd be prepared to accept pretty much whatever interest rate pattern
evolved during the appropriate time period as a result of pursuing
these quantitative targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I want to ask a question first. Your
economic forecast is based on a 6 percent rate of [money] growth. If
you take the rate of growth of money down another full percentage
point, what does that do to real growth and to the unemployment rate?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You did assume that the rate of growth in
money would be slower in the first half of the year?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. The staff forecast is based upon the
money path of alternative 1 on page 15 in the Bluebook, which is 6
percent for the year. It's slower in the first half--I think it's
around 5-1/2 percent and then 6-1/2 percent in the second half--but
the short-run path consistent with that is alternative B.

MS. TEETERS. What happens if you reduce that path by a full
percentage point?

MR. KICHLINE. Do you mean for the long-run target or the
short-run target? In the short run, if you stuck to the 6 percent
target mentioned and simply altered the money path for one quarter and
then picked it up the next quarter, it really wouldn't have a
significant impact on inflation or real GNP.

MR. AXILROD. Governor Teeters, there's a degree of fine-
tuning in the numbers here that has to be taken with a grain of salt.
But on page 25 in appendix C, if you reduce that 5 percent to 4
percent and still aim at something like 6 percent M1 growth, which is
what Jim's assumption is--that's the third column under alternative C
--you'd end up in the fourth quarter with a somewhat lower funds rate
than under his basic assumption to make up for the greater restraint
now. That's in essence what that would tend to lead to. Similarly,
if you had a 5-1/2 percent long-run growth, which we have not shown
here, the funds rate in the fourth quarter would probably be somewhat
lower under a short-run alternative C path than under short-run
alternative B path.

MS. TEETERS. I'm not sure I got a [complete] answer. My
inclination is that if we cut [money growth] below the 6 percent
that's in the forecast for the year, we'll have a more severe
recession on our hands as we keep the interest rates up. I have a

-69-



1/8-9/80

great deal of sympathy with Dave Eastburn's point of view that we
should stick to a number and let the interest rates fluctuate. Where
I come out is that I'd like to see a 5-1/2 percent growth rate for the
year as a whole and I'd set a target of approximately 5 percent for
the quarter to give us a little range to meet the needs at the end of
the year. I don't think, frankly, that we can undertake a policy for
3 years of consistently reducing the rate of growth of money supply.
I just don't think that's in the cards for us in terms of what's going
to happen in the economy. We've brought the rate of growth down
consistently now for 3 years, but there's a certain minimum to which
we can get and I don't think it's 3 or 4 percent. We are going to get
ourselves into a position of setting a target which is so much too low
that it's either going to have severe impacts on the real growth of
the economy or we're not going to meet our targets. Realistically,
we're going to [have to] come down to a plateau for growth of the
money supply and try to hold it there rather than reduce it a
percentage point year after year; and a rate of growth in the money
supply of about 5-1/2 percent strikes me as about where that minimum
is, given the other things that are going on in the economy. So, I
can buy alternative B for the quarter, but I do have a higher target
for the year as a whole.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.

MR. TIMLEN. My preference, Mr. Chairman, is for alternative
C. I think it's consistent with efforts to reduce the growth in the
aggregates over the year 1980 and also consistent with the [view] that
the basic economy may be slowing in the first quarter. I think it
would have an important impact on inflationary expectations and help
our credibility. It will also [add] strongly to the message conveyed
in terms of the relevant interest rates in the foreign exchange
markets, where I must say the emphasis is on interest rate levels as
opposed to the movements against reserve targets. I don't have a
strong feeling on what the federal funds range should be, whether it
should be 11-1/2 to 16 percent or 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. I'd just
as soon stay with the existing range of 11-1/2 to 15-1/2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I continue to think that the economy
moves on interest rates. If I rely on the money supply, it's because
in [a period of] inflation I think that's a better way to get the
right interest rates than to try to do it outright. But I don't
regard the money supply as a black box where I have to accept
everything that comes out. So if an unreasonable interest rate comes
out, I reserve the [option] to evaluate that on its own terms. As
Nancy said, we have reduced the growth of the money supply for 3 years
running and have brought inflation from about 7 percent to 13 percent
in doing so.

MR. PARTEE. With able help.

MR. WALLICH. With able help from various--

MS. TEETERS. We really brought the real rate of inflation
from about 7 percent to 10 or 11 percent, Henry.

-70-



1/8-9/80

MR. WALLICH. Well, we can argue about the numbers, but
[inflation] has gone up while the growth of the money supply as we
define it has gone down. So I lean toward the tighter side for the
long term, alternative II. And within that framework I lean toward
alternative C in terms of the old definitions of money. I don't care
whether we use the old or the new definitions, just so we don't
misunderstand. I would go with the numbers that are in the Bluebook
under alternative C: 4 percent for M1; 6.5 percent for M2; and 7
percent for M3. I would raise the lower end of the funds rate from
11-1/2 to 12 percent and make the top 16 percent. I agree with Chuck
that before the rate got to 11-1/2 percent we would probably find
ourselves making a decision about the discount rate anyway.

MR. BLACK. Henry, did you say you would change the top of
the funds range to 16 percent?

MR. WALLICH. To 16, yes. And the bottom to 12.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's amazing to me how
I can have such a fundamentally different view about how the world
works than Chuck Partee and yet find that he stated my policy position
much more eloquently than I could ever state it. Whatever you wrote
down for Dave Eastburn and Chuck Partee, write down for me and that
would be great. I would just say that on Bob Mayo's point, it's not
clear to me that a bad decision is better than no decision at all; I
think we ought to publish all the numbers and let people help us find
out--

MR. MAYO. I'm not arguing against that, but I think we
should indicate a dominant preference.

MR. WILLES. I don't think we have enough information.

MR. PARTEE. We will [indicate our preference] in the Policy
Record, certainly.

MR. MAYO. We are forced to do it. Let's be proud and carry
the flag and not say we don't know but maybe this is the better of the
two. I see us being too academically sound, if I can put it that way,
rather than carrying leadership for a figure. And if we can't carry
that leadership, nobody can.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think alternative B looks good,
even though I came out yesterday for a 4-1/2 percent midpoint. I feel
that if we are going to bias the flow during the year, it ought to be
the opposite of what most people have been saying. I think the rate
of growth in the early part of the year ought to be greater and the
rate of growth in the latter part of the year less because I think we
will be better off with a saucer-shaped recession than a V-shaped one.
So, to the extent that we can obtain these [rates of growth], it's
such a weak economy that it should help to cushion the extent of the
decline and hopefully produce a more saucer-shaped than V-shaped
recession.

-71-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You hope to produce a more saucer-shaped
than V-shaped one [and would] increase the money supply more rapidly
in the first part of the year and less rapidly in the second part.

MR. MORRIS. Right. Traditionally, following our earlier
policies, we have supplied very little monetary growth in the early
part of a recession. We have encouraged a sharper decline in the
economy thereby. We lagged in reducing interest rates and then when
the unemployment rate got really high, we turned around and produced
very rapid rates of growth in the money supply. That led to very big
swings in the economy, which I think are counterproductive in the long
run to controlling inflation.

MR. RICE. May I interrupt, sir? Don't you think the shape
or the depth of the recession is already determined now?

MR. MORRIS. It probably is, largely. I'm not suggesting
that we can--

MR. RICE. So what we do now--

MR. MORRIS. It's just that to the extent we have to make a
decision, it ought to be biased in this direction. But I'm not under
any illusions that we can fine-tune this thing.

MR. RICE. I don't believe that anything we do today is going
to make the recession more saucer-shaped or more V-shaped.

MR. PARTEE. Well, the second part of it could affect the
character of the recovery.

MR. COLDWELL. It might prolong it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're on, Mr. Rice. It's just that you
have to expand on your comment because you are next on the list.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, given the forecast for nominal GNP
for this quarter which I believe is 5 percent and is, of course, very
weak, and given the forecast for the inflation rate which I understand
is 15 percent for this quarter, I would--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consumer price index.

MR. RICE. The consumer price index, yes. I think this is a
good quarter to try to keep the rate of growth in money at the low end
of the 1980 range. That would give us leeway to allow it to expand at
a faster rate later on in the year if that appears desirable, and I
think it will appear desirable. So for this quarter I would favor
alternative C; I would be comfortable with a 4 percent rate of growth
for the next 3 months. Also, I think this is not the time to accept a
sharp reduction in interest rates, and alternative C will assure that
interest rates will not fall significantly. So my preference at this
time would be for alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, as a number of people around the
table have already noted, 1979 was a nonrecession year. It's a bit of

-72-



1/8-9/80

a humbling experience in terms of our ability not only to fine-tune
but to forecast. As I recall your statements on the subject, I think
it's to your credit that you spoke out and said that you weren't sure
we were in a recession despite announcements coming from other high
places that the recession began a couple of months ago and was already
half over. That's an interesting commentary on the state of the art
of forecasting. In any event, given that uncertainty about our
ability not only to fine-tune but to forecast, it seems to me that
inflation does remain the key threat to the longer-term health of the
economy--to economic growth, employment growth, a sound dollar, and so
on. For all those reasons and without going into any more detail, I,
too, would come out at this time in favor of alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would opt for
alternative C, taking advantage of what would appear to be fairly slow
growth in money that we are focusing on in the first quarter. I would
note that historically--in recent history at least--we haven't had
very much growth in money in the first quarter and, quite likely, that
history will be duplicated this year. To get somewhat of a head start
on our longer-run targets it seems to me that we ought to accept that
slow growth in the first quarter; and as a result alternative C would
be attractive. I would also note that if you focus on Ml, its growth
even under alternative C is greater in the first quarter than we had
in the fourth quarter, which turned out to be a fairly strong quarter.
I don't know what that implies except that it just reinforces my
thought that we quite likely will get very slow growth in the first
quarter and ought to tolerate it whether it is below 4 percent or not.
The interest rates are an important factor both domestically and
internationally and we shouldn't lose sight of that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I would like to be listed under the alternative B
team. I think there is a possibility that "C" would represent too
drastic a reduction from a higher level of money growth to a lower
level of money growth, and that could have recessionary implications.
So, I would opt for "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn, would you like to say something?

MR. WINN. I guess I was shaken by last year's experience
with money growth, so I am suspicious of almost any number we put on
these things, frankly. I remind you that any number we pick is fine-
tuning of a degree, and I'm not sure the numbers differ that much in
terms of the fine-tuning aspect. I suppose because of last year's
experience and the concern as to what will happen in the money demand
area, I would probably stay with "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz, you're left; you are not
volunteering.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'm just very uncertain about where this
economy is going to go, particularly in this quarter. I can foresee a
situation in which growth of 6 percent could be very restrictive and
growth of 3 percent could be very loose, depending upon what happens.
So I come out between "B" and "C" and I would hope that there's some

-73-



1/8-9/80

real flexibility for us to react as we see what actually is going to
occur this quarter. I do have some concern about interest rates. I'd
like to see them slowly come down as we go through the year. It would
worry me if we had a sharp drop in interest rates in this quarter when
we show very high inflation rates. That could be disastrous in the
foreign exchange markets and I don't think it would give a very good
impression to the country as a whole. I come out somewhere between
the B and C alternatives.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we seem to have some differences of
opinion, but they are not enormous. So let's ruminate a few minutes
and drink some coffee and see whether we can bring this to a
conclusion.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Gentlemen, ladies. After great Solomonic
perusal of the preferences expressed by the members of the Committee
and others, and evaluation of those qualitative comments that were
made--the acute ones and I discarded the others--let me make a general
comment. I think, as a number of people have mentioned, that we have
an image problem or an opportunity--I don't know which to call it--
that is perhaps as important as the numerology at the moment. I have
sympathy for the comments that said we have to appear to be quite
cautious during this period, particularly until the market gets a
little more settled down in terms of interpreting our actions.
Substantively, I personally would not mind seeing some decline in
interest rates; in fact, I think it would be desirable on the domestic
side if we can get by with it on the international side. It may be a
little inconsistent with the energy problem, and this is where the
compromise has to be struck. Everybody was between "B" and "C" in one
way or the other basically. There are probably a few more on the
Committee for "C", but [the margin] is very narrow, and for the non-
voting members it is a bit the other way.

Nobody talked much about the interest rate range. I would
say, consistent with the desire not to have a misinterpretation of our
actions, since there is not very strong reason to change the interest
rate parameters anyway, let's just leave the range the same. In that
respect we can say when this [directive] is published that there can
be no misunderstanding about whether any change was made with regard
to the interest rate parameters. I'm not sure that the bottom or top
of any of the [proposed] ranges is going to be relevant during this
period, as a number of people have indicated, so I don't think there
is a strong reason to change the range. I would propose leaving it as
is. It was also implicit in the comments that primary, but not
exclusive, emphasis is to be placed on M1. That is the measure
basically used to construct the paths; we don't ignore [M2], but it's
not exactly a 50-50 weighting proposition. I'm not going to suggest
what weight it has in any numerical terms. I think the primary
emphasis will tend to be on M1, but we will keep a weather eye cocked
on the M2 figure.

In terms of the range [for Ml], as I said, everybody was [for
growth] between 4 and 5 percent, and I would propose that we just
state it in the directive as "between 4 and 5 percent," which I think
is consistent with the atmospherics of the [situation]. That is open
to an interpretation that I personally would not resist, but we would

-74-



1/8-9/80

draw a path on the basis of 4-1/2 percent consistent with that opening
stance. But let me say that we would be more concerned about a
situation where [growth] was tending toward the lower side, 4 percent
or below--we can't control these things that closely--and interest
rates were rising; we would tend to get aggressive more quickly,
providing more reserves. And if it went in the other direction where
it was drifting high, if interest rates were falling out of bed and
giving us trouble on the international side we would be prompter about
getting it back in the range, in terms of attitudes and judgments
about the kind of path shifts that we have to make in the reserve
numbers in the period. But we would start out with 4-1/2 percent.

MR. COLDWELL. I'm not quite sure you said what you wanted to
say.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I may have said it wrong, but I
think you--

MR. COLDWELL. You mean we should react more rapidly if M1
growth goes up with the interest rates falling than if M1 growth went
down and interest rates were rising.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, either way. In other words, if M1
[growth] were low and interest rates were also low, we would be slow
about changing. But if it were low and interest rates were high, we
would change more quickly. It's how quickly we move to make the
judgment, which might have to be made. It's just this judgmental
issue, which we went through at least once, of changing the path in
the view of what is happening.

Well, Mr. Altmann just wrote [suggested wording for] the
directive which says "between 4 and 5 percent for M1 and on the order
of 7 percent for M2." The latter happens to be the alternative B
number. It's another way of saying something around 7 percent. So
that's what I would propose for your consideration. Operationally,
the question arises as to what that means in technically constructing
a path. I suggest that it means 4-1/2 percent for the arithmetic of
it, but we have to make this borrowing assumption in constructing the
path. That seemed to be an easier decision before last week than
after this week. This week has been somewhat of an aberration, where
we had a high funds rate consistent with an exceptionally low--
inexplicably low--borrowing level. All I can say--and I think we have
to be prepared to look at it again after another week or two of
evidence to see if this aberration seems to be continuing or if it
seems to be reverting to the earlier pattern--is that I have a nice
round number to suggest to you; that it is a round number may be its
only virtue. But it falls between the earlier experience and the
present experience, and the number is $1 billion of borrowing. Now,
that is lower than anything we have been dealing with up until this
past week. The latest information on the money supply, as nearly as I
can gather--I hate even to put this in your mind in a way, but having
opened the issue I will put it in your mind--is that the tea leaves we
have on the number for next week's publication would show fairly
significant growth. It's not inconsistent with this 4 to 5 percent
range but, if anything, it is a bit toward the upper side of that
range for January.

-75-



1/8-9/80

MR. AXILROD. A stronger number, Mr. Chairman, is for [the
week] we are not [yet] going to publish.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not the number we are going to
publish this week but the number we would publish next week. It's a
very unreliable indication, but for what it's worth, it is not
inconsistent with this kind of range. But it doesn't suggest that
there is great danger of [Ml] falling way down in the range in
January. That's if that number means anything.

MR. AXILROD. We would be projecting a 5 percent rate of
growth in January instead of 3-1/2 percent, if that number held up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So the proposal is for: 11-1/2 to 15-1/2
percent, or unchanged on interest rates; between 4 and 5 percent on M1
with the understanding that I suggested about 7 percent in M2; and
starting out--but looking at that very hard in a week or two in the
light of this recent aberration--with something like $1 billion of
borrowing.

MR. PARTEE. One cosmetic thing. Would it be better to say
"about" 4 to 5 instead of "between" 4 and 5? It sounds very specific,
as if we expect it to come between the numbers. I realize that's what
we mean, but we won't accomplish it. So maybe if we said "about" 4 to
5 percent--.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [The sentence] says "seeks". I don't know
how--

MR. PARTEE. And "on the order of" is what you have for the
second part.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "On the order of" is what I have for the
second part. I have the slight feeling that maybe "between" is a
little better cosmetically, but it's no big deal. Henry.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I have a couple of points of uneasiness.
One, it seems to me that we may be biasing this in the direction of
lower interest rates by the low borrowing assumption. What happens if
borrowing is higher? Then, presumably, until the nonborrowed reserve
path is adjusted, total reserves would be higher than we thought. So
the low borrowing assumption does have some implication for the total
reserves we anticipate and for interest rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure that's right, Henry.
We are getting into this darn lagged reserve accounting again. But in
the immediate future, which is going to be relevant for judging this,
we will know what the level of reserves is. We are just judging the
nonborrowed reserve path, saying we are putting the nonborrowed
reserve path at $1 billion below what we know reserves will be next
week. That's for the first week anyway. Now, it depends--and this is
the uncertainty--but that would be tighter than last week in terms of
borrowing when we had the market quite tight with a lower level of
borrowing. We just don't know the significance to attach to that.
You might be right, but it's not in accordance with the most recent
experience.

MR. WALLICH. Not the very recent experience.

-76-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. Basically the $1 billion
was arrived at--other than that it's a round number--by being halfway
between the experience of the last week and the previous week.

MR. MORRIS. It would seem to me a lot more sensible if the
Committee instructed the Manager to seek a total reserve path that
would be compatible with these [Ml and M2 growth rates] rather than
have the FOMC try to estimate what the [appropriate] level of
borrowing is. I think we could eliminate that from our agenda without
any loss, and probably some gain, before--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are going to have an argument, I
suspect, with Governor Coldwell. Let me repeat. I think what we are
doing is that we are aiming at a total reserve path and it's 4-1/2
percent [Ml growth] under this version. The instrument that we affect
is nonborrowed reserves. What we don't quite know how to do is [how
to determine] what level of borrowed reserves is consistent with the
total reserves path that is really the objective. That's engineering
in Mr. Roos' terms, I guess. But I'm telling you what I propose for
that element of engineering.

MR. ROOS. If we worked with a monetary base--and I know that
is a dirty word--we'd obviate all these problems, I think.

MR. WALLICH. It does make a difference what the source of
reserves is, and we should not ignore that. It may be a refinement,
but borrowed reserves are not quite the same thing as owned or
nonborrowed reserves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From my standpoint, I suppose I'd be
perfectly happy with what you suggested, Frank--just leaving it to the
engineers, as Larry said--but I'm not sure the Committee as a whole is
willing to leave it entirely to the engineers.

MR. AXILROD. President Morris, if you did that, some of the
staff could sit around and make a decision and say: Well, we think
borrowing ought to be zero. And the funds rate would be dropping very
sharply immediately. We wouldn't make such a callous arbitrary
decision, but you would be leaving that possibility open.

MR. MORRIS. I don't really understand that.

MR. AXILROD. Well, it's because we know required reserves
for next week, and the Desk has to make the choice of whether those
required reserves will be met by borrowing at the discount window or
through the Desk's provision of nonborrowed reserves. If those
required reserves happen to equal the total reserves that seem proper,
the Manager still has to make that decision.

MR. WILLES. But you can't [play] that game for a quarter.
You can do it--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but that is always the position we are
in for any particular week. Even looking beyond the week for which we
know the reserve number, we know what level of total reserves we want
to aim for to [support] 4-1/2 percent or whatever the number is. What
we really don't know in a sense is how to get there, because we don't
control one element in the reserve base.

-77-



1/8-9/80

MR. MORRIS. And, therefore, I don't think it makes any sense
for the Committee to tell the Manager to follow a nonborrowed target
unless we also tell him not to pay attention to total reserves. Now,
in the last month he had to change the nonborrowed target. I think
that was the correct thing to do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if I understand the comment made
yesterday and this is combined with your comment, we have to get some
kind of compromise. We are interested in total reserves. Our success
or lack of success in reaching that target will depend upon, over a
period of time, how much banks borrow and how much we put in as
nonborrowed reserves. Taken together it will depend on both of those
things. It is not an indifferent decision in looking at the outlook
whether they borrow or whether we put in the reserves. Frankly, I
think we have to leave some room to the staff--or Mr. Sternlight, Mr.
Axilrod and myself--in making those judgments as time passes.
Governor Coldwell yesterday raised the question as to whether, if we
make a big change in assumption, the Committee [wants] to look a bit
at the engineering, in Mr. Roos' term. Now, I don't know at what
point you want to do that, if at all. All I'm suggesting by throwing
out this figure is that this is at least a chance to look at the
initial [borrowing] assumption that goes in--we meet again only 4
weeks from now or whatever--and maybe that's enough. But there was a
question about that yesterday. You don't even have to look at the
initial assumption if you want to leave it to us. But it's a matter--

MR. MORRIS. I really think it's meaningless. But if people
get some solace from it, maybe it's all right.

MR. COLDWELL. If you are willing to convert everything from
borrowing to nonborrowed reserves, sure, you can call it meaningless.
I don't believe it is meaningless. I think it's quite meaningful if
we shift from $1.5 billion of borrowing to zero borrowing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The staff presumably would only reach that
judgment in the light of their own assessment as to whether it's
consistent with the total reserve path. They have that constraint.
And if they keep being off the total reserve path, presumably we will
get a new staff or something because they are making the wrong
judgments. But that is an inevitable matter of judgment inherent in
the discount window that somebody has to make. It's a question of
procedure as to how much the Committee wants to get into that
judgment. I tend to agree with you, Frank, that the answer is "not
too much." But at least initially, when we're meeting anyway, it's a
question of how much we want to--

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out right where Frank did.
It's not only the matter of borrowing, it's a matter of what
liabilities the banks use up or [whether they] release reserves that
are not part of the money supply. All those things have to be
estimated and there are a lot of them. To me borrowing involves the
same sort of problem. I see it just the way Frank does.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if you want to proceed this way, I
will tell you instead of asking you in a sense--and permit you to
object--that the staff is planning to seek borrowing of $1 billion
initially and they will use their best judgment as time passes. If
you want to object to that, object, but it doesn't have to be part of

-78-



1/8-9/80

the decision in any formal sense. I don't think we need to prolong
this unless somebody really wants to object to that Solomonic
compromise between the experience of last week and the earlier
experience.

MR. AXILROD. You mentioned the staff and the departure of
the staff if we are off the total reserve path. In that regard the
Committee should remember that with lagged reserve accounting, if
deposits turn out to be strong, borrowing will rise and there is no
way in the world to get back on a total reserve path in as short a
period as 4 weeks; we are going to have to wait longer for the--

MR. MORRIS. But it will dictate because we have a 3-month--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Whatever we start with, if nothing
else goes wrong and we are moving above path, the immediate
manifestation of that is a rise in borrowing; if we are moving below
path, the immediate manifestation is a decline in borrowing. That's
what happens.

MR. EASTBURN. I don't want to prolong this either, but I
have some confusion on a related point and that is the role of the
discount rate. I had been under the impression that the philosophy
[at the Board] was that, given lagged reserve accounting, the
differential between market and discount rates was not an effective
factor in encouraging or reducing borrowing. However, in the Bluebook
there is a comment in paragraph 18 on page 17 about what will happen
if the discount rate isn't changed under certain circumstances and the
influence of that on borrowing. Has there been further thought [at
the Board] about that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that the question of lagged
reserve requirements, which keeps coming up here, and the discount
window posture, which bears upon this question, are under review.
Within the next month or so I think we have to put both of these
matters, certainly the reserve requirement issue, on the agenda. Are
we going to be ready in time for the next meeting?

MR. AXILROD. That lagged reserve requirement [study] will be
ready within a couple of weeks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about the discount window?

MR. AXILROD. That will not be ready in that time frame.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not before the next meeting?

MR. AXILROD. I doubt it. It could be accelerated, but I
don't think--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The point I am making is mainly that any
comment at the moment is tentative depending upon where we go on that.
But given the way we are now operating--the way I look at it anyway--
the amount of borrowing presumably will affect the level of market
rates relative to the discount rate. A couple of comments were made
this morning. Let's suppose borrowings [have to go] way down to
achieve this path. For a while at least the discount rate is going to
constrain how far [the funds rate] can go down, so long as the banks

-79-



1/8-9/80

are borrowing. Now, once they stop borrowing, it can go below the
discount rate; but so long as they are borrowing significantly,
presumably market rates will not go appreciably below the discount
rate. If it went the other way and borrowings tended to increase, one
would expect interest rates to go up given this level of the discount
rate. In theory, I suppose, we could reduce the discount rate in
those circumstances and at the same level of borrowing we might get
lower market rates in the short run anyway than we otherwise would
have. So the discount rate fairly directly affects the market rate,
all other things being equal.

MR. EASTBURN. The practical aspect, as far as those of us at
the Reserve Banks are concerned, is that we do have our Board meetings
once every 14 days and they make recommendations on the [discount]
rate. With a fairly restrictive directive so far as the aggregates
are concerned, there might be some question one way or the other as to
what happens to this--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That judgment--I think I made this point
before--seems to me to be more important than it used to be. That's
because if you propose either an increase or a decrease in the
discount rate, we can basically say that the message, if we're all
interpreting it the same way, is that we want market rates higher or
lower. We're not really saying we want borrowing to be greater or
less, although that may be the ultimate implication over a period of
time. But the immediate effect would be to change market rates rather
than borrowing. Ultimately, [a new discount rate] obviously may
affect borrowing because it has affected the climate in financial
markets. But the short view, as I look at it anyway, is that if
you're sending the Board a message about the discount rate, you're
sending us a message on where you think market rates should be, all
other things equal. Of course, this is why we didn't act in October
and November when market rates were up wherever they were--14 or 15
percent on the federal funds rate--and a lot of people said we should
raise the discount rate to close the gap. It was our judgment that,
at least in the short run, it wasn't going to close the gap but was
just going to put the market rates up further. So it was a question
of whether or not we wanted market rates to go up further. I think
all that changes if we open up the discount window. If we didn't have
a natural restraint on borrowing, which we have had ever since the
beginning of the Federal Reserve System, but if we operated [with an
attitude of] borrow all you want if you find the rate attractive to
you, then we'd have to manage the discount rate in a different way.

MR. PARTEE. I do think that the level of borrowings is
somewhat of an index of possible need. That is, if we got a high and
rising level of borrowings, that would mean we're exceeding the
monetary targets and there would be more indication for a rise in
rates than if we got a low and declining level of borrowing; in the
latter case [reserves] probably would be falling below target and that
would be consistent with the reduction so--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In general.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I don't think it really will seem all that
inconsistent over time.

-80-



1/8-9/80

MR. WILLES. Mr. Chairman, could you explain how the discount
rate influences--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market rate?

MR. WILLES. That's a little different than I thought.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod has a nice econometric
function which hasn't worked so well recently, but nonetheless
reflects the theory. Banks are reluctant to borrow. Their
willingness to overcome their natural reluctance to borrow depends
upon how cheap the discount window is relative to market rates. With
a given reluctance to borrow, they will borrow more if the margin is 4
percentage points than if it's 1 percentage point. So, if you put up
the discount rate and change the existing situation in the margins but
you don't change anything else including the amount of borrowing,
market rates will go up. And they are going to be forced to borrow $1
billion in the current example. In the existing situation that's what
we say. We can control that in the short run. We know they are going
to borrow $1 billion. We know, if this equation is right, that they
will only borrow $1 billion when the federal funds rate is 1
percentage point above the discount rate. So we now raise the
discount rate from 12 to 13 percent; they won't borrow that $1 billion
that we are going to force them to borrow until the federal funds rate
is 14 percent.

MR. WILLES. Well, that's a very interesting view of the
world.

MR. AXILROD. It will hold, President Willes, for 2 weeks;
that's certain under lagged reserve requirements.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, the higher interest rates are then
going to affect everything else, so we begin getting a different
answer. But in the short run I think that's what happens.

MR. BLACK. That's implicitly assuming no change in excess
reserves, Mr. Chairman. I don't think that's right.

MR. WALLICH. Well, the changes that can occur, such as
changes in excess reserves and changes in total deposits that banks
can bring about, would have to be enormous in order to offset any
significant shortfall of reserves because the multipliers are so high
for M1. That multiplier is on the order of 10 and for M2 it's on the
order of 20, so banks would have to bring enormous pressure on their
borrowers and the holders of securities in order to make up a given
shortfall in reserves by changing their reservable liabilities.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they change their liabilities, it will
ultimately affect reserves, and that's what would occur from the
higher level of interest rates. It's not going to affect reserves for
2 weeks.

MR. WALLICH. I'm trying to say what the difference is
between lagged and nonlagged reserves. It is a small one, as far as
the [reserve] adjustments go.

-81-



1/8-9/80

MR. PARTEE. Because even with nonlagged you still have this
tremendous multiplier. Yes, I agree.

MR. WALLICH. That's right.

MR. WILLES. Well, I don't want to prolong the discussion,
but it makes me very nervous that we would take what in effect is a
deterministic, very short-run model and decide the time path for
changes in the discount rate, then market rates. I think that's a
very questionable thing to do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand quite what you are
saying. It doesn't mean that we can't change the discount rate. It
just tells us to recognize that if we change the discount rate, the
short-run impact is going to be to put market rates up, which may be
what you want.

MR. WILLES. Well, what's the short run? Is it 2 weeks or 4
weeks or 6 weeks? We could get exactly the opposite results if you
change the time horizon by a relatively small amount.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about the small amount. But
there's no question that if you put up interest rates, the ultimate
result might be to reduce the money supply, which might have all sorts
of impacts and produce lower rates over a period of time.

MR. WILLES. Fairly quickly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm talking about the immediate impact.

MR. PARTEE. Reduce the money supply and get lower interest
rates!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't have to wait--

MR. COLDWELL. Do you want comments on this compromise or
what are you going to do? Mr. Chairman, I'd rather have [a range]
centered on 4 percent than the 4-1/2 percent you've chosen. The
[risks] of 5 percent are too high to me. I think we ought to be
aiming for something less than that in this coming quarter to make
sure we do not overstimulate at this particular moment, and I'd much
rather we have a 4 percent rate. The range could be 3-1/2 to 4-1/2
percent if we want a center point; or for a single point 4 percent
would be my strong preference. With the $1 billion in borrowing I
have no problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment?

MR. WALLICH. I feel somewhat the same way. Evidently these
[choices] do not matter a great deal [individually], but the
combination of what seems to me historically low borrowing, an
unchanged lower end of the funds rate, and a somewhat higher rate of
M1 [growth] all cumulates a little in my view.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I am on the opposite side. Somebody needs
to speak. It looks as if the chances are that we will have something
like 5 percent [Ml] growth. I don't think we ought to be deliberately
following a mechanism that pushes rates up in this quarter, which is

-82-



1/8-9/80

probably a declining quarter in the economy. I'm prepared to have 4
to 5 percent to accommodate other members, but I certainly wouldn't
want to center [the range] on 4 percent, which I think does bias it in
favor of a rise in interest rates.

MS. TEETERS. I also think it's the wrong time to have
interest rates going up. If the economy slides off, for once we
should be going with it rather than lagging behind it.

MR. COLDWELL. Steve, I thought you said alternative C was
consistent [with the current] rate, not an upward [move in the] rate.

MR. AXILROD. Alternative C in the first quarter we assume
would be [consistent with] something like the present interest rate
level; it might go down a bit, but more likely--

MR. COLDWELL. [Down] a bit, but not upward.

MR. AXILROD. Not in the first quarter.

MS. TEETERS. But it seems to me we want to have some
flexibility here. If the economy does slide off, I think we'd want to
see interest rates slide off. If we go to a very stringent monetary
policy of 4 percent [Ml growth], we are sort of gluing the [funds]
rate at 14 percent with a possibility of it going higher. As I say,
it would be nice for once to have Fed policy moving in sync with the
economy. And if the economy doesn't slide off, the interest rate is
not going to come down.

MR. SCHULTZ. As I see it, Steve said the best estimate the
staff can make at this time is that January [Ml growth] looks like 5
percent. That would mean that if we center it on 4 percent, we're
going to have to have some additional restraint at this point in time,
and I'm not sure that that's that we want.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?

MR. BLACK. For once, Mr. Chairman, though Governor Rice and
I voted at [opposite] ends of this spectrum, we have agreed that
either of us could accept the other's position.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a pretty fine judgment when you
get down to 1/2 percentage point differences. But I would suggest to
both sides that under my interpretation of this the degree of
resistance to either end of the range is somewhat affected by what
does happen to interest rates, which I don't think we know. That is
where the concern is on either side, and the concern is a reasonable
one. But I get a little leeway in there. Now, one can argue that M1
can be put a little higher or a little lower but if there aren't any
other comments, I guess we can vote. Is this package understandable?

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
President Balles Yes
President Black Yes
Governor Coldwell Yes
President Kimbrel Yes
President Mayo Yes

-83-



1/8-9/80

Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
First Vice President Timlen Yes
Governor Wallich Yes

Unanimous, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There were a couple of other things I
wanted to mention, which I'm not sure I remember now.

MR. MAYO. Don't mess it up!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, not on [the policy decision]. I just
want to remind you again that both the discount window procedures and
lagged reserve accounting are relevant to what we are doing, and if we
are really going to stay on this technique, they urgently need
examination. We are not talking about any easy change in either of
those, if we want to change. While the surface logic seems to say to
change from lagged reserve accounting, I suspect it would not be easy
to do that mechanically in the banking system, particularly before
membership gets resolved. I'm just not sure how easy it is to do. If
we are really talking about changing the discount window mechanism to
something that seems to me logically more consistent with this
operating technique, again on first blush, I suspect we are talking
about overthrowing 60 years of Federal Reserve history, which is not
an easy thing to do either. So they are not going to be very simple
questions to deal with, but they are inherent in this operating
technique.

We had an agenda item on release of the FOMC Memoranda of
Discussion for 1974. I take it this has been read by the staff and--

MR. ALTMANN. They have been read and reviewed by the staff
and the international parts have been reviewed also by staff at the
New York Bank. The Treasury has been consulted on it as well, all in
accordance with past procedures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we need a vote on this?

MR. ALTMANN. Yes.

MR. WALLICH. I would like to say that it has been checked
out very carefully. My own feeling, if I were one of the foreign
central banks, is that I'd rather not have that much reported about
what my representative said at particular meetings. But it has all
been correctly checked out, as in the past, and there seems to be no
uneasiness.

MR. PARTEE. The one thing proposed for deletion is the Bank
of England's attitude toward support for the institutions operating in
London. I would have assumed that would be public knowledge by now.

MR. WALLICH. You would rather have even more--?

-84-



1/8-9/80

MR. PARTEE. I'm really asking another question, Henry.
There is something in a memo of yours, apparently, that is going to be
deleted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As a matter of procedure, these are
checked with the foreign central banks, aren't they?

MR. WALLICH. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they requested that this be deleted?

MR. TRUMAN. We volunteered to delete it in this case.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they are happier.

MR. TRUMAN. To answer Chuck's question: When this lender of
last resort issue was being discussed 5 years ago there were some
items, especially with regard to consortia banks, that were left
fuzzy. Governor Wallich's notes are more explicit on the fuzzy part
but because of the fuzziness there may be some disagreement. [It
conveys more] than the public knows; they sense it but they don't know
it. That and the fact that views are directly attributed in those
notes is the reason we felt it was wise and consistent with previous
procedures to delete it.

MR. PARTEE. My only question, Ted, was that I thought it was

He happened to be representing the Bank.
But if it is more explicit than even current public understandings,
then there is a basis for excluding it, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need a motion on this.

MR. COLDWELL. So move it.

SPEAKER(?). Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that shall be released.
The next meeting is February 5. I would assume that the discussion on
the long-range targets, having had [this preliminary] discussion
today, can go reasonably expeditiously. And on that basis I assume we
can do it all in the morning. We do have the lagged reserve
accounting question. We probably will not have a discount window
question [to consider] by that point. I would hope to get something
on the lagged reserve accounting out to all the members of the
Committee before the meeting and that discussion. The meeting time
doesn't necessarily have to be extended at this point. We probably
aren't at a point to make a decision right now.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, in view of yesterday afternoon's
discussion, the basic GNP forecast would probably assume an M-1A
growth rate of something under 6 percent. The staff in its wisdom
will have to decide on somewhere around 5 to 5-1/2 percent to be
consistent with that discussion. In any event, we would have some
alternatives to interpolate.

-85-



1/8-9/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a problem. You remind me. I
don't know whether it's particularly useful right now, but a precedent
was created. Perhaps it's a precedent; we could make it a precedent
anyway. The last time--was it earlier in the year or at the midyear
meeting--?

MS. TEETERS. Mid-July.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the July 1979 meeting a forecast was
given by the Board of Governors in the testimony. It was the Board of
Governors [forecast] of GNP for 1979 and 1980, too.

MR. PARTEE. Well, if you read the Humphrey-Hawkins Act,
that's what it seems to require.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it technically requires
that.

MR. PARTEE. It says the Board's view of the relationship to
or the consistency of the Open Market's Committee decision with the
outlook for the economy.

MR. COLDWELL. Consistency with the outlook of the
Administration? Is that it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. I know it's going to be hard to back up on it
because it was very well received by the Committees. Very little
attention was paid to it, though.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It raises a bit of a question in my mind
on whether it is worthwhile polling the Committee on what their
economic outlook is. We went through that exercise once or twice with
Mr. Miller. Do people want to be polled on what their economic look
is? Is it a useful exercise?

MS. TEETERS. The law requires that the Board--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know. That particular [requirement] is
for the Board, but I have no strong feeling one way or another on
that.

MR. PARTEE. We'll be working off the staff projection at
that time and I think an indication of agreement or disagreement or
points of agreement or disagreement might be helpful.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might ask you for that next time,
but I don't know.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, did I understand that if we have
staff papers on one or more of these studies that you anticipate those
being discussed in the morning meeting rather than at an afternoon
meeting?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we also have a request from a member
of the Committee. Willis Winn sent me a letter raising all sorts of
interesting questions on the international scene--I don't know whether

-86-



1/8-9/80

that letter was distributed other than to the Board members--and
suggested that it might be a good idea to have a general discussion of
the international scene. Some of the questions are quite profound.
That raises the question in my mind whether [to allocate more time for
discussion]. While I think we can pretty clearly do the work we have
to do in February in the morning, would there be any desire in view of
that and perhaps a discussion of lagged reserve accounting and inter-
related matters to begin the discussion the afternoon before? I'm not
sure it would have to be a meeting; it could be a discussion the
afternoon before. How do people feel about that?

MR. MORRIS. I think it would be a good idea.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no great resistance to coming in
the day before, if I read you right.

MS. TEETERS. Could we start earlier in the day--everybody
was here [yesterday] by noon--and end earlier?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not sure that we will do it, but
let me keep that option open if we have some of these other [issues]
to discuss. I don't think it would have to be a meeting, for what
difference that makes, but it might be worthwhile having an early
afternoon discussion session. So, let me review that.

MR. ROOS. In spite of remaining flexible, the earlier we can
get notification the more helpful it would be. Getting travel
reservations is a real problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. I think we are finished.

END OF MEETING

-87-




