









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


TRANSCRIPT

FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING

September 16, 1980

Prefatory Note

This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files. The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.

Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.

Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations

Mr. Kichline, Associate Economist
Mr. Axilrod, Economist



Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

September 16, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal

Reserve System in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 16,

1980, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mr. Schultz
Mr. Solomon
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, Eastburn, and Mayo,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Minneapolis, and Atlanta, respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Petersen, General Counsel
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist
Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis,
Eisenmenger, Ettin, Henry, Kichline,
and Truman, Associate Economists

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic
Operations, System Open Market Account



9/16/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of
Governors

Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division
of International Finance, Board of
Governors

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,
Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Messrs. Boehne,Brandt, Burns, Fousek,
Keran, Parthemos, and Scheld, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta,
Dallas, New York, San Francisco,
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively

Ms. Nichols and Mr. Sandberg, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Chicago and New York, respectively

Mr. Miller, Assistant Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
September 16, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can come to order and approve the
minutes if somebody will make a motion to approve. Without objection
we will approve the minutes. Mr. Pardee.

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions or discussion? We have to
ratify the transactions.

MS. TEETERS. So moved.

MR. PARTEE. Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Do
you have any recommendations, Mr. Pardee?

MR. PARDEE. Yes, in terms of first renewals on swap
drawings, there are six drawings on the Bundesbank for a total of
$301.2 million. And there are three drawings on the Bank of France
for a total of $85 million, one of which is a second renewal for $24
million. The second renewal will require authorization by the
Committee.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume that if we have to renew these,
we will do that without any objection. I don't think it takes any
formal action. I might say that Mr. Pardee raised with me the
question of whether we want to change the terms on the swap
agreements. We can consider that perhaps next month; I'll talk to the
Treasury first. The Committee discussed making the terms more
symmetrical a year ago or two years ago--well, maybe both--

MR. PARDEE. Both; [the first discussion was] about two years
ago.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Most of the swap agreements now say that
when we are in debt, we share the loss or share the gain with the
other central bank; when they are in debt, they take all the risk. So
it's an asymmetrical arrangement and the Germans have raised the issue
in the past. They didn't raise it again this year, did they?

MR. PARDEE. They are prepared to at any moment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They probably will raise it again. They
have raised it in the past and we have had some discussion of it. The
arrangement looks peculiar the way it is [structured] now. Whether we
gain or lose on the operation depends not only on the gain or loss but
on the interest rate differential, because the other side of the
bargain would be to shift to the foreign rate rather than [use] our
rate on the interest rate dimension on the swap. We, this Committee,
if I am accurate, arrived at a consensus either two years ago or one
year ago or both that it would be a good idea to change this and [make
it] more symmetrical. The Treasury agreed in principle but didn't
want to raise the issue at that time for a variety of reasons. I
forget just what the reasons were.



9/16/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My reason was very simple. At that
point Proxmire was opposed to intervention and so was Henry Reuss.
And the Exchange Stabilization Fund of the Treasury, because of paying
off the Roosa bond guarantees, was beginning to run in the red--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To put it mildly.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's finally back in the black
because the IMF drawing added to the resources, and the extra interest
has helped on that. But at that time we were in the red and we would
have gotten a major reaction from the Congress plus a very high level
of unhappiness being expressed by both Proxmire and Reuss on
intervention as opposed to free floating. So I said the timing was
bad even though I agreed in principle. I think the conditions have
changed now. Proxmire and Reuss are much more reconciled to a managed
float and are not that unhappy with it, and the Exchange Stabilization
Fund balance sheet has moved back into the black. Under those
circumstances, I assume the Treasury would not object.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that for a fact; I
haven't talked with them. And I don't mean to debate the issue today.
I just want to warn you that it will probably come up [at our meeting]
next month and we will provide a little more explanation and have some
materials for the Committee. A logical time to bring it up is
probably next month as we get ready for the [annual] renewal [of the
swap agreements] in December. Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or comments?

MR. ROOS. Yes sir. May I start, Mr. Chairman? Peter, we
did an analysis of the direction of interest rates in the period from
June 13 through September 5. That's about a three-month period. And
it's rather amazing, as you pointed out, that most short-term rates
were up [significantly]--90-day certificates were up 239 basis points,
4-month commercial paper was up 236 points, and 6-month bill rates
were up even more than that--and yet the fed funds rate increased by
only 79 basis points according to our computation. Why would there be
that enormous disparity? Why would the fed funds rate have risen so
much less than other short-term interest rates?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure. It depends somewhat on the
time period one takes. Mid-June was just about the low point in the
market rates. The funds rate had come down in June, I believe, to the
9 percent area.

MR. ROOS. Doesn't the funds rate normally track these other
rates?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I'm not sure which follows which.
Normally, some of these other rates tend to build on the funds rate or
on dealer financing costs, [which] tend to track fairly close to the
funds rate. As one goes out in the maturity spectrum, there is a
descending degree of tracking to the dealer financing costs.

MR. ROOS. You mentioned in your report the sense of the
telephone conference, which caused you to intervene in the fed funds



9/16/80

market. Did you have a feeling from that call that you had some
constraints on--

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it was a serious inhibition.
I would not say that it was something that caused us to intervene; I
would say that it was something that modified in some modest degree
the form of intervention. We had some reserves to drain to meet our
paths. We undertook those draining operations rather gingerly; for a
few days, we got some help from the Treasury by getting them to raise
their balance so that reserves could be taken out without the Desk
having to enter the market in an overt way and be seen taking reserves
out aggressively.

MR. ROOS. But you don't feel that--

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it stopped us at any point,
really, from reaching our paths.

MR. ROOS. That wouldn't have been a major contributing
factor to the fed funds rate moving up only 80 basis points, whereas
everything else was going up 250 to 300 basis points? We weren't
holding the funds rate down, were we?

MR. STERNLIGHT. We were not holding down the funds rate; we
were seeking in late August to reach our reserve paths in a way that
avoided putting aggressive new upward pressure on it. In any event,
the funds rate at one point touched the lower bound of 8-1/2 percent
in July, around mid-July, and was up to nearly 11 percent in August.
So it may be to some extent just a choice of the time period in your
comparison.

MR. MORRIS. Early in the period, Larry, the market was
leading the funds rate in anticipation. And I think that's the base
period pattern.

MR. AXILROD. Well, the dating might change your results. It
is true that recently other short-term rates have risen more than the
funds rate. But I don't think that is terribly unusual. After all,
you are talking about 3- and 6-month rates as against a 1-day rate.
There are times when people begin to expect a rise in rates, and the
3-month or the 6-month rate will move a little more than the funds
rate under those conditions. In August we had a big resurgence in
bank credit demand and large CD issues, which pulled up the CD rate in
particular. I don't think that is extremely unusual, although those
rates have moved up closer to the funds rate than had been the
experience over the past two or three years.

MR. ROOS. Those figures in that period did seem to be
[unintelligible].

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, if you used something like the past
5-week interval, the funds rate would be up something like 1-3/4
percentage points--from around 9 to, say, 10-3/4 percent--which is
roughly [comparable to the move on] other short-term rates.

MR. ROOS. Thanks, Peter.



9/16/80

MR. BLACK. If we hadn't overshot our targets, [the funds
rate] would have been up more, too, more than likely. I wonder if
that didn't contribute to some of the rise in the other rates.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Total reserves were [above the path]; we
were about on target on the nonborrowed reserves. If the aggregates
had not overshot the target, yes, that surely would have made--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Peter, based upon nothing more than
reading the newspaper, I have the sense that the market is a little
less hypersensitive to our daily operations than they were two months
ago. Is that true or not true?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Just in the last week or two, I would share
that sense. There was one incident during the period, which I
mentioned, when we did some RPs and the markets really took off; but
they just may have been reacting because they had overdone their sell-
off during August. I wouldn't want to bet a lot of money that they
have really matured to the point where they will take our operations
as fully in stride as we'd like from day to day.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though you're right that it
hasn't been [the case] in the current [period], I still think there is
a residue of misunderstanding about the Desk's operations. I hear
that from all of my visitors--that the Fed is giving conflicting
signals. They don't understand [our new procedures] completely no
matter how much Paul has said on this. That's why we were thinking
that a technical explanation by Peter and his people to the dealers,
with the press listening in, might make a lot of sense. But it might
be wise to wait on the timing of that until we sense that concern
increasing again. At the moment things are quiescent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think The New York Times has a different
guy writing the articles now, don't they?

MR. STERNLIGHT. That's true, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That fellow seems to have gone out of his
way a couple of times to say that these operations are just to provide
reserves or to withdraw reserves and they have no implication for
interest rates.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But he's quoting dealers, too. And
some of the dealers who were critical a couple years ago are more
relaxed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wasn't quite clear to me whom he was
quoting. I thought maybe he was quoting Peter or you; I'm not saying
that was so but I think--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Unintelligible].

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, with the Times change, there is a
better man on the bond market. But this period of misunderstanding
did not involve just that one paper or just the press, Mr. Chairman.
I think it was people in the market, too.



9/16/80

MR. ROOS. The Wall Street Journal has changed its team. I
noticed that Mr. Foldesse, or whatever his name is, who used to write
--or used to misinterpret this--is no longer on that column in the
Wall Street Journal. Is that his name?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It's Foldesse. He is writing it sometimes,
I think.

MR. ROOS. Is he?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe he's on vacation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?

MR. EASTBURN. I have questions, Peter, about the discount
rate. First, has the rate level been a problem for you in the
seasonal targets and so on? Second, what is the market sentiment
about the discount rate and the changes in it?

MR. STERNLIGHT. As to whether the rate level has been a
problem, it has [made it] difficult in these last couple of weeks in
terms of aiming for nonborrowed reserves in that we expected some
greater borrowing. It has been hard to gauge just how much that
borrowing would be. I think one of the factors was that the funds
rate was 1/2 or 3/4 or sometimes even a point above the discount rate
and there was an attraction to the discount window, which makes it
harder to judge. I wouldn't say that it is a serious problem for us
at this point nor do I get the sense that it has been that serious--
some of you [from the Reserve Banks] probably know better--in the
administration of the window. As to market expectations, there was
some feeling around late August that there might be a move on the
discount rate. That has died down some. Possibly it has begun to
crop up again lately, but I have not heard too many comments on that.

MR. EASTBURN. Would a change be a substantial shock to the
market?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think at the moment it would be something
of a surprise, yes.

MR. MAYO. Would it make your job easier if there were a
change, or is that an unfair question?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't see it making the job easier.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Peter, when you made that adjustment of $150
million to the nonborrowed reserves target, what determined the
decision to make it that amount and not $100 million or $200 million
or some other number? This had to do with the overrun on the total
reserves so, of course, by that decision you were determining the
level of borrowing. The level of borrowing again determines the funds
rate. So I'm trying to understand the structure of this reasoning.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm not sure we have a closely reasoned
rationale for just how we arrive at those [adjustments]. This is done
in consultation with Mr. Axilrod and his staff, but it was with Ed



9/16/80

Ettin at the time I believe. Were you there, Steve? We have close
consultation with the Chairman as well. On this occasion and in other
instances when that kind of adjustment was made, it was typically for
some fraction--often roughly but not precisely half--of the overage or
underage of total reserves from the path. I must say that on this
particular occasion it was also because we had had a bulge in
borrowing in the Labor Day week. And if no such adjustment had been
made--if we had not reduced the nonborrowed path--it would have left
us in a position of expecting almost no adjustment borrowing for the
balance of the period. In a way one might say we backed into it by
saying, in effect, that we probably wanted to keep adjustment
borrowing in the $400 to $500 million area. And that contributed in a
major way to that $150 million decision.

MR. WALLICH. Do you use a monthly model or do you use some
relationship between the funds rate and the level of borrowing?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it's that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have that pseudo-precision.

MR. ROOS. Well, if the level of borrowing comes in higher
than we would anticipate, [can't] you reduce the level of the
nonborrowed reserves path accordingly? Can't you adjust your open
market operations for the unexpected bulge in borrowing or the
unexpectedly low borrowing if you ignore the effect on the fed funds
market? Can't you just supply or withdraw reserves to compensate for
what has happened?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, we could. There's always that question
of how much we want to compensate for that high borrowing. We faced
that kind of decision in [this statement] week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Desk can't [adjust] in the short run.
It's fixed. In a sense they could do it over time if people are
borrowing more, as they may be now. They seem to be borrowing more
than we would expect, given the differential from the discount rate.
But in any particular week it is fixed.

MR. ROOS. Do we have to supply the reserves?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to supply the reserves.

MR. ROOS. [Why] do we have to supply the reserves? If we
did not supply those reserves, we'd force the commercial banks to
borrow or to buy fed funds, which would move the fed funds rate up.
What is lurking in the back of my mind is this: Are we, in effect,
frustrating our ability to achieve what we want with the aggregates
and with reserves because of possible concern about fluctuations in
the fed funds market? In other words, do we accommodate that problem?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can force [the depository institutions]
to borrow more in a given week, but we can't force the level of
reserves lower.

MR. WALLICH. Yes, but by forcing them to borrow more, we are
raising the funds rate. And the question here is: Are we in that
more distant sense back on a funds rate target?



9/16/80

MR. ROOS. You said it, Henry!

MR. AXILROD. Governor Wallich, as you know, with lagged
reserve accounting there is simply nothing we can do in the current
week other than determine the level of free reserves in the banking
system with open market operations, given required reserves. And to
the degree that there is a relationship--and it's pretty loose these
days--between free reserves and interest rates, we are in some sense
in the short run determining the funds rate. But in the longer run,
of course, it's the market movement in the money supply relative to
our target that will determine the funds rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All this affects the funds rate, but I
don't think one can say that doing what we did, which was a compromise
in that one week, was aimed to affect the funds rate. You could argue
that if we were pulling back the nonborrowed reserves, that would
[imply] a funds rate objective--that we were forcing a higher funds
rate.

MR. AXILROD. I was trying to say that, inevitably, doing
that in one week would have an effect on the funds rate relative to
not doing it in that week because required reserves are fixed. But
over the longer run--though I don't know what the funds rate would be
because of the looseness in the relationship between free reserves and
the funds rate--it does not. That little [effect] passes away.

MR. WALLICH. I'm not saying that this was not the best way
of coping with it. But conceptually, for instance, one could say that
for every dollar of overrun on total reserves we will reduce the
nonborrowed not by $.50, not by $1.50, but by $10. Well, that would
have produced massive borrowing and the funds rate would have shot up.
Presumably that wouldn't have been a very good decision with the
reason being that one shouldn't disturb the markets unnecessarily.
It's a question of how much of a disturbance to markets one is willing
to accept in order to get closer to the total reserves path.

MR. AXILROD. Well, as Peter mentioned, this was done in the
fourth week of a 5-week period. So one could ask: Should it have
been done in the third week or the second week? It was delayed until
the fourth week because there was some hope that what was in train in
the first and second weeks, in terms of tightening, would show some
evidence of bringing down required reserves. Then, by the fourth week
we were still running well above our total reserve path, so by that
time it seemed only reasonable, in view of past experience and past
operations with this technique, to make an adjustment of roughly half.
As Peter mentioned, if that adjustment hadn't been made at that time--
and I would say maybe we should have done it earlier--then we would
have had a very sharp drop in borrowing and maybe some drop in the
funds rate in the short run, but I'm not sure. We had a large bulge
in borrowing earlier without a lot of rise in the funds rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been in one of these periods,
which seem to be recurrent or almost perpetual, [where the incoming
data on the aggregates seem to move] in one direction or another.
It's not always in the same direction. But all of the actual
preliminary figures and the estimates keep showing lower money supply
figures than eventually materializes. We have had runs either of this



9/16/80

sort or precisely the reverse before. But it doesn't seem to be
random. It does--

MR. PARTEE. It's a [long-running] characteristic. I've seen
it--

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think it's because the economy is
stronger than we are projecting, Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be, but I [don't] see why that
would affect the actual estimates that are made. Why these
preliminary numbers run low or high when they are supposed to be a
kind of random sample is beyond me. But it seems to happen for weeks
in a row.

MR. MORRIS. Nonetheless, I think the system is working,
Henry, in the sense that the Desk has pushed the funds rate up 200
basis points, which I suspect is more than this Committee would have
done if we had made an overt decision on it.

MR. WALLICH. That's for certain.

MR. ROOS. I hate to belabor this, but if we look at the
quarterly average rates of money growth on page 7 [of the Bluebook],
for example, we see that in the first quarter M-1B grew at 6 percent,
in the second quarter it declined at minus 2-1/2 percent--[the number
in the column labeled "Alt. B"] is a misprint, I think--and in the
third quarter its growth has skyrocketed to 12-1/4 percent. One can't
feel that our basic objective is being met with those violent
fluctuations. And I don't think those rates of growth in any way
reflect any action that this group agreed upon or any policy or
directive that we gave. They're just all over the lot. And what
worries me is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand those numbers, frankly.
Just stop for a second. That second quarter has a misprint in it?

MR. ROOS. Yes, that's minus 2-1/2 percent, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It should be minus 2-1/2 percent in both
of those columns.

MR. ROOS. But what worries me is that we will agree on
something today for the next three months, or whatever period, and
then we will hope like mad that somehow or other something out in the
wild blue yonder will occur to enable us to meet that. I don't have
the feeling that we really are causing the events to occur through our
operations that we on the Committee have agreed upon from time to
time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's quite true. But the
question is whether we have control in the short run, and I'm afraid
this recent pattern that you point to shows that we don't. Most of
this increase in the third quarter came in one week!

MR. WALLICH. But we really do have to look at what Frank
Morris pointed to, the behavior of interest rates. You don't like the
behavior of aggregates. Interest rates have been the one thing that



9/16/80

have been even more volatile. And I think that since the mechanism
works through these interest rates, we really have had more leverage
in what we have done.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we got criticized by the bankers
when they were here the other day for having too much volatility in
the money supply growth and too much volatility in interest rates. I
told them they could criticize us for one or the other but not both at
the same time.

MR. FORD. Did you offer them interest rate controls!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have had volatility in both. Why
can't they criticize us for both?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what mechanism gets rid of
the volatility in the one without increasing [the volatility in] the
other.

MR. ROOS. Well, Paul, maybe we ought to do some work to try
to see whether we're approaching this in the most effective manner in
terms of accomplishing what we have all agreed we ought to accomplish
and whether the mechanism [we're using] is really the best one or not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's always a fair question.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, if we do that, we ought to be
sure we understand what our long-run objective is. As I view it, it
is not to make the money supply grow by a steady amount quarter by
quarter but to achieve a longer-run path of monetary and credit
expansion that is conducive both to healthy economic growth and a
reduction of inflation. I don't see the system as working out
unfavorably just because the quarterly pattern is so erratic.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are all matters that we have to look
at as time passes. I don't particularly like what has been happening
in the sense that we have put all this money in the money supply and
have had these quarterly fluctuations which don't seem to be
particularly controllable. What is the significance of that? The
most optimistic view is that these quarterly movements are not very
significant. We had a decline in the second quarter and we have [now]
made up for it. We will see what happens in the fourth quarter, but
the jury is still out. We may have had a short-run bounceback here.

MR. WALLICH. But by having interest rates collapse as
dramatically as they did, don't you think that we did a good deal to
shorten the recession? Housing must have come back somewhat earlier
and some other things may have come back earlier than they would have
had we let interest rates go down gradually the way we otherwise
normally would have done.

MR. PARTEE. And then as the economy [rebounded], the demand
for money increased again and we found ourselves reacting against
that. There is a demand side, Larry, and it has shown sharp shifts
this year. We've worked against them and, of course, it's a question
of judgment as to how strongly to work against the demand factors in
the market. But by [historical] standards, we worked against them a
good deal harder than we did in the past. We have had both a sharper



9/16/80

decline in rates and a sharper, earlier recovery in rates than ever
before in my recollection. And that is because of the change in
policy announced last October.

MR. ROOS. Chuck, I think we've made great progress. All I'm
asking is whether from time to time we shouldn't review what we are
doing and try to make it even better.

MR. WALLICH. If we do something along those lines, I would
urge that it include an effort to see if we can't systemize the
periodic adjustments in the path and find some way to appraise what
the likely effect will be of [making adjustments of] $100 million or
$200 million or whatever.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would call to your attention that Mr. Axilrod
and Mr. Lindsey recently wrote a paper for the American Economic
Association which addressed some of these questions. You might find
it interesting reading. I suspect that you will not agree with it
very much, President Roos, because the indication is that we need to
continue to exercise some judgment and that we need to continue to
look at interest rates to some degree. I also felt that it argued
very strongly for keeping fairly wide target ranges, which I think is
consistent with that as well. But there has been some thinking and
some writing on that subject, and you might find that article
interesting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Paul, I wonder if the October 6th anniversary date
doesn't give us an opportunity to make some educational efforts that
are unrelated to the current market scene to reaffirm some of these
things.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have been considering how best to
do that. I have a public appearance tomorrow; I may or may not take
the opportunity to do that. But it is a matter that continues to
concern me and we will find an opportunity. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my point is related to the one that
I believe Henry was making. It seems to me that we may have held off
making the adjustments to the nonborrowed reserve target too long
because we expected, on the basis of our projections of the demand for
money, that we would get certain behavior. That's very hard to
[predict], as all of us know. It's almost next to impossible to do, I
think, so I would favor a little more prompt adjustments to the hard
data we have in terms of setting our nonborrowed reserve targets.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Could I differ with that? I see
problems with that. There are times when, given the unpredictability
of the markets, if we are in there too quickly making adjustments, we
could be whipsawing the markets. And we will get all kinds of
complaints about the unpredictability of Fed policy. I don't think
there's any across-the-board rule of thumb that we can adopt on the
frequency of adjustments. I think we have to leave it to the judgment
of the people who are [tracking] this on the Board staff and at the
Desk, regarding the chances that a certain movement will get reversed
and whether we should move [immediately] or wait a day. I just don't
see any other way of playing this.

-10-



9/16/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we probably ought to find some time
to discuss this at greater length. But following up on Mr. Solomon's
comment, there is a danger [in making adjustments too promptly].
Let's take March, when the aggregates were running a little high. We
were pretty tough then, but suppose we had followed this procedure and
had made even sharper adjustments to the aggregates when they were
running high in March. What would have happened in April? We in fact
had a 16 percent [rate of] decline; one just doesn't know looking
ahead. The problem is that this process apparently runs, like
everything else in economics, with some lagged effect. And it's those
lags that give us 90 percent of the problem.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I just make a brief
statement? I think Tony is right that we would get a lot of criticism
from the market for more movement in interest rates, but I believe we
would smooth out some of these abberations in the money supply.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a question of what is important.
Now, we can't answer these questions this morning, but I have begun to
hear a lot of comments from people who say the volatility of interest
rates in and of itself is a bad thing.

MR. BLACK. Most people believe that, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not just talking about market people.
I've had a complaint from automobile companies that their dealers will
not hold inventory because, while they perhaps can afford present
interest rates, they're not going to get stuck with a big inventory of
cars [with] the risk that the interest rate will go up to 20 percent
on them and they can't get rid of the inventory. It's that kind of
problem, which I don't think is irrelevant. I hear the same thing
from the homebuilding industry. I don't know how justified that
[complaint] is, but--

MR. BAUGHMAN. It's not necessarily bad.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know.

MR. PARTEE. It depends on what your economic objective is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's hard to say. The housing people, of
course, argue the same thing: That they'd go ahead at current
interest rates, but they are afraid of getting caught in an upswing
[in rates] before the house gets completed. So, I don't know whether
it's good or bad. But there are a lot of problems here that are--

MR. BAUGHMAN. Capital goods can be built to order.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if I may just take one minute of
the Committee's time: It's a little difficult to think of what is
going on with the money supply in a vacuum, independent of what is
going on in the rest of the economy. In the spring we had rather
strange events: We had the introduction of a credit control program,
which was rather unique in our history; we had interest rates going to
levels that were unique in our history; and we had responses in the
rest of the economy that were rather unique. Among those responses
were that people chose to get out of debt rapidly and to get along
with less cash by a huge amount. And the mechanism that the Committee

-11-



9/16/80

put in place, as I would see it, was flexible enough--it could be a
lot more rigid with certain institutional changes--to be responsive to
those changes. I believe it's wrong to think that in the short run
the money supply will behave only in the way the Committee a priori
wants it to behave, Rather, in the short run it will behave in
response to what is going on in the economy, only toned up in certain
ways by what the Committee wants. It's an awfully big thing the
Committee is confronting and in the short run it's very hard to
influence it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there is a range of issues to which
we will be returning continually and maybe in a more orderly fashion
than this morning. Mr. Kichline.

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In view of the questions about the present
economic situation and the discussion of a turning point and all the
rest, let's just pause here for questions and comments on the business
situation. And if anybody wants to volunteer attitudes toward tax
reduction, I would be interested in hearing them. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might ask Jim: What
was the selling rate for automobiles in the first ten days of
September?

MR. KICHLINE. It was 7.3 million units using our seasonals,
and in both July and August it was 6.4 million at an annual rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When do the leading indicators come out?

MR. KICHLINE. I don't know.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not very soon.

MR. MORRIS. It's usually at the end of the month.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Am I correct in associating the
increase in employment with the reduced rate of decline in real
output? I get an impression that probably no productivity gains are
going on.

MR. KICHLINE. We have a significant decline in productivity
in our forecast for the third quarter. The decline in the second
quarter was revised since the last Committee meeting. The early
numbers showed a decline of 4 percent; it's now roughly 3 percent and
we have forecast a further decline. That is, the increase in output
is not sufficient to offset the substantial change in hours worked,
and our productivity number in the current quarter is down about
another 2 percent at an annual rate. So the productivity performance
that is associated with this forecast is a distinctly poor one.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. When people talk about the underlying
rate of inflation corresponding to the average hourly increase in
labor costs in the industrial sector are they assuming flat
productivity?

-12-



9/16/80

MR. KICHLINE. Well, people refer to different things. A
standard approach is to use a cyclically adjusted productivity number,
and those estimates range all over the lot. Our own is something like
3/4 of a percentage point. And it's assumed that businesses tend to
respond to changes in productivity over a longer period of time and
are not influenced by the quarterly changes. So, taking those kinds
of productivity numbers on average, they would dispense with [the
quarterly fluctuations] and say that the underlying trend is something
like [a rise of] 1/2 to 1 percentage point. Using that kind of number
gives us unit labor costs running about 9 percent. Compensation is 10
percent, and with 1 percent or so productivity you get unit labor
costs of 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Aren't hours worked going to be down in
this coming quarter?

MR. KICHLINE. Just a small amount--3 percent relative to [a
decline of] 8-3/4 percent in the second quarter. So they are still
down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three percent down. But you have a GNP
estimate down 3 percent, roughly. I just--

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I am referring to the nonfarm business
sector. Nonfarm business sector output in this forecast is down 4.9
percent. Nonfarm productivity is down 1.9 percent and hours worked
are down 3 percent.

MR. MORRIS. But you implied that if you had had the retail
sales figure when you made the forecast that the forecast would show
less weakness than was in the Greenbook.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, we would take some of the gain in
personal consumption expenditures out of inventory, so it wouldn't all
show up. But I think we'd have at least a percentage point less
decline; instead of a 3 percent decline in real GNP we would now have
a decline of perhaps 2 percent or a shade under.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I have a question, which I could
have asked last time too but didn't, on the gross domestic business
product fixed weight price index. That is the index the staff uses in
its projection as the best index of inflation. [The projection has
for] the first quarter of '81 of [an annual rate of] 10.3 percent, for
the second quarter 9.5 percent, and for the third quarter 8.5 percent.
I can't understand what causes that tremendous improvement in the
inflationary outlook in those two quarters. Also, my second question
is: Why do we use this rather than the GNP deflator, particularly
since we usually respond in terms of the GNP deflator when Congress or
others ask us for figures along this line?

MR. KICHLINE. With regard to the first question, the major
change in this improved outlook is that we have assumed the increase
in social security taxes in January. The employer portion will be
cranked directly into unit labor costs obviously, and we assume that
businesses will try to pass those increased costs through fairly
quickly. So, the first half of the year is importantly influenced by

-13-



9/16/80

the social security tax increases, and that effect tends to wear off.
In addition, running with slack labor markets and unutilized capacity
for an extended period of time we think will begin to make larger
inroads on the level of inflation. But it's mainly social security
affecting the first half and pretty much absent in the second half.

MR. MAYO. In the 1980 pattern, though, you have a higher
rate of inflation in the fourth quarter. I assume that's the Civil
Service [pay] increase and you don't have that for the next year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a Civil Service increase in here?

MR. MAYO. It's 9 percent.

MR. KICHLINE. The big factor is the rapid acceleration of
food prices that we have projected. On the second question you asked,
on why use this one, all of the price indexes now present a
[distorted] picture and we are frustrated as to which one to choose.
We obviously shifted away from the implicit deflator because of the
shifting weights, which give a distorted picture at times. You are
quite correct that the Congress and others often refer to the implicit
deflator. My own preference, frankly, is for something like the PCE
deflator. But in a world in which we have rapid increases in energy
prices, both the implicit deflator and the business fixed product
deflator tend to understate what is happening because of the
subtraction that is cranked into these numbers. So, you can put your
money down and take your choice. There are many indexes available.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Jim, I have noticed--and this may be grasping
at straws--that the average hourly earnings series for the months of
July and August shows a very marked deceleration to around 4-1/2 to 5
percent on top of almost 10 percent for each of the first two
quarters. Is there anything to that or is that just a statistical
aberration?

MR. KICHLINE. On average hourly earnings, I don't know of
any quirky information in terms of the monthly numbers. We have
assumed, in fact, on a quarterly average basis that the hourly
earnings index will be running around 9 to 9-1/4 percent, down a
little from the second quarter. These numbers are very volatile on a
monthly basis but we have not altered our view that there is a
developing trend that's very different from what we have seen in the
first half of the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. The economy seems to be coming around much
faster than expected. This could be for one of many reasons, which
could be very hard to disentangle. I'd like to get your reaction.
One would be that the automatic stabilizers are stronger than we
think, that the budget goes into a bigger deficit faster, and other
such events. Another might be that our interest rate policy has been
particularly effective. A third might be that the economy is just so
inflation jittery that after people catch their breath they rush out
and try to beat the game again. But in any event, we do seem to have

-14-



9/16/80

gained a responsiveness to upward factors and lost a responsiveness to
downward factors. I'd like to get your thoughts on that.

Now, with respect to tax policy, I'd just say that if the
economy is stronger than expected, interest rates presumably will be
higher. Monetary policy in some sense would be tighter. A tax cut
will make fiscal policy easier. So we would be moving exactly in the
wrong direction on the fiscal/monetary policy mix--toward tighter
monetary policy and an easier budget stance. That's just the opposite
of what a growth-oriented economy should have.

MR. KICHLINE. With respect to your question, I would link
the second and third quarters together. If you look back at the
misses in terms of actual performance relative to expectations, the
second quarter was a big miss not only to the staff here but I think
as a general matter. It was much weaker than before. So, I would
think that the rather extraordinary measures taken in late winter or
early spring had a significant impact, and in retrospect a greater
impact than we would have judged at the time. It would not seem
unusual, therefore, to find some snapback in the third quarter in some
of those sectors that were sharply depressed. Now, [I don't know]
whether that has occurred because interest rates are lower, consumer
attitudes are different, monetary policy is different, the automatic
stabilizer response is working, or fiscal policy [is easier]. I think
in general one can say that we got off track in the second quarter and
it's not unusual to see some snap-back. The critical question is
whether in fact this is the beginning of a sustained sizable expansion
in real activity. And assuming the monetary policy that's in the
forecast, which we perceive to be restraining--consistent with some
further rise in interest rates--even with the tax cut we do not
believe that we are on the verge of seeing sustained strong expansion.
It's quite possible that we could have a couple of months of fairly
strong business news followed by some weakness. But I don't see that.
The key issue is whether we are set up for continued strong expansion.
I don't see that as a likely outcome at the present time.

MR. WALLICH. This few months of weakness that you set out as
a possibility: Could you visualize that going to the extent of GNP
growth turning negative again?

MR. KICHLINE. Oh, I think so. That's the double dip or the
W or the extended L or any of the other exotic terms in fashion. I
think that's quite possible. In the staff forecast, for example, we
are talking about a small negative, and it doesn't take a great deal
at an annual rate to find something that would flip that to positive
or [more] negative.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In our financial report for the
Redbook, we included the views of some key financial experts in New
York. And Henry Kaufman in those remarks is predicting a double-dip
recession.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Are there any estimates yet as to the amount
and the timing of capital expenditures associated with the energy
programs that are now apparently getting shaped up and into form for

-15-



9/16/80

financing either directly by the government or by government
guarantees of the interest rates?

MR. KICHLINE. We do not have anything in house and I am not
aware that anything is available within the government. Our own
assumption is that the program is being funded essentially with
windfall profits and [will involve] synthetic fuel and that sort of
thing. We have much longer lead times. It would not have an
appreciable impact within the year 1981 but would be building over
time. The energy sector itself in our forecast is fairly strong. We
implicitly are using the energy sector as one that is holding up
business fixed investment. That is, we'd have a sharper decline if it
weren't for substantial energy sector investments. I can't answer
your question directly, but I'm not aware of any such numbers around.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Would you anticipate, assuming the program
evolved, that we would be speaking about magnitudes of capital
expenditures that would become a significant element in the trend of
the economy?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, over the long run. But I really do think
we are talking about a medium-term horizon, in the mid-1980s or so,
given that these programs have long lead times. So, later on in this
decade, if the programs continue, the dollars expended [will be
significant]. In current dollar terms, expenditures of $200 billion
plus over a period of time are being talked about. That, in fact,
will be a principal feature of the business investment sector later in
the decade.

MR. BAUGHMAN. As to your question on the turning point, Mr.
Chairman, I think the staff projection is about as good as can be
done. I see no reason why it doesn't have as high a probability of
materializing as any that might be made. And I certainly share the
view that we don't seem to have the stage set for a sustained
recovery. I would visualize the next year or so as an ongoing battle
between monetary restraint and the deeply imbedded and still spreading
inflationary thrust, with the result that improvements in employment
and production may well be a casualty of the struggle between
continued [monetary restraint] and the surging inflation thrust.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I should regionally
adjust that comment; I interpret it as quite bearish.

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

MR. PARTEE. That was a national comment; it wasn't a Texas
comment.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Now that you've provided an opening, there is
a continuation of what strikes me as a rather unbelievable volume of
new office building construction in all centers of significant
population size through the Southwest. It does not seem to be slowing
down. That is, new projects are being planned, funded, announced, and
started. And the financing for them, particularly the equity money,
almost without exception seems to come from foreign sources. I'm told
that if you can't figure a project so that it looks as if it will be
profitable and viable with some debt in it, that presents no
particular problem. The suppliers of the equity simply supply more

-16-



9/16/80

equity and are willing to take a fairly low computed return on the
equity they put in. It just goes on seemingly without--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There must be some correlation between our
ability to sustain office building and not do much factory building
and the productivity figures.

MR. BAUGHMAN. That could well be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. You asked about where we stand on tax policy, and
that's one of the things my staff has been looking at. We're very
concerned about the explosive growth on the spending side that we've
seen in the last year or so. It now appears that on a year-over-year
basis federal spending both for defense and nondefense purposes is
well up into the double digit range, well beyond earlier forecasts.
I'm curious to know, Jim: In your projection and in your model of the
federal deficit on an NIA basis, I take it that $67 to $68 billion
shown is without the tax cut.

MR. KICHLINE. No, we have a $28 billion tax cut in our
forecast; [that is an assumption] we adopted two months ago or so. We
have not changed it; we haven't matched it up with the
Administration's proposal. So we do have roughly a $28 billion tax
cut.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Effective January 1st?

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. Well, retroactive to January 1.

MR. FORD. You're saying that without the tax cut there would
be a $40 billion deficit next year?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, roughly. We'd have a somewhat weaker
economy, we would assume, so receipts would be lower. So it wouldn't
all be taken out. The Administration has a $36 billion deficit in
fiscal '81 with their tax proposal, which is assumed to come along
late in the fiscal year and that affects receipts principally in the
following fiscal year.

MR. FORD. Well, I remember the President saying just a few
weeks ago that there was going to be a zero deficit next year. So I
[proceed] based on the trend in their forecast rather than the
absolute level. Looking at off-budget spending trends that are coming
on stream and adding them on to a realistic estimate of the deficit, I
would come to the conclusion that we definitely have to resist a
countercyclical tax cut at this time. It would lay the groundwork, as
a couple of the previous commentators have noted, for a very tough
situation for us early next year in that we would be looking at a lot
of pressure in the financial markets with a possible crowding out
scenario. We'll be caught in the trap of either having to create and
be given [the blame] for a credit crunch or for letting the aggregates
get away from us in the first, second, and third quarters of next
year. And when we have already committed ourselves in public to
reducing the rate of growth of the money supply I don't see how we can
hope to do that if we have to do it in the context of a huge deficit
developing early next year. So, I think we have to fight this

-17-



9/16/80

countercyclical tax cut. But if we wanted to add something to what we
say, I'd say it should be directed toward the need for a longer-term
change in the tax structure that would emphasize taxing consumption
more and investment and saving less, together with some indexed
reduction over a longer period of time of the inflation premium in the
tax structure on incomes of all kinds. I'd be inclined to continue to
fight the tax cut as a countercyclical [measure] and start to fight
for tax reform as a longer-term measure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm basically in agreement with
the staff's view on where the economy is going. In the near term I
might be even a bit more optimistic than the staff. I've felt for
some time that the recession is likely to be short and I think when we
look back a couple of months from now we may find that July was the
trough of the recession and we were starting to come out of it in
August. But the long-run growth prospects that the staff sees are not
good. And certainly the growth of 2 percent is far, far below what we
have typically seen for the first four quarters of a recovery. I
believe we need slow growth, and I'd be happy with 2 percent real
growth. I do think Ernie is right that we're going to be struggling
over the next year. I think we will struggle not just over the next
year but over the next 5 to 10 years with the question of how we trade
off real growth against fighting inflation. We're going to have to
try to find a policy that will let us stick with the long-run battle
against inflation and not try to get it done right away.

Now, I want to call attention to the fact that I can agree
with the staff's forecast for next year only if the kind of policy
assumptions that underlie it [are realized]. They include a
substantial tax cut at the first of the year and a monetary policy
that I don't think is properly characterized as simply saying that M1
grows at the midpoint of the range we've been setting. [The reason is
that] the staff's forecast hypothesizes a substantial reduction in
demand for money. I'd like to have Jim expound just a little on his
best judgment as to what the outlook for next year would be if in fact
that drop in the demand function for money doesn't occur.

MR. KICHLINE. I think I've heard this question somewhere
before! As you know, we have assumed a further downward drift in the
money demand function. For 1980, from the fourth quarter of '79 to
the fourth quarter of '80, given what has happened and assuming no
further downward drift, the drop amounts to about 3-1/2 percent. For
1981 our forecast assumes [a drop of] about 4 percent. That is the
difference between the assumed actual money growth and that which
would be predicted by the econometric model, which was estimated
through mid-1974. It implies that there are financial innovations or
other changes. We have assumed 4 percent [based on] what has occurred
in several years in the past. But it's really a matter of faith, one
might say, at this juncture. There is some basis for assuming it.

MR. PARTEE. Is that for M-1A, Jim?

away--
MR. KICHLINE. That's M-1A, right. Now if you take that

-18-



9/16/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's M-1A unadjusted? You just take M-1A
at its raw value?

MR. PARTEE. We've got NOW accounts--

MR. KICHLINE. No, we don't. It's M-1A adjusted for ATS
accounts. It gets very messy and complicated and is best left
untouched here. But in any event if we take that away, we have in
effect a tighter monetary policy than is assumed in our forecast. We
did a model run which essentially limited measured money growth to
4-1/4 percent and had no drift [in money demand], and we get no
recovery in economic activity at all. It's flat throughout 1981 and
the deflator is .3 to .4 lower. So we're talking about nominal GNP
down 2 to 2-1/2 percent from what we have in the forecast now, but we
don't get a recovery in economic activity. And the model says that we
get astronomical interest rates that are hard to believe--a bill rate
of 18 percent or something like that.

MR. GRAMLEY. Why are they hard to believe?

MR. AXILROD. It's hard to believe they'd be sustained, I
think.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, if we extend this to the second quarter
of 1982, we can see the collapse. Bill rates are, say, 18 percent and
the deflator is 8 percent. It's hard to believe that that would
persist for any extended period of time.

MR. GRAMLEY. But it persists unless the economy has an even
worse performance than that or unless the political pressures on us to
give up are so substantial that we cannot persist.

MR. KICHLINE. Right. I have no problem with that. I'm just
saying it's not a sustainable pattern. At some point you have to get
back into balance, which can occur from any of a number of sides.

MS. TEETERS. What is the historical record on this drift in
money demand?

MR. KICHLINE. Let me just read [the numbers]: 5-1/2 percent
in 1975; 4 percent in 1976; 1-1/4 percent in 1977; 1/2 percent 1978
and 1979, and we're estimating 3-1/2 percent in 1980.

MS. TEETERS. It's not a steady series. It fluctuates
rather--

MR. KICHLINE. Oh, it's by no means steady.

MR. WALLICH. It fluctuates cyclically, doesn't it? That is
to say, at the beginning of a recovery velocity increases more.

MR. GRAMLEY. This is not a velocity increase; it's a
downward shift in the money demand function. This takes into account
the cyclical movement in velocity that accompanies rising interest
rates. This series is one that says: What would the demand for money
be, given both nominal income and interest rates?

-19-



9/16/80

MR. WALLICH. I was thinking without rising interest rates.
At constant interest rates, velocity tends to increase more at the
beginning of a recovery. The explanation would be that people have
accumulated some liquidity and some idle funds.

MR. AXILROD. I think what Governor Gramley is saying,
Governor Wallich, is that in '75 and '76 we might have been making an
analysis that we were at the beginning of a recovery and velocity
would be increasing. That's true. But if we only said that much, we
would have been underestimating how stimulative monetary policy really
was in 1976 because in addition we had this downward shift in money
demand. People didn't want to hold money, so velocity was going up in
part also because of that. That's what this demand shift is; it
already takes into account the impact of interest rates. And with
that impact, people want to hold even less money, so we have an even
bigger velocity. In effect, the measured growth of money in '75 and
'76 of 4 or 5 percent or whatever it was in an economic sense was
really more like 10 percent.

MR. MORRIS. Yes, but what you're talking about is an
unexplained residual that we can't forecast. Isn't that really--

MR. KICHLINE. That's the problem with this. This is an
error in an equation in which [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know the great faith I have in these
equations in general, Mr. Kichline. But given that great faith, the
naive question that [occurs] to me is: Why do we keep talking about
this equation that had [an end point] of '74? Why don't we refit it
through '79 or something?

MR. KICHLINE. The period [since 1974] is one in which we
have had lots of financial innovation going on; it [leads to] very
unstable [relationships]. You can fit anything you want. We have an
almost unlimited capacity to supply new equations or numbers. But you
are quite correct in suggesting that one ought to be cautious in using
this. Nevertheless, I think it is instructive in the sense that it's
a money demand function that makes some economic sense.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But when you read off those numbers it
sounded as if this demand shift that Governor Gramley talks about
would basically disappear if you had used the last five years in
fitting the equation. It would be in the equation.

MR. KICHLINE. No, I don't think so.

MR. GRAMLEY. It would be hard to fit that for the whole
period and get [meaningful equations] because the co-efficients would
be moving. You would be averaging through them and you'd get a result
that would be neither fish nor fowl. It wouldn't pertain to the pre-
1974 period or the post-1974 period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was thinking about just fitting it for
the post-1974 period. The average shift was what, 3 percent or
something, in those numbers you read?

-20-



9/16/80

MR. AXILROD. If we throw out '75 and '76, it probably would
still fit [the rest of the period]. It depends on what one thinks
really went on in that period.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, [if you throw out] '75, '76, and '80,
you're right on track, but--

MR. GRAMLEY. The point that I want to make is that since
we're uncertain about this shift--and I agree with you, Mr. Chairman,
that we just don't know enough to put a lot of faith in these
equations--what we're looking at is a policy course that we really
ought to be assessing in terms of a potential for real growth at
something between 0 and 2 percent. We really don't know where
[potential] falls in that interval. It may fall toward the lower end
or it may fall toward the upper end. So we're looking at a forecast
for economic activity which will produce an unemployment rate that may
hold steady or may rise very substantially next year. And that is the
way we need to assess what we're doing, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Jim's answer to your question, Mr. Chairman,
reminds me about a forecaster friend of mine who was quoted in the
paper recently on the outlook as saying that he had a whole pile of
numbers in front of him and they were all useless. It is frustrating
when one hears all the scenarios that could develop--the double-dip,
the L, and so forth. But cutting through all that, if one looks back
three or four months ago and considers the divergence of opinion then,
there may be a little more unanimity on what is really going on or
likely to go on than there was earlier, for whatever that may be
worth. What seems to be showing through, particularly in comparison
with the expectations of last spring, is that almost everybody would
agree that the recession is going to be shorter than expected--that's
the good news--and that inflation is going to be worse than expected,
which is the bad news. And I know a few that I would consider to be
reputable forecasters who are forecasting a boom in 1981. And therein
lies our real dilemma. As I look at the Board staff's forecast on
real GNP and the implicit price deflator and the unemployment rate--
and our staff forecast is not significantly different on any one of
those--the inflation picture is certainly discouraging, particularly
in terms of past cyclical experience. You will recall that in the
last recession the GNP deflator stood at 10.6 percent at the trough,
the first quarter of '75. But a year later it was about half that
amount. We really made progress in the four quarters after the trough
of the recession. If one tracks [the progress] in previous
recessions, [the pattern] is essentially the same. The real dilemma
for us on the policy side is posed by the inflation numbers we are
looking at in this forecast, where one year after the presumed trough
of the recession, which is the fourth quarter of this year, we still
have an implicit deflator of 8.8 percent, an unemployment rate of 8.3
percent and a real growth rate of somewhere around 2 percent. The
question it poses is: How much, in fact, can demand management do to
change this? I'm not happy about what I consider a reversed mix of
monetary and fiscal policy that seems to be shaping up; I would share
Governor Wallich's feeling on that. But as long as we have this kind
of inflation outlook, which is certainly too high to be socially or
economically acceptable--and ditto on the unemployment rate--it would
be hard for me to favor a tax cut for the reasons that have already

-21-



9/16/80

been set forth. I cannot support a tax cut in view of the outlook for
persistently high inflation unless or until the federal budget gets
changed in a way I don't think it is going to get changed. I think we
are stuck being the only game in town in terms of gradually bringing
some pressure to bear on the inflation problem. And as much as I
would like to see tax reform, tax reduction net, I share your view
that it's something we shouldn't encourage in the near future.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're estimating in New York that the
fiscal year 1981 deficit, brought up to date with all the recent
adjustments, is around $61 billion. Most of the people in Wall Street
are also estimating a deficit in the $60 billion area.

MS. TEETERS. Does that have a tax cut in it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That has in it a tax cut which
represents basically the consensus [unintelligible]. Remember, we
have the Reagan tax cut, the Carter Administration's, and the Senate
Finance Committee's. [Our forecast] is based more on the
Administration's [proposed] tax cut. It also includes the
cancellation of the import levy tax and the withholding tax on
interest and dividends, which revises the estimates. And there is a
revision involving improved revenue because of the earlier bottoming
out of the recession. I understand that the Administration has
updated its estimate only to $41 billion so far. What they did was
simply to take the mid-session figure of $29.8 billion and add the
adjustment for the economic renewal package and the failure of the
bill on withholding tax on interest and dividends. Having said all
that, I don't see how we could oppose for substantive reasons, aside
from the momentum, a moderate tax cut. I think a moderate tax cut
makes sense. I agree with what I believe is the general feeling in
the country that it ought to be focused in a more structural sense to
promote investment and hopefully, although I'm not very sanguine about
it, some improved productivity. The impression in the press, Paul,
was that you took the line in your first appearance on tax matters
that a tax cut probably would be advisable this year but was premature
to consider at the time [of your Congressional testimony] and ought to
be studied carefully. I had the impression, maybe an erroneous one,
from the press that in your more recent appearance you seemed to be
opposing any tax cut. There was an implication of that more than the
emphasis on timing and composition in your earlier appearance. Is
that an accurate press [account]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know that I meant there to be any
difference, really. Both times I conceded that they could go ahead
now if they wanted, if they didn't put the expenditures up any higher
than they are now projecting on the investment side. I don't think
that's possible or practical. I don't think they're going to go along
with just the investment side alone, but there's room [for that]. I
am not ready to say that there's room for anything beyond that unless
the expenditure trend looks better than I so elegantly expressed it in
my last appearance. And I don't know what that [will be]. The
Administration's pro forma projection for '82--with pro forma meaning
just where current services will carry it--is for roughly an 11-1/2
percent increase in budget expenditures in fiscal '82, which is when
their tax proposal would have its full effect. That might leave us

-22-



9/16/80

with a balanced budget if the expenditures were no higher than that
trend, if I recall these numbers correctly, at around the 6 percent
unemployment rate. The full employment budget would still be in
surplus, but the full employment budget assumes a lower unemployment
rate than that by a substantial margin. Now, is that adequate? I
don't know. I think it's borderline. That is where I come out.

MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not looking at the substantial
additional deficits from the off-budget agencies, which are now moving
toward $20 billion. Then there's the borrowing by the sponsored
agencies, which also is on the order of $20 billion. I don't know if
it's fair to throw that one in, but surely one has to add the off-
budget agencies to the $61 or $62 billion.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But at the same time, given
the increase in the tax burden and given the psychological attitudes
in the country--and I'm not talking about politics in the narrow sense
of the term--there will be an enormous loss of confidence in this
country's future and in the vigor of the growth of this economy if
people feel that they simply have to accept this increasing tax burden
with no relief in sight. As I said earlier, I strongly support not
giving any relief in across-the-board personal income tax cuts, even
though those [taxes] are terribly onerous. But I think we have to do
something to show that we're working toward a tax policy oriented
toward structural improvement in the economy. I suppose it is
analogous to my feelings on productivity. It's not a question only of
tangibles, things one can quantify. It gets get into social,
cultural, psychological, and work ethic attitudes around the country.
In an intangible way the people's perception of the tax burden and
what government is doing about it is a very important substantive
factor in the economy. And I don't think we can just look at the
numbers and say: Well, it's $60 billion and, therefore, because we
know it's going to make monetary policy tougher we oppose it.
Obviously, if we can bring down the expenditures side, that would be
great. But I don't believe it's going to happen because of the
defense component, no matter who gets [elected]. We have a choice
among various unpalatable alternatives. If we can do something to get
the spending side down, fine; everybody agrees on that. But the issue
still is: Where do you stand on the tax cut?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are going to have a little difficulty
with time here, if we don't move along. We have talk of a double-dip
recession and we have a double-dip request to talk from Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I can't disagree with the staff
projection, although I put myself in the camp that thinks the
potential for a W shape [outcome] is very real. But we are also in
another period where I think there may an inordinate focus on what the
next quarter is going to be, whether it's going to be a little plus or
a little minus. In a sense that question is academic because when we
look beyond those numbers and underneath the numbers what we really
have to come face to face with is a rather dismal picture. We are
almost a year after October 6, 1979; and the year was by any standard
a very wrenching one. Certainly, I think one can conclude that if it
were not for the role the Federal Reserve played, it would have been a
heck of a lot worse. But the fact of the matter is, looking now a
year later at the price numbers, for example, one can throw a very,
very small net around the annual inflation numbers for 1979, 1980, and

-23-



9/16/80

1981. And certainly the prospects for the real economy are at best
mixed. When I think about the whys of that, I am even more persuaded
now than I was that the volatility and the uncertainty that we see
still reflect a fundamental fear and expectation that somehow or other
inflation is going to get worse. There is a recognition, I think
often subliminal, that if inflation does get worse, the result will be
even more instability.

When I put that all together in the context of public policy,
bypassing the tax question for a minute, it seems to me that we have
another credibility problem to deal with. Up until now there has been
a lot of discussion about credibility measured in terms of whether we
stick to and hit these targets for the money supply. If one looks at
1981 and assumes that we stick to them and hit them, it seems to me
that we are openly facing another credibility question. That is:
Okay, we've done all this and we've hit these targets for two years in
a row or whatever it will be, so where are the results? The
credibility question that ultimately will arise is: Does it work, can
it work, or will it work? And if we are looking at a situation at the
end of 1981 that looks anything like the forecast, it's going to be
even more difficult to justify the kind of policy we are talking about
simply because people's frustration levels in terms of
[unintelligible] and performance will have been eroded, I suspect.

That's a back door way of getting to the tax question. My
instinct is like a lot of other people's. Looking at the sheer
numbers and the sensitivity of expectations and all the rest, my gut
feeling is that a tax reduction, even a well structured one, would be
counterproductive at this time. But at the same time, I also feel
that there has to be a way that a tax reduction can be structured in a
positive way, along the lines that Mr. Ford and Mr. Solomon spoke of.
I am still very intrigued with the idea that somehow or other there
should be a way to structure a tax cut that helps us get at the wage
question. And I think the pressures are going to be enormous in that
direction. I wish I could figure out a way to make some more sense
out of it. But my bottom line on the tax cut again comes down to its
structure and how it is done. If it's just a straight traditional
kind of tax cut, then I would have to resist it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black. And I urge succinct comments
by all.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have no serious disagreement
with the Greenbook forecast for the remainder of 1980. As for whether
this flurry of favorable news we have seen constitutes an upturn that
is already in progress or near, we are inclined to doubt that. We
think it might be, as Jim Kichline suggested, in part a bounceback
from the abandonment of the special credit restraint program. And I
don't think we have yet seen the full reaction to the deceleration in
the aggregates that we have brought about and that we have committed
ourselves to doing. So the main difference we see from the staff's
viewpoint is that we have more damping of inflationary expectations
and less inflation than they do. As for the reasons, I'd just have to
summarize by saying that we have more faith in our post-October 6th
actions than I believe the staff does. It's easy to forget, as John
Balles reminded us awhile ago, that we had a pretty significant
deceleration in inflation as late as the '75 downturn before the
aggregates got away from us. I'm also a bit encouraged by the flurry

-24-



9/16/80

of indicators in the Redbook that we have had some weakening of price
pressures at both the retail and the commodity levels. Finally, if
the staff is right on its forecast of inflation, as most people seem
to think--which I guess is more likely in some ways to be right than
ours--then I would be very skeptical that we would have as much
strength in the real economy as the staff projects.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. My view is very simplistic. I have been on
this Board a little over a year now and my attitude has changed fairly
considerably. I've come to believe that inflation is intractable,
dangerous, and overwhelms all other problems that we have. I think we
are going to have a very slow recovery; I think we need a slow
recovery. I don't see how prices and wages are going to come down
unless there is pressure on them over a considerable period of time.
I hope whatever Administration we have understands the luxury of
having the first year of its Administration be one which follows a
recession, which hasn't happened in a long time in the past. I hope
they understand that they can do something next year that they may not
have the opportunity to do any other time. My attitude on a tax cut
is that it ought to be geared with inflation in mind. We should
ignore questions of equity; we should ignore questions of stimulus.
Our policy should be geared entirely to attempting to do something
about inflation. I like the idea of doing something about
depreciation. I like the idea of trying to offset somehow the social
security [tax] increase. I think we have to have some consideration
of a tax-based incomes policy. I don't know how that would work. I
haven't been able to figure out anything that is practical. Our
experience with credit controls leads me to believe that it's hard as
the devil to have that kind of situation, so I'm not very sanguine
about [devising] one that can work. But I believe some kind of an
incomes policy is necessary because I think every single thing we do
has to be geared to that one fact that inflation is the most serious
problem we face. It's bigger than everything else put together and
we've got to begin to get it down over time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey. Welcome back.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm delighted to be
here. Let me just start by saying that we would not differ greatly
from the staff's projection on the economy. We think the coming
quarter might be a bit stronger than their projection because we start
from the premise, regardless of what the Chairman or others around the
table may say about a tax cut, that a cut is in train and we are going
to get one. We should be talking about the structure of that tax cut
rather than whether or not we will or will not have one. Having said
that, it also seems to me that we have not made any real progress
against inflation as a result of the fact that people are now
projecting a very short recession. Historically it's true that we
don't see any movement on prices until well after the recovery is
under way. What I'm afraid of is that our new procedures have done
nothing more than shorten the cycle and that they will not produce an
atmosphere that will permit any movement against prices this time. If
we indeed have the kind of growth that the staff is projecting, which
is modest to be sure, and if we have gone through 3 or 6 months of
decline albeit very steep and we get no movement on the price side,
then I think it will all have been for naught. That says to me that

-25-



9/16/80

in the period ahead, since we are the only [game in town], monetary
policy is going to have to be fairly restrictive. And we are going to
have to face the criticism that Jerry just mentioned, but that's a
year down the road. So I'd rather get something working now, even
though we could have negative growth in the period ahead because of
the tight monetary policy, given that we will get a tax break, and
take that heat a year from now. Otherwise, we have will gone through
a period that has netted us nothing and we are going to have to start
again, whether it's incomes policy or some other type of governmental
policy. Maybe that will come to pass, but I would like this Committee
at least to put the kind of monetary policy in train that suggests
that we may not have positive growth in the period ahead--that we may
be looking for a W or a little longer [before recovery].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. I assume you are going to have
a statement of faith.

MR. ROOS. Succinctly, I would say that at a time when both
major political candidates seem to be competing for what they can
promise in the way of a tax cut, I would strongly support what you
have said, even if you have to overkill, in terms of opposing a tax
cut until we get through the November [drama].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that conclude comments on this
general subject? Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Paul, personally, I have been surprised at the
bounceback. I don't know how many more months it will take to
convince me that I'm wrong on that score, but I still have a question
mark. But I think we have lost our benchmarks regarding the impact of
certain things on economic activity. Take interest rates, for
example, and the changes in financing practices that have taken place
to offset [the effects of changes in interest rates]. There is all
this building being done now with different kinds of financing where
the interest rate per se is not as high, but a 10 percent gross kicker
is established on top of any interest rate so that whenever we raise
the level of rates it doesn't necessarily change the outlook in the
[usual] sense of the term. [Lenders] have gone to financing that is
not long-term; it's a 30-year commitment with a rollover every five
years and a 2-1/2 percentage point change in interest rates either way
adjusted over that [5-year] period of time. So there has been a lot
of adaptability--in terms financing structures--to changes in rates,
just as we have had adaptability in terms of money. I'm impressed as
I watch the checks on the money funds flow through our office. When
you see a check for $12 million drawn against balances that don't
exist, you wake up to what is being measured and what velocity means.
There was an announcement this morning by Master Charge about their
introduction of new check concepts and plastic money to replace some
of our measures [of money]. So, again, I think our benchmarks in
terms of what we do [and the impact on] economic activity need to be
reexamined.

On the other side, I'm impressed with the sociological
changes that are taking place in our society. Part of this goes back
to the inflation issue. We ought not miss the polarization that is
taking place in society between those who are being pinched by
inflation and those who are not. It's no longer just a racial issue;
it's showing up in a variety of ways. And that scares me, frankly, as

-26-



9/16/80

I ponder what it means down the road. When one talks to doctors and
psychologists and others about what complaints they hear [from
patients], one finds that finance has suddenly become the biggest
factor in their consultations. Personal bankruptcies in Ohio are the
third or fourth largest in the nation and they are growing. Again, our
benchmarks are lacking in terms of our ability to appraise what is
happening on that score. There is a certain segment of our society
that is really being squeezed by inflationary developments, and food
prices are only going to add to this. So the pressure for a tax cut
is going to be very real. The problem is that it won't really address
the problem. It will just bail out a few people and the issue will
come back again down the road.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are being squeezed for time, I keep
saying. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I would say first that I think the bottom of the
recession has been reached or is very close to being reached and that
the economy is probably turning up right now. Secondly, I think it
will be a sluggish recovery. The price increases will be so large
that there won't be available income to spur more than just a very
gradual recovery. We could get a month or two of good retail sales
but then I think we will have a relapse and we won't have much of a
growth rate. Basically that is what the staff is forecasting. Third,
I do believe in the W [scenario], but it's likely to be a W that is a
little more extended. I believe that 1982 will be the year of
recession, similar to 1958 and 1960-61 when we had two rapid
recessions in a period of great concern about inflation and a period
of restrained policy in the late 1950s. And fourth, I think the
second recession will bring the decline in income growth and,
therefore, the decline in inflation. We have to get through this next
year, and next year we will have a lot of inflation because of food
prices. The years 1960 and 1964 and the 1974-76 period were affected
quite a bit by a very favorable bump in agriculture. This year we
will not be getting a favorable bump; it's going to go the other way.
Therefore, the inflation rate will remain high so long as income
growth remains high. But in the '82 recession I think income growth
will slow considerably and the rate of inflation will slow
considerably. So if we just sort of float along with this and try not
to be too expansive or too restrictive and bring about some kind of
change in the structure of the system over the next year or so, I
think in time what Fred hopes for will be accomplished.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Gee, I hope this room isn't bugged!
The Federal Reserve predicts a second recession [after] next year.

MR. PARTEE. That's just my own personal view.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I can be very brief. I mainly want
to get on record on the tax cut question. I don't disagree in any
major way with the staff forecast. The only reservation I would have
on the staff forecast is the qualitative amendment that was made on
the basis of the most recent retail sales numbers. I don't see any
basis for a sustained expansion in retail sales, and I don't see
anything in the personal income data or wage and salary numbers that
would lead me to expect a strong or even a moderately strong

-27-



9/16/80

resurgence in consumption expenditures. Like most people, I think we
are seeing the signs of the early stages of the recovery, a very weak
recovery. And anticipating the discussion that is coming up, I don't
think we ought to do anything to choke off this weak recovery in its
early stages.

With regard to the tax cut question, I'm pleased for the
first time to agree completely with what Tony Solomon said, especially
his comments on the intangibles. I think that was a very perceptive
statement of our situation. So briefly, my position would be that
it's simply too late to think in terms of a countercyclical tax cut.
But we have to think in terms of tax reform--tax reform in the
direction of increasing incentives to invest, incentives to save, and
incentives to improve effort. And once an effective rational tax
reform program has been developed, I think it would be very important
to announce the intent to reduce taxes over a given period in the
future. In short, I have a great deal of sympathy for the Feldstein
proposal of announcing in advance what the government intends to do
with respect to taxes and the tax structure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I only have two quick questions. If we have no
change in tax laws, what is the increase in the tax burden from the
fourth quarter to the first quarter?

MR. KICHLINE. If we have no change in taxes?

MS. TEETERS. No, if we have the tax increases that have
already been been legislated. How much of the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As a percent of GNP or something?

MS. TEETERS. No, just what the dollar volume is. We have
the social security [tax increase] and something else.

MR. KICHLINE. The social security [increase] is worth $18
billion for the year; part of it is the [higher] rate and part of it
is the [higher] base. The windfall profits tax next year I believe is
worth $16 billion and bracket creep is worth about $10 billion. So
the first digit is a 4; it's about $44 or $45 billion. We have a $28
billion tax cut in our proposal here, so we still have the tax burden
rising in 1981.

MS. TEETERS. Suppose we don't have a tax cut? What happens
to your economic projection?

MR. KICHLINE. The impact is a decline in real GNP of about
1-1/4 percent fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter and that would mean in
that period maybe a tenth or two off the deflator.

MS. TEETERS. So your growth in calendar 1981 would be
essentially zero? Is that correct?

MR. KICHLINE. Yes. It may be 1/2 or 3/4 percent--but small,
very small.

-28-



9/16/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you introduce the
next subject and then we will [break for coffee].

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we can come to order, let's see whether
we can resolve our business after our lengthy discussion, which has
perhaps had some discouraging tinges to it. I was struck in listening
that it is quite conceivable, given what one senses is going on right
at the moment, that when some of these August-September figures come
out they will look a little better [than expected]. I don't think
that has any great significance. In terms of the sluggish outlook--
nobody mentioned this so I will just mention it--apart from all the
other conclusions which were quite general about having to have a
fairly sluggish recovery by historical standards because of the
inflationary problem and longer-term needs of the economy, I think
statistically when we don't have productivity growing we don't have
the room for the same kind of recovery that we traditionally have had.
If we have a recession, the economy can grow by 4 or 5 percent, even 6
percent, for a few quarters. It doesn't bring us as far up the
employment curve as it does when we don't have any productivity
growth. And for that reason alone one wouldn't look for the same kind
of numbers, sustained very long, that we typically have had in earlier
recoveries. But we have problems. I did not detect from the earlier
comments that anybody thinks he or she has any totally satisfactory
solutions, if I may put it that way. But this Committee does have to
proceed on [making] some decisions, and presumably in the framework of
our established operating procedures.

At this point, you have two [Bluebook] alternatives before
you. That does not exhaust all the possibilities, obviously. I may
be wrong, but ordinarily the alternatives we have before us haven't
had a gap [between them] that is quite this wide, for M-1A anyway.
The reason may be that [the intermeeting period] is a little longer
[than usual]. It is probably realistic to have it that wide to make
the decision meaningful since the reality does not obey the very
narrow differences that we typically are presented with. I would draw
your attention to these charts, which I'm sure you have already looked
at, that look backwards from the fourth quarter [to] early next year
if we do follow one or the other of these paths. They show how [the
results] would look against the targets that we have set and reset for
ourselves. I was a little surprised when I saw these. I just hadn't
quite caught up with the fact that M3 apparently was stronger in
August than I had thought earlier. So while I had thought we were
rather comfortably in the middle of the M3 range, M3 is within the
boundaries but is relatively high [in its range]. And that is one
problem, [that we are] testing the high side of our ranges in all
three measures except M-1A. That's the situation in which we find
ourselves. Would anyone want to take off from Steve's comments or
otherwise suggest a course?

MS. TEETERS. May I ask a question?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure.

-29-



9/16/80

MS. TEETERS. I might qualitatively expect interest rates to
be higher. Specifically, where would the federal funds rate be in the
third and fourth quarters under "A" and "B"?

MR. AXILROD. Under alternative A we would expect an average
level of the funds rate by the fourth quarter of something like 11-1/4
percent, give or take a little. So it may be higher than the level of
the last few days by about 1/2 point or a little less.

MR. PARTEE. That's on average for the whole quarter, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, and we'd expect a further rise--

MR. PARTEE. It would be turning up as the quarter went on?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. And under alternative B the average for
the quarter would probably be around 12-1/2 percent. That's assuming
that the move toward that level doesn't somehow affect economic
activity in the fourth quarter [very] promptly.

MS. TEETERS. And that would produce a mortgage rate of what,
about 14 percent?

MR. AXILROD. The mortgage rate we have under "A" would be
around 13-1/8 percent, which is not far from where it is now. But if
that were wrong, I suspect the rate would be higher. And under "B" I
could easily see the mortgage rate moving up between now and year-end
-- this is my view and others maybe differ--to around 14 or 14-1/2
percent, depending in part on the degree of concern institutions have
on whether rates are going to move up even further.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that we are in a [difficult]
position, and maybe we will always be in this position--certainly we
were when we met last month and we carefully set the level of
borrowings, which is a critical factor and one we have to consider
today. But [last month] within two days or something like that the
money supply exploded in a way that made that a nominal assumption--
I'll call it nominal--because it was clear that the money supply in
the space of two days was way above the path we were talking about and
the real decision we made on borrowing quickly became nominal.
Obviously, I don't know what is going to happen this time. The
assumption is--or as Steve said, "indications are" that money growth
in September is going to be weak. "Indications" sounds to me like a
pretty strong word. I don't know what indication he has other than a
preliminary figure for next week, and these preliminary figures have
been notoriously unreliable. But the figure that he is assuming is a
decline of $1-1/2 billion in M-1A.

MR. AXILROD. In the week of the 10th we had a $1-1/2 billion
decline and [we expect] very little increase in the current week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I am noting is that if that did not
materialize, whatever we talk about here in terms of the borrowing
assumption can change rather quickly. Nonetheless, I think it is
significant to focus on that variable. It's a little difficult just
in a technical sense in that I think it is fair to say that the
federal funds rate that seems to be associated with current borrowing
levels is less than one might have expected. So in that sense there

-30-



9/16/80

seems to a little less restraint with a given level of borrowings than
we were assuming last time we were in a borrowing phase, six months
ago or whenever.

MR. PARTEE. What is the borrowing level, Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the staff is estimating it this week
at around $1.1 billion or so.

MR. STERNLIGHT. This week could average about $1.1 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, actually, it has been well above
that. It has been averaging $1.4 billion or something like that.

MR. STERNLIGHT. It was $1.3 billion through yesterday.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the federal funds rate has been about
10-3/4 percent.

MR. STERNLIGHT. 10.80 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is not the relationship that we
ordinarily would have thought--

MS. TEETERS. How much of that is a result of the banks being
out of the [discount] window?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may just be that; we don't know.

MS. TEETERS. Everybody has been gone from the window for
what, three months?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may be that or it may just be a gradual
change in attitude. Under the new operating technique they haven't
been chastised all that much when they are in as they were before. I
don't know. It may be that with the passage of time, when they have
been in a little more, that the relationship will tighten up a bit.
Maybe it's a more fundamental easing; I just don't know.

MR. MORRIS. Well, it's the first time that the funds rate
has been above the discount rate for a long time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The discount officers tell me that
they are reluctant, since the banks have been away for so long, to get
right back to the same level of disciplined access.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody has a sense
of what may be going on in that area, but it's a rather significant
variable in terms of the way we now operate. Maybe we ought to
consider whether--. Well, is it a fair assumption to say that if you
haven't been talking to the banks in New York, that probably means
nobody has been saying anything to any of the banks? Now, this has
only been going on for a month or so or less, so you haven't had much
chance to get after repetitive borrowers, I'm sure.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I can't change my mind set that
quickly. First of all, the volume of New York borrowing isn't that
big. My impression, without remembering the numbers, is that it's not

-31-



9/16/80

the usual proportion of nationwide borrowing. But we have been in
recession. And it hadn't even occurred to me, Paul, that we should
start using moral suasion other than the normal level of trying to
discourage--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question is: What is the normal
level? I wouldn't think anything more than normal [is appropriate],
but I--

MR. PARTEE. We have that table that shows banks about to
come under administrative pressure and [the number] is virtually zero
as I recall, using the normal standards. There just hasn't been
enough borrowing for a long enough time for anybody except the one
bank in Philadelphia.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we should watch this for a while
longer and see--I'm not suggesting any new departure here--whether
attitudes either in the Reserve Banks or in the banking world have
suddenly changed. But then, it's very hard to know.

MS. TEETERS. The one week that we had very high borrowings
we also had very high excess reserves, didn't we?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was true for one week. It happened
in some week in August, I think.

MR. AXILROD. The borrowing was high in the week ending
[September] third; and excess reserves were originally extremely high,
on the order of $650 million. That was revised down to about $489
million a week later, but that is above average. I might add, Mr.
Chairman, that I don't have the borrowing by Federal Reserve District
but I do have it broken down by money market banks, which are the 46
largest, and others. In the week of the third, when borrowing was
$1.3 billion, money market banks borrowed $800 million. And in the
week of the tenth, when borrowing was around $600 million, money
market banks borrowed around $400 million. I don't have any breakdown
for this week, but that indicates a fairly active use by the large
banks, which probably fits with the hypothesis that they don't feel
very reluctant to borrow, not having been in for ages.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that additional element, it's
an inevitable uncertainty I suppose. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I just wanted to ask Steve a question, following
up on an observation you made a little earlier, Mr. Chairman. As you
know, Steve, there have been some pretty large underforecasts in the
Bluebooks we had at the time versus how things turned out for June,
July, and August. I just wondered what makes you so optimistic, as it
were, that we are going to get very slow money growth in September?

MR. AXILROD. I don't think we are going to get slow money
growth over the rest of the year. And whether that [more] rapid
growth is going to occur in September, October, November, or December
I'd be the first one to say I couldn't really tell you because there
is a lot of noise in the month-to-month fluctuations of money growth.
The only basis for saying slow growth in September is that we have
modestly firm data for the first three days of the month and
preliminary data for the next seven, so we have data for something

-32-



9/16/80

like a third of the month. Those data show an average level for the
month below the level in August. So allowing for some rise over the
balance of the month--I think there will be some rise--we'd get a very
low growth rate. Now, if we get a revision in the preliminary data
for the week of the 10th of plus $1-1/2 to $2 billion, like we got
last week, and if the week of the 17th shows no coming down from that
but remains strong, then it's quite possible that September could be
moving up again to very high growth rates. Similarly, we could get
downward revisions and get very low growth rates. What I'm saying is
that all we have is the first 10 days, of which seven of those days
are partial data.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recent revisions all have been upward, but
at some point that pattern will change. So, who knows?

MR. PARTEE. One could also say, Steve, that having had a
very big month, which might represent some degree of stock adjustment,
the odds are for a period of relative calm the following month.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that happens often. [I feel fairly
comfortable] predicting what is going to occur--that there will be
strength sometime in the fall. But in which particular month is
almost impossible to tell.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. May I ask: On this anticipated fluctuation in the
funds rate for alternative B, let's say that in the model it would
average 12 percent. Do you also estimate what the peak pressures are
likely to be? In other words, are you anticipating that at times it
is likely to hit the 14 percent ceiling [of our current range] and
that we'll have to react accordingly?

MR. AXILROD. No, on the assumption that the Committee
retained a 14 percent ceiling, we wouldn't see that as an impediment
because it's largely been interpreted as an average over the days of
the statement week. Therefore, if it were at 13 or 14 percent or even
a little above 14 percent on some days, I wouldn't presume [the
ceiling] would be an impediment. If we were wrong and there was a lot
more demand for money and we are much closer to the ceiling, then it
could in fact become an impediment.

MR. FORD. My feeling is in line with what John Balles said.
I'm worried that the forecast may once again underestimate the
pressures on monetary expansion. And given the fact that we are
rapidly approaching the first anniversary of our new policy and are
going to be scrutinized very carefully on the fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter performance, I would think we definitely have to get focused
on taking a conservative course of action, which would be moving to
something like alternative B, possibly even widening the band of
allowable interest rates rather than narrowing it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, I don't want to get into a debate as
to whether the New York staff makes better estimates than the Board
staff, but I'm fascinated--if I have my figures right--that for the
fourth quarter New York has expansion in M-1A of 3.2 percent and the

-33-



9/16/80

Board staff has 7-1/2 percent. The same [pattern] is true for M-1B;
it's a little less so on M2. If I am reading these right, the
differences seem unusually large. I'm wondering if anyone from New
York or the Board would want to say anything about it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not operating in a very fast
league either.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I didn't know that those estimates
were circulated. You're right about the New York numbers. But the
difference is not in real GNP estimates. It's almost entirely in our
assumption that there will be a reversal in the shift in money demand,
wholly for transactions balances--that as people become increasingly
sensitized to inflation they will reduce their holdings of non-
interest bearing or low interest bearing transactions balances.

MR. MAYO. I find myself much more comfortable with the New
York figure. That doesn't mean--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand, let me point out
that the Washington figures have been more correct than New York's for
the last two months. This difference in assumption has been there for
two months now.

MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure exactly how that 7-1/4 percent got
in there, but I probably ought to explain, President Mayo, that it is
sometimes difficult to make a distinction between projections and
targets.

MR. MAYO. It may be a derivative figure.

MR. AXILROD. And what we have in alternative A is 7-1/4
percent growth in the fourth quarter, which would be the implicit
target if you were going to hit 4-1/2 percent for the year.

MR. MAYO. I see.

MR. AXILROD. We would expect that; that's very close to a
projection because we like to make projections assuming no changes in
interest rates. But we expect some rise in interest rates as I
explained even with that. So in the Bluebook where we have the 7-1/4
percent [growth rate], that is the target necessary to hit a
particular level over the year.

MR. MAYO. Okay. Well, the fact that they are so different
doesn't influence my own opinion, which is that alternative B is the
right way to go. I think it's a much more prudent approach, but I
found I was covered with curiosity.

MR. AXILROD. I should add that if New York is right and the
Committee adopts either "A" or "B," there will be a sharp drop in
interest rates.

MR. MAYO. A sharp drop in interest rates?

MR. AXILROD. If money demand is going to be that low, there
ought to be a drop in interest rates.

-34-



9/16/80

MR. FORD. Let's pray for New York [to be right]!

MR. PARTEE. Sometimes that's what it takes, prayer.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have an opinion, Mr. Mayo, that you
are going to give us as to why you have a [unintelligible].

MR. MAYO. My opinion is in favor of alternative B. I do
question why there should be any difference in the fed funds range
under either "A" or "B." I think [the current range is] sufficiently
broad to encompass both of them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. Mr. Chairman, I didn't comment in the go-
around about the business outlook because I really don't know what is
going to happen. So it seems to me that what we need to ask ourselves
is: Where can we make the biggest mistake? To me the biggest mistake
would be to underestimate the possible vigor of the recovery. That's
the mistake we have made so far and I think it would be a greater
mistake to underestimate than to overestimate. The other mistake is
to be too liberal with monetary growth. Given that kind of approach,
I think alternative A is unacceptable. Alternative B is just barely
acceptable, as far as I'm concerned; I would prefer something less
than that. An alternative C of 4-1/4 percent for M-1B would provide
more insurance for the year's growth; it would put growth for the year
a little above the midpoint, which would give us greater assurance
that if we miss, it would still be under the ceiling. That, I think,
would require us to set a higher range for the federal funds rate of 9
to 15 percent. If we do that, we should feel free to use the range as
necessary to accomplish those goals. That would be my preferred
solution. Another less acceptable alternative would be a "B-minus,"
somewhere between "B" and "C." But I think we ought to go for "C" and
watch in the next couple of months to see if these biases that I
expressed are being borne out. We do need to do something about the
discount rate. It may be too soon right now and [the current rate]
may not complicate Peter's life very greatly, but we are in a new
environment and I just don't know how the rate figures into the
thinking of the banks [about] borrowing. So we might as well start
getting that in alignment and keep it there as much as we can. So I
think we need to get that up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just translating your comments: You're
prepared to see a big increase in interest rates right now?

MR. EASTBURN. Yes, I think so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, to me alternative B defines the
maximum growth paths for the aggregates that we can be satisfied with.
I'm perfectly willing to accept that. I think the economy in the
fourth quarter is likely to be stronger than projected and, therefore,
we may see bigger rate increases than the Bluebook is contemplating,
but I think we simply have to accept that. However, I wouldn't go as
far as Dave and shoot for something more stringent than "B."

-35-



9/16/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's because
different people are talking, but the business outlook suddenly sounds
more ebullient than the impression I was left with earlier. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I share the concern over the change
in the funds rate range in alternative B and I would prefer to see it
at 8 to 14 percent. Or, if we are going to move it, I would move the
top range as a signal without an intent to use it. But it seems to me
that is the wrong way to signal what the staff had in mind. Secondly,
I'd remind us of the considerable literature that we have created that
is less than three months old on the shortfall and its desirability
and so on and so forth and the feeling that we need to perform this
time if we are ever going to. I would favor alternative B or
something even a little less with a chance to review it after
experience. I do not feel that this [decision] is carved in granite
and can't be changed, but I'd set out on that course because certainly
we have underestimated more often than we have overestimated.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, we had the luxury, relatively speaking,
of moving back on track at an even faster rate than we had decided
some months ago. Now we face the question of whether we want to
overshoot the track or take the wrench of getting back on it firmly.
I think we ought to get on it firmly. The economy once more is giving
us less unemployment and more inflation. It's painful to think that
we are going to move to a mortgage rate of 13-1/2 or 14-1/2 percent,
but in an economy with 10, 11, 12 percent inflation, we are going to
have to get adjusted to that, bad as it may seem. The economy
probably will adjust more easily to it than [we expect] in our gut
reactions. So, I wouldn't be too worried about letting rates rise.
Alternative B seems about right to me. I would like to see the funds
rate move a little higher toward the upper end, [though] not
immediately; we need to pause before it goes to 14 percent. And I
would like to place more emphasis on M-1B. When M-1A and M-1B diverge
as much as they do now, that indicates to me that the factors that
differentiate them have gained in importance. And one is in some
danger of losing sight of that if one thinks more in terms of M-1A,
with its seemingly rather low growth values. If one thinks in terms
of M-1B, one gets to fairly respectable rates of growth even under
alternative B. So I would like to stress M-1B, at least in our
thinking if not in the directive, instead of M-1A.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. The comments so far have been [for a course that
is] tougher than I would like to be. I did indicate that I thought
the recession had bottomed out; but, of course, it's incorrect to say
the recession is over. It just means that the downward movement is
over and we are at the low end of the range. And we have seen a
pretty considerable increase in interest rates, one that could begin
to threaten even a moderate recovery in housing. So it seems to me a
little early to blithely expect to see interest rates go materially
higher. If one thinks of these numbers for the aggregates as being
targets--and I believe that's how we should think of them--and the
actual comes out differently, then we should modify our operations.
Interest rates go higher than the median here if the aggregates are
strong, and they go lower if the aggregates are weak relative to the

-36-



9/16/80

targets. If one thinks of these as target numbers for the 3-month
period of October, November, and December and looks at the charts,
alternative A isn't that bad. It's a little high, I think, mainly
because I don't like to see M-1B running as high in the range as it is
there. So, I would like to suggest an alternative between "A" and
"B." I would say, for example, 4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2 percent for
M-1B, and 8-1/2 percent for M2; the latter would be the same as the
alternative B number and is more a hope than anything that we would
do, actually.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just give me those numbers again.

MR. PARTEE. I said 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. I do think
it's probably time to make a little movement in our broad funds rate
range, and I would raise it a point on the bottom and top and make it
9 to 15 percent. Chances are that even under the staff presumption it
will be at about 11 percent and probably drifting up, so 9 to 15
percent is not so a bad as an outer limit kind of range. And I would
do that on the presumption that these are targets. If the aggregates
come in stronger than this, we will move up in that range; and if they
are weaker, we will move down in that range from our current 10-3/4 to
11 percent. So, that's what I would prefer. As far as borrowings are
concerned, I don't think we should use a figure as high as the one
that Peter mentioned as the base, $1.1 billion or something like that.
But it probably needs to be quite a bit higher than we talked about
last time. I was thinking of something around $600 or $700 million as
the base we would start from on the borrowing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I really only find alternative A acceptable.
As Chuck says, we are probably at the bottom of the recession. To
take the few indications of reviving growth and use that as an excuse
to tighten monetary policy seems to me totally unacceptable. We will
create a double-dip recession if we start taking interest rates up as
high as we would get them in alternative B. Last fall, which is not
very far behind us, mortgage rates in the 14 to 14-1/2 percent area
almost completely closed down the housing market. It wasn't an
availability problem; it was lack of demand. So, I would strongly
support alternative A, and I would keep the funds rate approximately
where it is. This just doesn't seem to me the proper time to rock the
boat.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, all of us are deeply concerned
about the inflation problem; I don't think any of us is more concerned
than the others about it. And we are trying to find a way to deal
with it. But we just have to recognize that if we turn this economy
around again and promote another decline in economic activity once the
bottom has been reached, this country and the Congress may not have
the tolerance to let us continue. I don't think it will. Now, the
financial conditions that would emerge under "B" are no longer
consistent with the staff forecast. The staff's forecast has mortgage
rates reaching 13-1/4 percent by the middle of 1981 and [under
alternative B] we are talking about a mortgage rate of 14 to 14-1/2
percent in the fourth quarter. I just think we ought to move slower
than this. We will be in real trouble if we push so hard that we

-37-



9/16/80

choke off any possibility of recovery. I want a slow recovery; I
think we all do. But I don't want one that is so slow that the
economy ends up turning back down again. So, I'm with Governor
Teeters. I would support alternative A.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would opt for
alternative B, but with the caveat that the [monetary growth] figures
listed in "B" would be the maximum we would accept; we'd accept
somewhat slower growth during the period ahead, if indeed the economy
or other factors would dictate that. On the other hand, I see no
reason to raise the lower bound of the federal funds range from 8 to 9
percent, as suggested under alternative B. I would leave the funds
range at 8 to 14 percent. In part my feeling about this stems from
the fact that M-1B is more acceptable to me as an aggregate to measure
what we should be doing with monetary policy in the period ahead.
Looking at the quarterly average for M-1B under "B," for example, we
are still talking about a [quarterly average] rate of 7-3/4 percent
for the fourth quarter, and that is a fairly high rate of growth.
Anything that would exceed that would be troublesome to me. Just to
restate my position: I would take "B" but as the maximum; I would
accept somewhat lower growth if it did indeed come about. I'd leave
the federal funds rate range at 8 to 14 percent because I don't think
it makes that much difference. If the rate gets up to around 14
percent, we ought to be talking; we can do that in a telephone call
rather than at this time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I pretty much share the feelings expressed by
Governor Wallich and Messrs. Guffey and Morris in that "B" is the
maximum that I would like to see us go. We are all torn between the
risk on the one hand of choking off recovery with too great a rise in
interest rates and the danger on the other hand that we will make no
significant progress on inflation. My first preference would be to
lean against the inflation problem a bit harder by what I would call a
"B-minus." I wouldn't be unhappy if the specifications of "B" were
reduced somewhat to avoid overshooting for the year as a whole, which
I think we could come pretty close to given the range of error and how
things go. Dave Eastburn mentioned 4-1/4 percent for M-1B. I had
jotted down 4-1/2 percent for the August-to-December target. That
would give us growth of 5.6 percent in M-1B for the year as a whole,
pretty close to the upper end of the range. I think somewhere between
"B" and "B-minus" is the lesser of the evils, considering the two
different evils we have to avoid.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I would prefer Dave Eastburn's alternative C. I
would be pleased with John Balles's alternative B-minus. I would
begrudgingly support alternative B if that's the best we can get. I
wouldn't go with anything more expansive than that. For those who are
concerned about higher mortgage rates, if we do anything that would
imply the possibility of an explosion in the aggregates, I think
mortgage lenders in response to heightened inflationary expectations
would increase their rates anyway. If we cut this by having a control
on aggregate expansion on the down side, if you will, I think we won't

-38-



9/16/80

get any higher mortgage rates than we would going the other way. And
we would be consistent with our stated determination to give top
priority to our concern about future inflation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I think the target in Mr.
Eastburn's suggestion is probably the appropriate one. We are at a
stage where we should make a small move on the discount rate. I have
the impression that there is something of a last gasp with respect to
the credibility of the Federal Reserve out there in terms of coming
within our targets by the fourth quarter. I realize that the ranges
are such that we probably can't get all [of the aggregates] into them,
but we have to get some of them in and I would suggest that, for
whatever reason, those be the important ones. I think Governor
Gramley is probably right that if we don't come out about there, we
are going to get more specific instructions [from Congress] on where
we should come out and we may have less freedom of choice in the
future.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did Governor Gramley say that?

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I think I said something a bit different.

MR. BAUGHMAN. For different reasons.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think he had rather the opposite in
mind.

MR. BAUGHMAN. He had different reasons, but wound up in the
same place. I would like to note also that when we reported to our
board of directors last week on the new Regulation A and what we
anticipate the guidelines coming along with that will be, we got quite
a strong negative reaction. They felt it was a significant
retrenchment in our posture at the window. They have been engaged
aggressively in the last couple of years in trying to build better
rapport between the institutions in the District and the Federal
Reserve and feel they have been making considerable progress. They
are persuaded that the institutions will see this as a more stringent
face at the discount window and that they will have lost credibility
with what they view as their clients in that respect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'm delighted to hear that there's so much
commitment to our targets and that we're going to have the strength to
make sure we get growth within them. I'm a little surprised to hear
so many people feel that the fourth quarter is going to be so strong.
I would remind you that interest rates have already gotten to the
point where they are having some impact on economic activity. Mr.
Kichline, for instance, has housing starts for August at 1.4 million
but then dropping to 1.2 million in September. And that's just with
mortgage rates where they are right now. I don't know how sensitive
automobiles are going to be to interest rates, but it seems to me that
we don't have very much chance of a big strong recovery in the fourth
quarter, yet that is what I hear influencing the [policy preferences]
around the table. I'm afraid that alternative B or something even
more conservative than that risks putting us in a more difficult

-39-



9/16/80

position than a path that is a bit more expansive. I don't want to go
to alternative A; that may put us in some danger of going out of the
range on the upper end. But, you know, New York may be right one of
these days. I'm afraid that if we go to "B" or something even more
conservative than that, we may get ourselves in the difficult position
of having to be too expansive in the fourth quarter. And we will get
this stop-start pattern again. With these forecasts being all over
the lot, I think we're much better off somewhere between "A" and "B,"
which gives us much more flexibility. And I really think it is
crucial that we retain as much flexibility as we can. So that makes
more sense to me than anything else. That will give us an opportunity
to look at September and will give us the kind of flexibility we need
to get where we want to go through the end of the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative A for the
reasons set forth by Governors Teeters, Gramley, Partee, and Schultz.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. End of statement?

MR. RICE. End of statement.

MR. PARTEE. I didn't support alternative A.

MR. RICE. I know you didn't, but you gave reasons for
favoring alternative A.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll try to be almost as brief as
Governor Rice. I think we can best hit the balance we're looking for,
in terms of both the credibility of policy as perceived by the markets
and the country on one hand and our concern about aborting the modest
recovery, by an intermediate solution. I'd like to suggest something
that isn't too different from what Chuck Partee suggested. I think we
ought to have borrowing of $700 million, 4-1/4 percent for M-1A, 6-1/2
percent for M-1B, and 8-3/4 percent for M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last one?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 8-3/4 percent. Even though I'm
indifferent on whether we have 8 to 14 percent on the fed funds range
or the extended one, I think it's unnecessary to extend it, and we may
be giving some policy signals unintentionally. I don't really see
much advantage [to changing it]. On balance, I would say we ought to
stick with 8 to 14 percent.

Let me say a word about my feelings on credibility. I'm
sorry to take longer than I intended but [let me say a few] more
sentences on this. When I talk to people in the markets, they are not
questioning our credibility or the steadiness of our policy at the
moment. There is a vast underlying skepticism that we will stick to
this policy later in the year or early next year, but at the moment I
think they are impressed. They have seen a very substantial rise in
interest rates as the aggregates have moved up and they have not seen
us try to stop that. So I don't think we have a credibility problem
at the moment. We have the constant suspicion that we will buckle at

-40-



9/16/80

some point but [market participants] don't feel we have done so or are
in the process of doing so at this point. If the projections turn out
to be anywhere close to accurate and we take these intermediate
targets and and the borrowing level we've talked about, I think we
will end up with interest rates somewhere in this range in the short
run. And if necessary, we can tighten up later in the year when the
pressure comes on. So that is what I would [do].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's everybody, isn't it? I confess I
am a little struck by what seems to me a contrast in some of the
policy judgments, or aggregates judgments, and what I took to be the
tone of the earlier discussion, which was highly restrained in terms
of a forecast of ebullience in the business world and somewhat
skeptical of full faith in short-term movements in the aggregates. I
approach this with a feeling of some concern about [how we will] come
out of this meeting right at this stage. We've had a very high
August, to be sure. We've had several months that were very high, but
August was particularly high. There is some hope that September will
show a leveling and a possible turn in the business situation. I
think it's probably [going to be] a real turn, if a real turn
encompasses the idea of a W, with a rather weak middle of the W.

I was somewhat concerned that we would come out and say, in
effect, that we're throwing down the gauntlet and that we would make
damn sure that we would meet our targets in a very acceptable way and
take all the risks on the side of interest rates and the economy. I
think that's a real implication of "B." I don't think we can in
honesty adopt "B" without saying: Okay, beginning tomorrow or
whenever we will go out and in effect force interest rates up. And I
would have great reservations about that kind of approach. On the
other hand, I don't feel quite comfortable with "A," given the way
those charts look, particularly the M-1B chart, which a number of
other people have mentioned. I think Governor Partee's comments are
correct. We look at these as targets--and God knows what's going to
happen--but we haven't got the short-term control mechanism that
guarantees we're going to meet the targets. That much has been
demonstrated by recent experience. But we do bias the [decision in an
effort to meet the targets]. I would pick up in Governor Partee's
comment, which has been seconded by the comments of a number of
others, that the best thing we can do is to aim someplace in between
"A" and "B." I think that's consistent with not taking much of an
overt step at the moment. We'll see how the money supply figures
develop. That may be as early as when we get a revision in the
preliminary [M-1A] figure. But certainly we keep getting surprised by
these [numbers] in one direction or another as time passes. I don't
know what projection is right. But if the number comes out high, I
think any of these alternatives imply that [market conditions] could
get tighter and borrowing would go up. If it comes out as favorably
as New York suggests, I suppose it would go the other way. If it
comes out as favorably as New York suggests, it probably means a
weaker business picture than many people have in mind and we might get
a rally in the markets. In those circumstances, with that kind of
aggregates picture, I'm not sure that would be undesirable.

So, consistent with what a number of people have said, but
certainly not everybody, I would play it neutrally at the moment.
That's what we did last time. It lasted for about two days until the
money supply figure came out high [unintelligible]. I hope another $9

-41-



9/16/80

billion increase doesn't come along and throw us off course quite so
quickly as last time. But [ongoing developments] are what we would be
guided by to a considerable extent. I don't know what neutrality
means precisely, given this borrowing discussion we just had. I
believe you've assumed $800 million with alternative B, Steve, and
that seems to me low if we really wanted to get to alternative B.

MR. WINN(?). Don't we have to have a discount rate
assumption, though, to make that borrowing assumption?

MR. AXILROD. We assume the present discount rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at the moment, we assume the present
discount rate. That doesn't say the discount rate wouldn't go up if
the funds rate moved significantly higher. Presumably, we would
maintain some relationship [between them]. I'm not saying the present
relationship is all that bad--I don't think it is all that bad--but if
[the spread] got substantially wider, the discount rate question would
certainly arise. As I say, I don't quite know what neutrality is. I
think a figure as high as $800 million or perhaps $700 to $800 million
or someplace in that area might be consistent with neutrality in the
short run. In that way I am picking up something Steve associated
more with "B" than with "A." But in terms of the targets, this
implies amid all the uncertainty a change in trend, and if there's
anything to the longer range interest rate forecast, I'm not sure we
want to go quite that far. By the longer range interest rate forecast
I'm talking about the quarter. That's not a very long range, but it's
beyond the next two weeks. I don't know what it really does imply; we
have these different estimates.

MR. AXILROD. I might add, Mr. Chairman, that when we were
writing "B," which was Friday afternoon, we were not aware that banks
were going to be quite as willing borrowers as they were.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm obviously affected by the most
recent evidence, which may be false evidence. But it sounds to me as
though right at the moment anyway a little higher level of borrowing--

MR. PARTEE. It's very temporary, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's some evidence for it. I
don't think it's just a phenomenon this week. What are those
borrowing figures in the recent week? You just had them.

MR. SCHULTZ. But they are going to be distorted by Labor
Day, I think.

MR. AXILROD. The borrowing has run--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was over $1 billion in the week of
September 3 and I don't remember what the funds rate was then.

MR. AXILROD. It was 10-1/2 percent and then it dropped to
10.22 percent and borrowing to around $600 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My impression is that, more often than
not, these borrowing figures have been higher than what we normally
associate with the equivalent federal funds rate.

-42-



9/16/80

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But obviously there's an area of
uncertainty.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, may I make a
suggestion, building on what you've said? If we go for what you call
a "neutral" or what some of us have called an "intermediate" solution,
we might take a leaf out of what we did earlier in the year but on the
opposite side. We might say that if the aggregates come in somewhat
lower than the intermediate targets, we won't adjust the reserve path
accordingly but would accept that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [We wouldn't adjust the path] quite so
quickly anyway.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [Yes, not] quite so quickly. We
would accept them. So if the opportunity offers itself, we'd err on
the side of not pushing in reserves.

MR. WALLICH. Do you mean that we should then reduce the
nonborrowed reserve path or not reduce it? If the aggregates are
weak, I think the analogue to our earlier action would be to reduce
the path.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's right.

SPEAKER(?). That's what he said.

MR. PARTEE. Without limit? That's rather wide open; it
could mean zero, -5, -10.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it brings us out to somewhere
[unintelligible] than if in that situation we had put in "B."

MR. MORRIS. We would be tolerant of errors on the lower
side. That's--

MR. PARTEE. Remember, we did say last October and throughout
the next several meetings--as I recall, the number was 4-1/2 percent--
"or somewhat less." But it was only somewhat less; if it were
significantly less, we would move against it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have some difference of
opinion and I am proposing that we come out someplace in between.
These numbers do not lend themselves to easy averaging without coming
up with rather small fractions. And when we get down to the last
quarter, I think it becomes fairly irrelevant. We have heard two
averaging proposals. Mr. Solomon was a 1/4 percentage point higher
than Mr. Partee on two of the numbers. Have we ever used a number
with 1/4 for a period this long?

MR. ALTMANN. I don't recall that we have; I'm not sure.
Steve might know.

MR. GRAMLEY. May I ask, Mr. Chairman, to what specific
periods Mr. Solomon's and Governor Partee's numbers refer? I wasn't
quite sure. August-December?

-43-



9/16/80

SPEAKER(?). August-December.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we're all talking about the
August-December figures.

MR. PARTEE. No, mine is September-December.

MR. GRAMLEY. No, Governor Partee says his was September to
December.

MR. PARTEE. The base month is August and the last month is
December. That means we're talking about--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I assume we're all talking about the same
[period as in the Bluebook alternatives], which is August to December.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think a very good case can be
made for using quarterly averages for two reasons. One is that our
targets are set in terms of quarterly averages, and the second is that
the figures look a little better in a sense. If, for example, we were
to hit the 5-1/4 percent midpoint that we originally had, it would
require a rate of growth in M-1B of only 3 percent between August and
December. But it would require 4.9 percent between the third and the
fourth quarters because August was very high. If we take the 5-3/4
percent midpoint that we talked about earlier, that would involve 4.8
percent growth between August and December but 6.8 percent between the
third and the fourth quarters. That is, what I'm doing is assuming a
steady progression from August to December.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure what the significance of that
is.

MR. BLACK. Well, we set our targets in quarterly figures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We set the annual targets that way, but--

MR. BLACK. Yes, but it's difficult to know what to do with
August to December because we don't know what the configuration of the
last quarter will be. And the figures I use just assume an equal
progression.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll let Mr. Axilrod comment. But it
seems to me a lot more convenient operationally to talk about a
monthly target than a quarterly target that is so much affected by
what has already happened.

MR. AXILROD. We tried to blend this in some sense by having
the operational target go from month to month, but trying to get it so
that it results in the quarter-over-quarter growth that the Committee
wants.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, one can express it either way.

MR. AXILROD. In general I have a little trouble with the
quarterly average because if one took that quarterly average extremely
seriously, whatever we put in there for the fourth quarter implies one
real wrench to hit it. If we go off [target] very early in the
quarter--if the pattern month to month varies from what we have in

-44-



9/16/80

here--in the last part of the quarter we really have to wrench it
around to hit the target. It is true that the quarter over quarter
will vary, but it makes for a much more orderly procedure in relation
to markets to do it that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we're stuck, unless we make an extreme
assumption, with the fact that the quarterly jump is going to be
fairly sizable because August went way up. Even if growth is level
from now on, we'd get an increase of some magnitude in the fourth
quarter. That's a fact of life. But if we were concentrating solely
on quarterly figures--while mechanically we can rationalize one with
the other--I think we'd tend to get more abrupt changes than we really
contemplated in setting the target.

MR. BLACK. But that assumes we don't do anything about a
bulge that appeared early. Then we'd have to wrench it later. But if
we take action promptly, we don't necessarily have to wrench it later.

MS. TEETERS. But we have taken action. After all, bill
rates are up quite a bit.

MR. BLACK. I'm talking about in the future, Nancy. My
personal feeling is that we're not going to have as much upward
pressure on rates as people think because I don't see that much
strength in the economy. But that's a guess. We really can't
forecast that with any degree of certainty.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we took these--if I may so term
them--more hawkish views and if we were honest with ourselves given
the range of probabilities, we would be saying that we've got to go
out this week and take a rather overt step to tighten up the market.
That may not be necessary, for sure. That's what we don't know. Now,
[doing] that may turn out to be wrong if the economy is very weak, and
we might have to retrace the step. And that's one of the things that
I think we would be better advised to avoid.

MR. GUFFEY. There's an alternative for that, Mr. Chairman,
is there not? [We could adopt] the alternative B [growth] rates and
drop the borrowing assumption from $800 million to perhaps $700
million, thus increasing the nonborrowed reserves to make up the
total. That would not push up interest rates early in the period
necessarily. It would give us a bit of time to view what is happening
to the aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may just be talking about a gut feeling,
but I tend to share the view that Steve first expressed: That if
there's a risk here, it's going to be on the high side rather than the
low side. I'm just going by recent experience; that's the way it has
been. That could well be wrong. I have no problem with starting out
with $700 million or something in that range. But I do have a feeling
that starting out in that range and putting a lot of weight on [growth
rates] as low as those in "B" may delay for two weeks what you're
talking about. I think the odds are that at some point we're going to
have to put [interest rates] up quite overtly and strongly. We may
have to do that even if we went with "A." If we went to an "A+" we
might have to do it. I can't guarantee [anything]. All I'm saying is
that we have a stronger case if [growth in the aggregates] did get
high. Obviously the higher the monetary numbers are, the more

-45-



9/16/80

protection one has in a sense--the more explanation one has for why
the market is reacting the way it has and why we have reacted the way
we have under those circumstances. I don't think we have much
[protection] if we're demanding that September be practically flat,
which is what the staff is projecting. And I hope that's what it is.
But we're also demanding that October and November be [almost] though
not quite as flat. Obviously there's an arithmetic difference between
these, and the way one falls in the spectrum is what we're talking
about. But I would want a little more justification, in terms of the
aggregates, for the kind of interest rates some of you are talking
about before I saw those interest rates in the market. We are talking
about an M-1B that I quite agree is a little higher than I'd like to
see ideally. Just rationalizing, M-1A doesn't look so bad under these
alternatives. M2 we think is going to be a little high. There's not
much we can do about it. M3 is a little higher than I'd like to see
it. But just weighing the risks, and against the background of the
business [conditions] discussion that we had, I would like to have a
little more evidence that the aggregates are fully running in excess
of reasonable targets before very overt moves are forced. That's what
it comes down to. Mr. Corrigan, did you comment? You didn't.

MR. CORRIGAN. Since I got penalized for my double-dipping
before--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I counted and we had everybody.

MR. PARTEE. Well, you thought he'd used up his turn.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I miss anybody else?

MR. BLACK. I didn't say anything, Mr. Chairman, but I will--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry. I deprived all our double-
dippers. I added up wrong. There are more people here than I
thought.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not sure I can add anything much to
what has already been said. This is a nasty dilemma. One point that
hasn't been mentioned, which does loom somewhat large in my mind, is
the fact that how we end up in 1980 is going to have a bearing on how
we start 1981 as well. And that at least has led me in the direction
of "B," but that's not a very powerful feeling at this time because of
the uncertainty. The other thing that is bothering me about this
quarter is that it's a quarter in which we are probably going to have
even more problems with numbers because of all the news reporters and
everything else. We could be a bit more in the blind than we usually
are. I just wonder [about that] in terms of the interval we're
looking at now, if we did something like Mr. Solomon has suggested in
the very near term. If we do get continued rapid [monetary] growth in
September and early October, I think the credibility issue will become
very real. Market rates are going to move up anyway, and we'll have
the worst of both worlds. Maybe there is a middle ground: Perhaps in
the context of something like Mr. Solomon has suggested, the quarter
as a whole could be looked at again at the next meeting and we could
operate more with an eye on the next month until we see where we are.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what we've been doing the last
few months, in effect.

-46-



9/16/80

MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's right. But as I would look at
it, I tend to think we're at or near a pretty critical crossroads.
All I'm suggesting, within the framework of some sort of compromise,
is that maybe we can get September under our belt and keep a little
more open position on the fourth quarter until we see where September
comes out. That's because if September [growth] really is modest, I
don't think we're necessarily talking about the kinds of pressures
that people are so concerned about and that I'd be concerned about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I really made my main point. I
come out around "C," [which some speakers have proposed]. The main
point I want to get across is that there's a lot of repetition in
these figures. And if we say we want to hit that midpoint of 5-1/4
percent, for August to December that translates to about 3 percent but
for the third quarter to the fourth quarter it's a great deal more
than that, about 4.9 percent. That doesn't sound so bad.

MR. PARTEE. You're talking about M-1B, Bob?

MR. BLACK. Yes, M-1B. And if we hit the 5-3/4 percent
midpoint, that would give us a quarterly growth rate of 6.8 percent,
which sounds fairly high. But that translates into growth from August
to December of 4.8 percent if you assume equal [monthly] increments.

MR. PARTEE. All you're saying is that August is a big month.

MR. BLACK. That's what it amounts to. And I'm saying that
without much growth, because August was so high, we can get a good
quarterly growth rate with figures that look scandalously low on an
August-to-December basis. That's the point I wanted to get across.

MR. PARTEE. You still have a [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right, but you're playing
with arithmetic in a sense. The question is what we want to do in a
substantive sense.

MR. BLACK. The other point I was going to make is about
credibility. If [monetary growth] comes in as high as a lot of people
expect, I think we're going to have a pretty serious problem. We may
have not only high inflation but high interest rates as well. Whereas
if we [hit our target], I think we're going to see some effects on
inflation and we may end up just with higher rates, without as much
inflation. But this route is going to give us both.

MS. TEETERS. How would you formulate this to make it a
neutral policy until the next FOMC meeting? What numbers would fit a
neutral policy for the next month?

MR. MORRIS. What do you mean by neutral policy--no change in
interest rates?

MS. TEETERS. No, I'm just saying that I would like to see
things rather calm until we have a better idea of what is going on out
there. I agree with Jerry: Things are too uncertain to try to set a
policy at this point that's going to carry us through December. So,

-47-



9/16/80

if we could find some way to wait a month without rocking the boat in
any way and get a little better idea as to whether some of these
[developments] are real or transitory, that would be the wise thing to
do.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I sort of disagree with Jerry. We're
trying to set a target path that we think is acceptable. If the
numbers come in high, then markets are going to have to tighten; and
if the numbers come in low, markets are going to have to ease. It's a
target concept rather than a projection concept that we should think
about when we're specifying these. So I don't see why we can't state,
as suggested in the Bluebook, the target growth rate we would like to
see for the last four months of the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment about neutrality relates to how
we come out of this meeting right now, not for the next month. I
don't think we can ignore what is happening to the money supply for
the next month. As I said, we take a chance whatever target we set.
If next week's figure comes out to something like a reduction of $1-
1/2 billion it doesn't apply to anything we have said here. But if it
comes out significantly different from that, we're already beginning
to diverge under any of these targets. I guess one can argue it any
way. My particular problem is that I think ["B"] is a bit unrealistic
--that may not be a good word because anything can happen, including
the New York projections, in which case it wouldn't be at all
unrealistic--taking the broad range of probabilities. We probably
wouldn't be neutral coming out of this meeting with alternative B.

MR. WALLICH. Neutrality has many meanings.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I talked abut neutrality with a very
particular meaning: What is the level of borrowings that we start off
this track on, recognizing that it will change if within the week
these figures begin deviating substantially from whatever target we
set.

MR. WALLICH. That's really the old funds rate technique in
an aggregates version. That is, we immediately allow the funds rate
to respond to any change in the aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would be allowing the borrowings to
respond, that's right. I don't know any way of running this technique
without having a--. Well, let me put the question to you. Do we have
a conclusion for somewhere between "A" and "B"? I will leave for
later exactly how to compromise those numbers. Does a borrowing level
of $750 million, just to take the midpoint of some that have been
mentioned, and something in between "A" and "B" attract a spectrum of
support?

MR. ALTMANN. People could raise their hands.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so.

MR. GRAMLEY. What aggregates would you associate with this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Between "A" and "B."

-48-



9/16/80

MR. GRAMLEY. If you start out with "A" and then go halfway
between that and "B," that's $700 million on borrowing. To go a
little further to $750 million--another $50 million in borrowing--
means it's so close to "B" that I am getting very uncomfortable. I'm
not at all sure that we might not end up with 14-1/2 percent mortgage
interest rates on average in the fourth quarter. And that just seems
to me to be too big a wrench.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me on the basis of the
opinions that were expressed that the compromise would really be
[halfway] between the [midpoints] of "A" and "B" and the midpoint
between "B" and [the proposed] "C." A lot of people expressed an
opinion of wanting to go further than "B." That would bring us up to
"B" at the very best in terms of the compromise.

MR. PARTEE. I think you have to isolate the voting members.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would like an expression of general
opinion on a mid-course between "A" and "B."

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Everybody or the voting members?

MR. PARTEE. I agree with Lyle's comment, by the way, on the
borrowing level. I think $750 million is too high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The voting members. I said someplace
between $700 and $800 million. I don't feel I can judge that with any
accuracy. I'm not so sure that $800 million couldn't turn out ex post
to imply a little easing.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd agree with you if we could just get the
sense of it and split it right down the middle between "A" and "B,"
recognizing that we really don't know whether the recent level of
adjustment borrowing has been unusually high and will stay high or
whether it will come back down again. If we had that general sense
without [being precise]--if we took a range for adjustment borrowing
of $600 to $800 million and gave the Desk and Steve Axilrod some
flexibility to deal with it depending on what actually happens--I
could live with that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Do you want that much flexibility,
Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it's an important part of the
Committee decision. I wish we were better able to give you guidance
to know what the relationship of the funds rate and borrowings is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You referred to this borrowing level
before, Steve. Do you just want to repeat what you said?

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I was assuming that if the
Committee wanted to start off in a posture where in some rough sense
the pressures in the money market weren't terribly different from what
they have been in the last week or two, I would think an average level
of borrowing of $600 million is way too low. An average level of $800
million might just about be consistent, given the fact that borrowing
has been running high in the last week, with not much change in money
market pressures. If my interpretation of what the Committee means by

-49-



9/16/80

neutrality to begin with is right--that is, basically money market
pressures about as they have been, taking everything relevant to that
into account at least initially--then I would think a number between
$700 and $800 million would about do it. We would technically write
down $750 million in the path, but if borrowing were coming in high,
we'd adjust the nonborrowed reserves down a bit and vice versa. We
could just as well do that with a $600 to $800 million range. We'd
write down $700 million and if $750 million looked right, then we'd
lower nonborrowed reserves in the course of the week. If $650 million
looked right to give a money market sense as it has been, we'd raise
them a bit. We can operate with that kind of flexibility, and that
may be best given this developing uncertainty about what particular
level of borrowing is "right."

MR. GUFFEY. Are you making those comments based upon a
weekly horizon or for the five weeks?

MR. AXILROD. My memory going back three or four weeks ago--
well, I wasn't here but from the discussion I heard--three weeks ago
there was an expectation of a rather high funds rate, say, around 11
percent, with borrowing around $400 or $500 million. That didn't
develop. Banks were much more willing to borrow and the funds rate
only got up to 10-1/2 percent. We expected this week a funds rate
between 10-1/2 and 11 percent, closer to 11, with borrowing around
$750 million. Well, banks very promptly went in and borrowed $1.7
billion when the funds rate got to around 10-7/8 percent, again
indicating a greater willingness to borrow. So, therefore, we should
provide less nonborrowed reserves. I think there is some uncertainty.
If I had known the level of borrowing on Friday when we wrote the
Bluebook, I would have raised both the $600 and the $800 million to
get to the point where "A" was a tick toward ease and "B" a tick
toward tightening to start with.

MR. GUFFEY. My question is: If the Committee decided on a
"B" or "B+" target for the aggregates, would you construct the path
based upon a borrowing assumption of $750 million for five weeks?

MR. AXILROD. If the Committee decided on "B," no. I would
assume that borrowing consistent with this discussion of somewhere
between $600 and $800 million is neutrality. I would assume [for "B"]
it would be somewhat above $800 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a little confusion, I think,
because Steve, if I understand it correctly, has changed his mind from
the time that the Bluebook was written, given the extra week's
experience of relatively heavy borrowing with relatively less pressure
on the money market than would have been expected.

MR. AXILROD. With uncertainty.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So I'm taking that into account in my own
comments. Let me put the issue to you again in a general way. We'd
have to focus on the borrowing level a bit more precisely and we'd
have to resolve the fractions even if this proposal for roughly
halfway between "A" and "B" commanded enough general support. But the
borrowing level is biased a bit higher than the Bluebook says is
consistent with those alternatives, based upon the comments that were
just made.

-50-



9/16/80

MR. SCHULTZ. You want raised hands on that issue?

MR. PARTEE. You want preferences or can live with?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess "can live with."

MR. PARTEE. That was a wise decision, I think.

MR. ALTMANN. Seven, not counting yourself.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's pretty clear, without going
through any other exercise, that we're not going to get a larger
feeling for any other number. Let me just bear in a little more
closely. Halfway between is literally 4-1/4, 6-5/8, and 8-3/4 percent
on the aggregates, right? The main difficulty with that, as I see it,
is the 5/8ths. It looks like a half-size, as they say.

SPEAKER(?). You're an awfully small person!

MR. AXILROD(?). Mr. Chairman, the staff [unintelligible] if
you adopted 6-1/2 percent [for M-1B].

SPEAKER(?). And 8-3/4 percent at least [for M2].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we literally wanted to avoid quarters--
it would lean a bit toward "B"--I'd take Governor Partee's numbers of
4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent. Let me say a word about the funds rate
range. We're right in the middle of [the current range]. As Tony
Solomon and some others said, why fiddle around with it at this point?

SPEAKER(?). Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to say 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2
percent and $750 million. But I have no strong argument against the
alternative, which I suppose is 4-1/4, 6-1/2, and 8-3/4 percent. That
just puts in quarters.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'll go with either.

MR. PARTEE. I don't care. It seems to me that our actual
experience is usually broad enough that it looks rather funny to be
putting down quarters as targets. But I would accept the quarters.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think you're probably right. It looks better
without the quarters. And those numbers are a bit more conservative,
which seemed to be where people wanted to move to a little.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's obviously closer to B. And with a
$750 borrowing assumption--

MS. TEETERS. We could round up instead of down, gentlemen.

MR. SCHULTZ. I hope we don't lose anybody.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I'm disturbed, not so much even
about the figures as this: I thought we had agreed, and that all
thinking that has ever been expressed about targeting aggregates
[suggests], that we had to set long-term targets and stick with them.

-51-



9/16/80

Trying to fine-tune, as I think this discussion is demonstrating that
the majority in this Committee is dedicated to, for 30 days in order
to have some effect on interest rates I think is a reversion back to
very thing that we abandoned last October. It makes intelligently
targeting on aggregate growth and on reserves an impossibility. This
whole conversation reflects, at least as of this moment, that we've
thrown in the towel on our noble expressions and intentions of last
October 6th. We're right back to trying to control interest rates and
trying to move from moment to moment, which is what has been happening
in this Committee as long as I've been sitting in these meetings.
This is where we have gotten into trouble in the past; whenever we've
been faced with a difficult decision we've always said, in effect,
let's wait another 30 days or another 60 days. We procrastinate. And
that is why, I think, we are in the inflationary situation in this
nation that we find ourselves in today. I apologize for that.

MR. PARTEE. Larry, we're within the targets.

MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Roos, I don't want to engage in an
argument, but I think we're doing exactly what we said we were going
to do on October 6th. If you recall, we announced that the former
policy had been that we looked at the aggregates and at interest rates
and we put more emphasis on interest rates; but now the policy was
going to be that we would look at the aggregates and at interest rates
but we would put more emphasis on the aggregates. At no time did this
Committee ever say that interest rates would be ignored.

MR. ROOS. Fred, we can't do both at the same time and
accomplish both objectives if they're incompatible. I'm being--

MR. SCHULTZ. You'll pardon me if I respectfully disagree.

MR. PARTEE. And I would point out, Larry, that we're well
within the targets that we specified in January and respecified in
July for three of four aggregates. M2 is a trifle [above]. But I
don't think the concept has been violated.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the best of all possible worlds, I
could be lowering these targets just for the sake of imagery. But let
us not forget that M-1B is obviously specified too low and we chose
not to change it at midyear. But some of that discrepancy between
M-1B and M-1A is coming out of savings deposits. We don't know how
much, but it is. I think we can say unambiguously that it's too low
relative to what we thought we were setting at the beginning of the
year. Well, we have a proposal of 4, 6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, with
$750 million on borrowing and keeping 8 to 14 percent on the funds
range.

MR. GRAMLEY. Do we understand this as halfway between "A"
and "B" but with the numbers just rounded to 4 percent and so on?

MR. SCHULTZ. It's a bit more toward "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one further point. It's
the point that Mr. Solomon raised earlier, which is a point I don't
think we can quantify. But we have operated before when we were
either high or low in a way that implied some tolerance for shortfalls
or overshoots. When we were high we said "or somewhat below,"

-52-



9/16/80

implying more tolerance for shortfalls. During the summer, in fact
for two months--maybe we shouldn't have but we did--we said if
[monetary growth] comes in high, we will be tolerant of an overshoot.
I could well see adding a tolerance of an undershoot to some degree
here. I don't know that we can specify that arithmetically. But what
we would be saying is that if the numbers come in unexpectedly low--
that would mean total reserves were coming in low--we would be slower
about making any adjustment that might otherwise be made in raising
the nonborrowed reserve path to make up for the shortfall. That's
just the opposite of what was done--

MS. TEETERS. That is moving very close to "B." You've
rounded the numbers down and then tolerate shortfalls.

MR. PARTEE. I think it's worse than "B" because if what
we've seen in the economy is a little bubble, we could be very slow to
have an adjustment to it. We are not out of these ranges. I don't
see the basis that we had last summer for doing that, when we were
clearly below the ranges, or last fall when we were very concerned
about being over the ranges. We are within them.

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but we don't have much room for error.
That's my problem.

MS. TEETERS. That's just a function of being in September.
We've nailed ourselves down on the end of December and that's--

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, but September to December is a very short
period in terms of controlling the aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we haven't got a lot of room. We have
more room for undershoots in a purely target sense than for
overshoots.

MR. PARTEE. But we most recently had a big month, and that's
the only thing you're saying: That we had a really big month. When
we had a small April, the shoe was on the other foot and that dropped
us right below our target ranges.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that's when [we did this]; it was
following that very low month that we adopted the opposite [approach].

MR. PARTEE. But we were below the ranges._

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We were below the ranges.

MR. MORRIS. But we had a lot more time in April [to reach
our annual targets] than we have in October.

MS. TEETERS. The fact that there is an end point to this
shouldn't be what decides this. We could change the specifications to
the middle of next year, which I understand the Committee did when it
had a rolling base. But to over-fight to make it in the last four
months just for appearance sake, regardless of what happens in the
real economy, seems to me the epitome of foolishness.

MR. MORRIS. If we're in a position where we don't think the
guidelines make sense, I think we ought to change the guidelines.

-53-



9/16/80

MS. TEETERS. But we're within them.

MR. WALLICH. Yes, but [the aggregates have been growing] at
higher rates than compatible with the guidelines. And we're within
them because we're making up for a large shortfall. So if we continue
at this rate of speed, we're going to overshoot. Our question is
precisely: Do we want to get back on track by making a slight bend or
a significant bend in the rate of growth?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck, my suggestion carries forward
on what Henry just said. I don't understand why you say that a very
minor nuance--that if the opportunity arises, we tolerate an
undershoot--is worse than alternative B.

MR. PARTEE. Because it just means that there's a very lagged
response to an unexpected weakness in market terms. That's what it
means. And I would point out that for these last four months of the
year we're talking about growth rates of 4, 6-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent;
those aren't fast. They are within the ranges, I think.

MR. WALLICH. You're not including August?

MR. PARTEE. No, and I'm not including April either. August
is water over the dam and April is water over the dam. We're talking
about the next four months.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B would be right at the top of the
range [for this year], I think.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But Chuck, if there is a weakness in
the figures, the markets will reflect that. Therefore, we have a
small delay in not correcting the undershoot but it isn't as though
we're going to be pushing up--

MR. PARTEE. But we'll take out the reserves and that will
mean that the money supply will be low. And there won't be a self-
correcting operation.

MR. WALLICH. Even though I would like the consequences of
that action, I don't think it is a good principle. I didn't think it
was a good principle when we did it [when monetary growth was] on the
way up, so I shouldn't like it on the way down. It's really getting
back to a funds rate target.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought you liked those.

MR. WALLICH. Okay, but [unintelligible] a given rule. Given
that option, I'm not proposing to go back to that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can always consult, so let's not make
that part of the proposal. I, frankly, would be delighted if the
money supply comes in so weak that it provokes a consultation as to
what to do about it. We'll cross that bridge when and if we come to
it.

MR. WALLICH. In that case, wouldn't it be helpful if we
raised the lower limit of the funds rate?

-54-



9/16/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't want to target on the funds
rate, you just want to raise it!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no great objection to raising the
lower limit on the funds rate if that's what the Committee wants to
do. It's not accomplishing anything; I'm persuaded by the point that
Tony made earlier. But if that's really important to somebody and it
convinces them to join in this consensus then--

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the discount rate is 10 percent.
In some sense that's a fairly effective lower limit because if
[monetary growth] gets weak enough that borrowing gets to zero--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think it's very substantive
whether we--

MR. AXILROD. It's going to be a problem for [a funds rate
of] 8 percent.

MR. PARTEE. You can bet that long before it got down to 8
percent we would be consulting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For that reason, I'm not disturbed by
raising [the lower limit of the funds range] to 9 percent either.
It's purely a cosmetic question.

MS. TEETERS. I'd like to see the range kept at 8 to 14
percent. That gives us the maximum amount of range for it. I'd hate
to signal by raising [the lower limit] that we were tightening policy.
If it's meaningless, then why do it at this point? I think it will be
taken as a signal in the market that we did some tightening.

MR. PARTEE. Technically, it wouldn't be [known to the
public] until the policy record came out since they never test either
end of this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's virtually inconsequential
except that somebody is going to read the policy record a month from
now and see that we raised the lower end of the band by 1 percentage
point and will wonder what that means, if anything. I'm back to 4,
6-1/2, and 8-1/2 percent, 8 to 14 percent with a feeling of virtual
indifference on my part about that, and $750 million. Are we ready to
vote?

MR. GRAMLEY. Can we again have some interpretation of this?
This is almost "B," and I thought we were starting out with some sort
of compromise between "A" and "B." Plus you were almost willing to
increase the lower end of the funds rate range and that's even further
toward "B." And I'm just getting uncomfortable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess you're uncomfortable about the
borrowing. All I'm doing is accepting--because I tend to agree with
it--that the borrowing specifications in the Bluebook are a little low
based upon what we know now. So I'm just adjusting for that.

MR. AXILROD. When you asked the question, Mr. Chairman, I
was assuming that $750 million was the midpoint around which there
could be some variation. With nothing else changed--that is, if the

-55-



9/16/80

paths were all working about like this--if the funds rate was going up
very high and if borrowings were $750 million, there would be a
certain freedom within the very first week on that interpretation such
that borrowings would be lowered because that would be an indication
that the demand for borrowing was not as high as we thought. So I
think we would be interpreting it along the lines of what you were
saying, Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Okay, thank you. That helps me.

MR. PARTEE. It's really a $700 to $800 million range, or
something like that.

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. That's a better way to think of it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ready.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Guffey No
President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos No
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich No
President Winn No

MR. ALTMANN. Eight for, four against, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose we ought to eat, and we're going
to eat right here. Oh, one quick thing. We need somebody to be
second in command after Governor Schultz to act on freedom of
information requests. Governor Coldwell used to do this and we've had
no alternate since Governor Coldwell left. We have to repair that
oversight. It has not proved to be a heavy responsibility. Governor
Partee, who serves in that function for the Board of Governors, has
agreed to serve in that function for the Open Market Committee, if the
Committee so agrees. Do I have a motion?

SPEAKER(?). So moved.

SPEAKER(?). Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without active dissent, Governor Partee
will be the alternate.

MR. ALTMANN. Now that that has been accomplished, I might
say that I have just recently denied a request which is likely to
provoke an appeal.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm certainly glad that Governor Schultz
is here!

-56-



9/16/80 -57-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that doesn't get to Governor Partee.
Do you have a question, Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I may have missed it, but I don't think you
formally approved the Open Market Desk's [intermeeting] operations.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we don't want to overlook that.
Without objection they are approved.

MR. PARTEE. What would happen if we didn't? Is it any good
for a loss or a gain?

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we might have to talk about "Peter who?"!

END OF MEETING




