









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

May 6, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held on Tuesday, May 6, 1980. This was a telephone conference

meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., except

as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list

of those participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Guffey (Kansas City)
Mr. Morris (Boston)
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos (St. Louis)
Mr. Schultz
Mr. Solomon (New York)
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn (Philadelphia),
Mayo (Chicago), and Willes (Minneapolis),
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), and Black
(Richmond), Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco and Richmond

Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel
Mr. Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis
(Cleveland), T. Davis (Kansas City),
Eisenmenger (Boston), Kichline, Truman,
and Zeisel, Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for
Domestic Operations, System Open
Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of
Governors



5/6/80

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market
Secretariat

Messrs. Forrestal (Atlanta), and MacDonald
(Cleveland), First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
Cleveland

Messrs. Brandt (Atlanta), Boehne (Philadelphia),
Burns (Dallas), and Scheld (Chicago),
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, Dallas,
and Chicago, respectively

Messrs. Bisignano (San Francisco), Broaddus
(Richmond), Cacy (Kansas City), and
Danforth (Minneapolis), Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco,
Richmond, Kansas City, and Minneapolis,
respectively

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
May 6, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we should proceed, even though
some of the Board members have not yet arrived, because I have very
little time myself. Mr. Axilrod, why don't you proceed?

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, [as the Committee knows], of
course, we have had continued very weak money supply data since the
last get-together. And total reserves for the four-week intermeting
period, estimated from what we can tell about the amount of required
reserves and the excess reserves that would be held at roughly current
interest rate levels, seem to be running about $800 million below the
target path. And that's with borrowing coming down very close to
nominal levels. In the current week, borrowing ex First Pennsylvania
is now down to about $500 million. Our projection and expectation is
that in the next two weeks it will run around $250 million ex First
Pennsylvania. Thus, if any more reserves were put in to try to attain
the total reserve path, they would have to go into excess reserves,
which would cause a very sharp drop in the funds rate from the recent
level. The funds rate has been moving down toward the 13 percent
bottom limit of the Committee's range and yesterday was below it.
Thus, effectively now, the funds rate is a constraint on the
adjustments we would make to the total reserve path. We won't have
any additional data on the aggregates until tomorrow, but I would not
expect them to change substantially enough to indicate that the funds
rate would not remain a constraint in adjustments to the reserve path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The general question we face here, to
which no one knows the answer, is how forceably we have to push in
reserves to get the money supply turned around or what influence that
has on the federal funds rate. We are operating in an area in which
we haven't operated before under the present technique. But it seems
quite clear that if we do not change the federal funds rate
constraint, we will simply be operating at a 13 percent level of the
federal funds rate indefinitely without any assurance, and with a
probability, that that will not in the short run turn the money supply
around. The question in my mind is how much additional leeway should
be given. I suspect that 12 percent [as a lower limit] will mean that
we will operate with a 12 percent federal funds rate, so I would
propose going somewhat below that. My own hope would be that the
funds rate won't necessarily decline all that much further with the
necessary injection of reserves. But we don't know, and I think we
ought to give ourselves a little more leeway. I would suggest 11
percent as a possibility, but people could talk about other numbers as
well. We meet in two weeks; whether that kind of adjustment will hold
us until then I do not know. It all depends upon what happens to the
data, what happens to reserves, and what happens to interest rates
during that period. We could have a little more leeway if we moved it
down to 10 percent, which is still consistent more or less with the
present level of market rates for instruments other than federal
funds. But that presumably would also be consistent with
further declines in those rates. It would give us more opportunity to
be sure that the reserve base was performing the way it's supposed to
perform. But that's a matter of choice. I think we have to make some
reduction, and it's a question of how much. I will stop right there.

MR. MAYO. Bob Mayo here, Paul. Just to put it on the table



5/6/80

I move that we go to a 10 to 17 percent tolerance range [for the funds
rate]. That's 3 perentage points off on both ends. The symmetry with
removing the 3 percent surcharge is purely coincidental. But I think
that would give us the flexibility we need.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Other comments?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony Solomon. I think
we ought to move the funds rate as gradually as we feel we can. Even
though I feel that we will end up with 11 percent, I would hope that
we could operate for the next week or so at slightly above 11 percent.
So I would like to recommend that we put the floor at 11 percent. I
don't have any strong feeling on the ceiling.

MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I would go along
with moving the floor down to 11 percent; I think we have to take
[whatever steps] we have to take to get the money supply turned
around. But, having said that, I do want to convey to you the strong
feeling that was expressed to me over the past week when I met with
several members of our board of directors. I've written you a letter,
which probably hasn't landed on your desk yet, hoping and urging that
you would find an appropriate occasion to make a strong public
statement as to why we have not resisted this decline of interest
rates. [I'd urge you to say] that it does not mean we're [abandoning
our] anti-inflation fight and to explain that it's to head off the
unexpected and undesired absolute shrinking of the money supply. In
short, these directors feel that there's a great danger of a broad-
based public misunderstanding of what we're up to that may be
interpreted as an easing of our anti-inflation policy and may result
in some bad effects on inflation psychology.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm aware of that [risk]. We've been
pretty lucky in escaping it so far. I think we've fairly largely
escaped it. I do not have a lot of time, so I hope the comments can
be kept fairly brief. Maybe we could hear from the members first.

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I would support
moving [the lower limit] to 10 percent. I think 11 percent is a
little tight, even for the [short] interval because the commercial
paper rate is already below 11 percent. So if we have to catch up
with the rest of the money market structure, it seems to me that 10
percent is consistent with the rest of the market.

MR. GUFFEY. Paul, Roger Guffey. I would reluctantly accept
11 percent but would be happier with 12 percent. I would hope that
the move down would be very cautious and that [we] will catch up with
the market someplace around [that] level.

MS. TEETERS. Funds are already trading at around 12 percent,
aren't they, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Peter may wish to speak to where the funds rate
is this morning. Yesterday it averaged 12-1/4 percent. I think it's
around there this morning.

MR. STERNLIGHT. The last I heard it was 11-7/8 percent. The
market is really waiting to see what actions the Desk might take
because there is a sense of reserves being available today.



5/6/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have to take any action the rest of
this week?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it depends on the Committee's
decision, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it depended upon the reserve
base.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, compared with our interim nonborrowed
reserves objective, we're looking at a need to take out something like
$500 to $700 million. But one might say that there isn't a great need
to take that out, given how far below we're running on total reserves,
as Steve has outlined.

MS. TEETERS. If you left the $500 to $700 million in, what
would happen, Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. The funds rate presumably would soften, down
to whatever lower bound the Committee agrees on.

MS. TEETERS. All the way to 10 percent?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it could, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not talking about a lower bound that
is necessarily binding every day. Who else has a comment? I'll just
go down the list. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. I don't think it makes a great deal of difference
whether we lower it to 11 or 10 percent. I would go along with
either. It's a matter of [what level] we expect the funds rate to
reach if we continue to follow our objectives. So, either 11 or 10
percent [is acceptable to me]; I don't think it makes much difference
at this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos. Is there no Mr. Roos?

SPEAKER(?). He's coming in a second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, given what appears to be extreme weakness
in the economy, I would favor 10 percent. I had been afraid that
perhaps we could get some surge in either the economy or the money
supply but the chances of that at this point seem slim or none. So, I
would agree with Frank Morris that we ought to go down to 10 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I suppose I'd go to 10 percent if the market is
as weak as it sounds. If we settle on 11 percent, I think we will be
back here pretty quickly, probably before the end of the week or
certainly the early part of next week. We might as well give
ourselves the leeway and let the market sort of find its own level at
this point. So, I would favor going to 10 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.



5/6/80

MR. WALLICH. I think we're in danger of making a great
mistake. The real policy action is on interest rates, not on the
money supply. Whatever happens to the money supply over a period of a
month has next to no effect on the economy. But these interest rates
--not only internationally but domestically--convey an impression of a
drastic shift in policy and create expectations that we're all for
inflation as soon as we work out of this difficulty. So, I'd stick
with 13 percent.

MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I would strongly recommend
the 10 percent figure. I think we've got to be willing to let
interest rates move fairly freely, both upward and downward. And 10
percent would be my position.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do others want to make a quick comment?

MR. BAUGHMAN. I would prefer the 10 percent.

MR. WINN. In Cleveland we would prefer the 10 percent, too;
we need the flexibility.

MR. BLACK. Same in Richmond.

MR. EASTBURN. Philadelphia would go with 10 percent, and I
second John Balles' views [regarding a public statement by you].

MR. WILLES. Minneapolis prefers 10 percent.

MR. FORRESTAL. Atlanta prefers the higher number, but we'd
be willing to go with 10 percent. However, we still think, as does
Governor Wallich, that inflation is the major problem and that two
months of decline in the money supply should not cause us to
overreact. So, I would prefer a number higher than 10 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we obviously have a somewhat split
view. Does anybody have any further comments?

MR. MAYO. My support of 10 percent, Mr. Chairman, is really
to give the Desk the flexibility that I think it badly needs. I'm not
saying that we ought to go to 10 percent; we should do what comes
naturally in terms of the way the market responds. But I see no
particular point to moving [the lower limit] to 11 percent and then
having to come back in another week or so and move it to 10 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I really feel that it's not a
question of catching up with the market. Whatever action we take will
influence the market. We have to be perceived as moving fairly
gradually and prudently. And I would hope that everybody feels as
well that we want to retain the perception that the Fed is not
changing its policy [of fighting inflation]. So it's really important
to show a sense of prudence and gradualism in this [so as] not to
precipitate further sharp declines in the market rates by people
seeing us move so abruptly to a level as low as 10 percent. I would
hope we would move down to 12 or 11-1/2 percent in the next week or so
and maybe stay there for a week, and then move to 11 percent if
necessary.



5/6/80

MR. ROOS. There are [several] points I would like to make.
First of all, we have announced that the foundation of our policy is
to permit money to grow at 5.5 percent. Secondly, we have announced
that we have abandoned the policy of attempting to stabilize interest
rates. And thirdly, I think we recognize that the most important
objective of the Federal Reserve today is to restore credibility in
our willingness and our ability to stick with a long-range policy and
not change course the minute any short-term phenomenon occurs. So in
addition to what Tony Solomon said [regarding] our objectives, I think
the most important objective is consistency and re-establishing our
credibility. And I know of no way to destroy that credibility more
quickly than to start dancing back toward the stabilization of
interest rates, after you and all the rest of us have said that we're
no longer targeting on the fed funds rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there is some question as to
how credibility gets defined in these circumstances, which I suppose
is what the argument is about. In my mind, the one thing that bears
upon this a little is that whatever we decide is going to be published
fairly quickly. I don't know what way that cuts, but it leads me to
be a little more conservative than I would otherwise be. And that
lends some support to the 11 percent number. On the other hand, I
don't like the idea of just going to 11 percent and sitting there on a
floor for too long, because I think it might be inconsistent--though
we don't know what the money supply figures will be--in getting [money
growth] turned around. So I'm left in a bit of dilemma. But we can
always meet again. And if it makes [Committee members] more happy or
if we maximize the satisfaction and minimize the risk by taking an
interim step to 11 percent, recognizing that we may have to come back
next week, that's okay with me, too.

MS. TEETERS. You know, Paul, I'm a little disturbed by the
fact that when [the funds rate was] going up nobody was concerned
about the speed at which it went up. It ratcheted up over a period of
about six weeks. And if we are really going to follow this policy,
then we're going to have to let the market determine how rapidly it
comes down. It seems to me we should give ourselves some leeway and
if we're wrong, the market will turn the rates around and they will go
back up again.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would hate to see that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We may be in a situation where literally
in order to get the [money supply] turned around [the funds rate] has
to go very low and then go right up again, which bothers some people,
including me. But I don't know how to avoid that either. If we were
only talking about the funds rate, it would be one thing. But we're
talking about dragging the whole structure [of interest rates],
probably.

MS. TEETERS. Well, with the prime rate at 17-1/2 percent, it
doesn't bother me very much to drag it down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I don't think there'd be any argument
with. Well, the choice is between 10 and 11 percent, I think; and I
don't know that anybody wants to change his or her mind basically. It
comes out with a slight majority for 10 percent, I think. Well,
maybe--



5/6/80

MS. TEETERS. Could we settle for 10-1/2?

MR. ALTMANN. Six [members indicated their acceptance of 10
percent].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four.... I don't know
how you get six.

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I wouldn't object
to adopting 11 percent, with the proviso that we have another meeting
a week from today. I just don't think that 11 percent is going to do
it. But if you want to proceed on that basis, that would be
acceptable to me.

MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I feel that setting up a
meeting a week from now could be bad practice, if we were to tolerate
a further withdrawal of reserves. Our big problem right now is that
the aggregates are undershooting our targets. If, for example, for
four or five days the Desk had to withdraw reserves in order to keep
the funds rate at 11 percent, that would further exacerbate our
undershooting problems. And I think we'd end up being accused of
having once again been procyclical in making the prospects for a
recession even more real.

MR. SCHULTZ. Prospects? It's here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds to me as if maybe we ought to do
10-1/2 percent.

MR. RICE. I really don't think it makes any difference.

MS. TEETERS. We're in a range where it doesn't make any
difference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote on 10-1/2 percent.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
President Guffey No
President Mayo Yes
President Morris Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
President Solomon No
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich No

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get everybody? Did you get Mr.
Mayo?

MR. ALTMANN. I got Mr. Mayo. There were seven votes for and
three against. We only had ten [voting members present].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, I guess we're settled. Thank you.

MR. BALLES. Paul, would this be an appropriate time to spend
a few minutes on the discount rate?



5/6/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't have a few minutes. I
assume that we're going to remove the surcharge very promptly.

MR. MAYO. The Chicago board has just approved that.

MR. ROOS. So has St. Louis.

MR. GUFFEY. I would hope that the Board of Governors would
wait until the end of the week to announce it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have to decide that today, but
I don't know quite why you say that.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, because some of us have meetings [of our
boards of directors] on Thursday and would prefer that this not appear
to the market to be an unusual action by the Board of Governors or the
respective Banks.

MR. BAUGHMAN. We just had a special meeting to approve this.
We had a special meeting on the presumption that it would be announced
promptly; otherwise, we would have waited until Thursday.

MR. MAYO. Same way with Chicago.

MR. EASTBURN. Same for Philadelphia.

MR. ROOS. Same for St. Louis.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll be considering that today.

MR. SCHULTZ. I have one other comment. I would hope that
everybody out there is doing some hard thinking about how and how
quickly we can get rid of these credit controls.

MR. BLACK. Yesterday!

MR. EASTBURN. Philadelphia votes yes.

MR. MAYO. Keep the money markets mutual funds control on a
little longer.

MR. GUFFEY. Let's declare a victory and withdraw.

MR. WALLICH. I would agree with that.

MR. BALLES. If we go down to 10-1/2 percent on the funds
rate, that's going to make the basic discount rate a real penalty.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, we'll consider that Thursday.

MR. SCHULTZ. Okay. Thank you very much.

END OF MEETING


