









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

November 18, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,

D. C., on Tuesday, November 18, 1980, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,
Mr. Solomon,
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn

Chairman
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Baughman, and Eastburn, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Black, Corrigan, and Ford, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Minneapolis, and Atlanta,
respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Petersen, General Counsel
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mannion, Assistant General Counsel

Axilrod, Economist
Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ettin, Henry,
Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open
Market Account

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account



11/18/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate Directors, Divisions

of Research and Statistics, and International Finance,
respectively, Board of Governors

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board
of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors

Messrs. Boykin, Doyle, and McIntosh, First Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and Boston,
respectively

Messrs. Boehne, Brandt, Danforth, Keran, Parthemos, and
Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia, Atlanta, Minneapolis, San Francisco,
Richmond, and Chicago, respectively

Mr. Kubarych and Mrs. Nichols, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York, and Chicago, respectively

Mr. Ozog, Manager, Securities Department, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 18, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to act on the minutes.

MR. PARTEE. So moved.

MR. SCHULTZ. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Mr. Pardee.

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Should we ratify the transactions before I
forget?

MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection they are ratified. Is
there any discussion?

MR. WALLICH. Scott, you made a number of very interesting
observations. I just want to check on how to interpret them. One,
you said we bought as many marks as we possibly could. Was there
really in some sense a restraint on how much we could do? Why
couldn't we have done more?

MR. PARDEE. It's an interesting exercise in how we achieve a
certain objective. In order to maximize our purchase of marks, we
have to have a rising dollar market. So each time the dollar would
rise, we would be in the market either in New York or in Frankfurt
through the Bundesbank. But we would do small amounts. And to the
extent that we would be perceived as operating we would [then want to]
be perceived as backing away. It's quite different from an operation
in which we're trying to stop a movement in the rate. The idea was to
allow the rate to continue to move and thereby we would continue to
amass marks. Once the exchange market comes to a stable point, it's
very difficult to dig many marks out of it.

MR. WALLICH. My second question: You said the dollar might
have been driven to levels that would have been perceived as
unsustainable without this intervention. Do you have any thoughts as
to what these levels might have been?

MR. PARDEE. It's very possible that it could have gone over
2 marks to the dollar, but with a much more volatile market, much
greater pressure on our foreign central bank counterparts to do
something in response to the decline in their currencies, and much
greater pressure on the EMS snake relationship.

MR. WALLICH. I also noted that you said we helped other
countries hold their interest rates down. I believe that is right and
I believe intervention can have that function. And it's an important
effect. I just want to argue that one can't trade off intervention
for interest rates very far, though there is some such effect.



11/18/80

MR. PARDEE. I tried to phase it artfully. I don't see that
necessarily as an objective of policy. No one has told me that it's
an objective of policy. I'd say it's more a result of the policy.

MR. WALLICH. And finally, were you satisfied with the amount
of foreign support you got and their maintenance of orderly markets
once the dollar dropped sharply and then recovered sharply?

MR. PARDEE. Well, the only instance of foreign support was
from the Bundesbank on that Tuesday morning. Since we are operating
through them to buy marks, there is the possibility that we would
complete the circle and ask them also to sell marks for us. The risk
is that once we start intervening through the Bundesbank really in
support of the dollar, then we will take over all of the operations on
both sides of the Atlantic, which could be very expensive. So on that
morning, I talked to my friend from the Bundesbank who said he had no
particular interest in buying dollars that morning, but he did notice
some conditions that he considered to be disorderly--that is
widespread, sharply moving rates--in the market. So he did step in
and buy dollars even though as far as his broader interests were
concerned there was no need to step in at that time. But we did have
good cooperation. I hope our operations now are buying a good bit of
cooperation for the next sequence of difficulties for the dollar.

MS. TEETERS. What do you mean by that? Do you think the
dollar is going to drop?

MR. PARDEE. Exchange markets are very volatile. We have
periods in which the dollar rises and we have periods in which it
drops. And as I indicated, to the extent that interest rates level
off or drop back, we may have a decline in the dollar. And to the
extent that the markets tend to overreact then, I am sure we will be
back in the market on the other side. This has been the way of life
since 1973.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Scott, would you say that our trading partners
are estimating our current account improvement at close to the same
magnitude as the staff estimates?

MR. PARDEE. You might know more about that than I do, [Ted].

MR. TRUMAN. I am not sure about our trading partners per se.
The market in general tends to have a somewhat smaller [estimate of
our] current account surplus in 1981 than we do. The OECD has a
forecast for our current account surplus for 1981 in the $12 billion
range as compared with the staff's $18 billion. Now, I would consider
those in the same ball park, but we tend to be a little higher than
the consensus that I am aware of.

MR. BLACK. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I guess I don't understand the operating rules
that we use for intervention any more, Scott. I thought we intervened
only in disorderly markets. We have had a market that has been moving



11/18/80

up; it was not particularly disorderly. You said we bought as many
marks as we possibly could. I didn't understand that to be what
people did when they intervened. And my impression is that we bought
far more marks than the Germans did. That is, we are doing the
supporting of the mark, not the Germans. And you gave as a reason for
it that it helps hold down interest rates abroad, which I think is a
very strange reason indeed because it seems to me that if we want to
hold down interest rates, we ought to hold them down here not abroad.
So I just don't understand what is happening. You also said that we
were doing this to match the Treasury's [foreign currency] debt. But
we have matched the Treasury's debt. We have gone $100 million over
the Treasury's debt and you were still buying like mad early this
week. So I think it's time for a discussion of the terms on which we
intervene and what our strategy is other than that we just buy as many
marks as we can every time the dollar goes up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how prolonged a discussion we
can have, but I would state it somewhat differently.

MR. PARDEE. I am open to discussion, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about buying all that we can.
That's a matter of interpretation.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we bought $250 million [worth of marks] or
something like that on Monday. How much did the Germans do?

MR. PARDEE. The Germans have had a

have taken up a great deal of their time. So what we've had in
terms of economizing time, is that the Bundesbank officials--

MR. PARTEE. If we do the buying?

MR. PARDEE. They've been worrying about the mark/French
franc relationship and we have been worrying the mark/dollar
relationship. We have been providing them with orders, which would be
roughly the type of operations they would have in line with our
objectives and in line with the kinds of operations they have
conducted in the past as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Germans have a mixed mind
about this whole thing. They don't like the mark depreciating, but
they at least have an argument as to whether intervention is effective
as a means of preventing it from appreciating. There's one school of
thought that says: Let it go up so it will go down further and the
market will learn a lesson. And I think that school of thought has
been prevalent. But we have been in a position of rather eagerly
buying in large part because the Treasury was extremely anxious to
cover its losses. They are also anxious--I think it's a reasonable
point and this is a combined operation--to have some surplus over the
coverage of their [foreign currency denominated] bonds in case the
dollar goes in the other direction. They want a cushion so we will
have some margin of protection without making them short. And I
suppose from our standpoint, a cushion seems reasonable too.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know why that is.



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a small cushion now; we haven't
debated precisely how big the cushion might be.

MS. TEETERS. But isn't that really the question? What are
we going to do now? We've covered the Treasury's debt.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's only part of the story. The other
part is that, with the dollar rising against the mark, a normal
leaning against the wind does relieve pressures on both us and the
Europeans to do something different in domestic policy than we really
want to do. So the two things have to some degree coincided, to the
extent the latter is important. I wouldn't put a lot of weight on
that in terms of affecting interest rate policy. But to the extent it
affects that, it goes in [the right] direction. So both of those
reasons coincide in suggesting that when the mark is weakening
appreciably some intervention seems desirable.

MR. PARTEE. As I look at the experience of other countries
over the last couple of years, Paul, I observe that the countries with
the smallest inflation rate have been the ones with a rising currency.
There's some circularity in that, of course, but it is certainly true,
other things equal, that a rising currency reduces the observed
inflation rate for a country. We have as a major objective of policy
reducing inflation. I should think, therefore, that we would like to
have a rising currency.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't mind having a rising currency to
some extent, and it has been rising. I think it's clear from what
Scott said that we have not been intervening in a way to prevent any
rise in the dollar.

MR. PARDEE. In fact, to the extent that we backed away--

MR. PARTEE. When we buy $250 million in a day, we certainly
have prevented some rise in the dollar that day.

MR. PARDEE. To the extent that you back away, you leave an
impression in the market that you're not holding the rate or, in fact,
that your operations are not effective in holding the rate where it
is. So you are helping the rate to move along that way.

MR. WALLICH. Well, with respect to the dollar, I think we
have to aim at a happy mean. We want a strong dollar because it helps
on inflation. We don't want it to get so strong that we're not
competitive. We've had considerable appreciation in real terms. And
as far as the accumulation of reserves is concerned, in the long run I
think we have to become like other countries and rely on owned
reserves, not on the swaps that others can deny us the use of. And we
ought to be building up some reserves gradually.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I second that very strongly. Chuck,
it's a different kind of world in the last few years and will be
increasingly so. First of all, I would hope that we are not going to
be living permanently in a world where our interest rates are so
ridiculously high compared to those of other industrialized countries.
I hope we will find ourselves in an improved domestic economic
situation. Under those circumstances, once that artificial stimulus
[in interest rate differentials] is removed--to have a spread of 9



11/18/80

percentage points between Eurodollar and Euro deutschmark rates is
incredible--the dollar is going to go down very, very sharply.

MR. PARTEE. The dollar will go down because inflation
subsides. Is that what you are saying? After all, inflation is the
reason that interest rates are high.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but what I am assuming is that
there will be some moderation, but only partial, of inflation. There
will be a much larger drop in interest rates at periods of time
because of the way we've seen history [work] on this.

MR. MORRIS. Perhaps in the next quarter.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe next quarter. Nobody can be
sure of these things, but I suspect we will see disproportionately
large reverse movements in the dollar. I think we have to have a very
substantial volume of our own foreign exchange resources to cope with
such a situation. If we are always drawing on swap lines every time
we have to move in, the other countries can call the tune on us much
more easily. Having our own resources will make us a little more
masters of our own policy. I am not sure I see why you are concerned
about this. I would not place the emphasis on intervention being a
good thing because of the interest rate policy moves one can therefore
avoid to some degree. Your concern relates to intervention to
accumulate foreign exchange resources more than--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what the facts are on this,
Scott, but my impression is that at times in the past the U.S.
government has had substantially more net foreign exchange resources
when the dollar has been strong. I don't mean huge, but our net
[holdings] are only at about $200 million plus now, right?

MR. PARDEE. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have been substantially higher than
that in the past at times of--

MR. PARDEE. Well, before the Carter notes on a couple of
occasions we held $300 or $400 million worth of marks. It was in that
range, but not substantially more.

SPEAKER(?). We hold quite a lot of yen.

MR. TRUMAN. We have yen and Swiss francs, too, at the
moment.

MR. PARDEE. Yes.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, may I raise a technical question?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. RICE. Do we have to sell securities in order to finance
our purchases of foreign currencies?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, yes.



11/18/80

MR. RICE. Have we tied specific sales of securities to a
specific volume of--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it is washed out as another
operating factor. You can't identify a sale of a security for a
foreign--

MR. RICE. How do we know we need funds for financing our
foreign exchange purchases?

MR. PARTEE. It is a factor affecting the reserves.

MR. RICE. Our foreign currency purchases?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just goes into all the other factors
draining or providing reserves. So there is somewhat of a one-to-one
relationship.

MR. RICE. So when we sell securities, we raise interest
rates in the United States, do we not?

MR. PARTEE. Well, that was one comment that I was going to
respond to. One thing I disagree with on our policy here is that we
are not buying government securities. Instead, we are buying German
marks, and that does have a market impact in the United States.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,--

MR. PARTEE. Secondly, we are taking an exchange risk that I
don't think is warranted for the central bank.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are not buying Treasury
securities; instead we buy marks in the very short run. But you have
to ask what those people would do who want to get into dollars
otherwise, and presumably those people are getting into dollars and
buying some securities. They may not be Treasury securities, but in
the larger scheme of things it is a wash in our domestic market. We
are getting a capital inflow which we would not otherwise get.

MR. PARTEE. They are going to do that anyhow, aren't they
though?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, because otherwise the exchange rate
would go up and presumably we would get an equilibrium in the market
and they would not buy the securities. Sure, the analysis is that in
the immediate sense we are just selling Treasury securities; but
somebody is on the other side of that [transaction], buying something
coming into dollars.

MR. RICE. Are you saying that the net effect on interest
rates in the United States is neutral?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The net is probably zero in that sense,
yes.

MR. PARTEE. But it is downward on the markets
[unintelligible] interest rate. Wouldn't the same thing apply in the
case of marks? [More holders will] be able to sell out of marks?



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am discussing now a mechanical
relationship. How it affects policy, whether the Bundesbank wants to
raise their interest rates or lower their interest rates because of
[movement] in the exchange rates is a different matter.

MR. TRUMAN. We wouldn't get the capital inflow without the
intervention. I agree with your point, but the capital inflow is
facilitated by--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we wouldn't have the capital inflow.

MR. TRUMAN. That's because the official intervention is the
outflow counterpart to the private inflow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is precisely my point. You don't get
the capital inflow without the intervention.

MR. ROOS. To further confuse the issue, look on page 10 of
the Bluebook. I was always under the impression that strong interest
rates domestically tend to attract foreign money into our economy and
bolster the value of the dollar. But on the bottom of page 10 it says
"Continued intervention by the United States to slow the appreciation
of the foreign exchange value of the dollar could generate additional
pressure in Treasury yields, as the Fed offers securities to the
market to finance foreign currency purchases." It looks as though, if
I understand this, we are totally chasing our tail because we are
selling [Treasury securities] in order to seek [less] appreciation in
the value of the dollar in foreign exchange markets, and in the
process we are doing something that could generate additional downward
pressure on Treasury yields. I thought that upward pressure on
Treasury yields is what bolsters the value of the dollar. Or do I
have it totally backwards?

MR. SCHULTZ. That is what it does; it pushes it up not down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This gets into rather--

MR. PARTEE. Except, Paul, they wouldn't have any--

MR. ROOS. Except for what? It certainly doesn't do--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the immediate sense, it requires more
selling of Treasury securities. There is no question. That is
because Treasury securities is all we operate in. The other side of
the transaction is not identifiable and it may well not [involve]
Treasury securities. Now, if that makes a difference to you, it can
be of some significance. But in terms of the general supply and
demand in the money market as a whole, it is probably a wash. But in
a very direct sense we sell Treasury securities to the extent we buy
marks.

MS. TEETERS. But isn't the real question before us: What
are we going to do from here on out?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if you want to have a
prolonged discussion today; we can do it next time, if desirable. The
general issue, as I understand it, is concern about how much [we
should accumulate]. What should be the guidelines and all the rest



11/18/80

and what should be our net positive position in foreign currencies?
There are really two questions. There is that question plus under
what conditions does it make sense to intervene. Now, we have just
been basically leaning against the wind for a variety of reasons that
have been mentioned. We now have--looking at the government as a
whole, and I think it is relevant in this particular case because the
Treasury has been looking at our balances as a hedge against the
Carter bonds at the moment--a $200 million positive position. If
there's real concern about that positive position and about that
getting to the considerably bigger magnitudes that we are talking
about and if interest rates stay high, then we have an immediate
problem. I frankly do not feel that concern. I think it would be a
reasonable precaution to hold amounts within the ranges we are now
talking anyway--by which I mean in the hundreds of millions area. I
have no real problem with that; I not only have no real problem, I
think it is desirable for the reasons that have been suggested.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. May I comment on Chuck's second
point, the exchange risks? Of course, we have the same exchange risks
when we borrow on the swap lines to support the dollar. I would
argue, Chuck, based on my experiences at Treasury, that the exchange
risk is much smaller if we have substantial resources of our own. We
are almost sure to make money on our present operations. We are
buying the mark at a time that it is weak.

MR. PARTEE. Well, you think it is weak.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I know it is weak.

MR. PARTEE. You cannot foresee the future, Tony.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can't see it completely.
There could be a Middle Eastern war, which would upset the situation.
But if--

MR. PARTEE. That is a very reasonable possibility, isn't it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But if you extract from
military [conflict and other] extreme assumptions, in economic terms
with inflation in Germany now running 3-1/2 to 4 percent and with the
miserable [inflation] record we have, when our interest rates come
down--which they will to some degree though I am not saying they will
come down a helluva lot--we are going to see some major reverse flows.
I think you will find that we are in a better position to minimize our
exchange risk and maximize our gains if we have a stock of resources
than if we are forced to start borrowing. It's just a longer-run plan
basically. And it is a more comfortable situation for the people who
are actually managing this. There is no mathematical proof of this,
but I feel that most people in the Treasury and in the foreign
exchange area in New York would agree with me that this is the way to
operate in practice. We have not done badly at all in the last few
months on this whole question of exchange risks and profits and loss.
And one can be a better manager when one has--

MR. PARTEE. Well, certainly, if one assumes that 180 is the
right rate for the mark, we ought to buy all we can at more than 180
because when--



11/18/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think 193 is not sustainable.

MR. PARTEE. I don't know.

MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, could we get a staff analysis of
our own reserves and those of other countries and some analysis of
this particular question? Then maybe we could discuss it at the next
meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that is probably what we ought to do.
But I would point out, just in terms of this general problem, that we
have an example currently of a country that is taking the extreme
opposite view, which is the United Kingdom, and even they have
accumulated some reserves. They have had a very high inflation rate,
high interest rates, and a prolonged and very sizable appreciation of
sterling. Whether that is good or bad is the question. But that is
an example of a country that is taking a different view. They have
not taken it so extremely that they haven't acquired any foreign
currencies; they have. But they haven't acquired very many.

MR. WALLICH. That is for monetary policy reasons not because
they made decisions about reserves. I think we ought to bear in mind
first Tony's point that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it has anything to do with
their fears about gains or losses on foreign exchange transactions.
Whether it's for, as you say, monetary policy reasons or economic
policy reasons, they are willing to take a strongly appreciated pound
to put pressure on their inflation rate.

MR. WALLICH. I think gains and losses in the exchange market
have to be evaluated including the interest that one earns. On one
side if we have D-marks, as Tony says, the chances are that in the
long run the D-mark will be stronger than the dollar, but we will have
lower interest earnings on that. On the other hand, if we owe
D-marks, having drawn on the swap, say, that is an adverse position
because the D-mark may appreciate. If we pay interest in D-mark
terms, we would be benefitting from that. So the interest to some
extent counteracts the risk factor insofar as the risk factor is based
on purchasing power parity considerations, which will not work out
exactly in the long run. Also, I would like to remind you that other
countries have enormous reserves. The Germans still have, I think,
$40 billion; they had $50 billion plus. The Japanese have $20
billion. They all take a great risk because these reserves are mostly
in dollars, which from their perspective have depreciated, giving them
losses. We have a very large gold stock. Every time the gold price
moves, we are becoming richer or poorer. We [never] pay any attention
to that, and rightly so. But let us not say that we are without
exchange risks from the movement [in the value] of our financial
assets.

MS. TEETERS. But I am afraid we are making policy by
default. By not giving any guidance at this point, we are saying to
the international Desk in New York to go ahead and do what it has done
for the past month. That could lead us not to $$100 million but to
another $2 billion in marks. And that seems to me a rather major
decision. Do we want the Desk as the mark rises to buy marks as



11/18/80

rapidly as they can and to accumulate a war chest? Is that what we
are telling them to do?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it is a bit of an exaggeration to
say they bought as many as they could, but that is a market judgment.

MR. PARDEE. This is what I am telling the Treasury anyway.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Institutionally we have to face the fact
that the Treasury is extremely eager to acquire marks and build up a
nest egg. They will build it up if we don't. It is very awkward for
them to--

MS. TEETERS. They've done it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but they're still short [of
their objective] by about a billion dollars.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is in fact very awkward for them to
hold [marks]. I don't have any disagreement with the Treasury policy.

MR. GRAMLEY. I think Governor Partee's and Governor Teeter's
point is well taken. What Governor Partee is really asking is: What
underlies our intervention policy? What are our objectives? Should
we be using intervention policy to impede progress on the inflation
front by [not] letting the dollar appreciate? What are we doing? So,
I think some more analysis of the broader context would be helpful.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I accept the notion that people think that
is true. And I have no reluctance to do it. I do not myself feel the
least bit confused about what we are doing, which apparently we have
not articulated correctly. We are leaning somewhat against the
appreciation of the mark and we are willing to accumulate some
balances for all the precautionary reasons that have been suggested.
That's apart from mostly in the past being in the position of just
getting back into balance as the United States and that phase at the
moment is over. It changed very rapidly a week ago when we suddenly
got into a minus position after being in a positive position for a few
days. But having reached that arithmetic point, I had presumed that
we were willing to acquire some additional foreign currencies
consistent with our general philosophy of being willing to lean
against the wind, anyway. Now, if that is wrong, we ought to change
it; but I don't think it is wrong.

MR. PARTEE. To avoid disorderly conditions?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well,--

MR. PARTEE. I believe those are the terms of the directive
of the Committee.

MR. GUFFEY. The Committee does have rules with respect to
what the Desk can hold.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. The [informal limit] now
is $1-1/2 billion. [Secretary's note: The $1-1/2 billion informal
limit is for all foreign currencies excluding yen. There is a
separate limit of $1 billion for holdings of yen.]

-10-



11/18/80

MS. TEETERS. And we can change it by notation vote between
meetings.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, there is an intermeeting limit as well as
a maximum we can hold in any one currency. Aren't we getting at or
near that limit? If it is not changed--

MR. PARDEE. We might be. As I said, in marks we now have
$1.1 billion against [an informal limit of] $1.5 billion. The maximum
for the total open position was left at $8 billion from an earlier
siege; that we have not changed.

SPEAKER(?). In all currencies?

MR. PARDEE. Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. So in the period ahead, we are talking about
accumulating a maximum of $400 million in marks unless we have a
notation vote to change the limit during the intermeeting interval.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As things now stand, that is correct.

MR. GUFFEY. That seems reasonable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can schedule a longer discussion
of this--

MR. PARDEE. Technically under the directive we have two
reasons for intervening. One is to counter disorderly conditions.
The other is to change balances in light of future needs. There is a
very weak need [currently] for piling up lots of marks, but in light
of future needs it's something we clearly have in mind. Also [the
directive requires that] we have close and continuous consultation
with the Treasury. And right now the Treasury is in a mood to have us
buy as many marks as we can.

MR. PARTEE. Of course, this is run by a steering committee
of the FOMC, [the Foreign Currency Subcommittee]. But that
subcommittee has to observe the rules that the Committee has laid
down. I just think the subcommittee ought to read those rules and
decide whether it is authorizing transactions in keeping with them or
not. And I would like to have a review of the subject.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can review the subject. We will review
the subject.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask Scott a
question. I would be interested, Scott, in your views on the
divergent trend between the spot and the forward rates last month.
The dollar rose by an average of 1.1 percent against six major
countries on a trade-weighted basis. But the forward rate for one
year went down by about .3 percent. And the longer-term forward rate
went down about 1 percent. What do you make of that divergent trend?

MR. PARDEE. Well, we've had substantial movements in
interest rates.

-11-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless the market is in disequilibrium, it
is an interest rate arbitrage.

MR. PARDEE. There are wider and wider differences between
dollar rates and foreign rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is in equilibrium isn't it?
The forward differential changes every time interest rate
differentials change.

MR. PARDEE. I don't know of anything other than [that].

MR. TRUMAN. If you believe--and some people do and some
people don't--that the forward interest rate is the expected future
spot rate and has something to do with purchasing power parity, as
Governor Wallich mentioned, and things like the longer-term outlook
for a country's current account and so forth, then the fact that the
forward rate has moved over this period could be interpreted as
suggesting that expectations of inflation in the United States
[relative to abroad] have moved up over this period. That would be
one story. I am not sure, personally, whether one would want to put a
lot of weight on that particular story. But that is a possible and
plausible interpretation of why there was an increase in the
divergence between the spot and [forward rates].

MR. WALLICH. I would like to add to what Scott said about
the purposes of intervention. There are those two reasons he
mentioned. One is countering disorder, not maintaining order; we
sometimes say it is countering disorder. Disorder this time seems to
be mostly on the way up whereas in the past it usually was encountered
on the way down. There is also accumulating for future needs. And I
would say that forming a reserve is provided for in that. But the
main qualification is that it has to conform with article IV,
paragraph something, of the IMF articles of agreement. And that gives
a fairly wide degree of latitude for intervention in conditions of
floating [exchange rates]. It specifies mostly what one is not
prepared to do, such as driving the exchange rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It speaks of erratic--

MR. WALLICH. Erratic fluctuations, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will have a more orderly review
of this at the next meeting. Do you have a recommendation with
respect to operations?

MR. PARDEE. Yes, the swap lines are cleared. But between
now and the end of the year all of our swap lines with 14 foreign
central banks and the BIS come up for renewal for a further 12 months.
As in the past, I am recommending that the Committee approve the
renewals at this meeting, so there will be ample time for the formal
exchange of cables with our partner central banks who must also go
through their formal approval processes. This year the negotiations
are somewhat more complicated in view of the Committee's decision to
eliminate the risk-sharing provisions on our drawings and to switch to
our paying of interest rates based on what one would pay on the
currencies we borrow rather than on the U.S. Treasury bill rate. We
have had no problem with substance with the other central banks which

-12-



11/18/80

are most affected by this decision. They agree that this is a logical
approach. Indeed, I found out that the Bundesbank had been rather
quiet about pushing the issue because they made some further
calculations and found that it might be to their advantage to keep
things the way they were, given the interest differentials. But they
haven't complained that we are moving this way. For most we are
waiting for each of the central banks to indicate which specific
instrument in their market, a Treasury bill or whatever, corresponds
most closely to our Treasury bill. In most cases there should be
little difficulty. But in two important instances, with the
Bundesbank and with the Bank of Japan, the corresponding instruments
to our Treasury bill are not obvious. We must be careful not to link
our swap drawings to a higher cost instrument than a Treasury bill
might be. For swap arrangements on which we are not likely to draw, I
see no need to negotiate a specific instrument on their side.
Nevertheless, we could come down to the wire on some of these
negotiations, so I would like to recommend that the Committee approve
the renewal of swap arrangements now subject to a final review and
determination by the FOMC subcommittee when these negotiations have
been completed that the terms and conditions are acceptable. So it
involves agreeing generally now that we can proceed with the
negotiations and then a review by the subcommittee that the terms on
the elimination of the sharing of risk and on the particular
instruments that we will be using are acceptable to the Committee.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My recollection is that the Committee
hasn't formally approved these [agreements at this stage] but that you
are authorized to proceed and undertake these negotiations. We will
have to approve them formally at some stage. There has been some
limited consultation with the Congress by the Treasury. So far as
they are concerned, it is okay, but I am not absolutely clear in my
mind that there will be no objections.

MR. TRUMAN. There hasn't been any objection on the House
side to date. There was just one question.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had a consultation on the House side?

MR. TRUMAN. Yes. The Treasury staff talked to people on the
House side and they have not stirred up any objection.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks as if it's proceeding on course,
subject to these technical [details].

MR. PARDEE. But they are important elements of the
negotiation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand.

MR. PARDEE. We want to know what interest rate we are going
to be paying on the marks we borrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. You don't need any specific
action now today, do you?

MR. PARDEE. Well, approval of the renewal of the [swaps].

-13-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are they going to be done before the next
meeting?

MR. PARDEE. Yes, December 4th is the first maturity for a
number of them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Do we have a motion on that?

MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.

MR. BLACK. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections? That is approved. Now,
there is this one question of the Swedish swap, I take it, as to how
big that will be.

MR. PARDEE. Right. They haven't said anything, so we have
let sleeping dogs lie. We have a sentence in the cable that will go
out indicating that we are reconfirming the increase to $500 million
through May, which is the date set [for the expiration of the
temporary increase]. We will make reference to the agreement of last
May in this cable. They might come back to us.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the case where we temporarily
increased the line through next May, and you are suggesting that the
renewal would be consistent with maintaining the increase but only
until next May.

MR. PARDEE. Right. I assume that at some point they will
come back to us and ask us to make the increase permanent. But since
they haven't made it an issue, as I say, I have let sleeping dogs lie.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So that doesn't require any action then.

MR. PARDEE. No separate action for today.

MS. TEETERS. Why did they want an increase in the swap?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They were in trouble.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They wanted the increase because
Governor [Wohlin] felt that they might have to draw on the swap line.
The $200 million line was extremely small, so we felt it would be a
gesture of cooperation to increase it to $500 million and it would
give him a little more clout, so to speak, in talking with the Swedish
government about what he felt were certain inflationary policies that
were putting the Swedish currency under pressure. And this was a way
of reinforcing his position. He felt that there might be a need for
it. The last time I saw him at the BIS last week he

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This was arranged last April I believe.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. It is not a burning issue, but
it seemed like a useful gesture of cooperation at that time.

-14-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was discussed with the Committee,
though.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, yes. We approved it.

MR. PARDEE. I am sure it will come up again because they
will probably ask for a continuation; but at the moment they haven't.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we are not doing anything on that. Our
earlier decision stands. All right, Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, could we have the most recent
money supply numbers?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M-1B startled me. I don't know how there
came to be such a difference between M-1A and M-1B, $700 million for
M-1A and $1.4 billion for M-1B, as Peter said. I was just looking at
these data and M-1B is only $100 million higher than it was four weeks
ago while M-1A is $500 million lower than it was four weeks ago. Now,
the figure four weeks ago had a little spike, but we haven't had a big
increase since the [October meeting]. We have had two weeks of
decline and then this week of increase which has about balanced off
[the declines]. I might say on those money supply figures that they
don't reflect complete reporting; they reflect reporting for all the
member banks and the sample of nonmember banks that we used before.
When we complete the tabulation of the nonmember banks that we have
not been getting, there may be a need for a benchmark revision, which
would be exactly analogous to the benchmark revisions we have been
making every quarter anyway. We indicated in the announcement that
that might become necessary. There is no reason to think that the
benchmark revisions will be any bigger than those we have made in the
past, but it is going to take several more weeks, I take it, to get
the flow of data from the new reporters before we integrate it. We
will do that all at one time and then if it comes out different from
[the estimates based on] the sample, we will announce a benchmark
revision.

MR. ROOS. Will we get back on the Friday cycle this week?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not positive of that. Mr Axilrod is
a little skeptical, I guess. We expect to do it on Monday if we don't
do it on Friday. But we are not certain yet we can do it on Friday.
I might say that as I understand it, the whole process went quite
smoothly. People seemed to be reasonably satisfied with the data we
have, though we don't have all the new reporters. Tell me, Mr. Beck,
if I am not reflecting your views and other's views accurately. We do
not yet have the data from the new reporters but the data from the old
reporters seem to be in pretty good shape, and we got the numbers
together with a relatively short lag. I think that's quite a tribute
to the efforts throughout the System to get this done in an orderly
way. And it does seem to have gone quite smoothly. I know it
involved a lot of hard work around the System generally.

MR. BLACK. When we publish these figures, are we going to
break down the reserve figures for the old members and then the new
reporters separately?

-15-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we are going to do?

MR. AXILROD. If you are talking about publishing the reserve
figures, I don't think so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, there is a problem here which you may
be referring to but I can't recite it all exactly. Steve, you can
correct me, but I think the main problem we are running into is that
we have a huge amount of excess reserves now with the new system.

MR. BLACK. That is what I was thinking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is all this vault cash. So, what we
are going to do is to put an additional line on the statement that
says "excess vault cash" or something like that. For analytical
purposes people presumably will subtract out the vault cash that is
just sitting there from the total of excess reserves to get an excess
reserve figure that seems functionally [equivalent to] the old excess
reserve figure.

MR. AXILROD. We are going to publish two forms of total
reserves. One will be the total including all the vault cash of all
nonmember institutions, which would imply very sizable so-called
excess reserves. But then we are also going to publish a total
reserve figure which will include the reserve [deposits] held at the
Fed of all depository institutions, vault cash of those institutions
that hold required reserves at the Fed, plus the vault cash for those
who do not hold required reserves at the Fed up to [the amount] equal
to their required reserves. The sum of those figures [less required
reserves] would be excess reserve balances at the Fed, but not excess
vault cash since we are not putting in the [surplus vault cash of]
nonmember institutions. And that's the item we propose to run on;
that will have in it an implicit excess reserve figure that is very
little different from the excess reserves that we've had recently.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In effect, it's excess reserves of bound
banks, bound banks meaning those that have a reserve requirement
higher than the vault cash they ordinarily hold.

MR. BLACK. I was just thinking about the problem of
interpreting these for people on the outside.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a real problem, but I--

MR. AXILROD. We will explain that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We think this should satisfy them, but
it's a problem for us too.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, only half in jest, I would like to
suggest that this would be a good excuse to stop publishing weekly
figures at all and to publish them about once a month. I am more
convinced that these weekly numbers create more mischief than they do
good. Is that doable at all under the Freedom of Information Act?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've [looked at] that, I think.

-16-



11/18/80

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It is doable in one way, because I
have looked into it. If we publish the weekly seasonally unadjusted
figures and only make our seasonal adjustment calculation once a month
when we publish the seasonally adjusted figures for the month, then we
are okay under the Freedom of Information Act. But if we don't
publish the seasonal adjustment and still prepare it internally, then
we could be subject, although with a time lag, to a Freedom of
Information request.

MR. PARTEE. People in the market would do their own
seasonals.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but there would be all different
kinds of seasonals; [they would be] all over the lot.

MR. PARTEE. A Sindlinger seasonal and so forth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know, but my own instinct is that
we would not get by with that. I have had some casual conversations
[about whether] we would be subject to Freedom of Information Act
suits if we didn't straighten out these reserve figures somehow to
show them on some basis that made sense and was comparable with the
past figures, which is what we are trying to do by the way Steve
described it. [I was told that] people were about to bring suits to
demand that we make such calculations so that they're not fouled up.
I cite that as the sensitivity in this business.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, one can make a persuasive
argument that the weekly seasonal adjustment is so unreliable that it
shouldn't even be prepared internally, and we could prepare it on a
monthly basis [only]. Therefore, I don't see that anybody would have
to face this issue. My lawyers tell me that--

MR. BALLES. That would appear to me to be a viable way out
of this trap, Tony.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It boggles my imagination to think that we
would really operate for a whole month without attempting to
seasonally adjust the figure.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we would have to get successive estimates
of the month we are in based on weekly information, using the monthly
seasonal adjustment factors. I think it could be done. But I don't
think it would be constructive to have ten different seasonals of the
weekly numbers floating out there in market; that in itself would be a
source of great confusion.

MR. SCHULTZ. Legal questions aside, we are already getting
enormous criticism that we are not doing a very good job of explaining
what we are doing right now. And if we attempted to do that, I think
we would get inundated with criticism. And I suspect certain members
of the Congress would rise in wrath.

MR. WALLICH. I think the basic objection is that we would be
throwing away information, even if it's not very good information. We
can always filter that. There's a great deal of research on whether
one should throw away information just because it's not very good.
The answer is to filter it and give it little weight. We may be

-17-



11/18/80

giving too much weight to the weekly data, but to throw them away
totally just reduces the accuracy of the steering mechanism.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may be too Polyannaish, but when I
observed the market recently, I thought there was a change in that
they have kept these weekly figures in some reasonable perspective.
They haven't jumped all that much just on the basis of one week's
data. Occasionally, we get a jump because they say, in effect: We
were hoping it would come down and now we have lost hope. And that's
pretty much the way that we have looked at it, too. If we have these
targets, we really can't blame them for observing [the trend] over a
period of time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's true, Paul. Peter
Sternlight also feels that the market is reacting to the weekly
numbers in a more moderate way. Even so, it is interesting that three
more public-minded and important market participants in New York in
telephone calls to me over the last couple of months basically made
the same suggestion that John Balles has made. They believe that the
weekly figures are inadvisable and are causing much more volatility in
the market.

MR. BALLES. That's what I am concerned about. Surely, there
can't be anything that says we have to publish bad numbers. We have
been faced with enormous changes, such as social security changes and
government pay increases and so forth, that have created real
suspicion about the meaning of the numbers we are churning out,
despite the best job that the staff can do. I am sure that the staff
is doing their best on these weekly seasonals, but they have to be the
wildest, most unreliable things that we--

MR. GRAMLEY. But if we publish seasonally unadjusted
numbers, they will be even more erratic. And it's true that there
will be a lot of seasonal adjustment factors floating around the
market. But the official numbers put out by the Fed will be even more
erratic than what we put out now. It doesn't seem to me that we can
ever correct the problem that is bothering the market except by not
reacting to the weekly numbers the way we do. We are [now] causing a
problem by reacting to them.

MR. BALLES. It's the market that is reacting to them,
though, not us.

MR. GRAMLEY. Those numbers were around there for a long,
long time, John, before we got onto the policy that generated these
erratic movements in interest rates. It is not the market's fault.
It is our fault. If we want more stability in rates, we know how to
get it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I am willing to re-examine this
issue. I don't know how to do it analytically. My own instinct, as
expressed by Fred Schultz, is that even if 90 percent of the people in
the market agreed with us, the other 10 percent are going to raise a
ruckus and there's going to be a big brouhaha. We can look at the
issues; I don't know how to look at them systematically, but we can
try.

-18-



11/18/80

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have done various kinds of
research, which we could make available to the Committee, to try to
determine if the market has behaved "rationally" or not. My memory is
that the results are that mainly they have behaved rationally. That
is, they have moved when they view the change in the money supply as a
good predictor of the change in the federal funds rate and have not
moved otherwise for the most part. So from that point of view, there
doesn't seem to have been all that much irrationality in market
reactions. But we can update that research and present it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we would lose something [by
changing] this. On some occasions, obviously, it is extremely
annoying to publish these weekly numbers which may be erratic. On
other occasions, like today, when the market is thinking that the
money supply is even stronger than it probably is, it is nice to get
the numbers out and show them it is not quite as wild as they think it
is.

MR. BLACK. Let's just publish them when they're good!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I could edit the figures--

MR. WALLICH. I can't see how one can believe in markets and
then try to avoid supplying information, however [questionable it is].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, why don't we have a little paper
written on the pros and cons of this.

MR. FORD. Paul, if we do that, which I strongly [favor]--I
support the notion that we should look at the pros and cons of all of
the issues that have been raised--we ought to consider one other basic
question, which we are assuming can't be raised. And that is just not
generating the numbers so often. I heard you say that we couldn't
operate for a month or even two weeks without going through this
exercise. But [I wonder about that] when I look at the commitment of
resources that we are making to this--the overtime, the blood, sweat,
and tears of the staff. One can discount that very heavily in terms
of a need for information. But there are other countries in the
world, it seems to me, that operate their monetary policy without
going through this tremendous expenditure of resources and all the
problems of revising and re-revising and interpreting and re-
interpreting the data.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, if you raise that question, you
have to raise the question of how we keep reserve requirements,
because basically these figures are generated in the first place so
the banks know what their reserve requirement is. [Unintelligible]
monthly reserve requirements.

MR. GRAMLEY. We could take the incoming deposit reports,
which are on a micro basis, and calculate reserve requirements which
are not based on the same concept of deposits that goes into the money
supply. Then we could if we wished, as we used to do many years ago,
just calculate the money supply on the last day of the month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can theoretically; it is not going to
save much work.

-19-



11/18/80

MR. PARTEE. The problem of [using just] that day is that it
might be high and it might be low. Then it would be like--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we do a paper raising all these
issues.

MR. AXILROD. We wrote it 3 or 4 years ago.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I would hope that if you do a paper of
that kind there would be an added dimension to it. And that is that
given the environment we are living in today, communication has become
an integral part of monetary policy to a degree that it never has been
before. What people are thinking about in regard to what is going on
and our credibility are of considerable importance to the policy
itself. So I would say to you that there may be an added dimension in
terms of communications that wasn't an issue 2 or 3 years ago, which
should be addressed in such a paper.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In this general connection, let me make a
point about something I have looked at recently in preparing some
testimony. I don't know if it will provide you with any reassurance
or not, but if you think our M1 has been unstable, look at any foreign
country's M1 figure. If you look at the data over a period of years,
the standard deviation in the United States is about half of that in
other countries on a monthly basis, as I recall the numbers. Even the
annual numbers don't look any better; they look worse. Isn't the
characteristic of all these series that M1 is much more unstable than
M2 and M3?

MR. ROOS. In this connection, could someone just report
briefly on the progress of Steve's effort to restudy how we are doing?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try to do it later. I don't
know what it is myself. But let's get on with our work here.

MR. BALLES. One final point, if I may, Mr. Chairman. I have
been impressed with the ingenuity of the Board's legal staff in
finding ways around the date in the Monetary Control Act on which
reserve requirements would have to be put into effect. I hope they
will exercise that same ingenuity with respect to our purported
responsibility under the Freedom of Information Act to put out weekly
money supply figures. I hope that issue can be examined in depth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will produce a memorandum. Did you
have a comment that you wanted to make earlier, Bob?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we have gotten right far off [the
topic]. My comment was related to a technique on monetary policy. I
don't know whether you feel we have time for anything more on that or
not. I can ask at a later time. It's an important point, but we have
spent right much time, so I'll wait.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did we ratify your transactions, Mr.
Sternlight?

MR. EASTBURN. Could I ask Peter a question? Peter, would
you elaborate just a little on the techniques of the Desk in view of

-20-



11/18/80

the uncertainties in these numbers? Are you operating pretty much as
before or what?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I was apprehensive a month ago about the
kind of flow of information we might have as we came up to the
November 13 date. I was gratified that we did not seem to be getting
as much confusion and uncertainty [as I expected], at least, as that
week began. Things seemed to be settling down in a reasonable
pattern. Now, I have to allow that I was thrown off by the demands
for reserves that we experienced yesterday. I just don't have an
explanation of that. I am not sure whether it had more to do with the
changes coming out of the Monetary Control Act or whether it was just
some unsettlement in the immediate wake of the new discount rate and
penalty rates. Until I can see more on the behavior in terms of
desired holdings of excess reserves and so on, I just don't have a
good answer. But at least up until now, we have not felt a need for a
significant departure from what had been our mode of operation.

MR. CORRIGAN. May I ask just one quick question, Steve?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It better be quick.

MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of what you mean to publish, I think
you said that the reserve numbers will include the required reserves
associated with the new reporters. The money supply numbers and total
benchmark when done will not? Is that correct?

MR. AXILROD. That's right, but it will include the same
sample.

MR. CORRIGAN. The sample of nonmember banks?

MR. AXILROD. That's right, but that might be for only a very
few weeks.

MR. PARTEE. It's the sample that is used to estimate the
universe, Jerry.

MR. CORRIGAN. I appreciate that. Do we now have a firm fix
on how many nonmembers will actually have to post reserves and what
the level of total reserves associated with the nonmembers is?

MR. AXILROD. No, not at this moment. We don't even have the
total required reserves for members for this week as of this very
moment. That may be part of the source of Mr. Sternlight's problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline.

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. SCHULTZ. Jim, do you have the preliminary survey on
building permits for last month?

MR. KICHLINE. We have it for the first half of the month,
which was down 14 percent from the level in September.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't you go ahead, Steve, and then
we'll have a general discussion.

-21-



11/18/80

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we now want general comments on
the economic situation and strategy. Let me make only two preliminary
points. First of all, the story isn't in yet but I will anticipate
the story. I don't know what is going to happen to long-term rates.
I take it they are higher now, or not much changed anyway, than before
we changed the discount rate.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Not much changed but somewhat higher, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that the discount rate change
has had an impact on short-term rates. I'd just point out once again
that thoughts that a discount rate change is a "freebie" in adjusting
to the market are not warranted in the particular situation that we
are now in, when banks are borrowing very heavily. The use of the
surcharge is an attempt to moderate that reaction, but just how much
it will moderate it or whether it will moderate it at all is not
totally clear. That's the general point on the paths. Looking ahead,
let me say that I would find too intense a discussion on precisely
where the target is in the short run sterile--not only sterile, but
possibly misleading--because it doesn't have much to do with where we
set the path. As I indicated last month, we've had repeated
indications in the past few months when the figures were coming in
high that it made very little difference where the target was set. It
made a lot of difference as to how we reacted to the deviation from
the target, right or wrong. And that's precisely what the discussion
ought to center on more profitably--whether one looks at it in terms
of what the borrowing adjustments in particular should be or, as some
people may, in terms of what kind of interest rate changes one is
willing to tolerate or permit. Those are the variables. And they
have very little to do with whether "A," "B," or "C" is chosen because
the actual events are likely to [vary] over a much wider range, up or
down, than is indicated [by those alternatives]. The results are
unpredictable, and as Steve just said, probably not much affected by
what we do between now and the end of the year because we simply don't
have that much time to affect the aggregates. So we have to look at
it with a view that what we are doing today may affect developments
after the end of the year. I don't see how one can avoid it. So,
with those preliminary comments--

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, could I just repeat my question to
Steve on the technical study of how we go about achieving our targets?
Is that progressing well?

MR. AXILROD. Well, President Roos, we are going to have all-
day staff meetings tomorrow and Thursday on the first drafts of the
papers and I would be in a much better position to comment after that
than before. But so far as I can tell, people are right on schedule
in the production of the documentation and I expect to have a very
fruitful meeting.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to ask a question also. Am
I correct in assuming that when when you talked about being in the
lower half [of the ranges] in the coming year that that would be based
on the actual fourth quarter of 1980 and would not attempt to correct
for any overshooting?

-22-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That has been the practice and I would
presume that that is what it will be, yes.

MR. PARTEE. I would think we'd adjust our targets in the
light of it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Consistent with past practices, if
we wanted to adjust, in effect, we would put the target lower and
explain that as the reason why the target was lower. I don't know
that that's written in concrete, but that is the implication of what
we've done before anyway. It is what the Congress is used to and it's
what we are used to. So in a sense we still have a sliding base on an
annual basis. We no longer have it on a quarterly basis if we
continue that procedure. We could debate that, but that has been the
presumption, anyway.

MR. WALLICH. Well, that gives excessive weight to the
achievement of the target for the rest of the year. I think it would
be much better just to adjust the path for the next year rather than
[to try] to reach a particularly low base in order to avoid base
drift.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I see no reason [why we couldn't] do
it that way--to say we're still targeting with an older base--if the
Committee wanted. We'd have some confusion, I think, in explaining
ourselves. But if that's what we wanted to do in substance, it is
conceivable.

MR. PARTEE. There are other questions involved, too. There
always were [unintelligible] questions about justifying the floating
quarterly base and they certainly would be stronger if we were
targeting on a floating annual base.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I am not recommending that because it
would seem to complicate things even more if we were to change the
practice. How are we going to adjust for the NOW accounts [in the
effort] to understand all these changes? But I was just wondering if
you think we will be under political pressure or internal pressure to
in some way absorb the overshoot.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. I haven't thought about
that question particularly. I certainly haven't thought about a
change in procedures. [Unintelligible] there is something to say if
it changed the procedure despite all the very valid objections you
have. If it was thought terribly important to try to make up for an
overshoot, instead of just having a target that sounded terribly low
next year, we might get the same result but it would look a little
different. I literally had not thought of doing it that way. I think
there would be a horrendous problem in explaining precisely what we
were doing, but it may have some merit.

MR. WALLICH. Different aggregates have overshot or not
overshot in different degrees.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would have to change the relationship
among them. I am sure of that. Well, I think we ought to begin a
general discussion. Governor Wallich.

-23-



11/18/80

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the picture we are facing
is one in which the economy has been a great deal stronger than we
expected. But we also now face the prospect of a greater degree of
weakness hereafter resulting from this strength. In other words, it
puts somewhat of a ceiling on the development of the economy if it
becomes really strong temporarily and that raises interest rates to
levels that will push the economy down again. I would not try to
counteract the prospective dip in the economy, if that is what might
happen in the first quarter. I think we ought to look further ahead
into the future, both with regard to the real sector and the monetary
aggregates. Now, I think the chances of a repetition of the second
quarter of 1980 are very slight, even if interest rates don't go down
as sharply as they did then. I doubt that the economy will suffer
anything like that. But the chances of a severe drop in interest
rates are there again. And if we [allow] that a second time--if
interest rates go up and then go down again in a yo-yo fashion--we
will be accused, reasonably, of destabilizing interest rates beyond
what is necessary. Our new techniques do imply that interest rates
will be more volatile, and that's the way the economy is kept on track
under these conditions. But we shouldn't yield to that tendency of
the system very much.

So far as the aggregates are concerned, my inclination would
be to try to get back on track in the first quarter of 1981 but not in
the present quarter, even if that were possible by a drastic wrench.
But at the same time, I'd try to limit the interest rate implications
of that. The interest rate implications of just saying we are going
to get back on track in early 1981 might be to allow interest rates to
drop quite far if the economy is weak. I would say we should aim at a
relatively reasonable growth path from here on out; something between
"A" and "B" might do it if we want to be back on track with M-1B in
the first quarter, but not with the interest rates specifications of
"A" or "B." The interest rate specifications of "C" give us a chance,
if interest rates tend to go down sharply, at least to review the
situation and not to accept the slide willy-nilly as we did in the
second quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just in the interest of clarification,
Governor, I understand why you like the lower limit of alternative C
from what you've said. But I might have thought, knowing you, that
you might not like the upper [limit] implication because of the swing
in interest rates and the emphasis you put on--

MR. WALLICH. I don't feel very strongly about the 19 percent
[upper limit for the funds range]. It just seems to me that we should
not make the range too narrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're mainly concerned about the lower
limit.

MR. WALLICH. I have a concern about the lower limit. And 18
percent [for the upper limit] would be just as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. To step back a little on the economic picture,
Paul, I am concerned about two things. One is the energy situation.
While at the moment we are faced with a glut of storage space for oil

-24-



11/18/80

in this country and temporarily have a big supply hanging over the
market, trying to get a fix on what is happening in the Middle East is
extremely difficult. I came back from there with reports of from 3 to
10 years to put things back together. In this country we are talking
about 3 to 10 months. I don't know what the truth of the matter is,
but I think we are more heavily exposed to energy problems than we
have been in the past. If [those problems materialize], the price
implications are very scary for agriculture and [many other sectors]
because of the energy situation. Things are happening, and we have
had an interruption of supply. And not to try to get a better fix on
that is a serious mistake.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we can get a
better fix on it. I strongly underscore what you have to say: That
this is a major uncertainty. It is very much analogous to the
situation at the end of last year when we were humming along in some
sense and thought we might make a little progress on inflationary
sentiment and other things, and along comes a 50 percent increase in
the oil price. That has a certain implication for psychology,
behavior, money pressures, and everything else. The way that
situation is developing, we surely can't exclude another shock of that
kind in the relatively near future.

MR. WINN. They are talking about big increases in prices
this time, and that really scares me. My second observation--and this
is perhaps a sample of one--is that I can't help but be impressed by
the amount of military supplies that are being moved to the Middle
East. And that makes me think that defense expenditures in real terms
are going to be much larger than anything we see in the budget figures
today. I realize that the expenditures have gone up but it seems to
me that the assumption built into the models needs to be questioned
seriously. And this could alter the budget figures, resulting either
in offsetting [cuts] in other areas or again an uncertainty in the
picture that hasn't been completely built into the forecast for next
year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. After citing all these uncertainties, do
you care to express a judgment as to what you think is going to happen
or the nature of the problems we face?

MR. WINN. I am afraid we are going to get both [higher]
energy costs and a big increase in defense expenditures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does that make you want to be tighter or
easier in terms of the money supply?

MR. WINN. Tighter, sir.

MR. PARTEE. Tighter in terms of the money supply?

MR. WINN. Yes, I came back very much depressed about the
inflation picture over there and the complacency with which they face
it--the efforts to index it and then to juggle the index, the whole
problem of what it is doing to the economy, the brain drain that has
set in and the implications of that. I think it's a complacency that
we just can't buy in this country.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What country are you talking about?

-25-



11/18/80

MR. WINN. Israel and Egypt.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have all been
surprised by the resiliency of the economy since July and we are
concerned about the dip that the staff is projecting in the first
quarter. We'd all like to be able to produce a smooth 2 percent real
growth rate for the next couple of years but I don't think that's
compatible with our attempts to decelerate the rate of monetary growth
gradually. It seems to me that the rather small undulations in
economic activity that are probably ahead of us, as much as we may
dislike them, can't be avoided. We have probably produced a great
deal by our actions in the past months that is not yet reflected in
the economic statistics or in the monetary growth rates. Nonetheless,
I like the alternative B growth rates for the aggregates simply
because I don't think we can continue to raise our objectives for the
quarter month after month in response to unexpectedly high increases
in the aggregates. We did it last month. But I don't think we can
maintain our credibility if we respond to bulges in the aggregates by
raising their targets. So I would stay with the growth path for the
aggregates that the Committee voted for last month. I would set a 13
to 17 percent funds rate range because I have a feeling that we can
accomplish our objective within that. If we find that we can't, then
we can reassess it later.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you may have answered my question in
your last comment, but I say this for everyone's benefit: The whole
question, whichever one of these targets we pick numerically, is going
to be how hard we work to get to those targets and at what expense in
terms of borrowings or interest rates. And I think you have expressed
the dimension of your interest rate feeling anyway.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we have to give the Manager up to
17 percent on the funds rate, which is roughly 2 percentage points
above what we have already done. But I don't see the necessity of
pushing the top of the range to 18 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't want to do it prematurely,
but I'd like to get to some [views on the] borrowing assumption before
we finish. Mr. Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I find myself in the unusual
position of being sympathetic with some, though not all, of the
remarks of Governor Wallich. I haven't been with him since last
spring, so--

MR. SCHULTZ. I was with him right up to the very last.

MR. GRAMLEY. I was, too. I don't think we ought to try to
prevent a decline in economic activity in the first quarter. It's too
late for that. I think the staff is right that it is in the cards.
But I believe the staff may be underestimating the severity of the
decline that could occur early next year for two reasons. One is that
when the staff put its forecast together last week, it was able to
write: "Our forecast assumes a further rise in interest rates." That
no longer is true. The rise in interest rates which the staff assumed
is already here; it has happened. So interest rates are going to have

-26-



11/18/80

to decline somewhat from present levels if the staff's forecast is
going to hold. The second reason is that the staff has built into its
forecast for next year, and has continuously done so since early 1980,
an assumption that the money demand function is going to shift down.
That assumed shift, when they first put it in, was a year away. But
now it is right ahead; it is six weeks ahead. If that shift doesn't
happen, then interest rates not only are not going to stay at current
levels or go down a bit, but as the staff indicates, they will have to
go up 3-1/2 percentage points further in the first quarter. If we get
bill rates in the 16 to 17 percent range and the prime rate in the
range of 19 to 20 percent for the quarter as a whole, then peak rates
will probably exceed their levels of last spring. And then I am not
at all sure that we would not be in for a decline in economic activity
every bit as severe as the one we had in the second quarter of 1980.

Now, we are facing a very difficult long-run inflation
problem. I don't see any reason for thinking that any improvement has
occurred at all yet. But it would be extremely counterproductive to
follow a course of policy which pushed the economy over the cliff once
more. I think interest rates are high enough now. I don't want to
see them decline much; on that I agree with Governor Wallich entirely.
I think they should stay about where they are but not come down much
from here. We have recently seen performance in the money measures
along the lines that we wanted. We're starting to see the slowdown we
have been trying to get. In the past four weeks, as you indicated,
the M1 numbers show rough stability if we balance off M-1A and M-1B.
I could go with either of Steve's suggestions: Either narrowing the
federal funds range or setting some upper limit to the growth rate of
the monetary aggregates and accepting a shortfall, provided the
numbers come out right. If I were going to select the federal funds
range that suited my predilections, it would be something like 12 to
15 percent. Or if I wanted to go in the other direction, I would take
the specs of "A" and accept any shortfall in money growth from that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as far as the economy is
concerned, I think the staff projections and estimates are as good as
they can be. I agree entirely with Mr. Winn's comments about the
uncertainties associated with oil and I agree that the whole fiscal
economic policy area is one where what does or does not come out of
the hopper could have an enormous impact on expectations if nothing
else.

In looking at policy, I am driven by two conflicting
thoughts. One is the desire to come as close to the 1980 targets as
we can, or at least in line with Mr. Morris's comments not to adjust
the targets for the current quarter upward at this point. But at the
same time I'd like to enter 1981 on a growth trajectory that is
roughly compatible with what our targets for 1981 might be. There is
a bit of a paradox in that I think the first criteria would bring one
squarely to "B" and the second in some sense might bring one to "A" in
terms of the growth rates for the aggregates. I would reconcile that
paradox by accepting aggregate growth numbers somewhere around "B" or
maybe a bit higher. But in line with one of Steve's suggestions, I'd
treat those numbers as maximums, with the explicit understanding that
if we were hitting or exceeding those maximums we would adjust the
nonborrowed growth targets to offset any growth over the maximum. I

-27-



11/18/80

recognize that that in itself would probably mean that we'd end up
above the maximum for the period anyway because of the time it takes
to know we are above them and then to respond. But I, too, am a bit
encouraged by these more recent money supply numbers. And if there
were some maximum, I think it is possible that such a maximum could be
compatible with a funds rate band of maybe 13 to 16 or 13 to 17
percent. On borrowing, I'm just having a heck of a time figuring out
what might be [appropriate], given all of these number problems.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before we are too encouraged by the
aggregates in the past four weeks--and I'd love to be encouraged, too
--I remind you that these things have come in lumps and if we go back
one more week, we had a $5 billion increase.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's why I like the idea of trying to use a
maximum as more of a guide than perhaps we have in the past.

MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, the very preliminary figures would
indicate another increase for next week, so--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regard to the
economy, the staff's projection seems reasonable. I would just note
that they consistently have underestimated the strength of the
economy. And if that continues through the remainder of this quarter,
we could have some of the additional pressures that Steve spoke of on
interest rates. On the other hand, if I understand the Bluebook
correctly, for the first time in several months the staff has not
built into any of the alternatives any further downward shift in
demand for money over this remaining two-month period. So it would
give me some comfort that we may come closer to hitting those numbers
between now and the end of the year than we have in the last couple of
months when we experienced overshoots from the staff's projections at
the time of the Committee meeting. Coming down to policy
considerations, it seems to me there are a couple of things. The
Federal Reserve has a credibility problem. It has been talked about
around this table. Last month we chose to adopt ranges for the
aggregates for the quarter that insured that we would be outside the
[annual] range for at least two of the three targets--M-1B and M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt. I don't think
our adoption of those targets insured a darn thing. We didn't know
what the money supply was going to be.

MR. GUFFEY. No, but we understood that if we hit those
targets it would take M-1B outside for the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we hit those targets. But there is
nothing in our experience that says we are going to hit the targets
over that kind of a time period.

MR. GUFFEY. I would agree with that. And unfortunately, the
misses have always been on the high side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is certainly correct recently.

-28-



11/18/80

MR. GUFFEY. And that brings in the credibility question,
which I'd like to address.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the issue; the actuals have been
going higher.

MR. GUFFEY. And the revisions have all gone one way,
unfortunately.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.

MR. GUFFEY. As to the credibility problem, of course, we
will be in a new era after the change of Administration and the change
of Congress. And the Federal Reserve is going to be looked at in
terms of how we plan to perform. It seems important to me that we not
adopt aggregate targets at this meeting that would suggest we are
taking another step, as Frank Morris pointed out, toward insuring that
we will miss the aggregate target for 1980 to an even greater extent.
It seems to me that "B" is consistent with what we set last month;
thus I would opt for the B alternative with a funds rate range of 13
to 17 percent, having in mind that if we have underestimated the
strength of the economy for the remainder of this year, we may be
using that 17 percent. I am really suggesting that a cap of 17
percent might be appropriate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Well, some of what I say will be a repetition of
what Roger said. If one goes back to the fundamentals of what we are
trying to do, I don't think there's any question that if anything
emerged from the November 4 experience, it was a recognition that the
people of this country--and we are serving them--are primarily and
indelibly concerned with something being done about inflation. I
think the second fundamental that we have to address is the eroding
credibility of our ability to perform effectively in what we've
announced we're trying to do. If we continue to operate as we have
all year--I'm talking about our operating procedures--I would agree
with the Chairman that the choice we make today in terms of the
alternatives will probably have very little effect on anything because
[the results for the year] probably won't be a reflection of the
choice we make. However, if the Bluebook is correct, it's too late
really to accomplish our annual objective in terms of the targets for
the aggregates. But whatever action we take today will have a very
real effect on our credibility. Recognizing that the world knows that
we're above the upper limit of our M-1B target, for example, if we
don't choose an alternative that at least appears to attempt to
correct for that overshoot, I think we will see a further erosion of
our credibility.

Secondly, another factor that is currently affecting our
credibility is the increasing suspicions on the part of the public
that we are indeed moving back toward what I at least consider to be a
failed policy of attempting to stabilize interest rates. Therefore,
our fed funds range should not be narrower than the width we've
adhered to most of this year. I would opt for alternative C. Under
any circumstances, the danger that I would perceive in the future
would be permitting interest rates to drop significantly. And I would

-29-



11/18/80

not like to see us set a lower limit of the funds range at less than
14 percent.

Finally, I would hope desperately that by February, when we
go into [our deliberations for our targets] next year, Steve's study
will have been conducted and will be taken seriously. And I hope it
will be conducted, as I know it will be, with an open mind to see
whether we can't come up with a better operating procedure that would
reduce the potential margin of error between the actions we take at
these meetings or the alternatives we choose and how the aggregates
actually [turn out].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to make your comments a little
more operational, Mr. Roos. In choosing "C" are you saying that we
should immediately decrease the nonborrowed reserve target
substantially and therefore increase the level of borrowing?

MR. ROOS. No, sir. First of all, I feel that the technique
of operating with the nonborrowed and borrowed reserve paths is not
working. I can't answer your question because we place more emphasis
on total reserves in our view than on borrowed and nonborrowed
reserves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just interpret that. I can
understand that, but the only way we can affect the total is by
affecting nonborrowed.

MR. ROOS. Well, I think we could control the total, couldn't
we? Again, that's what Steve's people are studying and I hope they'll
get data on that. But I can't translate "C" specifically to
nonborrowed and borrowed reserve paths because I haven't asked our
people to develop that. I am not prepared to respond to that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I know we often say that we're
facing a period of unusual uncertainty. But this time I really mean
it. We obviously face uncertainty in the fiscal outlook resulting
from recent political developments. Also, as you and Mr. Winn
mentioned, there is uncertainty in the energy price picture. Also,
with possible changes in the discount rate and the surcharge, we don't
know what bank attitudes will be toward borrowing. So the picture is
very cloudy. Despite that, there seems to be an unusual amount of
agreement as to the direction in which we should move. I would say
that in light of all these uncertainties, the staff forecast is about
as reasonable as one could expect, and I see no reason to disagree
with that forecast. I feel that if we were to take any action that
would result in a significant raising of the targets, that would
certainly be open to an erroneous interpretation, or perhaps even the
right interpretation but certainly one that we would not like to see.
And it would definitely run the risk of adding to inflationary
expectations. So, I would not opt for alternative A. On the other
hand, it seems to me that any further move toward restrictiveness
would have the very undesirable effect of making the projected decline
in economic activity in the early part of the year sharper than we
would like to see or sharper than might prove to be the case if we
followed a more moderate course. Therefore, I would support
alternative B. And I agree with Governor Gramley that interest rates

-30-



11/18/80

are now about as high as they need to be. So I would combine my
support of alternative B with a federal funds range of 12 to 16
percent. Now, the growth that we get, of course, may be inconsistent
with this federal funds rate range. If it is, I would be prepared to
see the funds rate somewhat higher--maybe one percentage point higher.
But I would not like to see that occur without the advantage of
additional information.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I think the talk about the targets for 1980 is
irrelevant. We're done. At most we have four weeks in which to
operate and the reserves will be set with lagged reserve requirements.
So it seems to me what we're really talking about is how high we're
going to let interest rate go between now and the end of the year, and
that's it. I am also strongly of the opinion that rates are already
too high. We have already killed the housing market. We are
depressing the automobile market. We have continued pressure on
business fixed investment, and it's to a point where I think it will
stall out. I would like to point out to you that the last time we had
a federal funds range approximately like this was in February of last
year and we had a 9-1/2 percent drop in real GNP in the second
quarter. I think the changes in interest rates have influenced a
great deal the pattern [of GNP growth] we got this year. And I don't
think the staff has done a bad job. I went back and looked at their
fourth quarter-over-fourth quarter projection of February of last year
and they had a decline for the year of about 2 percent. And if they
have the fourth quarter right now, it's going to be a decline of about
1-1/2 percent this year. The pattern was different; the pattern of
interest rates was not the one anticipated. I think these rising
interest rates have an extraordinarily damping effect on the economy
and if we let them go any higher, we're inviting disaster again. In
addition, we'd be [inviting] a rerun of the great interest rate cycle
of 1980 on an economy that is not where it was last February. Last
February we were at 85 percent capacity utilization and at 6 percent
unemployment. A lot of things were different than they are now. We
have a relatively severely depressed economy that would be put through
the wringer again and I think that would be a mistake.

Some of you say you're going to take "B" because it's no
different from what we did last time. There's a 4 percentage point
increase in the federal funds rate range associated with "B." It was
9 to 15 percent [last month] and the staff is saying "B" is [now]
compatible with 13 to 18 percent. I think 18 percent is outrageously
high. On account of the growth in the money supply, we immediately
run everything up to the top of the range, usually within a week after
the Open Market Committee meeting. Consequently, I don't care what
you do with -the money supply. I do care what you do with the interest
rate range. I would put the maximum at 15 percent with maybe a bottom
of 11 percent. The borrowing assumption is funny because we determine
the borrowing from the nonborrowed reserve path. By doing a
nonborrowed reserve path, at least for the next two weeks, we
determine what the borrowings are going to be. There's a Catch-22
game going on here.

MR. WALLICH. We determine the funds rate; that determines
the borrowing, and that determines the nonborrowed, I think.

-31-



11/18/80

MS. TEETERS. You have worked it backwards, I think, Henry.

MR. WALLICH. That's the unspoken sequence.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we have a wide funds rate range,
then it's the borrowing assumption that determines the nonborrowed
reserve path, not the reverse.

MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. We seem to be all over the lot today. I don't
think it's so much that the situation is uncertain, Emmett. In my
view, it has been uncertain for some time. Now I find it threatening.
That's the tone; my feelings echo Willis Winn's, only I haven't been
to the Middle East. It seems to me that the odds are now getting to
be rather high that there's going to be an oil price increase of size.
I don't know that it will be 50 percent, but I wouldn't be surprised
at a $10 a barrel increase. And that's going to have a considerable
impact on inflation. I must say my view has always been that when an
external event like this occurs it's not the right response to cut
money growth targets because no other price is going to give. If we
cut money growth targets, all it does is compound the effect of the
oil price rise on real activity by forcing it lower than it otherwise
would be. And activity would already tend to go lower because of the
oil price rise. Nevertheless, it will be adding to the inflation
numbers and so will food prices. Thus, it occurs to me that what we
might get is considerable strength in the demand for money associated
with a nominal GNP that holds up [but incorporates] a decline in real
activity and an acceleration in inflation, which could keep a lot of
pressure on the money numbers. In that kind of environment, I think
interest rates could go to 25 percent. And that's something that we
have to be thinking about--what it means for the economy to have rates
above 20 percent--because that may occur.

The second thing that troubles me is that we will be having
fiscal restraint in the immediate future; that is, there's a tax
increase in six weeks. On the other hand, the new Administration
promises tax reductions, a series of them, which would certainly add
to pressures in markets over that period of time as the government
deficit is increased. I also agree that defense spending is going up
and is going to go up sharply. The new orders figures already show
it. The whole thrust of current thinking is that we will have to have
a larger defense establishment--and I would almost say "much larger"
defense establishment the way the talk is going. So without a war,
which is possible, we have all these things working against the
[successful] execution of policy.

I am very nervous about limiting the [governing factor]--that
is, the perceived rate of growth that will be appropriate in monetary
aggregates--by interest rate constraints because if we do that, we may
lose sight of what is really happening. But I guess I am prepared to
limit the governing factor of monetary expansion because of these
uncertainties. I rather agree that with prospects for increases in
defense, taxes, and oil prices we don't want rates to go down
significantly because we're going to have an almost semi-war economy
in the period to come. I also think interest rates are getting pretty

-32-



11/18/80

high. We are shutting off the building industry. We have the thrifts
back into a lot of trouble. That 6-month bill rate means that they'll
be paying over 14 percent for money this week, and they can't afford
over 14 percent. Neither can a lot of small banks. So we're
beginning to threaten the institutional structures of the economy
again, as we did early this year.

So I feel that we ought to constrain interest rate movements,
at least for a time, Paul. I have a fairly wide view of that, though.
My funds rate range would be 13 to 17 percent, centered on 15 percent
which is where we are now. I know it's nice to say that we have a
posture that we don't want monetary growth to go up and, therefore,
regardless of what is happening, we're going to hold the target right
where it was. But it's very unrealistic to do that. If we take
alternative B--assuming these November numbers are still more or less
holding, though I don't know what that $700 million increase means for
the projected number for November--it means that to hit our target, we
have to have a 5-1/2 percent rate of decline in the money supply in
December. A 5-1/2 percent drop is a rapid rate of decline in the
money supply. If we want to go to alternative C the way Larry does,
and [the projection for] November is right, we have to have a 9
percent rate of decrease. That would be the second largest rate of
decrease we've ever seen in the money supply in the month of December.
And I just don't think it's responsible to have a target that seems to
want such declines to occur. They might occur, but to want them to
occur seems to me inappropriate.

Therefore, I think we are forced to alternative A as the
target for the 2-month pattern, which is an M-1A of 2 percent, an M-1B
of 4-1/2 percent and an M2 of 7-3/4 percent. Well, the latter could
be 7-1/2 percent; we wouldn't have to have the quarter. So that's
what I would recommend. Alternatively, we can even specify it in
terms of the quarterly growth rates, which I believe the draft
directive suggests. Those are not high numbers: 4-1/2, 6-1/4, and
8-1/4 percent. I'd specify it in those terms and take a 13 to 17
percent funds rate range and be prepared to see those aggregates come
in markedly lower than the target if indeed that is what develops.
But I am beginning to doubt that that will develop in the period
immediately to come. On borrowings, I don't know. It's a funny thing
and I hate to mess with it. I think we ought to have them right about
where they are because it's awfully hard to assess what our [rate
increases] last Friday will do to tensions in that borrowing market,
with the 2 point surcharge. So I would take a neutral stance and
begin where we are on borrowing and see how things develop as the
period goes on.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where we are is $2 billion.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I know. But we had--

MR. AXILROD. The implication of what we were targeting on
was that $1.6 billion in borrowing would emerge out of the week.

MR. PARTEE. That's what I mean. It came in high for the
week, but we thought we were on a target of $1.6 billion, and that's
where I would [start] it. If the aggregates are strong, it will go up
from there. If they are weak, it will stay about there. That's what
I would do--not have an even-handed monetary target, but aim to hit

-33-



11/18/80

those numbers that I mentioned and if growth of the aggregates falls
short, let the shortfall occur.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're running awfully late. I don't know
whether people want to go out and drink some coffee before we finish
this. Let's do that. Then we'll come back and complete this
discussion.

[Coffee break]

[Secretary's note: When the meeting resumed after the coffee break, a
few comments were missed.]

MR. BLACK. It seems that way. The first question is: How
much confidence can we have in the relationship between the rates of
growth in the aggregates and the federal funds range as specified by
the alternatives? Everybody realizes that [estimating this
relationship] is a very risky business at best and that we probably
ask the staff to accomplish the impossible there. The second question
is: What are the risks involved if we miss the paths specified in the
alternative we choose, whatever that happens to be? I would consider
a further miss on the up side to be pretty significant--much more so,
of course, if we go with "A," less so if we go with "B," and maybe not
so significant if we go with "C." But perhaps the most important
issue of all is the likely effects on inflationary expectations of
whatever policy option we select. They would be clearly worse under
"A." That would involve raising the path for M-1A for the fourth
straight month in the face of overshoots. I looked back and found
that we had raised the December target figure for M-lA by a total of
$5.7 billion over the last three meetings. If we do more of that, it
certainly would not augur well for inflationary psychology.
Alternative B would involve not adjusting the target in the face of
some overshoots and would, of course, be less detrimental to
inflationary psychology. I think "C" would work positively [in that
regard], and although I don't think there is any earthly way we could
hit the target as specified by the end of the year, we could
conceivably be within the range for M-1B.

In any event, I think it would be better if we were perceived
as working toward a range even if we miss it, as I suspect we
necessarily will. Finally, there is the question of what this implies
for the 1981 targeting problems, which we've talked about. All of
these options are going to involve some upward base drift, a problem
with which we have contended for many years. Presumably "C" would
involve less upward drift, although I doubt there is going to be a
great deal of difference. So, I would come out for "C." I wouldn't
object to widening the federal funds range; I have never objected to
that. I don't like a range anyway, so to cover both "B" and "C" 13 to
19 percent would seem good to me. So far as the borrowing figure is
concerned, I would start off where we are now on borrowing. But then
if borrowing deviates from the figure we select initially, I think we
ought to adjust the nonborrowed reserve target in the opposite
direction by that full amount. In looking at the reasons for misses
in the past, I think part of the blame lies with the Committee in not
having selected the proper range, but in retrospect I believe we have
not been sufficiently active in adjusting our nonborrowed reserves
target to compensate for misses in the borrowing figure.

-34-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. I can be very brief because I agree with
Governor Wallich's and Governor Gramley's arguments and I come out
pretty much where Governor Partee is. I think the economy is going to
ease off considerably; I think inflation is extremely intractable; and
I think volatility in interest rates is going to give us a real
problem, so I would not like to see rates go up very much because I
don't want to see them come down very much in the first quarter. We
are going to have a great deal of trouble with this yo-yo effect. I
like the technique we are using because it has a tendency to get
interest rates to go more rapidly where they appear to need to go in
an inflationary environment. But we must use judgment rather than
adhere slavishly to some of these targets or we are going to get
ourselves in deep trouble. I think we ought to look at the aggregates
the way Governor Wallich has [suggested] we look at them--through the
first quarter. So to me something between "A" and "B" makes sense for
aggregates targets, but that's not the crucial question; at this point
borrowings and the funds rate are. I would put borrowings at about
$1.6 billion and the fed funds range at 13 to 17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, after listening to this dialogue,
I wish we had the option of saying none of the above relative to "A,"
"B," and "C," because there doesn't seem to be a good answer. Broadly
speaking, the dilemma that we've been faced with for some months has
gotten worse. In a sense, we are still the only game in town in terms
of an anti-inflation policy. Despite the election, if one looks at
bond yields, inflation expectations haven't gone down. The fact that
the forward rate on the dollar has actually gone down may indicate
that inflation expectations in the view of foreigners have gotten
worse. And while I continue to hope month by month, as does Steve,
that these higher interest rates will result in some downward shift in
the demand for money, I see a contrary trend going on. I think we are
going to experience more of it because the cost of long-term money is
so darn high that there is immense incentive on the part of businesses
to borrow short--that is, in the commercial paper market or through
banks--and that drives deposits up. So I expect this recent surge in
business loans to continue.

As I see it, the really damaging thing to the economy is the
height of long-term interest rates, and I don't see how we are going
to get them down until inflation expectations come down and until the
budget of the new Administration gets sorted out, which is going to be
a source of uncertainty. Meanwhile, we have to worry about whether
our monetary growth rates themselves are becoming a source of
inflation expectations, as some of my directors and a good many of the
professors at our recent academic conference think is the case. In
view of all of this, I think it is too late in the year to aim for
"C," which is a meat ax tactic; so the next less damaging [posture]
would be to stay pretty much with "B" as Messrs. Morris, Guffey, and
some others have said. I wouldn't want to increase further the ranges
that we are shooting for. Furthermore, I would not be inclined to
narrow the federal funds range, as some people have [suggested]. I
think 13 to 18 percent is a viable range to stay with, given all the
uncertainties that we face.

-35-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. The only comment I would like to make about
the economy is that I think the Board staff's forecast is inevitably
wrong in projecting a flat line beyond the first quarter, but we all
realize that that reflects the uncertainty that we face beyond that.
The first-quarter projection may be right, although I must say I am
impressed by how strong the economy has consistently been and how
wrong we have consistently been about that strength. What that does
to me is to tend to shorten my sights and make me less concerned about
what may be happening in 1981 and more concerned about looking to the
short term. And even though we can no longer achieve our targets for
the year, I think we ought to stick pretty much with what we had. So
that brings me to "B." I would not narrow the funds range. We have
been criticized and will be criticized for erratic interest rates but
we are equally criticized for erratic money growth. And I think the
limitations on the funds rate have had some effect in permitting money
growth to exceed our targets. So I would stick with the range that we
already have, do what we can to get within the limits of the targets
for this year, and start off as low as possible for 1981. I don't
know what the borrowing figure ought to be. I have written down a
range of something like $1 to $1-1/2 billion; I think somewhere in
that area is probably [appropriate].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am a rather pessimistic guy
these days and I couldn't get cheered up any with the discussion here
this morning. I think there is much to what Mr. Partee has said about
prices and wages, even given fairly strong monetary and fiscal
pressures and whatever pressures [come from] substantial unused
resources in the economy. And that means to me that about all
monetary policy can do is to avoid fueling additional inflation. Even
though we have had what we thought was a fairly tight policy for the
last couple of years it has nevertheless accommodated additional
inflation, so we must be pretty careful to try to avoid that situation
continuing in 1981. I am not impressed with the idea that we can
slowly and gradually wring inflation out of the economy using monetary
and fiscal policy. I see inflation strengthening and I see more and
more people apparently making a very good living out of marketing
inflation protection gadgetry and developing what seems to me to be
very high risk loans or uses of credit for that purpose. I read that
as indicating that inflation momentum or expectations are still
strengthening rather than weakening.

On monetary policy, I would think that the surcharge will
pretty effectively discourage borrowing by the large banks, so I would
not expect high levels of borrowing in the weeks immediately ahead.
With respect to the monetary targets and the federal funds rate,
alternative B seems to me about as good as one can do in the current
circumstances. I believe it would be appropriate to hitch on to the
"B" aggregate figures the suggestion that they serve as ceilings
rather than midpoints. And I am sorry to share the view that we do
have a fairly near-term end to this recovery that has gotten started,
given what needs to be done in terms of monetary and fiscal [policy].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, we're glad to have you with us
today.

-36-



11/18/80

MR. DOYLE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There have been two
prominent themes in the discussion so far, and I certainly would
emphasize that there is some inherent conflict between what to do
about the uncertainties on the one hand and what to do about the
credibility issue on the other. The uncertainties question, as
Governor Partee and others have already pointed out, may be changing
from that status to something closer to [a real threat] in terms of
the energy situation. I believe the reaction to movement in either
direction on that is difficult to determine. That is, if a change
does occur or is suggested in either direction, it's hard to say just
how the market or anybody else would react in terms of dealing with
these uncertainties that I don't believe are perceived by the markets
generally at the present time. On the credibility side, I might
suggest that the issue may not be that we have a credibility problem
but that we don't have one. In fact, I think the public and market
perception of the Federal Reserve, as someone else has just suggested,
is that we are the only game in town and that we are doing the job
right. Therefore, I would not like to see any further slippage from
the targets that were [adopted] last month. I believe it would have a
severe credibility [impact] and would produce some negative reactions.
Therefore, I would support alternative B with some slight narrowing of
the funds range, perhaps to 13 to 17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. I'm disheartened, as everyone is, about the
alternatives in front of us. On the inflation front, Paul, everything
we have discussed and everything we see is disheartening except the
possible outside chance of house prices weakening due to a disaster in
the housing market. That's clearly shaping up in front of us. I feel
strongly that it's too late to try to salvage the year-to-year growth
rates in the monetary aggregates because it would require a very sharp
adjustment that would be extremely difficult to achieve. So I would
come out, for essentially the same reasons Mr. Balles mentioned, in
favor of alternative B with the proviso that the aggregate growth
targets be viewed as a maximum. I would not be inclined to narrow the
range on the fed funds rate. With regard to what Governor Partee
said--he threw in something about how we communicate this to the other
regulators--I do think we are headed into a period of very difficult
times for the thrift institutions. In talking to Jerry Corrigan and
other people in different parts of the country, we are now starting to
see some really sharp deterioration in the balance sheets of thrifts
all around the country. I am afraid that in the next few months we
are going to see [the need for] some fast mergers in that area that
are going to be rather difficult, and I don't know what this Committee
can do about that. That's just another inevitable side effect of this
period we are entering. Should we get a crisis in the Middle East,
based on the OPEC meetings and consultations around this time, I think
we would have to consider reconvening this Committee to restudy our
entire program in light of the experience back in '74 when we went
through [an oil crisis] the last time. Overall I come out in favor of
"B" as it stands.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer a $1.6 billion
borrowing assumption and the specifications of "A." My first instinct
would be a fed funds range of only 13 to 17 percent, but I am worried

-37-



11/18/80

that if things don't go as expected, we might find that the 17 percent
upper limit would force the supplying of very large amounts of
reserves, more than the Committee would want. So my instinct would be
not to lock ourselves into the 17 percent but make it 13 to 18 percent
with some flexibility in judgment regarding that 17 to 18 percent
area. It seems to me that we ought to try to stay within the 17
percent, but if in consultation with the Manager it looks to you as
though that will require supplying more reserves than is advisable,
there ought to be sufficient flexibility in the directive for you to
make the judgment to go up to 18 percent.

MR. PARTEE. That's consistent, though, with having 13 to 17
percent and then providing, as we've done previously, for consultation
of the Committee if the 17 percent proves not to be reasonable.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean by telephone?

MR. PARTEE. Yes. The directive has that structure. I
wasn't criticizing [your suggestion]; I was just making a point that
what you said is consistent with choosing 13 to 17 percent and
emphasizing the possible need for consultation, which also goes with
what Bill said, I think.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is also some advantage, Chuck,
to leaving it at 13 to 18 percent with the Chairman understanding that
the Committee hoped it would not go beyond 17 percent, simply because
when the directive is published the market may overinterpret in a
negative way the fact that we narrowed the range. So, strictly for
the directive, I still would favor 13 to 18 percent but with an
understanding that, if possible, not to go beyond 17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's see whether we can reach a
decision. There is a fair amount of difference of views on some of
the specifics but some recognition on practically everybody's part of
some common concerns, too. On approaches, I would just make two
general points. I think what we are seeing now in general terms is
the famous collision between the recovery and monetary targets that
are in some sense too restrictive to permit recovery unless the
momentum of inflation declines. I didn't expect to reach [this stage]
this early, but here it is. A number of people have commented that
these targets, just to put it very quickly, lower the limit on the
ability of the economy to expand. They are going to continue to do
that, I suspect, given all the uncertainties, with targets of the type
that we have until inflation declines. And that's a very
unsatisfactory picture from any perspective, other than sole-minded
concern about hitting the targets. That's where we are and that's
where we may be.

Somewhat related to that, which has already been mentioned,
is that we still have some concern as to how much fluctuation we are
generating in the money supply figures and interest rates by not
recognizing some natural instability in these data. It's purely a
matter of judgment and it's totally unsatisfactory in terms of
reaching specific decisions because, to exaggerate a bit, we are
guessing. Let me simply put it that if we bend over backwards to hit
a target in the short run and find ourselves not making it, we end up
with exactly the opposite problem in a very limited period of time in
terms of the targets and with some real effects on the economy as time

-38-



11/18/80

passes. And we have unnecessary fluctuations; we may be stuck with
them to a degree but they are not a happy circumstance in which to
operate. But that doesn't give us precise guidance on how to balance
those considerations.

As for hitting the growth targets or not hitting the growth
targets--and I can only give you a personal view--I am not as
concerned about that as some people are because I don't think, as I've
said before, that these targets are written in heaven. There is a lot
of uncertainty in these relationships. I do think we have to
demonstrate, and I am satisfied that we have, that we take them
seriously. That is important. Whether being precisely in the ranges
or slightly outside of them is terribly significant to credibility or
not I think depends in part upon our own attitudes, how we portray it,
and how we describe the problems. [To the extent that] there is a
recognition of the very real problems that we have, that credibility
problem is diminished. If we attach what I personally think is undue
importance to absolute precision, obviously the public is also going
to attach more importance to absolute precision than they otherwise
would. In that connection, I would only remind you that most foreign
countries use a range. I believe they all do now. Is there one that
doesn't, Mr. Truman? I don't know. There used to be.

MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss don't have a range and the French
don't have a range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The French have been pretty good on their
targets. The Swiss have varied between growth in M1 of 23 percent one
year to minus 3 percent the next year to plus 4 percent the following
year, I think.

MR. TRUMAN. There was a year in between when they didn't try
at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they have not lost their reputation
for prudence and concern in the process.

MR. PARTEE. They couldn't have a range--

MR. WALLICH. It's a small open economy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sure, and that's part of the reason. All
I am saying is that in part the public's attitude toward these things
depends upon our general behavior, not the precise arithmetic
precision with which we reach the range. Well, that's a philosophical
comment. We have to reach a decision here.

So far as the money supply targets are concerned, I sense
that we are dealing with two somewhat conflicting concerns. One,
which I certainly recognize, is that we are in the middle of the
quarter. If we were on the schedule that we talked about before, this
would be the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. We would already have set
a quarterly growth target and the inclination would be not to change
that unless there was something very persuasive going on. But we
would consider whether to change it and how to alter our operations.
Certainly we have been forced to raise that target repeatedly in
recent months, and one can argue that for purely presentational
purposes it would be nice to avoid a further change in the target. I

-39-



11/18/80

think there is a lot to be said for that view. The consideration on
the other side was described by Governor Partee: Is that being
realistic? Is anybody here really proposing the strength of action
and the kind of interest rates that might be necessary in our best
judgment to reach alternative C--certainly "C" but even "B"--which
implies from now on [unintelligible]. Is it realistic to think [we
could achieve the target]? I don't doubt that it could happen, but
given all the uncertainty about the normal relationships that the
staff gives us, which in fact are very erratic but are all we have to
go on--

MR. MORRIS. But given the run-up in interest rates we have
already had in the last few months, it seems to me entirely possible.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it may be. You can reconcile
yourself to that view and that's all right. I don't think the staff
would say that that would be their best judgment.

MR. MORRIS. I think it's possible.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. Anything is possible here!
I agree it is possible.

MR. ROOS. I think some of us looked at it as a very short-
range [step] that would avoid our having to jam on the brakes next
year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could argue that. All I am
saying is that if we took the staff's median judgment and reflected
the distillation of assembled wisdom, recognizing that there is a huge
range of uncertainty around it, I think one would have to say [it
means]: Let's really bang it now. One could argue that that's a good
idea because it's going to save us a lot of problems in the future.
On the other hand, a lot of concern was expressed that really banging
it now is just going to complicate our problem in the very short run.
I think that kind of consideration would lead one in substance toward
alternative A. If I take seriously what I think I am hearing in
comments we have had about the interest rate range and the borrowing
assumptions and all the rest--that people don't want to go out there
and really bang it--that leaves me in something of a dilemma because I
think the Committee is in something of a dilemma. It doesn't exclude
the possibility that we could hit the targets because we just don't
know these relationships well enough. And there is the argument that
it's better not to change things and mislead anybody as to our real
intentions. I am not sure, but I believe the Committee members are
mostly between "A" and "B." I haven't counted and I am not sure they
all said precisely [what their preference was]. But that pretty well
describes the considerations. We are somewhat artificially
constrained because we are talking about a period that only has six
weeks more to run. If we were not right at the end of the year--if we
had looked at it from the perspective of the next four months instead
of the next six weeks--and were somewhat worried about how this looks
in terms of the targets for the year, I don't know whether people
would say something like "A" is reasonable.

MR. WINN. But don't we have to consider the trajectory
effect on 1981? To take the end of the year as the horizon with
regard to where we want to be I think is the wrong [approach].

-40-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I am suggesting in part.
I would guess that people might say "A" would be all right if we were
looking through the whole first quarter of next year. I don't know
whether that's true or not, but I--

MR. PARTEE. Abstracting from that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you mean by your
comment. I think what a lot of people are worried about, Willis, is
that by banging it really hard now, we're going to look foolishly low
instead of foolishly high in the beginning of the first quarter or
even in December. Now, one may think the economy is very strong--and
I think it may have a little [more] momentum right at the moment than
the staff implies, but I don't doubt that all the risks are for a
decline in the time perspective of now through the end of the first
quarter. But we may find the fourth quarter numbers are a little
higher than the staff is suggesting, which further complicates this
dilemma. We'll see just where you want to go, but I also detected
some concern about the interest rate level expressed by a good many
people. Consistent with what we're doing, I wouldn't like to get
deliberately in an area where we have to work against an interest rate
constraint because that changes the tone of our actions, but the
borrowings have implications for that. A $1.6 billion level of
borrowings or thereabouts has been mentioned by a few people. That's
lower than it has been, inadvertently or not, most recently. That
seems not inappropriate to me, if we don't want to put a lot of
additional pressure on the market because we just had a discount rate
change. And in a sense, by moving the initial borrowing assumption
down slightly, it probably will not have much of an easing effect on
the market. But it prevents the discount rate move from being
amplified and reverberating through the market excessively.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I mentioned that number because
that was implied in the week's figure. But we tried to be clear to
the Committee that in thinking this through we had assumed in the
Bluebook, for whatever constellation of pressures you are considering
on bank reserves, that with this discount rate move you'd have to
lower borrowing relative to what it had been. So in some sense that
$1.6 billion was before the discount rate action; a level of borrowing
consistent with that $1.6 billion after the discount rate action would
be somewhat lower. We'd put in a notional $1.5 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To be consistent with "A," in effect.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. But even you just said you
wanted to start at the recent level of borrowing. If you factored in
the discount rate action, that would have to be a bit lower. That's
just a technical [comment].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If your conceptual level of borrowing
before the discount rate action was $1.6 billion, it should be lower
now.

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

MR. GRAMLEY. How much lower?

-41-



11/18/80

MR. GUFFEY. The fact of the matter is that borrowing has
been higher than $1.6 billion. Over the 4-week period it has been
about $1-3/4 billion; it has only been $1.6 billion for the week that
we're in now. So what we're really looking at in terms of the recent
borrowing level is somewhat higher than that $1.6 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has been running somewhat higher
than $1.6 billion. What has the market done after your operations
this morning, Peter? Where is the federal funds rate?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It pretty well held those opening gains
after the money supply numbers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did the federal funds rate do?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Funds trading opened at about 17 percent and
went up to 17-1/2 percent--this was shortly after 11 a.m.--and we went
in and have offered some overnight repurchase agreements.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you don't know what has happened since
then?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I know that after we went in to do the RPs,
the market strengthened very slightly further, but not enough to be
noticeable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you're suggesting,
Steve, that consistent with what I and other people were trying to say
in concept--I lighted on $1.6 billion as a few people did--we should
really be saying $1.5 billion.

MR. AXILROD. Well, we had suggested $1.5 billion for "A" and
$1-3/4 billion for "B."

MR. PARTEE. Well, $1.6 billion is right in between.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In a sense, what a lot of people seem to
be talking about is that they want to keep "B" for the reason
suggested--that they don't want to show a further change in what we're
aiming at. But we were talking more about the specifications of "A"
with a higher federal funds rate on the low side of its range anyway.
Let me just get reactions to this proposal: The "B" specifications
and, taking account of Steve's comment, $1.5 billion or thereabouts on
borrowing, and 13 to 17 percent for the funds rate, which a number of
people mentioned for that, and a hope that they are consistent despite
an analysis that they might not be.

Steve has also suggested the idea--it sounds awfully
complicated but it just is complicated at this stage of the game--of
writing something into the directive that we are looking toward the
first quarter, in effect. We could certainly write it into the policy
record, anyway. We're thinking of "B" here on how we set the reserve
path and would repeat the targets that we had last time, which are
those in "B." And we'd put in some phrase that we recognize that
there isn't much time between now and the end of the year to get on a
specific path. But we would in a way reverse what we've said [in the
past] if we adopted "A;" we'd say the Committee thought that a small
overshoot would be tolerable, provided that growth in the aggregates

-42-



11/18/80

was at a pace consistent with more moderate growth next year. I don't
know whether that language--

MR. PARTEE. We could say "in the early months of next year,"
or something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The early months of next year, yes. Now,
what that leaves out is that some overshoot from the specifications of
"B" or any of these alternatives, if it developed, would be tolerable
in the short run without our aggressively moving against it. I don't
know how much you would work that language in, Steve.

MR. ROOS. Didn't several proponents of "B," Mr. Chairman,
also suggest that the aggregate figures in "B" be viewed as the top
limits and that we should not tolerate an overshoot?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a conceptual difficulty
there. I am sure that you are right, but sometimes those same people
said we should not set out now to bang up the borrowing level and bang
up interest rates. That's the inconsistency with which we are
dealing. Verbally they may have said "Don't tolerate an overshoot,"
but they didn't seem to be supporting the strength of action that
would be needed to insure against an overshoot.

MR. ROOS. In considering these figures, which are for the
next six weeks--and I recognize that short-term fluctuations in money
probably don't have a very real effect on output and the economy--are
we overlooking the fact that the first six weeks of this quarter came
in quite high? You speak of jamming the brakes on too hard with "C;"
wouldn't that really be counterbalancing an almost run-away situation
over the first six weeks?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no question, growth in the
aggregates was very high in the first six weeks; so are interest
rates.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, what would happen under these
specifications if, in fact, we came out from now to the end of the
year with what I would consider to be a very fine performance of the
monetary aggregates, i.e., no change in M-1A. If M-1A were completely
flat and let us suppose that in fact $1.5 billion in borrowing were
consistent with the specs of "B," then what we would end up doing I
think--if I'm wrong, maybe Steve or Peter could enlighten me--would be
taking actions deliberately to push interest rates up further. And
instead of a federal funds rate of 15 percent we would end up with 17
percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve can correct me, but my sense of it
is that if we started out at the borrowing level that we're talking
about and there were no change in the money supply from now on, week
by week, we would come out very close to "B," wouldn't we, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Actually M-1A would come out at "A." That is,
the average for the week of the 5th and what we expect for the 12th
comes out to a level for M-1A of $387.9 billion, and that's the
December level that's built into "A." To achieve the specs of "B"
would require a drop in M-1A from here on in.

-43-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You only get a $.3 billion drop in
December with no increase in the weekly figures from here on out?
Aren't you assuming some increase [in those weekly figures] in that
"A" [alternative]?

MR. AXILROD. I was giving you the December average level for
M-1A; it would be $387.9 billion. That's virtually no change from the
November average level, and the first two weeks of [December] are
roughly at the November average level. So there would be no change,
in effect.

MR. ROOS. Does anyone view M-1A as a serious aggregate?

MR. PARTEE. I do. I still think it's the most important.

MR. ROOS. Even though the change has occurred toward a
broadening--

MR. PARTEE. Sure, because I can't read M-1B with all those
NOW accounts being created.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is, Larry, that they're both
wrong. You should average the two. It gives you a rougher "right
answer," as a matter of fact.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, on this matter of whether or not
to have some maximum: If we took something like "B" or a little
higher or something between "B" and "A" for the aggregates paths and
treated them as a max--if for no other reason than having that be our
consultation point rather than perhaps the federal funds rate--I don't
think those things have to be incompatible. It comes down to a
judgment as to how much of an impact the things we already have done
will have. I think it might be possible to structure something like
that, which would just put somewhat greater weight [on the
aggregates], even if merely for consultation purposes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're having a consultation right now.
Out best estimate is that we are above "B." If you want to choose
"B," we are consulting.

MR. CORRIGAN. I'm saying in terms of this maximum, [use] "B"
or something a little higher than "B."

MR. PARTEE. We could say "A" is what we project and "A"
would be what we plot. It means essentially zero for the rest of the
year. And we'd accept any shortfall; but if it rose up above that, we
would react strongly against it.

MR. CORRIGAN. In a sense I think that's the key because if
it turns out that we get a couple more strong weeks, then all of a
sudden we're in a position that we're not even realistically looking
at [an outcome close to] "A" and then we're really in the soup.

MR. PARTEE. That's right. And that's a real possibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are realistically looking at "A" now.
That is the projection. Now, it's an extremely uncertain projection,
and I don't attach a lot of weight to it, but the experts say that's

-44-



11/18/80

where we are. The range of uncertainty around it is very wide. The
sense of what I have proposed, just distilling some of your comments,
is that for visual reasons, which are not unimportant, we will stick
with "B" [for the ranges] and hope growth comes out at "B," but act
somewhat like "A" at the moment. That leaves us with the question of
how strongly we react if "A" gets confirmed or, worse yet, if growth
goes higher than the specifications of "A." That's the sense of it if
we adopt these specifications; and it's reflected in part in the
federal funds range. Obviously, we have to consult if we hit [the
limit on] that.

MR. WALLICH. You said earlier that we ought to think more
about the deviations from the targets and the response to that than
about the absolute targets, and I thought that very persuasive. So an
important ingredient of this decision seems to be where do we go with
the funds rate if [monetary growth] falls below or goes above. Now,
one way of not capping but flooring the rate on the down side would be
to set a rather high [level for the lower] limit, and I suggested 14
percent. Another might be to say accept a shortfall in the
aggregates. I am not quite sure what that implies in terms of the
funds rate, really.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not sure what it implies in terms of
[that rate but] there is a relationship. What it implies is that
we're pretty slow about changing the nonborrowed path to make up for
any decline in borrowing. That's what it specifically implies, which
in turn slows down any decline in the funds rate.

MR. PARTEE. It might bring down the funds rate a little.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would come down some if we had a really
big shortfall, but--

MS. TEETERS. I strongly object to pegging that rate at 14
percent. We have let it run up way above what we expected a month
ago; and if you're going to play that game, Henry, you have to be able
to play it on the down side, too. A rate of 14 percent is just
ridiculous in this economy.

MR. WALLICH. After taxes fourteen is negative in real terms
for those people who pay taxes. I am being told that there are many
people who don't pay taxes and take the standard deduction or have no
profits, so one has to take both things into account. I think the
rates are almost there but not quite.

MS. TEETERS. Oh, baloney. Why shouldn't the security
holders have a decline in real income, too? Everybody else has.

MR. PARTEE. We've had this discussion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's clear that people in general
terms are willing to [tolerate] some shortfall from whatever target we
adopt, without moving very aggressively [on the funds rate]. I don't
want to pin that rate at 14 percent at this point, but I would be slow
to react on that side under our normal operating procedures. If the
market really thought the money supply was coming in low, we would get
a big psychological effect in the market that would move interest
rates. But we would drag in changing our paths. I think what is at

-45-



11/18/80

issue is how much we drag on the up side. If we set these kinds of
specifications, I would sense--without counting the people who did not
talk too specifically, and many people did not--that there is no
eagerness to whack it too hard if growth comes in above the ranges.
We're going to get some reaction.

MR. MORRIS. Would you define "whack it too hard"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a technical term! Let me say, just
in round numbers, that we start at $1.5 billion [in borrowings]. You
know, precisely what has happened after we argued interminably in the
last two meetings about whether the target should be one percentage
point more or less, is that within a week, or literally a few days,
the next money supply figure that came in was over anything we were
talking about. So we moderately whacked it, I would say. We raised
the net borrowed reserves, we lowered the reserve path by $100 million
or so, which was enough, and we probably overshot the reduction a
little. It was enough to have a very noticeable effect on the market.
Growth in the next week came in pretty high, I think perhaps by
coincidence. If it came in high [in the week ahead], let's say, but
more moderately high than those numbers, maybe we wouldn't do anything
for a week to see whether it was confirmed the next week. If it came
in very high, we'd probably react but more mildly than we did the
previous two times.

MR. PARTEE. That is, we would end up not adjusting the
nonborrowed reserve path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If it came in only slightly or moderately
above the path.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, we might begin to get some tightening in
the market.

MR. ROOS. Are you saying that we bias it to tolerate an
overshoot more than an undershoot?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think we're saying the opposite of
that. We're very tolerant of an undershoot. What I am trying to pin
down is how tolerant we are of an overshoot. I think the general
sentiment is that we're going to be less tolerant of an overshoot than
we are of undershoots. But should we be tolerant at all of an
overshoot is the question or do we react very quickly? My dilemma is
that if we're really not tolerant at all of an overshoot, we ought to
be whacking it right now, which is not what people said. So on how
tolerant we are of an overshoot, I suppose what we're saying is that
we'd be fairly tolerant right at the moment [up to the specifications
of] alternative A. If it got above alternative A, we'd be
progressively less tolerant.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd rather consult if the funds rate got over
17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whether the funds rate gets over 17
percent or not depends upon how tolerant we are.

MS. TEETERS. It's already at 17 percent.

-46-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

SPEAKER(?). Well, that's the point I was trying to express.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure we can escape this problem by
saying we're going to consult next week. I'm trying to consult right
now.

MR. FORD. Tony Solomon addressed that. What's wrong with
Solomon's approach?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Solomon's approach is fine, let's take it.
Let us proceed. The funds rate is already in his area for consulting.
I am consulting.

MR. PARTEE. Well, what do you want to do?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you want to do? That's precisely
the--

MR. SCHULTZ. That's the problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's not put it off until next week.
Here we are.

MR. SCHULTZ. I don't know. Chuck, what do you want to do?

MR. WALLICH. I think we ought to go slowly. I differentiate
between 14 and 17 percent, and I would hesitate to go above that.
Let's look toward next quarter and try to get on a [path] that will
get us back on track. Then we will [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me repeat: We put forward the "B"
specifications; we put down a funds range of 13 to 17 percent; we put
down a borrowing number of $1.5 billion at the moment; we don't do
anything except just what we're saying here at the moment.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we'll miss "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we'll miss "B" or
not. There is a lot of uncertainty. The staff tells us we're likely
to miss "B." We understand that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's what I mean. Taking the
staff's view, we'll miss "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We understand that. We're misspecified in
that sense. We're hoping that if the money supply comes in high
against their current projections in the next week or two, we're going
to increase that borrowing level. I can't be perfectly specific about
how much we're going to increase it; we haven't got a formula for
relating the borrowing level precisely to a new estimate of the money
supply. I am saying that if it comes in significantly higher than
that, we'd probably move it by $100 million, but we wouldn't move it
by more than that unless [the money supply] was enormously higher.

MR. AXILROD. Borrowing would rise in any event.

-47-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, borrowing would rise in any
event. We're talking about whether we reduce the nonborrowed
reserves.

MR. ROOS. What is the objective of that nuance? I'm a
little lost. I'm not asking that in a critical way. Why are we not
taking straight "B"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I want to get a sense from the Committee.
I'm not talking in numbers that will turn out to be somewhat
meaningless if we get new figures. I want to know how hard the
Committee is willing to [resist an overshoot]. We're talking about a
20 percent federal funds rate if these numbers really come in high. I
take it you're not--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, but that's not your proposal.
This is for 20 percent; yours is for 17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now. And 17 percent is barely marginal
now. The presumption is that if we have a $1.5 billion borrowing
level immediately, it will come down from 17 percent. But almost any
overshoot from what we now expect is going to force the consultation
you're all talking about a couple of weeks down the road.

MR. CORRIGAN. If we had a $2 billion increase in the money
supply next week, all of these numbers presumably would be out the
window.

MR. FORD. Yes, but if we put a 17 percent cap on the fed
funds rate, that almost guarantees--I mean it could be happening
before we get out of this room.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming that the present situation
is tolerable. We'll wait a week or so to see whether it comes down.
If it doesn't, we will have to consult again in a week or two.

MR. ROOS. That means that for a week we'll supply money too
quickly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether it's too quickly or
not. All I'm saying is that we only know that ex post, Larry. We'll
know whether it was too quickly or too little along about next March.

MR. ROOS. I was all set in the spirit of Thanksgiving and
generosity to move from "C" to "B," but this whacky proposal bothers
me.

MR. FORD. It's not whacky; it's semi-whacky.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I couldn't vote for "B" as it stands. I
would vote for "B" as you suggested it--that is, if we don't really
mean the specs of "B."

MR. GRAMLEY. Should we instruct the staff to calculate the
nonborrowed reserve path accordingly?

-48-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [From what] I observed, a good many people
came right to that conclusion. But there is enough difference so that
I'm not sure I can see a majority anyplace.

MR. WALLICH. I'd be willing to go to 17 percent [for the
upper limit of the funds rate range] provided the 13 goes to 14. My
concern is more with the lower limit than the upper limit.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, it isn't going to happen. You have no
worries, Henry, between now and the middle of December on how low
interest rates are going to go. The worry is in the first or second
quarter of next year. And I think the higher we put interest rates
now, the greater the danger is that by the second quarter economic
activity is going to be in a nice steep decline and interest rates are
going to be falling like a stone. We're going to be chasing the money
supply. The way to keep out of this is, as the Chairman says, to not
whack it too much now, to let things settle down. We've gone a long
way. And we have gone a long, long way just since October. We've
increased short-term interest rates by something like 2-1/2 to 3
percentage points in a month. In a month! We've increased long-term
interest rates by a percentage point or so, a bit less for mortgage
rates. Those are enormous increases by historical standards. We are
really resisting money growth. I think the Chairman is quite right in
that. We're showing our determination. And we have let interest
rates move through swings since the summer, since recovery began, that
are just totally unprecedented. Let's wait and see what happens.

MR. ROOS. Lyle, have we resisted money growth, though, to an
extent that would have a beneficial effect on reducing inflation?

MR. GRAMLEY. [Unintelligible.]

MR. SCHULTZ. Over the long run it will. That's a long time,
Mr. Roos.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me see if people think we can reach
some kind of consensus around stating "B" and in some sense adopting
the specifications of "A" because of a feeling that they may prove
consistent over time and that we shouldn't anticipate their
inconsistency. I suppose that is the analysis that--

MR. MORRIS. But the reserve path is going to be drawn on
"B." Is that what you're saying?

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, the reserve path is drawn on borrowing--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The path is in a sense drawn on "B" but
with a starting point on borrowing which the staff tells us in their
best judgment is more consistent with "A." But we're overriding [the
staff's judgment on] that in a sense. The changes from then on would
be consistent with "B." Let me just finish this. Again, let me try
to get some degree of consensus for 13 to 17 percent. I think Lyle is
probably right that we're not going to hit the 13 in the next month.
I recognize that we're at the 17 right now. Implicitly by citing that
kind of target, we are accepting the current level of market rates.
We'd accept it fluctuating even slightly higher for a few days in the
thought that the specification for the borrowing will probably bring
it at least slightly lower. If it doesn't, we will have to consult

-49-



11/18/80

because [our specifications] will be inconsistent. But we'll let that
go for a week or so. We will react quite sluggishly to shortfalls.
We will react less sluggishly to overruns, but without enormous
aggressiveness. We don't have a formula for--

MR. BLACK. That's whacking it lightly.

MR. MORRIS. I don't think 17 percent is whacking it lightly,
though.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're right there now.

MR. MORRIS. Yes, but we've only been there for a couple of
days.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

MR. STERNLIGHT. What I might say about the 17 or 17-1/2
percent that we are getting today is that I don't see our approach as
accepting it. We are putting in reserves. I regard that very high
rate of yesterday and today as something of an aberration. I would
think, given what we're aiming for, that it ought to be getting down
more than--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what we're assuming now. But
you're basically operating on the reserve path, as I understand it.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, but there are enough uncertainties in
that reserve path that we feel this is one of those occasions that we
just have to use a little discretion around that.

MR. WINN. What do you consider to be the normal rate at this
time?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I would expect it to be more like 15
percent, given the borrowing level of $1.6 billion that we've been
aiming at this week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could talk about mild [adjustments in]
quantifications or whatever. Does that general pattern represent a
legitimate consensus? Can I have a show of hands on that?

MR. PARTEE. How many would accept it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I'm asking whether it's essentially
[acceptable], without getting into every last refinement: Is this
acceptable, with the explanation.

MR. ALTMANN. Seven.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's better than you usually get on the first
try. [Now] it's eight or nine.

MR. ALTMANN. Eight.

MR. ROOS. Instead of starving us into submission, you've
whacked us into submission!

-50-



11/18/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It appears that I am as reasonably close
as I can get to a consensus. I don't know if there is any refinement
that will conceivably increase this number. Henry is worried about 14
percent on the lower end. I am not sure whether that's operationally
significant or not.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think you did very well. You lost Henry and
Nancy. And that's about as good as you can--

MR. WALLICH. Why not do it my way?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. Part of the reason,
Henry, to put it baldly, is that it upsets a lot of people's doctrinal
views to have [the range] that narrow.

MR. SCHULTZ. You better vote before you lose somebody.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's vote.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Guffey Yes
President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters No
Governor Wallich Yes
President Winn No

It's 10 for--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "10-4" means the meeting is over!
Let me say for all its difficulty, I think we were concentrating more
on the right variables today. And it was helpful to me. We have some
underlying problems that aren't going to go away. A number of people
made comments, which I think are understandable, about whether the
whole process of gradualism makes sense. I just don't think that's an
issue that we can decide at this meeting. Nor, indeed, is it an issue
that is up to the Federal Reserve itself because we're not going to
deviate successfully from what has been termed gradualism without an
effort by the government right across the board, of which we would
have to be part.

When I speak of collisions next year, I think you ought to be
aware, and I'm sure you are, of the potential for the Federal Reserve
to be left out there hanging alone in extremely unsatisfactory
economic circumstances with expectations, deliberately [encouraged] or
not, of what we can do about inflation through monetary policy alone
much overdrawn. And when policies are not a success, there will be an
inclination for people to say that somehow inflation would have
disappeared if we'd been 1/2 percentage point within the target
instead of 1/2 percentage point outside the target or if we hadn't had
a big fluctuation downward in the first quarter and upward in the
second quarter or whatever. That is a conclusion that I don't think

-51-



11/18/80

bears much relationship to reality. Nonetheless, we're going to be
extremely vulnerable, particularly if we feed that impression
ourselves that somehow we're going to do it all alone.

MR. BAUGHMAN. I would think, Mr. Chairman--and I presume
this is going on or will go on--that it would be desirable to get the
new President to commit his credibility as early as possible to
attacking inflation for the purpose of trying to erode somewhat the
possibility that we will be standing out there alone.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The danger that I see, and I put it very
crudely, is that everybody will be committed to an attack on inflation
but it's entirely up to the Federal Reserve to perform.

MR. PARTEE. That won't hurt. We've already been there.

MR. BALLES. I have a hunch that our Horatio at the bridge
act isn't really going to change unless or until the size of that
budget deficit comes down, however it may be done. Until then, we're
under awful pressure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is one major element. There are a
lot of other elements in the inflationary picture. Don't forget,
there are people out there who are approaching this from one point of
view, which at the extreme--Mr. Corrigan ran into this the other day--
is that the budgetary deficit doesn't make the least bit of
difference. And other policies don't make the least bit of
difference. Inflation is purely a monetary phenomenon. And if the
Federal Reserve would only get its act straightened out, it would
pretty much disappear in 12 months.

MR. BAUGHMAN. But I think that's a pretty small group.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're very vocal, Ernie.

MR. BAUGHMAN. I know it's a very vocal group but I think
it's pretty small.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in one sense, it's a small group.
I'm not sure it's an uninfluential group. And when things don't go
well, there is a certain irresistible political temptation to say that
that small group was right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. But another thing, too, is that the Federal
Reserve in its own way has done a marvelously effective job of
convincing people that the growth of money matters, to the point where
even for nonmembers of that small group it is very easy to latch onto
[monetary policy] as the scapegoat. Even the nondoctrinaire people
who don't even understand it--

MR. BAUGHMAN. I assume we're not prepared to disavow that.

MR. ROOS. Is that small group currently being subjected to a
chastising?

MR. BALLES. You're getting whacked, Mr. Roos!

-52-



11/18/80

MR. SCHULTZ. What is even more disturbing is that I'm
convinced that the vast majority of people in this country think
control of the money supply has no connection to interest rates. That
is really disturbing. They say: You know, interest rates wouldn't be
so high if you people would just control the money supply. That puts
us politically in a very difficult position.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Very often [the interpretation is] even
narrower. It's if you wouldn't print so much money.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's right. That's what they're talking
about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I bring to your attention that the next
meeting is a bit off schedule to get us in line with our new schedule.
So it's on a Friday because that's the time when we could fit it in.
It would not be surprising if we have to have some consultation before
that time. I hope some food is out there.

MR. ALTMANN. I am told that it is.

MR. PARTEE. It's only four weeks away.

MR. BALLES. Paul, are we meeting here for the planning
session?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes we are.

END OF MEETING

-53-




