









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

February 4-5, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in

the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

in Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, February 4, 1980, at 4:50 p.m.

and continuing on Tuesday, February 5, 1980, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Coldwell
Mr. Kimbrel
Mr. Mayo
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, Roos, Timlen, and Winn,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee

Messrs. Baughman and Willes, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Minneapolis,
respectively

Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Axilrod, Economist
Mr. Holmes, Adviser for Market Operations

Messrs. Brandt, R. Davis, Ettin, Henry, Keir,
Keran, Kichline, Scheld, and Truman,
Associate Economists



2/4-5/80

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Messrs. Kalchbrenner and Prell, Associate Directors,

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors

Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors

Mr. Smoot, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia

Messrs. Balbach, Corrigan, J. Davis, T. Davis, and
Eisenmenger, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Cleveland,
Kansas City, and Boston, respectively

Messrs. Broaddus, Danforth, Mullineaux, and Sandberg,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and New York, respectively

-2-



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
February 4-5, 1980

February 4, 1980--Afternoon Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will call the non-meeting to order. We
are not in a meeting at this point anyway; we may be in a meeting
later. I would just remind all of you that I sent out a memorandum on
the idea of possibly changing the [FOMC] meeting dates. It probably
would amount to having fewer meetings on the theory that with the
current operating procedure, I sense--maybe nobody else senses--that a
meeting after only four weeks doesn't give us much evidence on which
to change anything. With lagged reserve accounting and with a lag in
the numbers, we're hardly in the period that we were discussing before
the next meeting comes along. So there may be some logic in doing it
a bit differently. This is partly based on the idea, after looking it
over--and I think we all agree--that we need a little longer
perspective. It seems to me better to get the longer perspective by
sticking to calendar quarters rather than just always looking three
months ahead on some kind of moving average basis. If we take that as
an assumption, logically we should meet somewhere around the beginning
of a quarter and look at that quarter. We can review it sometime
during the quarter and also look ahead to the next quarter. Then when
we get to the end of the quarter, we will be looking ahead at the next
quarter. There seems to be a certain logical progression in that
method of looking at it as opposed to meeting more frequently when the
basic decision was whether or not to change the federal funds rate.
But I will return to the subject at the end of the meeting and then
[we will decide]. There's nothing magic about any particular time to
change.

MS. TEETERS. Well, there is some magic in it. I looked at
your [proposed] schedule and I thought that we probably should meet at
the very end of the quarter to plan for the next quarter. Then I
realized that we have constraints on two [meeting dates]. One is
because of the budget and the [President's] economic report [and] the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; so we have to wait until January to do
that one. Then we have a similar constraint in July when we have to
wait for the midyear review of the budget before we can do very much.
I finally came around to your schedule on two of the quarters anyway.
So, we might as well change the whole schedule into a similar pattern.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had nothing invested in any of the
particular dates or when we would change, if we change. But I do have
the feeling that every four weeks is a little frequent if we are
operating in this particular mode. I wouldn't feel that way if we
were operating more on money market oriented criteria.

MR. ROOS. Could [we meet] on the original dates in those
months instead of moving--?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a little hard. But look at the
dates carefully. As I say, I had nothing invested in the particular
dates that were put on that proposal, particularly when we get near
[the usual] dates, if there are problems in changing them. For
instance, for that proposed April 1, which looks logical except for
April Fool's day, March 25 is almost equally logical. And we could
basically have the same pattern by meeting on March 18th, because I



2/4-5/80

understand [that date is on] everybody's schedule now, although that
would leave a longer lapse before the next meeting. But there's
nothing sacrosanct about any of those particular dates.

MR. ROOS. Is there supposed to be a response?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, you can wait until later; it can wait
until after the meeting tomorrow. I just wanted to remind you to have
it in mind so that if you have any strong feelings they could be
adequately verbalized tomorrow.

The first thing on our agenda today is lagged reserve
accounting. Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, lagged reserve accounting, as the
Presidents and Board Members know, has been a subject of considerable
contention in the System since it was adopted in 1968.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're going to get an issue pretty soon
for which we just can't pull out the old memoranda.

MR. AXILROD. That's what I was getting to. There has been
considerable contention since 1968 when it was adopted. And I must
say from an internal perspective there was contention between 1966 and
1968, when it was being studied for adoption under a rather different
institutional environment and different operating procedures than we
now have. Various staff groups have studied this since 1973. I am
afraid you are not quite getting independent results since I think I
was Chairman of three of those groups. And they all three unanimously
concluded that there is very little to be said for lagged reserve
accounting from a monetary policy point of view if the Committee is
operating on a reserves target. One can't make a case that it is the
least bit of help and one can make a case that it is harmful. There
have been divergences among the staff even in that context of it not
being helpful. The question is: How harmful in fact is it? Some
would contend more strongly than others that it's harmful over the
longer run. Others would contend that it doesn't matter over the
longer run: That with or without lagged reserve accounting we can
perk along on a reserve target and manage to hit our objectives. I
think that's a legitimate source of dispute because the long run is
compounded of a number of short runs. And in a very simple-minded
sense in any 1-week period there is no defined relationship between
the multiplier on deposits and reserves in that week. That is,
reserves this week can bear any relationship to deposits because all
one has to do is worry about two weeks from now. So we rely almost
entirely, therefore, on banks' responses to interest rates to control
deposits. When you cut through it all, fundamentally that is no
different from relying on a fluctuating federal funds rate target.
So, I personally would tend to take the view that lagged reserve
accounting can make it virtually impossible to hit our targets in the
short run and probably is of some importance in making it difficult to
hit our targets in the long run. Thus, I think it is really quite
inconsistent with the present operating procedures. Now, I don't mean
to say that there aren't other things that are equally difficult. The
discount window is a problem and our own graduated reserve requirement
structure is a problem. But in the latter regard, some of Mr.
Lindsey's research would suggest that lagged reserve accounting



2/4-5/80

accounts for bigger divergences in the multiplier from predictions
than does the graduated reserve requirement structure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. From Mr. Who's research?

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Lindsey, on my right. So I would say that
while doing away with lagged reserve requirements is not going to
solve all our problems in hitting the aggregates, it at least looks
like a step in the right direction. In view of this cogent staff
analysis, one might be curious as to the reason no action has been
taken to date. I assume there have been two reasons. One was that
with the federal funds rate operating target, which has been the
principal System operating target for years, or even with a net
borrowed reserves operating target, lagged reserve requirements are
essentially an irrelevancy, like almost any reserve requirement is an
irrelevancy. With a funds rate target, the Committee is simply trying
to aim at that interest rate which will cause all the adjustments by
banks and the public, whether or not there are reserve requirements,
that will bring about the proper money supply. So in that sense it's
irrelevant. The other issue was membership. The lagged reserve
requirement is viewed as a benefit of membership. To test that view
we did run a survey during one of these staff analyses and, except for
those at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank, all of the directors of
Reserve Banks who represented member banks said lagged reserve
accounting was desirable. In St. Louis, the directors said it was
undesirable.

MR. ROOS. When was that?

MR. AXILROD. That was in 1976.

MR. ROOS. That was before the good days!

MR. SCHULTZ. That sort of follows the pattern for most
everything, doesn't it?

MR. AXILROD. The staff has no other way of assessing lagged
reserve requirements as a membership benefit. One's instinct would be
that it is minor relative to the real burden, which is the reserve
requirement itself. In sum, Mr. Chairman, the staff does believe that
it is probably appropriate now to move toward contemporaneous reserve
accounting if the Committee is going to continue with a reserve
targeting procedure. In that context, we did offer three alternatives
in the memorandum. One is moving from a two-week lag to a one-week
lag, which would presumably speed up the response of the banking
system a bit. The second is making reserve requirements
contemporaneous for Reserve City banks and leaving a lag for the other
5,000 banks. And the third is an essentially contemporaneous scheme
for all banks. Without going through all the reasons that are
detailed in the memo, Mr. Chairman, we did conclude that we see very
little advantage to any move now except the move to contemporaneous
accounting for all banks. That is, if the Board did not feel disposed
to move toward contemporaneous accounting now, for whatever reasons,
the staff would not suggest taking either of the other two
alternatives. We believe that their advantages do not outweigh the
disadvantages that might be entailed in terms of messed-up reporting,
failure to quell the public debate, and certain problems of the



2/4-5/80

multiplier that the mix system brings about. Those are all the
comments I have, unless Mr. Lindsey would wish to add something.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you have not left a lot of doubt as
to where you stand, Mr. Axilrod. Is there any dissenting opinion
among the staff on the importance of this matter?

MR. LINDSEY. I might say that, if anything, my views are
more extreme than Steve's.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In the articles and academic papers and so
forth that have been written on this subject, do they bring anything
to light or make any argument that you have not made?

MR. LINDSEY. No, in preparing these memoranda for the Board,
we thoroughly reviewed the literature starting from the early '70s on.
My own view, which isn't particularly humble, is that the quality of
the analysis presented here is much superior to the academic work.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We would expect that! Well, it's just
that the conclusion comes through a little more strongly than I read
it in that memorandum itself. I had a feeling that you saw some
disadvantages in the degree of certainty with which the Desk was
operating. Maybe Mr. Sternlight would like to comment.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I'd like to add a word or two. I feel
much less convinced than Mr. Axilrod that there would be significant
benefits from a switch to contemporaneous accounting. I can see the
theoretical case that he makes. I'd be among those who feel that in
the longer run even that theoretical case makes very little, if any,
difference. I can see some impediments to the Desk's operations under
a contemporaneous system in that we don't know required reserves in
the week we're operating in. Perhaps more significant than that, when
some deviation in required reserves stems from a factor other than the
behavior of the monetary aggregates--for example, a bulge in interbank
deposits or something of that nature that essentially we would want to
accommodate rather than resist as part of our reserve targeting--I
think contemporaneous accounting could send us off in a perverse
direction. So, I came out feeling that there is not all that much
advantage to it. And having the minus on the membership side--I don't
know how strongly to evaluate it, but I am told that it still does
have some significance--just made me pretty dubious about the
desirability of a change.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Holmes, you were there before and
after. Do you have any comments?

MR. HOLMES. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I can recall back in the
great debate over whether we should have lagged reserve accounting,
all sorts of claims were made that it was going to help the Desk
tremendously and that the Wednesday [settlement date] would be a
stable day in the funds market. We at the Desk never believed that.
But, if it does make a difference for bank relations and on that
ground alone it is useful to the banks, then we see no harm in the
lagged reserve accounting. I feel very much as Peter does that it
doesn't make all that much difference. It seems to me that the System
has introduced enough other changes recently in statistics and in
procedures that I see no urgent need, certainly, to go ahead with a



2/4-5/80

move back to contemporaneous reserve accounting. Along with Peter, I
doubt if it really makes that much difference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're not going to make a decision
this afternoon, but anybody who would like to comment on this subject
should comment.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have long felt that if we're
going to have a reserve operating base, sooner or later we are going
to have to move to contemporaneous reserves. As one example, let's
say that later on this year we get into a period where the money
supply is not growing or is contracting. That would mean that in
order to hit our target of total reserves, the Desk would have to push
in very large amounts of excess reserves at the expense of a pretty
sharp reduction in the funds rate. That might look a little funny if
we're willing to do it, but it is one of the consequences stemming
from lagged reserves. It is very awkward to control reserves with a
lagged system. On the other hand, this is a very awkward time for us
to make a change. As far as I am concerned, it's only a matter of
timing--of when we do it. I don't think this is an optimum time,
first because of the membership bill. I wouldn't want to throw
anything on the fire that could in any way interfere with that bill.
I'd want to hold off until it has been decided one way or the other.
Second, all of our computer systems people in the whole Federal
Reserve System are [working] flat out. We have the system automation
program and we have the work going forward in connection with the
pricing of Federal Reserve services. At least in the Boston Bank, we
don't have any capacity to do the work on [a shift from lagged
reserves]. And I think that is probably true around the System.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How big a job is this for us internally as
opposed to for a bank?

MR. TIMLEN. Depending on the alternative--the memo had three
alternatives--some of our people said four to six months for
programming.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am assuming going all the way to what is
called contemporaneous reserves, which isn't quite contemporaneous;
it's a one-day lag.

MR. MORRIS. I was told it would take us 90 days to implement
it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Boy!

MR. BALLES. I'd strongly support what Frank has said. On
the substance of the argument, I certainly join Steve; that's exactly
where I come out. Like Frank, I would also stress that it would be
very risky in my opinion even to raise this outside the Fed until we
get a membership bill passed because there will be some adverse member
bank relations in a transition. Secondly, I'd stress that both the
banks and the Reserve Banks need a long lead time on this, longer than
Steve thinks based on the impression I have from the staff memo. I
would think six months would be an absolute minimum. When you think
of banks in the West with statewide systems and 1,000 branches and so
forth, it gets to be a very, very complicated system of reporting.



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say it will take a long time because
they will--

MR. BALLES. Well, both for the banks and for us for the
reason that Frank said. Our data processing people within the Reserve
Banks have been knocked flat by the tremendous number of changes in
the current reporting series, by the cranking up of IBA, and by the
marginal reserve requirements. We have the possibility of a
membership bill on the horizon, which will bring us a lot more
institutions to deal with. On top of that, all at the same time, if
we try to plug in a very detailed, cumbersome, time consuming,
expensive reprogramming effort and try to do it too quickly, I think
we'll rue the day we did it. I'll tell you this: (1) I would hope
that a decision would be made to move to contemporaneous reserve
requirements; (2) I wouldn't even raise the issue unless we get a
membership bill; and (3) then at that point, I'd make sure that plenty
of study is given to lead time needs of both the banks and the Reserve
Banks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I appreciate your caution about raising
[this issue], but I did this morning.

MR. BALLES. Oh, you did? Now he tells me!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your caution is well taken and I
did it with some hesitancy. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Well, most of my speech has already been given.
But I would say of the three alternatives Steve presented, I certainly
would agree with the staff, or the reserve requirements policy group,
that a return to contemporaneous reserve accounting would be the
preferred solution. I think it is better than lagged reserves. But I
too feel, though I probably can't say it as eloquently as John just
did, that it very definitely ties into the membership bill, and I
would postpone it if only for that reason. I also feel, even though I
am known around this table as a pragmatist or eclectic or something--
no comment Mr. Roos--that there are two other ways that have not been
thoroughly presented and discussed by the Axilrod Committee but should
be. They have been subjected to a lot of good academic thought.
Maybe they are cockeyed, but I can't see the holes in them myself yet,
and I think they're worthy of discussion. One of them is Bill Poole's
paper, Frank, on what amounts to a 100 percent marginal reserve
requirement on the most recent changes since the last determination.
The other is the idea of some sort of reverse lag where, as we all
learned in our elementary money and banking text books, the Federal
Reserve or the Central Bank sets the reserves. That isn't as silly as
it may sound. We are not saying to a bank that it can't accept any
more deposits because its reserves have already been set. That can be
handled by the way it works through the accounting system. But it
seems to me that both of those ideas have enough merit that they at
least ought to be kicked around a little more by the SRAC and by
Steve's group. So, while I agree that the major reason for delaying
the implementation of this relates to the membership issue and the
timing, I would suggest that we have a little more work to do in terms
of analyzing these two ideas, just as examples. And if we want to
blow holes in them, let's do it. But some of us, at least, are
intrigued by these two ideas and the possibility that, if they work,



2/4-5/80

they will bring us closer, though obviously not completely, to a chain
drive rather than a belt drive, if I may use that [analogy].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you looked at those, Mr. Axilrod?

MR. AXILROD. We have in the past looked at those and several
other gimmicks that have been advanced.

MR. SCHULTZ. And he will now deliver an unbiased opinion!

MR. AXILROD. We'll be glad to consider them further.

MR. MAYO. There are good gimmicks and bad gimmicks. We deal
only in good gimmicks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, like Bob, my speech has been
pretty well given. I'll start with a conclusion: I think it would be
a mistake to make a change right now. There are several reasons. In
addition to the ones that have been given, I think the magnitude of
the problem has not been demonstrated to be great enough to justify
the cost of a change at this time. We knew when we made the change
years ago to lagged reserve accounting that it would have the effect
it is having. But at that point we judged that the membership
benefits overrode the negative effects it would have on the linkage
between the policy target and achieving the target. It seems to me
that the balance today is even stronger in the direction of membership
than it was at the time we made the change. And my recollection is
that the views we received from the Manager of the System Account then
were the same as have been expressed today. The Desk did not see it
as presenting an insurmountable operating problem. As to the
suggestion that it's irrelevant if we're operating with a federal
funds target, I find that persuasive. But it does seem to me that
it's inappropriate to throw into the same box the net borrowed reserve
target. That seems to me a different animal than the federal funds
target. And the suggestion that we have to achieve the monetary
aggregate target through interest rate effects is a part of any
operating procedure. The people who borrow from banks and the bank
officials who are handling banks' investment decisions are operating
in response to interest rates. And it's through the interface of the
banks and their customers that the asset side of their balance sheet
is affected, and then the liability side seems to me to flow from
that. So we cannot escape working through the interest rates in the
market to achieve influence on the monetary aggregates. I think
that's true whether we try to work through some reserve aggregate or a
federal funds target or a net borrowed reserve target. It comes down
to our ability, whatever the target, [to determine] the linkage
between [our objectives] and the aggregate we attempt to affect. But
in the final analysis [the key is] our willingness to let our efforts
influence interest rates in the market.

Along with Bob's reference to a couple of items and gimmicks
in the literature, I was expecting to see at least some passing
reference--to use the vernacular on the table--to a "gimmick" that was
kicked around fairly extensively a number of years ago: namely,
grouping banks into about five groups and having their reserve
settlement dates come up on a different day of the week.



2/4-5/80

MR. AXILROD. We have studies of that also, President
Baughman. We will be glad to--

MR. BAUGHMAN. Well, I don't know whether [those in] the
profession--

MR. MAYO. These are professional gimmicks!

MR. BAUGHMAN. On the willingness to let that [academic] feud
quiet down: Was it a matter of your persuading them or simply that
they felt we turned off our hearing aids?

MR. AXILROD. As far as Professor Friedman is concerned, I
think it was the latter. He was the chief proponent of it.

MR. BAUGHMAN. It seems to me that we should anticipate that
that will likely surface again. So, my view, Mr. Chairman, is that we
should not change at the present time. I agree with the conclusion
that our present mode of operation would work a little better if we
were on a concurrent basis. But I think the cost of going there would
be excessive now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Just to set the record straight, I have a change
of position since the advent of the age of enlightenment in St. Louis.
We're strongly in support of contemporaneous reserve accounting. I
would subscribe to John Balles' concern about moving before the
operational changes have been considered and made and [so forth]. In
talking to our bank relations people, I got the impression that as
many banks dislike this lagged reserve arrangement as favor it.
Anyway, let the record show that whatever happened in 1976 does not
reflect our present position. We support it.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, in June of 1976.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in deciding whether lagged reserves
are good or bad for policy, I think we have to decide whether the
likely errors in hitting the money supply stem from a lack of
responsiveness to changes in the volume of reserves or whether they
stem from unexpected changes in the appetite of the market for money
of the type that Frank Morris assumed. If it's the first, then one
can make a case that we get a little quicker response under lagged
reserve requirements than under the other in the sense that if we
inject a given volume of reserves, required reserves don't rise
immediately, so the banks feel a little easier and they kick this off
a little faster. In the case of unexpected deviations stemming from a
shift in the demand for money, then we do have an automatic braking
that comes about under contemporaneous reserve requirements that tends
to stop this unexpected change in the demand for money. I think it's
this latter type that's really the most troublesome for us under our
present mode of operation. So that does give a slight edge to
contemporaneous accounting under the present procedures. But I don't
think we ought to overemphasize that. I come out very close to where
Alan Holmes and Peter Sternlight did. At most, I would think the
delay would be two weeks. And if you accept any of the points that



2/4-5/80

Irving Auerbach was raising in his debate with Bill Poole in the
American Banker, then you may conclude that it may take longer than
most people assume for these multiple contractions or expansions in
bank credit to take place. In the kind of environment in which we are
trying to bring about a steady rate of expansion in money, and given
all these other slippages in the monetary multiplier, it's hard for me
to see that it makes a great deal of difference under present
procedures. But I do think that it is good for us, if we can, to
quiet this criticism that has been stemming from the monetarists. I
have two reasons: (1) It would divert their efforts toward trying to
help us achieve a monetary target and they would stop assuming that
it's as easy to hit as most of them have assumed; and (2) it would
remove any excuse that we have for not hitting the targets. And both
of those [results] would be rather salutary, I think.

As far as the other side of the coin is concerned, bank
relations, a lot of the academic commentators assume that it's easier
for a bank to adjust under contemporaneous reserve requirements
because it does not involve as large a change in excess reserves. But
they are not talking to the bankers I've talked to. I think most of
the Reserve Banks now provide each of their banks with a daily
statement on reserves, which shows their required reserves as
determined from deposits two weeks earlier. They subtract from that
any vault cash they held two weeks earlier, either add to that or
subtract from it the amount of carryover from the previous week, and
then show how much the banks must hold in their reserve balances for
the remainder of the reserve period. In fact, we even show that on a
daily average basis. So far as the small banker is concerned, all he
has to worry about is looking at that statement that comes every day,
early in the day--it never misses its schedule except when the carrier
doesn't run, which is very seldom--and he knows exactly the reserves
he has to hold on a daily average basis for the balance of that
reserve period. And if he misses it a little, he has the 2 percent
carryover. Most of them, if they watch it very closely, can get
pretty darn close to zero excess reserves. But I wouldn't favor the
adoption of alternative one--moving to a one-week lag--which I think
is the best of those Steve outlined, for the reason that John Balles
and Frank Morris and many of the rest of you have stated. It would be
a major problem [of implementation]. But as we move ahead, we might
think about how we could go to contemporaneous reserve accounting and
yet solve this bank relations problem. The problem doesn't stem
entirely from not having all the banks as members. I don't think we'd
want to burden the banks unduly even if they were all [members].

So, what appeals to me most would be a month-long period of
contemporaneous reserve accounting. I think that would have
practically all of the advantages of the [weekly contemporaneous
accounting period]. It would involve less rate volatility because
banks would have more opportunity to engage in interest arbitrage
within the reserve period. It would also give more time for this
adjustment to the changes in the demand for money--that multiple
contraction or expansion that some of the commentators seem to think
occurs almost instantaneously. It would reduce the work of the
Federal Reserve and the work of the commercial banks a great deal if
we didn't have to put this out on a weekly basis. It would reduce the
emphasis on the weekly figures that now cause us so much problems.
And if we eliminated the carryover in the process--and I think we



2/4-5/80

probably could get away with eliminating that if we went to a month-
long period--it would eliminate a form of slippage. But there are
some disadvantages to a month-long period without the carryover in
terms of unexpected reserve movements toward the end of the period.
And this would not be simply the last day in the case of many banks
that don't know their required reserves until five or six days later.
But if we did have an unexpected movement toward the end of the
period, it would have an effect on only 1/28th to 1/31st of the whole
period because of the month-long period as compared with an effect of
1/7th as we now have with a seven-day period. We also could not
provide as much help to the banks through giving them statements of
their required reserves, and that removes one of the inducements for
them to report more promptly to us. Certainly that is important to
us. Finally, with a long period of time, in a sense one could argue
that the banks wouldn't have to come to grips with a change in reserve
availability quite as promptly, and we might have some slippage there.
But on balance, if we combined these two, that might conceivably be
the best of the two worlds. But I would urge that we not move to that
at this time for reasons others have already stressed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, those were very thoughtful observations
by Bob Black. I just would like to make two points on those before I
briefly say what I meant to. I am not sure that we'll satisfy the
monetarists by this change. I think their reasoning is that they want
to minimize Desk operations. They believe that with contemporaneous
accounting all the adjustment can take place through a change in
deposits and none of the reserve needs have to be met by Desk
operations. You pointed out that these adjustments of levels of
deposits don't take place instantaneously. We need a very large
change for each dollar of reserves, something like a $10 change in
demand deposits and a $20 change in time deposits. These changes are
really so large that they can't take place quickly; any reserve
deficiency or surplus must still be met very predominantly from Desk
operations. My other reaction is that the one-month procedure sounds
like an ingenious possibility and well worth studying, but one can see
the danger of slippage if we expanded this [time period]. Suppose we
made it not one month but one year. One can see that that wouldn't be
workable. So somewhere between a day and a year there is an optimum
in terms of less disturbance but also less loss of effectiveness.

As far as moving to a contemporaneous basis right away is
concerned, I think the gain we have in terms of the monetarists'
analysis wouldn't be very great. The staff memorandum convinces me
that the gain in terms of speed might be very considerable. The
effects of any reserve shortage begin two weeks earlier unless we want
to assume that somehow a reserve shortage or surplus casts its shadow
ahead and the banks move into very short-term assets as soon as they
see their deposits moving in one direction or another. But that isn't
very likely because all they see is their own deposits moving; they
don't see the aggregate moving necessarily. So, there does seem to be
a significant advantage in terms of speed of adjustment and I think
that is important because even though we say that it really doesn't
matter over a quarter or so whether we deviate from our target, it is
always very hard to get back on track. It doesn't matter if we
deviate if we indeed get back on track. Nothing happens to the real

-10-



2/4-5/80

sector. But getting back on track may be very painful because the
forces that pushed us off may still be operative.

I have one question on something that I'd like to understand
better. I have the impression that under the present procedure, the
funds rate still serves as a guide to reserve needs. Peter seemed to
say that if we move to contemporaneous, we would lose that. At
present, a movement in the funds rate is an unambiguous indication
that reserves are either too large or too small and it is clear that
the Desk must take action unless it wants to have the reserve
imbalance met by borrowing or repayment. If we have contemporaneous,
then a move in the funds rate may mean indeed that market factors have
produced a deficiency or excess of reserves. But it also may mean
that the aggregates are moving in a particular direction, creating a
reserve surplus or deficiency. If the latter is the case, we may not
want to counteract that; we may want to let the change in the funds
rate do its job. Say a decline in deposits leads to a decline in the
funds rate. We would want the decline in the funds rate to help push
deposits back up. So there seems to be a possibility of using the
funds rate as a guide to operations under lagged [accounting] and less
of a possibility to do that under contemporaneous. Since I am
troubled, frankly, by the use of the funds rate as a guide to
operations because it exposes us to the appearance of still being on a
funds rate target, I wonder whether this wouldn't protect us against
that suspicion that we're trying to control the funds rate rather than
nonborrowed reserves and the aggregates. And I wonder whether the
Desk wouldn't be able to judge what it needs to do--determine the need
to add reserves or the absence of a need--without this indication
coming from the funds rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Well, I have the feeling that the honeymoon of our
experiment is about over. Consequently, I get a little more itchy to
fiddle with the machinery rather than to let it stand. I am convinced
that the acceptance of the Federal Reserve making this [procedure]
work is going to be more important than for membership and a whole
host of issues. I would not back off because of the effect it may
have on the membership legislation at this time. This is more
important than the membership issue. I am convinced that while there
are programming problems involved, we can get it done faster than we
assume if we change our priorities a bit. I would give up on some of
the other things we are doing, I think, and put this in place. I am
not sure how much time [it would take] but the biggest problem is
getting the Banks to rearrange their priorities in order to mesh with
it. I would pick up on some of the other comments about the
importance of saying that this [procedure] works. I am concerned that
the slippages are going to show up much more. There is a lack of
confidence in the market now about what we are doing and either [we
need to do] that or look at the discount rate again, or perhaps both,
very promptly or I think we are going to be in trouble.

I would like to raise one question. With [the development]
of the managed liabilities and RPs and other things, are we seeing a
change in the adjustment process now that will [become more
pronounced] if we start to tighten? Are we seeing that [adjustment
not] formally showing up in the deposit base but in some of these
items? I get lost in all the accounting as to how that flushes out.

-11-



2/4-5/80

MR. AXILROD. We have often expected that when the System
tightens, there will be an increase in managed liabilities that holds
down demand deposits. For example, there would be an increase in
issuance of CDs and RPs and all that. That didn't turn out to be true
in the fourth quarter when there seemed to be a sharp reduction in
bank credit demands. But for unchanged credit demands, so to speak, I
would expect that to be an element in the adjustment process. It
would be an aspect of the tightening--issuing [such] things and
putting upward pressure on interest rates in so doing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you think we are running out of
honeymoon time or however you expressed it, Willis?

MR. WINN. Paul, I hear more doubts being raised in more
areas than I ever thought possible. Their suspicion is that we are
[not] on a money target [unintelligible] very much a funds target.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't see it in the money supply
figures.

MR. WINN. Well, we are confusing it by all these different
money supply figures we are surfacing.

MR. PARTEE. We haven't done that yet.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they don't know--

MR. WINN. People are looking, Paul, at the reserve base
until we get--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how far the ingenuity of our
staff goes, but we will get off bounds on one definition. We changed
the definition in the seasonal adjustment factor--fixed it up
perfectly, I would say.

MR. COLDWELL. If we shift from lagged reserve accounting to
contemporaneous and confuse that issue--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I speak somewhat tentatively on this
subject which I have observed raging around here for many years. It
is somewhat religious in character. By the way, St Louis, I think has
always been on the side of the angels, Larry! They might have had a
little falling off or--

MR. ROOS. Steve tells me we were the only people--

MR. PARTEE. I would say you were always in favor of
contemporaneous accounting and I would say that Bob Black has always
been against it because he saw the public relations cost or the bank
relations cost. The latter was a major factor involved, I thought, in
the Board's accepting the lagged way in the first place. I am
impressed by Henry's argument. I do think the speed of adjustment is
something that is going to plague us because I personally believe that
sooner or later, but perhaps not right now, Willis, we're either going
to get a big surge or we're going to get a big collapse in the
aggregates and then we are not going to be able to do anything about

-12-



2/4-5/80

it because of the lags with which the demand schedule can be affected.
And two weeks is a meaningful amount of time in shortening that
process, if indeed it does shorten the process. I don't know that it
necessarily would because, after all, the Desk knows that the money
supply has surged or has fallen out of bed before the reserves have to
be put up to support the higher amount or the lower amount; and
presumably if they don't follow a strictly mechanical formula, they
can begin to make adjustments for it early on in their strategy. So
even that can be overcome.

My biggest problem is that I would lean toward
contemporaneous accounting except that I think the structure is much
too complicated to use it. Reported deposits are extremely
complicated; there is quite a variety of deposits with different kinds
of reserves against them. And it seems to me all of that is much more
difficult [to manage] on a contemporaneous basis; it would not be a
disadvantage otherwise if we had a very simple structure. Now, it
also happens that the membership bills all propose a very much simpler
structure of reserves than we now have. And it seems to me that if
[the structure were simpler], that would also tend in some sense, Bob,
to do away with the bank relations problem because it is no longer an
optional matter as to whether to follow the specified procedures. It
seems to me that a very much simpler structure and the change in the
whole reserve apparatus that would be associated with a new bill,
which probably wouldn't take effect for six months or something like
that, might be a time for introducing a change. But I would tie it to
those kinds of developments; I wouldn't do it now.

By the way, I do believe the point made by Frank and others
has some value: With our current way of processing the daily report
of deposits and the programming that exists we probably don't have the
capacity to make the change without risking a collapse of the
structure. That has begun to bother me. So, I wouldn't do anything
now; but the introduction of a new simplified system on different
terms and conditions might be an occasion for going to it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I have heard at least six
economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York opine on the matter
of reverting to contemporaneous reserves. Not one of them thinks
there is any major advantage in such a change, so I will be disposed
to follow that professional judgment in my Bank. I must say that John
Balles has given most of my points in terms of the bank relations
[effects of] such a change and I would like to stress the importance
of that. It is lead time, not only at the Reserve Banks but at the
commercial banks as well. I would say, too, that I don't think that
First VPs are in a position to start changing their priorities in the
computer support area. We have a number of very key projects going
forward in that area to bring up our new FRCS 80 communications
network. We are entering the area of resource sharing. And to change
our priorities to accommodate something that is not held out as having
a major advantage is to me very poor planning. I would also say that
we have had so many changes in the area of reserves--and those changes
involve a cost to our member banks--that this would just add to the
difficulties of shaping things in an orderly way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

-13-



2/4-5/80

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I also tread tentatively in an area
like this. In general, I am persuaded by Mr. Axilrod's theoretical
arguments that contemporaneous reserve accounting has advantages in
the short run when applied to a reserve targeting approach to monetary
control. Mostly though, I am impressed by what Mr. Sternlight and Mr.
Holmes had to say, which is that it probably won't make a great deal
of difference in how the Desk operates. I just have one question that
I'd like to ask Mr. Axilrod, if I may. I assume you are familiar with
Irving Auerbach's arguments in favor of lagged reserve accounting. I
take it that this is essentially an argument that the effects of any
shifts in money demand won't be very quickly felt in markets and that
the argument is based on the actual behavior of commercial banks in
their lending and in their portfolio management. I wonder what you
would say in response to Mr. Auerbach.

MR. AXILROD. Well, Governor Rice, Irv has a much more
complicated mind, I think, than I do. Also, the evidence with regard
to bank response has been developed over a number of years when the
System has been running a different kind of policy that is very
accommodative to bank needs. If at today's interest rates the bank
needed reserves, the System supplied it. So every banker worth his
salt knew that he could rely on the federal funds market within plus
or minus 1/4 percentage point to make his adjustments. In that kind
of environment, adjustments do tend to be made quite slowly. That may
be the best kind of environment; I am not questioning that. But I
think that's the basis for the empirical evidence. Without lagged
reserve accounting you introduce the possibility of controlling total
reserves. Now, you may or may not want to control them literally, but
you introduce that possibility whereas with lagged reserve accounting
that's much more difficult to do. If you can control total reserves,
offsetting borrowing as it occurs, then it follows that the banks are
simply not going to be able to put out the deposits and that in
consequence interest rates are going to move sharply up or sharply
down as banks are forced to make those adjustments. If the Committee
wants to move toward the kind of world where it is more certain of
controlling total reserves in the short run, or indeed in the long
run, then I think abandonment of lagged reserve accounting would make
it more practicable to do so. Now, if bank adjustments take a long
time, then it might require a lot more interest rate variation in the
short run to overcome that kind of inertia. However, I would feel
reasonably confident that after some transition period the process of
bank adjustments would be much shorter. Of course, in that process
banks would begin holding more excess reserves so we'd have that
problem to worry about. I know this is somewhat general, but that's
how I would respond to the kinds of comments that Irv makes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends in considerable part upon what
we do with the discount window issue.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. I am sure, even if we leave the window
open and don't close it, total reserves leaves you the possibility of
chasing it. You may not ever catch it, but it leaves you the
possibility of chasing it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. I have only two comments, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would agree with the Account Manager that this is likely to

-14-



2/4-5/80

have [only] minor advantages. But secondly, I would caution the
Committee that this is another interruption in the overall picture of
[the policy] the Committee is trying to follow. If we add that on top
of our redefined aggregates as well as possible daylight overdrafts
and additions from the membership bill, we're likely to complicate the
figures [further] and they are going to be difficult for people to
follow, even our very good staff.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't contemplate that possibility.
President Willes.

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found Henry's
comments and Chuck's comments particularly useful. So I would like to
[be recorded as agreeing with] whatever you wrote down for them. I
would add one thought, which goes back to the comment that Bob Mayo
made. I am not much for gimmicks, either. But if there's a bank
relations problem, as many think there is, it just might be possible
that the kind of proposal Bill Poole made can be structured in such a
way that we don't give much away but present it to the banks as though
we are giving them something when we are taking away lagged reserves.
His kind of penalty scheme, for example, in terms of the carryover
would make it possible to say that we are going to take away lagged
reserves but we are going to give banks some flexibility they don't
have now. And yet if we structure that penalty in the right way, in
fact, we're not going to give away much in terms of sloppiness in the
reserve figures. Looked at in that way--unless, as Chuck says, we get
the whole thing solved with the bill--it might be useful to consider a
gimmick like that simply as a bank relations vehicle. It may be a
means to get the advantages and not have the negative bank relations
impact that some of us, at least, are concerned about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess everybody has talked who wants to
talk. Is there anybody else who urgently wants to talk? Mr. Kimbrel.
When I put the adverb in front of it, you're in trouble!

MR. KIMBREL. I have a personal bias toward contemporaneous
reserves. And if we were operating so that we could accomplish it, I
would certainly opt for that. But I suppose our real thrust [should
be] Desk efficiency in discharging our directives, and those at the
Desk don't seem to be too enthusiastic about contemporaneous reserves.
I accept that against the environment of the costs of programming such
a change at the Reserve Banks and commercial banks. And, Mr.
Chairman, right at the moment any change in our relationships with our
member banks, even this, is not exactly very well timed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, those cautions seem to be rather
unanimously felt. I must say the other side of it is--I don't know
how important it is substantively--that when we work with a two-week
lag in the context of what we're trying to do now, one has a great
sense of artificiality. We are working to affect a reserve figure
that we always know we cannot affect because it always depends upon
something that happened two weeks earlier. It leaves me at least with
a very uncomfortable feeling over a period of time. But I think it
has been useful to get all these considerations on the table. I don't
know whether we have to look carefully at the reverse lag situation
and so forth or not.

-15-



2/4-5/80

MR. AXILROD. Well, we can. It depends how promptly the
Board would want to take this up. But Mr. Lindsey has already done
considerable work in that area, so we would be in a position to
develop something.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are in a position to talk pretty
quickly about that. I don't know where we'll come out, but--

MR. PARTEE. Paul, if we are going to be doing additional
studies on this, I have always been very taken by the notion of doing
away with Saturday and Sunday, which is another gimmick.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's coming up anyway, isn't it?

SPEAKER(?). You mean for Federal Reserve purposes only?

MR. PARTEE. Yes, excuse me, for Federal Reserve purposes
only, because of all the inefficiency of flows back and forth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the relevance of that comment is
that one thing leads to another. And there is this question of
whether to make a whole bunch of changes at one time or to keep making
changes, as I think we have been doing, that upset people.

MR. AXILROD. A memo on that very subject, on the effect of a
move from 7 to 5 days, has been prepared for the Board. We didn't
want to send it forward right at this time because of the confusion
with the memo prepared for this meeting, but we do have a staff
recommendation on that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the very least, obviously, there are a
lot of arguments to delay for a while. I think we ought to get all
these things on the table; maybe we won't want to delay them all. We
can look at the membership issue in a month or two and see where that
stands, but we ought to have at least a preliminary feeling of how we
would want to go, depending upon the resolution of that issue. Let's
hope it gets resolved one way or the other. Well, I don't think there
is anything more to add on this unless the Desk people want to say
anything in conclusion. Well, it has been useful [to see] how uniform
many of the views are about the theoretical desirability and the
practical difficulties in this.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to add one
footnote to this. From my perspective, it is not merely theoretical
desirability and practical difficulty but, as you commented, the
artificiality of playing with these numbers. That is driven home to
me almost every week, so I feel some practical impact of that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're going to have a presentation
on the international scene. I think a variety of questions have
arisen on this which may or may not be of any immediate relevance to
what we [do].

MESSRS. TRUMAN, SHAFER, and HENRY. [Statements--see
Appendix.]

-16-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's proceed to a formal meeting and hear
from Mr. Pardee about the international [scene] in the last month now
that we've heard about it for the next two years.

MR. PARDEE. Every time somebody mentions the international
value of the dollar, I don't know where I am. I feel like the zoo
keeper who is worrying about lions and tigers and bears and is told
that the animal kingdom is improving or not improving during the
course of the day. I am working in a different world than the one
we've just come from, though I have great sympathy with many of the
things that were said. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any questions for the zoo keeper?

MR. BAUGHMAN. I move slowly now so I didn't really capture
what you said in that very last statement. If the Bundesbank sells
dollars and takes in marks presumably, you say we may share in those
marks. What are you telling us?

MR. PARDEE. We have a bit of a dilemma. It would be rather
nice to see the dollar rise at this stage, after all the pressures
that the dollar has been under for these many months. And on that
basis, it's awkward for us to see the Bundesbank go into the exchange
market and sell dollars and thereby keep the dollar from rising as it
might otherwise. At the same time, we have $2.6 billion worth of swap
debt remaining and I am going to have to ask for a second renewal on a
good chunk of that swap debt. And the U.S. Treasury has a very
substantial short position in that it used a lot of the resources of
the earlier Carter notes in the intervention last fall. So, we have a
rather great need for marks. We have to balance off our wish to see
the dollar rise a little to reinstill a bit of confidence in the
market in the dollar against this need for mark resources.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you telling us that the procedure has a
possibility of lightening our mark debt?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When the Germans sell dollars and buy
marks, they give some of them to us sometimes.

MR. PARDEE. That's right.

MR. PARTEE. They give them to us?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They sell them to us.

MR. PARTEE. For dollars? How do they get an advantage out
of that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because we're repaying the swap.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Are you projecting a reduction in our mark
debt?

MR. PARDEE. I am if the dollar remains where it is [or]
continues to rise. There is still a rather substantial calendar of
mark-denominated issues coming into the international markets, which
will be converted at the Bundesbank. And this rediversification--
there's no term for it and the politics only goes one way--this flow

-17-



2/4-5/80

of funds back into the dollar provides us with opportunities. The
Bundesbank had one offer put to them this morning on which it decided
it didn't like the exchange rate. We would see quite a bit of that as
well: People coming back to the dollar, selling large chunks of marks
on the exchange market, and either the Bundesbank or ourselves taking
those [marks] off the market.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Our decision as to whether to use any marks we
acquire for the purpose of repaying debt will hinge not on the fact
that we've got some marks but rather on what is happening in the
exchange rates?

MR. PARDEE. Well, there is a certain urgency as far as our
repayment of debt is concerned. And whenever the dollar is strong
enough to take it, we open doors and windows. We have not gone into
the exchange market as an open buyer of marks. That's one point I was
making in my [report]. But to the extent that someone comes along and
offers marks to us, we will take them and use them to repay debt.

MS. TEETERS. Why is there a certain urgency of repayment?
Are those bonds coming due?

MR. PARDEE. We've had swap drawings outstanding since last
June and we're going into the second renewal on a number of these.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a recommendation to make in that
connection?

MR. PARDEE. I don't have the numbers, but between now and
the end of February we have a rather substantial list of swap
drawings, totalling about $1.8 billion, coming up for second renewal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions since
the last meeting. Do we have a motion to that effect? Without
objection they are so ratified. And you are asking for permission to
renew $1.8 billion of swap debt maturing between now and the next
meeting?

MR. PARDEE. By the end of February.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When are we going to meet next--March?

MR. PARDEE. Not until March 28th.

MR. PARTEE. The drawing has been outstanding for six months,
Scott?

MR. PARDEE. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This goes beyond any feasible next meeting
date I am sure. Do I have a motion? I do and I have an enthusiastic
second. Have we any objections? If not, are there any other
questions or comments on this?

MR. COLDWELL. Your pressure for urgency of repayment is
merely the annual date coming up?

-18-



2/4-5/80

MR. PARDEE. It's not merely the annual date; I think I have
a responsibility to the Committee to keep these things short term.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He always feels under pressure. I don't
know--

MR. COLDWELL. I understand that, but I thought you were
conveying a sense of real urgency and that maybe we ought to take
further steps than what we're now taking.

MR. PARDEE. Oh, no, I am not trying to go in that direction,
as far as the policy is concerned. But in terms of my own
responsibilities I feel that I have an urgency to clear this up. Now,
there is a tradeoff--we have to choose--because we're covering this
debt at a rather substantial loss to the Federal Reserve. And if we
waited three months or six months, the exchange value of the dollar
might be such that we could repay at a profit. On the other hand,
experience has shown that to be a 50-50 [probability]; we might be
paying it off at a substantially greater loss. I would rather get it
off the books while we have the opportunity and free up our resources
for later problems.

MR. COLDWELL. I was just testing the degree of urgency
you're putting on this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Only his normal pressure.

MR. WALLICH. Nothing as drastic as going into the market
and buying some D-marks.

MR. COLDWELL. And nothing as drastic as the Bundesbank
telling you that we have to get out [of debt].

MR. PARDEE. Well, we're having daily conversations with them
on their pace of selling.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I forgot to ask for approval of the
minutes of the last meeting. Without objection, they are approved.
How long is your presentation, Mr. Kichline?

MR. KICHLINE. Probably about 20 minutes.

MS. TEETERS. But then the questions will take it beyond
that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't have time for questions. There
is no ground swell for wanting to hear that presentation tonight. In
that case, maybe we'll dispose of Mr. Sternlight. He's always very
[brief].

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think I'll take that long, Mr.
Chairman. Shall I go ahead?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

-19-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I forget, maybe we can go ahead and
ratify your transactions. Without objection they are ratified. I
think we'll do no more than hear whatever comments or questions you
have to Mr. Sternlight.

MR. WALLICH. Could you expand a little on what you perceive
as market expectations about future inflation? I see that Treasury
bill futures, for instance, have changed by a very substantial amount,
something close to 100 basis points over a month or so.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I hadn't focused on a particular quantity,
Governor Wallich. It's just that "expectations of inflation" seems to
be the most commonly cited factor for this very marked rise in the
longer end of the market, with the longer bonds up about 100 basis
points over the past month. And there is the budget message; even
though it perhaps more frankly acknowledged inflation than some past
Administration messages, there is still the feeling that if the
Administration is saying it's that bad, it's going to be even worse.
I guess this is the kind of thing that greets one at times like this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned that some people thought the
new money supply figures would look higher. Why should they have that
idea?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I suppose just fear of the unknown, really.
We're coming out with something new, and it's partly that. It's
partly perhaps a misconception that since these new series are likely
to include some elements that have been growing rapidly the aggregates
will tend to show more rapid growth. That's the feeling. If there is
some account taken of the checkable deposits and money market funds--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason I asked is that they don't have
any sense of this revised seasonal.

MR. STERNLIGHT. No, but they have expressed skepticism about
the recent seasonal. Certainly I have heard the comment that the slow
growth in the past few months may have partly reflected an inadequate
seasonal adjustment for that period.

MR. BLACK. Peter along those same lines, all the new
definitions in January would show greater growth rates than we had for
those same measures in September to December whereas all the old ones
show less in January. What is the market going to say to that? This
is very closely related to what you were saying.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think they might feel that some of
their skepticism was well placed.

MR. BLACK. That's what I am afraid of, really.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a press conference scheduled for
Thursday, I think, to attempt to explain these new figures, and that
question is sure to arise. I don't look forward with a great sense of
anticipation to trying to explain either the substantial actual
complications or the fact that the numbers look higher.

MR. PARTEE. We do have the revised seasonal, Paul. That's
an annual event to revise the seasonal.

-20-



2/4-5/80 -21-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it doesn't have to go higher.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it happens to have done what the market
expected it to do. That is, it raised the seasonal factors for the
winter quarters and dropped them for the summer.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have lots of problems. This M2 number
is more like the old M3 number, but since it's called M2 and is higher
than the [old] M2, we've got a problem. Any other questions or
comments?

MR. BLACK. Stress the long run. Go back to the [previous]
six months and it will look a little better as you explain it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will adjourn until tomorrow at 9 a.m.

[Meeting recessed]



2/4-5/80

February 5, 1980--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We got through our agenda down to item 4
anyway, yesterday. I suggest that we begin with the staff report on
the economic situation and then perhaps take a little more time, if we
want to, on the discussion of the economic situation and implications
for the longer-term ranges in the light of the fact that this is the
meeting at which we have to set them for a year ahead. Mr. Altmann
tells me he would appreciate, for purposes of writing the minutes
anyway, a fuller discussion of your views than we have had at some
recent meetings. But more important substantively is the fact that
this is the annual meeting where we have to consider and rationalize
what we do in terms of the longer-range outlook. In that connection,
I don't know whether all of you noticed that the President exercised
his prerogative to relocate, I guess is the right word, the Humphrey-
Hawkins objectives. In the original Act they were 4 percent
unemployment and a 3 percent rate of price increase in 1983, and he
moved back the unemployment objective 2 or 3 years and the price
objective--what, 5 years?

MR. PARTEE. I think it's 1986 [for the unemployment
objective] and 1988 [for the price objective].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was 3 years and 5 years. It is
the first time that particular prerogative has been exercised, and
maybe it will make everyone feel more relaxed regarding how one
reconciles what we do with the dictates of that Act. I mentioned last
time that it might be useful--I will not insist upon this--to quantify
your feelings about the outlook. I'd say the best way to do it in
terms of the real GNP would be on a fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter
basis. In terms of prices, the consumer price index is the easiest
one to think about. And I suppose the unemployment rate would be the
traditional one. If you want to give some sense of your figures, you
can do it with any appropriate qualification that you think is
desirable: That you feel reasonably confident about it or immensely
uncertain about it or anything in between, because I think that is
part of the flavor within which we must operate. [We need] to take
account of the uncertainties in setting our own policy. Given where
we're starting, I hope to have a great revolution and perhaps have the
coffee break a little earlier, more toward the breakfast hour than
toward lunch, after we finish the discussion of the economic outlook.
With that, you may begin, Mr. Kichline.

MESSRS. KICHLINE, ZEISEL, and TRUMAN. [Statements--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little confused by this last chart.
This shows a rising rate of inflation through most of the first half
of 1981, or the first quarter anyway. I thought your projection
earlier showed a declining rate of price increase over that period.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, this is the GNP implicit deflator; on a
fixed weight basis it goes down. As you know, the GNP implicit
deflator subtracts out the energy prices coming from abroad and, in
fact, gives us a lower number than is being experienced domestically.
So the implicit deflator at this time would be an understatement of
the impact of inflation in this early 1980 period. The fixed weight
deflator is around 10 percent.

-22-



2/4-5/80

MR. PARTEE. How do you reach those confidence ratios? I
don't really understand the process by which you get a 70 percent
confidence interval.

MR. KICHLINE. We use the errors from the quarterly model in
the equations, which are determined from past history. We run a large
number of simulations; in fact this is based upon 400 experiments with
the model. And when looking at that, we determine it with a 70
percent confidence interval.

MR. PARTEE. How many were above?

MR. KICHLINE. How many of those were above and how many
below? In effect, using this very large number of simulations, the
model would say that 70 percent from the past fall within that bound.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd like to comment--I'm probably the only
simple-minded person on the Committee--that I found your presentation
to be the best I've seen. It was presented in a form that I found
very easy to understand and I liked it.

MR. KICHLINE. Thank you.

MR. COLDWELL. Could I ask a question, Mr. Chairman? The
Chairman [of the Congressional Committee] has asked us to talk about
possibilities regarding real GNP, the CPI, and unemployment. As I
understand your presentation, your real GNP forecast for 1980 would be
down 2.2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, wait a minute. That's for the year
as a whole, isn't it?

MR. KICHLINE. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.

MR. COLDWELL. Isn't that what you're asking?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes it is.

MR. COLDWELL. And you have the unemployment rate at 7-3/4
percent at the end of the year.

MR. KICHLINE. That's right.

MR. COLDWELL. What's your CPI? That is what he asked.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, you'd want to add a line on that table
for the staff forecast for 1980, QIV to QIV. The staff has a forecast
of 11.4 percent for the increase in the CPI. And for 1981 the staff
forecast for the CPI is 8.6 percent. Just for comparison--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the fourth quarter of 1980 you have
what?

MR. KICHLINE. No, for the percentage change from the fourth
quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980 we have 11.4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the rate of consumer price
increase in the fourth quarter of 1980?

-23-



2/4-5/80

MR. KICHLINE. 9.2 percent.

MR. COLDWELL. But the change over the year is 11.4 percent?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, we have a forecast of around 15-1/2
percent in the first quarter of this year with a combination of energy
[prices] and high mortgage rates driving it up. It drops to 11-3/4
percent [in the second quarter] and then to 9-1/4 percent in the
second half of this year, which measured fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter gives you around 11-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. What was it in the
fourth quarter of last year?

MR. KICHLINE. 13.0 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it's going to be 9.2 percent in the
fourth quarter of 1980, according to this projection?

MR. KICHLINE. That's right.

SPEAKER(?). Give or take a percentage point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is this change of 11 percent that
you're talking about?

SPEAKER(?). Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.

MR. KICHLINE. You take the level of the index in the fourth
quarter of 1979 and calculate the percentage change in the level to
the fourth quarter 1980. Early in 1980 we have very rapid increases
in the CPI and they slow later on.

MR. MAYO. Why don't you give us the quarterly figures. It
may help us.

MR. SCHULTZ. And year-over-year is different from fourth
quarter-to-fourth quarter.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, if you want to look at some of these
numbers: The fourth quarter of 1979 is 13.0 percent; the first
quarter of 1980 is 15.6; the second quarter is 11.7; the third quarter
is 9.2; and the fourth quarter is 9.2. Measured fourth quarter-to-
fourth quarter, that is an increase of 11.4 percent.

MR. SCHULTZ. What do you have year-over-year, for 1980 over
1979?

MR. KICHLINE. I think we have that on a different table. If
not, someone may have a calculator and we can--. It's 12.8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just have to decide what figure I want
here. I think I want the fourth quarter rate of change, your 9.2
percent figure.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think that's right. The rate of
inflation as measured by the CPI is reduced by the end of the year to
9-1/4 percent. The Administration has more than that, doesn't it?

-24-



2/4-5/80

MR. KICHLINE. I have a December-to-December calculation for
the Administration. They didn't calculate it quarterly; I have the
details, [so I can] calculate it. It's roughly comparable. For
fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter it's 10.4 percent in 1980, which
compares to our 11.4 percent. And for 1981 we're both at the same
level, 8.6 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The figures we are looking for, then, are
the [counterparts] of your minus 2.2 percent--that's the fourth
quarter-to-fourth quarter change in real GNP--the level of
unemployment in the fourth quarter, and the rate of change in the
consumer price index during the fourth quarter.

MR. PARTEE. You want the CPI in our [forecasts] rather than
the implicit deflator?

MR. MAYO. It happens to be the same; it's 9.2 percent for
the fixed weight price index, too.

MR. PARTEE. It does happen to be the same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you tell me what the consensus is of
private forecasts at this point?

MR. KICHLINE. The consensus of price forecasts or what?

MR. SCHULTZ. For everything.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, for these three items or some
approximations thereof.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't have a consensus. I can give
you some numbers based on a couple of the econometric model forecasts.
I might just say that a great deal of difficulty is associated with
this sort of exercise in that both the monetary and fiscal assumptions
differ. And in many cases one doesn't know what the energy price
assumptions are. Most outside forecasters that I am aware of now
include in their control projections some sort of tax cut as well as a
considerably more expansive monetary policy if specified, or if not
specified, implicitly so. Most of them have a recession, I would say,
that is two or three quarters in length beginning now. They have
maintenance of very high prices and a much sharper recovery in
activity late this year or in 1981. The Wharton model is something
like that, for example, and they do have a tax cut. And they assume
M1 growth of 6-1/2 percent compared to our 5 percent. In comparison,
the bill rates in that sort of forecast by the fourth quarter of this
year are below 10 percent, compared to 11 percent in the Board staff's
forecast. So, a good deal of the difference probably relates to
alternative policy assumptions. DRI is the most confusing of all. It
has an increase in nominal GNP from the fourth quarter of 1979 to mid-
1981 that averages 10 percent at an annual rate and has the bill rate
going down 3-1/2 percentage points. All of that is achieved with a
4-1/2 percent M1 growth, which is magic compared to anything in the
postwar period.

MS. TEETERS. Do you have the interest rate assumptions in
the Administration's forecast?

-25-



2/4-5/80

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, I do. Do you want a fourth-quarter level
or--?

MS. TEETERS. Fourth-quarter level.

MR. KICHLINE. The level in the fourth quarter of 1980 is 9.6
percent on the 3-month bill rate; in the fourth quarter of 1981, it's
8.8 percent. The staff forecast has a bill rate of 11 percent in Q4
1980 and 11-1/2 percent in Q4 1981. There is no explicit money
assumption that goes with the Administration's forecast.

MR. COLDWELL. But if you calculated it, what would it be?
They must have some [implicit assumption]. Is it higher than yours?

MR. PARTEE. It would have to be higher.

MR. COLDWELL. It has to be higher than yours.

MR. AXILROD. We are very pleased that they have not put that
in.

MR. MAYO. Me, too, Steve.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may be using a different equation.

MR. MORRIS. Let sleeping dogs lie, I guess.

MR. SCHULTZ. Eggert is very cheap. Why don't you go ahead
and buy it so you can have it?

MR. KICHLINE. We do buy it; I don't look at it. Well, I
can't say I don't look at it. It's a rundown of 30 or 35 forecasts.
Unfortunately, they come out with different time periods and no
listing of the policy assumptions, so it's very difficult to compare
one to another. It's helpful if one just wants to scan what private
forecasters are thinking, but we've had difficulty trying to relate
our forecast to others unless we have the detail of the monetary
policy [assumptions], for example. But we do receive that and do look
at it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me add one more item on the list that
I asked you to comment on and that is the fiscal policy
[unintelligible]. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Jim, maybe you've answered this. I am a little
lost. On the GNP implicit price deflator, where your projections show
an increase into 1981, did you put any weight on monetary policy? In
order words if, as we have announced, we are going to reduce gradually
the rate of money growth, do you still anticipate this upward movement
in the deflator, or was that not put in your--?

MR. KICHLINE. No, that plays a very important role. But we
have inflation coming down in 1981; it's not going up.

MR. ROOS. But you show it going up [initially]; it's sort of
a roller coaster.

-26-



2/4-5/80

MR. KICHLINE. Well, as I say, in part the deflator is a
statistical artifact when import prices are rising very rapidly. I do
believe that there's little that can be done to change the course of
price developments within the next three or four months. In fact,
already just about half of the first quarter is over, so in our view
we're locked into a very adverse price performance in the first half
of this year.

MR. ROOS. Do you see that prevailing through the second
quarter of 1981? In other words, you don't see any relief even though
we're doing what we are doing here in gradually reducing the rate of
[monetary growth]?

MR. KICHLINE. As I say, part of that is attributable to the
performance of import prices in influencing this calculation. It is
our view that prices do improve. If you take a look at an alternative
measure of prices, in the section that Jerry Zeisel was referring to--
go back one section [in the handout] right before the yellow sheet--
there is a chart that plots the gross domestic business product, which
is a fixed weight price index. There some of the problems from
shifting weights are at least taken out, and you can see that we do
have a decline beginning in the second half of this year, stretching
into and throughout 1981.

MR. ROOS. But if we hang in there, which we are determined
to do, and keep firm control over and gradually reduce the growth rate
of whatever Ms we are controlling, don't all these other things fall
into line? Or do you still have to run 400 equations to see what--?

MR. KICHLINE. What falls into line? I only wanted to tell
you that while we give you point forecasts, we're quite aware that
there's a wide range of error associated with any forecast. We tried
to look at past history to suggest how big that range is, and it's
sizable. We have no difficulty with your point that monetary policy
over time does have an influence on the economy and on prices. In
fact, the answer is: Yes, we agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like Governor Schultz,
I found this a particularly interesting presentation, but I think for
a slightly different reason.

MR. BLACK. You mean you're not simple-minded?

MR. WILLES. Without touching that line with a 10-foot pole,
I want simply to refer to the very last chart! I think the staff has
done us a great service in presenting that because with all the
conversation about whether the increase in the CPI is going to be 9.2
percent or whatever, if you look at that band [depicting the range of
error], that's an incredibly large band. We talk about the CPI in the
fourth quarter and it could be plus or minus some very large numbers.
While it's useful to go through these exercises to see where we come
out, I think we really don't pay as much attention as we should to the
enormous uncertainty that attaches to these forecasts. We've had some
people doing some work at our place--and I don't understand the
technical details so I won't take you through it--but let me just give
you an example of the kinds of problems one runs into in making

-27-



2/4-5/80

quantitative forecasts. If you think of watching a wagon on a TV
screen or a movie screen, you'll notice that the wagon is going
forward and it looks like the wheels are going backwards. The reason
for that, of course, is that as the wheel goes forward in the first
frame the spoke is up in the center and then it goes forward and it's
the second frame before it gets all the way back up to the top again
and so on around. So, even though the wheel is moving forward, when
you take pictures, it looks as if it's moving backwards.

MR. PARTEE. It depends on the speed of the projector.

MR. WILLES. You're exactly right. It depends on the speed
of the projector and the speed with which the wheel is moving. Now,
let's suppose that decisions are made in continuous time and you take
econometric snapshots on a monthly or quarterly basis. It could be a
matter of pot luck that the speed of the decisionmaking framework and
the speed of the projector are the same. If they're not, you can
actually take a picture that gives you just the opposite view of
what's going on. We happen to think that in many cases that's exactly
what happens. We have all these nice pictures that are actually
giving us pictures exactly the opposite, in terms of policy
implications, of what is going on in the "real world" and how it's
functioning. I simply say that to indicate that I think we need to be
particularly [cautious] at this time, given not only the uncertainties
in the world but the uncertainties about the tools that we're working
with, about what we think we can even say in terms of the time path
for the economy over the next eight quarters.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed yourself eloquently on
the wide band of uncertainty. Would you care to express a view on the
central tendency as you see it? Or are you so uncertain that you have
no view on this policy?

MR. WILLES. If you press me to the wall, I will. I don't
think I can say anything with any credibility, but I'll give you
numbers anyway. And if the numbers turn out to be--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it is not unimportant that
you say there's a great degree of uncertainty and I would like to get
that--

MR. WILLES. With that great big long caveat that I just gave
you, the numbers that we have in terms of real GNP for 1980 are more
positive than the staff's. We think on balance that there's going to
be some very modest positive real growth during 1980 and we tie that
in with what we see happening with fiscal policy and slightly stronger
business investment. I don't quarrel at all with the staff's deflator
number or their CPI number. If anything, though, given what I just
said about defense spending and so on, those numbers might turn out to
be low rather than high. I also don't quarrel with their unemployment
numbers.

MR. PARTEE. Even though you have positive output growth, you
would agree with that unemployment number?

MR. WILLES. Yes.

-28-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have any particular feeling about
fiscal policy?

MR. WILLES. Yes, the deficit is understated.

MS. TEETERS. By the staff or--?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is, without a discretionary tax
decrease it is understated.

MR. WILLES. But by how much, I--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you wish to say whether you think a tax
cut is a good idea or not?

MR. WILLES. I think a tax cut would be a disaster.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's a clear view! Mr. Timlen.

MR. TIMLEN. The one number I can read accurately from this
whole list of numbers is our projection of unemployment in the fourth
quarter of 1980, which is 7.3 percent. In New York we're probably
giving more weight to defense spending than the Board staff is giving,
not only in terms of defense spending by the Federal government but
capital expenditures by the private sector in anticipation of
government orders. In terms of real GNP, then, our picture for the
year, quarter by quarter, differs slightly in the timing and the depth
of the possible recession. Our four quarters run a positive 1 percent
for the first quarter, a positive 0.5 percent in the second quarter,
then two negative numbers in the third and fourth quarters of minus 1
and minus 2 percent. On a full year average basis that comes out to
[minus] 0.6 percent. Our deflator quarter by quarter ranges between
8.5 and 8.9 percent, so for the year we have 8.5 to 9 percent
inflation [as measured] by the deflator. Our CPI is somewhere around
10-1/2 to 11 percent. One thing that I would throw out that you have
not asked for is that our people in New York think the saving rate
will continue to be quite low for the entire year of 1980; to wit,
they have it averaging out at 2.9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you assuming on the saving rate?

MR. KICHLINE. It drifts up and for the year 1980 averages
4-1/2 percent.

MR. TIMLEN. Yes, there's a big difference between the Board
staff forecast and ours on the saving rate. On the federal fiscal
situation, for fiscal 1980 we are looking at a deficit close to $45
billion; I'd say $40 to $45 billion. And for fiscal 1981, depending
upon a tax cut, we have $40 billion on the low side without a tax cut
and $60 billion on the high side with a tax cut. I don't really have
a good judgment on whether there will be a tax cut on not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you think there should be one?

MR. TIMLEN. Do I think there should be one? For a change, I
would agree with Mark Willes. But some of the numbers are hard for me
to estimate in terms of the full impact of defense spending, whether
out of the government or the private sector. In terms of the

-29-



2/4-5/80

consumer, I just don't know how to read currently the effect of the
mild winter. I would have been rather concerned about the cost of
heating but I know our Buffalo branch is running considerably below
budget in terms of heating that building. What the experience is in
private homes, I just don't know. So the consumer may have a little
uptick there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that you think there's a fair
amount of uncertainty.

MR. TIMLEN. I wouldn't put it in quite the same language as
Mark, but I am uncertain.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the last chance I
get to say this so I am going to say it. In fact this is my last FOMC
meeting.

MR. MAYO. Why don't you stand up, Phil?

MR. COLDWELL. No, I am not going to chance that! I agree
that there's a high degree of uncertainty, but our track record and
our past performance clearly indicate that we've underestimated the
rate of inflation and I expect we will continue to do so. I think
there's going to be a rapid defense build-up, but impacting largely
upon expectations in the first part of this year. If that is the
case, we may see a moderation from what the staff was [projecting] in
the rate of decline in the first half. I think fiscal policy is going
to be easier than portrayed by the Administration's budget. Fiscal
policy is likely to be stimulative instead of restraining and I
suspect we will probably underestimate the aggregate data that we are
using. As for the data you've requested we comment on, Mr. Chairman,
I would put real GNP in a zero to plus 1/2 percent mode, the CPI at
the end of the year in the neighborhood of 14 percent, and the
unemployment rate at about 7 percent. And I have already indicated
that I think fiscal policy is going to be easier.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So you're not in favor of a tax cut, I
take it.

MR. COLDWELL. I am certainly not in favor of a personal
income tax cut. I think there is a case to be made to improve the
rate of business capital stimulation in the area of improving job
expectations, but I would question whether this is the right time to
do that. There's a fundamental fact of high inflation, which we need
to continue to keep our eye on; unless that is damped, the
possibilities of a rising rate of inflation are very good. I just
don't find myself in agreement with the idea of gradualism in economic
policy. It's a lovely theory but a practical monstrosity. Credit
availability in the economy is high in my view right now. And with
expectations of high inflation, the interest rate restraint is
minimal. Banker attitudes reflect no feeling of quantitative
restraint; to the contrary, they are seeing business as usual. I
admit the majority of the bannking profession seems to say that the
only thing that would satisfy them would be a major depression. But I
still think we have not obtained control over this and I suspect that
the recent trends in the international financial side are going to

-30-



2/4-5/80

create some dollar problems for us for the coming year. As you
struggle through these, I wish you well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. We're going to be left with
your decision for the rest of the year! Mr. Smoot.

MR. SMOOT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had very little time
to prepare for this. Dave is not well and sends his best, however, to
all of you. The last time I was down here I did have time to prepare
a great deal and I was very confused. Now I haven't had much time to
prepare very well and I am still very confused! Nevertheless, we
would be somewhat less pessimistic than the Board staff's projections.
To address your questions: On the real GNP, we see it negative for
the year, but maybe in the range of 1 to 1-1/2 percent negative. On
the CPI, we'd say up 10 to 11 percent for the year, but if I read my
own charts correctly we'd be closer to 10 percent in the fourth
quarter. And on unemployment, consistent with our somewhat more
optimistic view on the economy, we would be in the range of 7 to 7-1/2
percent. On the tax cut, we have considered a tax cut in the second
half of the year in the range of $25 to $30 billion. I would agree
with Governor Coldwell that it ought to be carefully constructed to
stimulate capital formation and to look at the social security tax.
Other than that, I don't find our differences with the Board staff to
be that great. There are a lot of marginal things that just add up to
a somewhat more--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand you, your forecast has a
tax cut in it?

MR. SMOOT. Yes, we would anticipate one. I would also
subscribe to Mark's comments that differences of 1/2 or 1 percentage
point at this time really appear to be somewhat meaningless.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The staff's forecast
is a bit more pessimistic than our forecast, and that largely centers
on two differences. One is the saving rate, which the Board staff's
forecast suggests will increase over the coming year while we believe
it will be either flat or at least at a low level, thus giving
consumers the ability to maintain in part their standard of living
even in view of heavy inflation. Secondly, we believe defense
spending will be somewhat greater than the staff is forecasting for
the year 1980 coming into the third and fourth quarters; it may be $2
to $3 billion larger in each of those quarters than the staff has
projected, thus giving stimulus to the economy. As a result, we would
see the real GNP at about flat, zero to maybe one percent on the
positive side, with unemployment someplace between 7 and 7-1/2
percent. The CPI in our judgment, however, is going to continue at a
fairly rapid rate. Our judgment is that it will still be in the 11 to
12 percent range in the fourth quarter. As to the fiscal side,
obviously there will be much more expansion than the staff or the
Administration are forecasting. And as to a tax cut, I would agree
with whoever said it would be a tragedy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

-31-



2/4-5/80

MR. PARTEE. Well, I have been concerned about defense
spending as a question mark in the outlook. I must say that the chart
the staff has provided us, showing an alternative with $10 billion
more defense spending this year and $20 billion more in 1981 and in
1982 on top of the 6 percent real growth that's already in there for
nonpersonnel costs, strikes me as a good liberal estimate of the extra
defense spending that might occur or that is possible in the short
run. And I would point out to you that it doesn't change the numbers
all that much. I believe they did this with the model, so it includes
orders effects and that kind of thing--that is, effects that occur
before the actual defense spending. So, both that and the fact that
it seems to me to look a little less [tenuous] than it was a month ago
make me feel that it isn't such a big possible plus in the economy in
the immediate future as it might have been. Also, the saving rate is
just very difficult [to forecast]. New York has a continuation of a
very low saving rate throughout 1980 and one could argue that there
has been a permanent shift in the saving rate. I don't think so. I
think it's going to come back up. I agree with the staff on that.
There is no evidence of a permanent move from money to goods of the
kind that would be indicated by that. So, I come down to an
expectation that real GNP will fall some this year, though probably
less than the staff has [in its forecast]--maybe 1 to 2 percent. The
employment rate I am quite sure will rise significantly because I just
don't think it is possible that services and trade will continue to
add to the employment rolls without output, without a commensurate
value added, much longer. So a 7-1/2 percent fourth-quarter
unemployment rate is probably a reasonable forecast. I'd have
inflation a little higher than the staff has--at 9 to 10 percent, say,
for the deflator and 10 to 12 percent for the CPI in the year ahead.
As for fiscal policy, I think there will be a tax cut but probably not
until next year. That's not as early as the alternative staff
projection has it, which is the middle of this year. It probably will
occur in early 1981, sometime in the spring, and it will improve 1981
results a little from what the staff has projected. But I would point
out to you that I think an absolutely binding assumption on the
recovery of the economy is the monetary assumption which, of course,
we have the ability to control. Did I get everything on this [list]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. You wouldn't particularly push for a
tax cut earlier.

MR. PARTEE. No, I think we ought to wait. I think it will
be necessitated by a high and rising unemployment rate, and I figure
that will be obvious to everybody by early next year. So it's a next
year venture rather than this year. When it occurs I agree with the
comments that have been made that we ought to do what we can to make
it stimulative for business investment if we have any effect. But I
do have to tell you that I think the full push will be to make it a
consumer tax cut when it occurs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I would like to go back to the last chart
again, as Mark did. You notice those tolerance lines, the top and the
bottom, are fairly narrow over the next three quarters. So it seems
to me that we're looking basically at a fairly set outlook for the
next three quarters and possibly into the fourth quarter, and I don't

-32-



2/4-5/80

want to throw away what is one of our major advantages. The Humphrey-
Hawkins Act requires us to give our outlook for this year. We have a
fairly good idea where we're going this year and where we're going to
end up, and our views do not differ a great deal as I hear what has
been said around the [table]. It's plus or minus a little here or
there, and that certainly falls within the tolerance limits of what
the staff has projected. Secondly, the Humphrey-Hawkins Act says that
in the middle of the year we are to reassess what we are doing. To
lock ourselves into a policy at this point from now until 1981 is the
biggest mistake we could ever make. We have some idea where we are
going for the next two quarters or we can come pretty close to it. We
have a chance to reassess it in the middle of the year. And I
certainly don't want to vote for a policy at this time that is going
to result in T-bill rates of 11.7 or 12.2 percent in 1981. I wouldn't
quarrel a great deal with what the staff has projected. I would agree
within one percentage point on almost any figure they gave us, though
I'd probably expect a little higher unemployment rate than they're
projecting and a little higher inflation rate, again depending on what
happens primarily in defense. But if you look at the full employment
surplus in the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1981, it jumps
$30 billion. And it jumps another $20 billion between the first and
fourth quarters of next year. We don't have to make a decision on
[1981] at this point. We have two more major decision points between
now and the beginning of next year, and I think we should utilize them
to the fullest. [We need to] consider the fact that we may settle on
a 4-1/2, 5, or 5-1/2 percent rate of money growth and it's not going
to have a great deal of influence over the next nine months. However,
at midyear if we have unemployment rates of 7-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent, we
must be prepared to change our policy at that point. I don't want to
go down the line item by item because I don't have a great quarrel
with [the forecast], but I do urge that we not give up the
flexibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like first to turn to page
3 of this package of charts and ask a question to the staff and then
make a comment. On the calculation of the high employment budget you
show for 1980 and 1981, Jim: These are your calculations, I assume,
rather than the official figures set forth by the Administration?

MR. KICHLINE. They're our calculations but we use the same
procedure, which has been revised.

MR. BALLES. In other words, it's benchmarked at a 5.1
percent unemployment rate?

MR. KICHLINE. Correct.

MR. BALLES. All right, thank you. My comment is this:
Within the last couple of years our Research Department has done quite
a bit of work [on this subject]. In fact, we circulated a paper to
the rest of you, just to share this view, giving an alternative
noninflationary full employment rate, which we estimate to be
somewhere between the high 5 percent [to] low 6 percent area, maybe
centered on 6 percent. That's based on a lot of detail I won't go
into, but it [involves] all the factors going into the changes in the
composition and behavior of the labor force. I asked our staff to

-33-



2/4-5/80

make a computation of what the high employment surplus would be if one
assumed a 6 percent unemployment rate, and it produces some radically
different figures. For 1980 the high employment budget surplus, [as
calculated] officially by the Administration, is said to be $4
billion. But using the 6 percent unemployment rate figure, we come up
with a deficit of $20 billion. Furthermore, off-budget financing,
which as I understand it is not included in this high employment
budget surplus calculation, would add another $17 billion. So looking
at it in this alternative way, I can see the possibility of fiscal
stimulus to the tune of $37 billion even on a so-called high
employment basis, defined as 6 percent in this calendar year. And
that, by the same reasoning, translates into a surplus of $12 billion
in 1981. The reason I went through this exercise was to get a
different view, depending on one's assumptions, of whether we have
real fiscal stimulus or fiscal restraint or how fast we are moving
from one to the other. It nets out for this year, certainly in my
view, to a pretty sizable fiscal stimulus rather than the restraint
officially forecast. And I think that has a pretty broad bearing on
appropriate monetary policy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A part of the question, if I may just
interrupt, is whatever the level, how much does it change?

MR. PARTEE. You have an improvement, John?

MR. BALLES. Yes. In my calculation, it changes from a $37
billion stimulus on the high employment basis, which adds in off-
budget financing of $17 billion and assumes a 6 percent
noninflationary full employment rate in fiscal 1980, to a $12 billion
surplus in fiscal 1981. Now that is quite a movement. But it starts
late this calendar year and [continues] into 1981.

MR. SCHULTZ. What kind of assumption do you have on normal
GNP growth? To put those figures together, you need some assumption
on normal growth too. Is 2-1/2 percent what you used? That's what I
think the staff here is using as their assumption.

MR. BALLES. I'd have to turn to Mike [Keran]. Do you have a
figure readily at hand on what we assumed for normal growth of GNP? I
am not sure we assumed [something on] that.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you have to make some assumption to come
up with the calculations.

MR. BALLES. Well, it falls out of the 6 percent unemployment
assumption--a certain growth in the labor force, a certain growth in
productivity, and that kind of thing.

MR. PARTEE. But you have to have a normal growth that will
keep the unemployment rate at 6 percent. I don't know what Mike used,
but I am sure he has a figure.

MR. BALLES. He may have a figure; I don't have it readily at
hand. We'll get it for you later.

MR. KERAN. It would be the same, [2-1/2] percent.

MR. PARTEE. 2-1/2.

-34-



2/4-5/80

MR. BALLES. Turning to the other questions you raised, Mr.
Chairman: Our staff forecast for the economy for this year is quite
similar to the forecast of the Board's staff, showing a decline in
real GNP from the fourth quarter 1979 to the fourth quarter 1980 of
exactly the same amount, 2.1 percent. We have the CPI going up by
11.1 percent from the fourth quarter to the fourth quarter. Sir?

MR. SCHULTZ. That's fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter,
though; that's not [the rate] in the fourth quarter.

MR. BALLES. No, that's from fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter. Our figures show in the fourth quarter of this year a rate
of 9.7 percent. That is our staff view; I am not that optimistic.
That is where our two staffs differ: The Board's staff sees a
continued rise in the inflation rate through part of this year; our
staff has a more optimistic assumption that we're at or near the peak
right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The [Board's] staff shows a decline in the
consumer price index for this year.

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, down to 9.2 percent [in the fourth
quarter].

MR. BALLES. Right, but I was thinking of their trend line on
the GNP deflator, which is going up for a while. Our unemployment
rate by the fourth quarter of this year is almost the same as theirs;
ours is 7.6 and they're showing 7.7 percent. The difference in our
views is that our staff is more optimistic with respect to a fairly
strong bounceback in calendar year 1981, which I hope is right, up to
growth of 4 percent plus, whereas the Board's staff is looking for
1981 real growth of only 2.6 percent. I am giving the staff views of
our Bank. My own personal instincts are that we're probably going to
have more inflation and less decline in real output than the research
staff at our Bank expects. That's based on pure hunch or instincts as
to what is going on in the way of a semi-wartime economy here. And my
pessimism on the inflation rate--my view being worse than either staff
is forecasting--comes among other things from what has been going on
in long-term bond markets in this past month, which I find extremely
discouraging. People are putting their money where their mouth is
really in anticipation. To me that is a very dangerous signal of a
rejuvenation of inflationary expectations. And it is discouraging
especially in view of our demonstrated good track record since October
6th in getting a genuine, observable, real deceleration in the money
supply, which I had assumed would impact favorably on inflation
expectations and hence on long-term bond rates. Yet despite what we
have done, we have seen a move in the long-term bond yield, which I
view as a good index of inflation expectations, back up to a new high.
So I'm very concerned that we adopt a posture that is a strong signal
of continued deceleration of monetary growth because that is the only
tool we have to combat these recently renewed rising inflation
expectations.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're not advocating a tax cut?

MR. BALLES. No, sir. I support your view 100 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

-35-



2/4-5/80

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the Greenbook revision resulted in
a move from a V-shaped decline to a sort of saucer-shaped recession,
which is probably in the right direction. Despite this, I think the
underlying foundations of the economy are quite weak. What strength
we have had recently has come mainly from efforts on the part of
households and some others to beat inflation. Now, I am aware of the
argument that the rising wealth of households stemming from such
things as appreciation of the value of housing may produce a wealth
effect that will cause them to hold their expenditures at higher
levels. But I think that is really a pretty weak reed on which to
hang the forecast. Sooner or later, this artificial prop to spending
that stems from inflation is going to fall apart, and an inflationary
economy is not a healthy one. And if it does fall apart, then at that
time I would expect, if inflation is worse, that we would have a
greater decline because of the attrition of real income and the high
interest rates that would discourage business investment. Also, I
think we would have a clamor for wage and price controls. If, on the
other hand, inflation is showing signs of abatement, then the effects
of this decline are going to be diminished. So I think Chuck's
observation a while ago that a lot depends on what we do is a very
significant point. That will affect the outcome to a great degree.
And I think we're going to have a very difficult job in the months
ahead because, like John Balles, I feel we're going to have more
stimulus from the fiscal side than most people seem to be assuming.
But I do think we are dead serious about our stated intention to bring
down the rate of growth in the aggregates, and I think we'll stand
firm. But since I won't be voting next year, I have a little less
confidence in that than I otherwise would have.

MR. MAYO. You want to say that again?

MR. BLACK. To get down to the figures, I think the drop in
GNP might be nearer 3 percent than the 2 percent the staff has
projected. Since I expect us to do well in the policy area, I would
put the fourth-quarter rate in the consumer price index a bit lower,
at 9 percent. I would guess their unemployment rate is not very far
off; my guess would tend toward 8 percent. As I indicated, I think
the deficit is understated--the stimulative effects are understated--
and I certainly would not favor a tax cut at this juncture.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel.

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, our views are not significantly
different from those enunciated by the staff. To put numbers to them:
For real GNP, we're looking at a minus 2 percent; for the unemployment
rate, we're in the neighborhood of 8 percent; and for the CPI, 11
percent. We do feel, though, that the fiscal [package] may be
considerably easier than the staff is now reflecting. We certainly
would not support a tax cut unless it were directed toward capital
investment. We wonder if defense spending may not be somewhat larger,
particularly in the private sector anticipating [orders]. Finally,
Mr. Chairman, we are growing somewhat concerned--and our concern was
not lessened any by Mr. Sternlight's comments yesterday afternoon--
that the market increasingly is believing that we are not slowing
money growth to the extent it expected from our October decision.
[Given] that and our track record in this upcoming period of the year
when with tax refunds we've been somewhat less than successful in
anticipating what money growth would be--if indeed we miss that as

-36-



2/4-5/80

much this year and we do have excessive money growth--I have to
believe that inflationary expectations are going to be escalating
again and may contribute more trouble than we need. So, I hope that
we will be demonstrating pretty forcefully that we expect to restrain
[money] growth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said 11 percent on consumer prices.
Is that year over year or during the fourth quarter?

MR. KIMBREL. Fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have a fourth-quarter figure
itself, just for comparability purposes?

MR. KIMBREL. I guess 9 or 9-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, a question [to the staff] first.
Insofar as there may be a windfall profits tax, are you assuming that
the revenues raised thereby will be placed back into the economy or is
that pretty much outside the projections here?

MR. KICHLINE. No, it's included in the projections. The
windfall profits tax--technically I think the words associated with it
are "energy trust fund," but that's a misnomer if one believes that
the revenues are segregated--is included in the budget figures. For
1980 we have something like a net addition of nearly $5 billion to
revenues. It's something like $7-1/4 to $7-1/2 billion in revenues
and $2-1/2 billion in expenditures, so it's around $5 billion net
receipts. And for 1981 it's around $10 billion net receipts. So,
that is included in these figures.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Thank you. I don't have a view significantly
different from the staff. I think the degree of uncertainty in the
outlook is not unusual at this point in time; it's probably less now
than it was a couple of months ago. It seems to me that the cork is
out of the defense expenditure bottle now and that that will probably
go along about as fast as orders can be placed and procurement can be
stepped up. That leads me to think that insofar as we may deviate
from the staff projection it is likely to be in the direction of a
stronger economy, less progress on the inflation front, and probably a
little less build-up in unemployment. But for our purposes here, I am
perfectly satisfied to accept the staff projections. If I were to
shade away from them, it would be in the direction I have indicated.
In addition to the defense spending, I have a view similar to the New
York Bank's view that consumers are still in the process of adjusting
to inflation and that the saving rate is likely to stay very low until
they do see some improvement on the inflation side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I base my projections almost entirely on a rate of
basic money growth, and the figures I will suggest are predicated on a
rate of growth of M-1A and M-1B of roughly 5 percent. If there is a 5
percent basic money growth rate, I would see real GNP declining by
maybe 1 percentage point fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. I would
see the GNP deflator, which is what we look at really, at about a 10

-37-



2/4-5/80

percent rate during the fourth quarter of next year, or maybe 9-1/2
percent--obviously, these percentages can vary by 1/2 point--and I
would see an unemployment rate of roughly 7 percent. However, I feel
very strongly that what we do will have a very direct bearing on the
outcome of these figures, and if we were to set growth ranges for M-1A
and M-1B at 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and if growth came in at close to
3-1/2 percent, that would have a significant weakening effect on these
three figures that I suggested, as we see it. In other words, GNP
would be significantly lower and unemployment significantly higher.
And if growth came in close to the top end of that band, at let's say
6-1/2 percent, I think we'd see a much more serious acceleration in
the deflator, a significantly stronger GNP result, and a significantly
lower unemployment rate. What I am driving at is that I think we have
the key to this in our hands and that all three of these factors will
depend on what we decide to do and how carefully and with what
determination we stick with whatever we decide to do. I would
personally be very much opposed to a tax cut. I would perhaps be much
more tolerant of a tax cut that was an across-the-board, consumer-
directed tax cut if later in the year or next year the government
decided to give some tax relief directed to stimulating capital
formation. I think that might be desirable but I do not favor a tax
cut, not that it makes much difference in that regard what I think.
But in what we do, we can make a big difference on the money growth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I think it's great that we get these scenarios out
on the table. My only concern is that my camera may be in sync but it
may be out of focus. So the picture that comes out may be quite
distorted. But let's take several of these assumptions that we've
passed over. First, the level of interest rates. I must confess that
when we talk about double digit interest rates, I get nervous. But I
remember that last year I got lectured by any number of people that if
we passed the 10 percent rate, that was going to cut things off; and I
remember after October 6th how things just dried up completely. But I
think we forget that it's real interest rates that people probably
take into consideration. And I have been amazed at the amount of
money coming out of the woodwork in the last two weeks of January and
the number of deals that are being formulated with respect to
apartment houses, hotels, commercial buildings, and so forth. The
amount of money that is being committed in this area has stepped up
tremendously after this hiatus. I think we see it in the bond market,
John, in terms of their attitudes. Some of the current financing I
think is being done to repay short-term debt. There's an awful lot of
talk going on with respect to financing, but that's not going to come
into the investment picture until the last half of this year. And
that being laced on top of defense expenditures, should they come
along, makes a little different scenario for this year's
[performance].

One other thing: In terms of your employment figures, have
you put anything in there for a possible draft or increased military
employment?

MR. KICHLINE. No, we have not.

-38-



2/4-5/80

MR. WINN. If you do this, you get a different scenario.
Again, this doesn't occur over night but it is another factor that
seems to me is down the road.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was "this"?

MR. WINN. If you put a draft in the picture, then it changes
these employment figures.

MR. PARTEE. Probably in 1981.

MR. WINN. It's probably down the road; I don't say it is
immediate. But, again, as one [looks at] various scenarios with some
different inputs, there are different results, obviously. While
housing is down, I too am amazed at the amount of money that is even
showing up for housing at the moment. So, as I look at the level of
rates, I go back to looking at availability; and I get nervous as to
what [level of] interest rates it will take to have a damping effect
on some of these [sectors].

In my scenario, I come out with a dip in the first half of
this year because I think it's already under way. But I can see some
revival in the second half, so that I get a 1 percent decline for the
year but it's quite a different shape. The price [situation] really
scares me. Go back and look at 1973 and 1974; maybe we're going to
multiply that distortion created by prices. And if the world
situation changes, some of the pressure for relief could come next
year--I think it's already under way for this year--and carry through
for a while. But we may be [unintelligible] upswing continuing
through part of 1981 and then real price distortion problems hitting
us by the end of the year. I see price problems in the 15 percent
[CPI] rate; that is going to give rise to increased wage demands and
re-opening of contracts and all kinds of pressures and we don't know
how that is going to factor through to the balance of the year. And
that's not in your scenarios, in terms of the wage assumptions that
you put in. One gets different price results with some of these
different assumptions. So I am even more concerned about inflation
developments and what they mean not only for 1980 but perhaps for 1981
and thereafter. And that has implications for the international side
and a whole host of things, which change the [scenario]. I think the
pressure for a tax cut is going to come both with the election problem
and the first half year results. That will further complicate the
problem and I would be opposed to it. This would be in my scenario,
Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you have an unemployment rate or a
price [forecast]?

MR. WINN. I get an [average] unemployment rate from the
fourth quarter to the fourth quarter of maybe 7 percent, but I think
it will probably go higher before it comes down unless we get a draft
and some other things that would change my numbers. I don't know what
is going to happen, but you get a different picture if you change your
assumptions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're in the high uncertainty group?

MR. WINN. Very much so.

-39-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, we ought to be recorded as
generally supporting the Board staff's projection and its numbers.
However, unlike most of the others, if the forecast is in error, I
think it will be because the recession could be substantially more
severe than they are projecting. We had a miss in our forecast in the
last half of 1979 because consumer behavior was much stronger than we
were forecasting on the basis of income growth and so on. This has
led New York and Kansas City and perhaps some of the rest of you to
look upon a 3 percent saving rate as a norm for the future. I think
it is also possible that when the unemployment rate starts rising the
consumer will turn defensive and we will see the saving rate rise
higher than the Board staff has projected and a bigger recession will
result. Also, the housing sector could be weaker than the staff has
projected. We don't really yet have a good fix on how the current
housing rate structure is impacting demand. But the Board staff has
the weakest quarter at 1.4 million starts. It seems to me that we
could see at least one quarter substantially below that. So, I think
we have a risk of a much sharper recession in 1980 than the Board
staff is projecting. It's a risk, but I can't attach the
probabilities to it.

As far as defense spending is concerned, we've talked to the
major defense contractors in the Boston area like Raytheon and others,
and they say that for the kind of hardware the Defense Department is
talking about most of the money will be going into long lead time
items. And while we may get a big effect on expectations in 1980,
they don't see a big effect on employment until 1981, even if the
program were to get geared up fairly soon. So, it seems to me that we
could see a different pattern: a very sharp recession followed by a
tax cut, an increase in the defense budget, and a big jump in 1981.
That's another hypothesis that hasn't been stated around this table.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get every hypothesis on the table!
Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that the odds have clearly moved
in the direction of less recession and more inflation than they were
some time ago. I think the degree of uncertainty is very high because
the saving rate is abnormal and, therefore, potentially unstable. And
if we move to higher rates of inflation, people could react very
unpredictably. But the thing that most impresses me about the
behavior of people is that in the last surge of inflation, in 1974,
the saving rate went up--and it did so not only in this country but
all over the world--while this time people have reacted differently.
They pulled the saving rate down. That seems to be a message. They
seem to be saying: "We're no longer so scared of losing our job that
we're stopping our spending. We're now out to beat the game." And
that suggests to me that we may be in a new ball game unless the move
to higher inflation rates throws a new scare into people.

Well, I had anticipated a somewhat more severe recession than
the staff, but recent events have taken me off that. I could see a
small dip in 1980 of maybe 1 percent, but [my forecast has] a very
wide variance. I see inflation now at very high rates, with the
deflator at 12 percent for the year, that is year-to-year. And the
CPI could be close to 15 percent. These [increases mean that] real

-40-



2/4-5/80

interest rates are no longer positive. I know that some of us don't
believe that real interest rates mean very much. But we're only 19
people and there are 220 million out there who believe differently or
at least act as if they believe differently. So I share what Phil
Coldwell said on that score. I don't see quantitative monetary
restraint being in effect--that is, availability restraint. And I
don't think that these interest rates, particularly when one considers
them after taxes, really bite. So we have to consider now that we are
in a group of high inflation countries with Italy and the United
Kingdom. Then comes a tier of moderate inflation countries and then
come the low inflation countries. We've moved very far. That is why
I don't really expect a tax cut this year. I think these forces will
give people pause unless there is a significant deterioration in the
climate. Eventually, I think there will be a tax cut simply because
we are getting more fiscal drag than we can accommodate over time. I
certainly would oppose a tax cut, and I would lean toward firm
monetary restraint. I don't know [how] one can have that confidence
in the nominal aggregates that M-1A and M-1B convey. All we know is
that these [measures] are extremely uncertain. I don't think the new
definitions capture all that's going on, especially in the Euromarket.
We capture only a small part of that. So I believe money is really
expanding faster than we think, and I would want to take that into
account in thinking that we can have 15 percent inflation. On
unemployment, I have no difference with the staff; 7-1/2 percent by
the end of 1980 seems a possibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. First, to go back to the charts for just a minute:
I greeted with some astonishment the chart on unit [labor] cost
indicators where output per hour, having deteriorated badly from the
beginning of 1976 to the present or the last available quarter,
suddenly takes a new spurt of enthusiasm and becomes positive. And
your unit labor cost, of course, shows just the opposite trend. I
would like to believe this, but I am not sure what the staff has based
it on.

MR. ZEISEL. Basically it is associated with our assumptions
or conclusions about more rational behavior by employers in regard to
their staffing. The deterioration in productivity is the other side
of the coin of this tremendous increase in employment relative to the
lack of growth in output. We're anticipating that the pressures of
rising costs and the evident lack of strength in markets over the next
couple of quarters will persuade employers that they are overstaffed
and that, therefore, they will be laying off employees and trying to
bring their costs better into line, which will show up in a somewhat
improved productivity performance. But as you will note, we have
negative productivity throughout 1980. It just isn't as bad as it was
in 1979.

MR. MAYO. In effect, you're suggesting that whatever labor
hoarding has taken place to date really isn't going to continue. And
that's one of the reasons your unemployment rate is moving up as much
as it is. Is that correct?

MR. ZEISEL. That is true, yes.

-41-



2/4-5/80

MR. MAYO. My other question on the charts relates to defense
spending. Frank stole my headline on that by his mention of long lead
times on defense contracts. I find the assumptions both in the budget
and in your table on real defense spending unreal. I don't think it
is possible unless there is an awful lot of shelf items involved--more
than I can imagine--to add 6 percent to real defense spending in the
remaining six months of the fiscal year. And that's all there is left
in this fiscal year. We have a history over the last 30 or 40 years
of projecting increases in defense spending prematurely, and I think
this is happening again in the budget figures and in the staff
forecast. Instead of being up 7 percent and up 8 percent or whatever
is shown on this chart, I would say it's more likely to be up 2
percent and up 12 percent. So, that would affect the attitude toward
these figures in 1980. On the other hand, I would support the total
that you have in your staff forecast because I think it's more likely
to burst out on the nondefense side in light of other factors between
now and the beginning of the new fiscal year. Now, that doesn't mean
there isn't an attitudinal and expectational response. But I think it
stems mostly from the evaluation of the inflation and the real GNP
outlook a year ahead, rather than manifesting itself in defense
spending in the fiscal year of 1980.

Having said that, I won't repeat Mark's caveats, but in terms
of point estimates I really don't have much quarrel with the staff
forecast on real GNP. As for the probabilities, I would say the
probability is that there will be less growth--in other words a bigger
decline, net, than the [minus] two percent the staff has--maybe a
[minus] 3 percent for the year. I am not quite as pessimistic as
Henry, but I will take shelter under his umbrella on the price index.
I don't think there is more than one chance in ten that we can get
down to 10 percent on either the CPI or the fixed weighted deflator by
the fourth quarter of this year. The chances are very good--I hate to
use the word "good" that way--that it will still be above 10 percent.
On unemployment, despite my question on the labor hoarding problem,
the chances are unfortunately also very good that unemployment will be
above 8 percent because the inflation rate is so sticky and so built
into consumer expectations that I think this is the way it's going to
crank out. No tax cut, please.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, what I wanted to say was said
by Frank Morris. I have no reason to argue with the staff forecast
with respect to GNP, the unemployment rate, and the CPI. Given what
we know today, these projections seem to me to be the most probable
outcome. But, I suppose like everybody else, I do have some worries;
and one of them is the cumulative effect of the erosion of disposable
income on consumer expenditures. Consumers may well be prepared to
spend less than has been projected in the forecast. And, of course,
if that happens, there will be further consequences for the economy.
Now, this may well be offset by the buildup in defense expenditures
toward the end of the year. So there is some uncertainty. But I do
worry that the possible shortfall in consumer expenditures may well
make the recession more severe than is projected. I also worry about
the cumulative effects of a restrictive monetary policy. If we are
successful in damping inflationary expectations, the reaction may well
be stronger than we now see, and this may also operate to make the
recession more severe. But these are just vague worries; I have no

-42-



2/4-5/80

data to support them. And for the purpose of making suggestions as to
monetary policy, I am prepared to accept the staff's forecast. As for
a tax cut, I would be opposed to a tax cut at the present time.
However, depending on how things emerge in the future, a cancellation
of the anticipated social security [tax increase] package could well
be an appropriate measure. But that judgment would await future
developments.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, as everybody around here is aware, I have
had a high degree of uncertainty about what was going to happen. I
have a little less right now, so far as my feelings about the near
term are concerned. I see three areas of weakness. First, I think
the economy is a little weaker than the numbers will show in January
because the weather in January was so remarkably good all over, and I
think that had a considerable effect. I am seeing some areas of
restraint that are secondary kinds of reactions to the October 6th
[action]. In the area of consumer credit, more and more banks are
cutting back on the availability of consumer credit and are increasing
the price and other factors. We're also seeing that with [credit
extended by] retail establishments; Sears and Penneys and others have
recently made those kinds of announcements. So, I think we are seeing
some restraint that hasn't been there before and the pressure is
increasing in that area. I do not think that we have seen the low in
housing. I agree with Frank Morris that it's going to go lower; it
could go considerably lower. We saw that chart on the commitment
rate, and my understanding is that the situation may be even worse
than that chart looks. And that's bound to begin to spill over into
housing durables pretty quickly. It hasn't done that much yet. As
far as autos are concerned, I don't see anything that is going to
bring them back very fast. Things may have to get worse in that area,
partly as a result of the [tighter] consumer credit and partly because
gasoline prices are going to continue to go up. We see that there is
more conservation than we really thought. People are more concerned
about [gasoline prices], and I think it's going to have a big effect
on their purchases of automobiles. So, I don't look for any strength
there in the near term.

On the other hand, longer term I see some areas of strength
that may be stronger than the staff assumptions. I disagree with Bob
Mayo on the defense side. The reason I do is that we're looking at
all of the news reports that say this involves sophisticated weapons
and there's a very long lead time. We are not looking at the
operations and maintenance side. My understanding is--I have just
seen some recent figures--that the Pentagon is estimating that for
ammunition alone they need more than $20 billion. Now, ammunition is
something that can be produced pretty quickly. So I think we may see
some faster impact on the defense side. The other area is the tax
side. It is an election year. I do not favor a tax cut this year; I
would, I think, next year. But we may get it this year. If you look
at the staff's chart "fiscal alternative-tax cut" and see what a
politician would see--that with a cut in payroll taxes he can have the
best of both worlds, better growth in GNP and lower inflation, which
is what that chart shows--that's very attractive to a politician. And
I just think that we may get enough weakness in this first half to
make a tax cut much more likely this summer. So, my figures are a
little stronger than the staff's: GNP down 1 to 2 percent;

-43-



2/4-5/80

unemployment 7 to 7-1/2 percent; and the CPI in the fourth quarter a
little worse than the staff's, at 10 to 11 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have missed one personal objective
of speeding up the coffee hour appreciably. But since we're short of
11 a.m., let me make a couple of observations. I do have the feeling
in listening to some of the different economic forecasts and comments
that our staff, which is sometimes accused of being Keynesian, feels
more constrained by the money supply assumptions than more monetarist-
oriented people. And that accounts for some of the differences in
view. Assuming that we're all intelligent people around the table,
[given the] differences in outlook that have been recited, I don't see
how anyone can come to any opinion other than that there is a great
deal of uncertainty in this forecasting business.

In terms of what we have accomplished or have not
accomplished in monetary policy in recent months, particularly as
reflected in expectations as best one can judge them, we have to
conclude that we've been [set] back very substantially and have
suffered a grievous blow from everything that has been going on
internationally--whether you're talking about oil prices, or Iran, or
Afghanistan and concern about defense spending. There's nothing much
we can do about that, but I think in some sense we're back to square
one or worse in terms of the public's concern about inflation. So I
tend to agree with those who see a risk of an inflationary breakout,
in modified terms, on the up side as a real danger. I also agree with
Emmett Rice and a couple of others who said that we could get a longer
reaction in the economy on the down side if that happened. I don't
know what we can do about that. We can't deal with both situations at
the same time. In fact, I don't think we can deal with the risk of a
downturn and ignore the inflationary side, because they're part of the
same parcel in some sense.

I feel rather strongly that it would be a great mistake to
put much money on any particular forecast at this point. I come back
to what Mark Willes said at the beginning, and I think the saving rate
question is a perfect illustration. I can hear persuasive arguments
around this table as to why it is going to go up and I can hear
persuasive arguments as to why it is going to stay down; and I don't
know of any criteria by which I can choose between those two choices
at the moment. In a direct statistical sense that will be the most
important influence on the economic outlook in the near term. There
are a couple of other things that might be mentioned that haven't been
touched upon. We have some uncertainty about tax refunds in the near
term, with some expectation that they may be very high relative to
past experience--I am talking about [the time period] between now and
April or beyond--and what that will do to the near-term timing of
consumer spending. What it will do to the near-term timing of the
kind of forecast the staff has I think is an unknown. If one assumes
some lag in defense spending but also assumes that the option of high
defense spending is going to come along [later], we could get a
pattern of big refunds for a while, in a sense artificially holding
things up, followed by a defense impetus coming late in the year and
taking over after the refunds subside. It only adds to my feeling of
caution about any forecast.

So far as the bond market and the banking system and the
availability of credit are concerned, I'd just make two observations.

-44-



2/4-5/80

I think the bond market people, who from the way they are behaving
apparently are quite discouraged about the inflationary outlook, have
concluded that money is freely available. I see one side of it. But
also, in talking to some bankers, I think there is something to what
Fred Schultz just said about a cumulative impact of restriction.
That's beginning to be felt by some bankers, who have talked to me,
anyway, not only in consumer lending but in mortgage lending and in
small business lending and other types of lending. I think it is true
that the last ones to feel that are probably the big companies that
have access to the bond market and to the banks, too. I don't think
the picture is all one way. There has been great confusion about--I
guess it was John Balles who said it--whether the money supply is
genuinely [or only] statistically under control. I think it is
statistically under control. I am not sure the market thinks it is
genuinely under control. And it comes down in part to some confusion
over our own operations. I meant to mention earlier--and I don't know
whether the presidents have seen it--that we put out an elaborate
technical explanation of what we're doing, which Mr. Axilrod authored.
It has gotten no attention in the press thus far, but it was an
attempt in considerable part to meet the questions that have been
arising about why reserves are going up 10 percent or 12 percent or 8
percent, depending upon which number you're looking at, while the
money supply is going up 3 or 4 percent. I don't know whether we will
convince anybody as that seeps into consciousness. But there has been
great confusion engendered by the differences in growth rates among
all these measures, including right now the various reserve measures
going off in widely different directions. I will leave you with that.

Let's have the coffee break and when we return get back on
these long-term and short-term targets.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can start. Let me make a
couple of preliminary remarks and just devote our attention to the
long-term ranges at this point. One preliminary remark is that,
whatever we do, I am afraid that we inevitably are going to have quite
a lot of confusion with the changes in definitions [of the monetary
aggregates] coming at the same time as [the setting of our] targets.
We are going to have a press briefing, not to give the targets, but to
explain the changes in definitions and the changes in patterns. We
have had to add to all our other complications the usual annual
revision in seasonal patterns. We can now go forward and talk about
the new numbers but we are talking about them against the background
of an increase of almost 5 percent in January, if we can switch our
minds now from 1-3/4 percent or whatever was projected before on the
basis of the old numbers. The new M-1A and M-1B are growing at
something like 4-3/4 percent in January, as I recall, which is pretty
much on the target that we set for ourselves by the grace of a
revision in seasonal adjustments. If policy fails, we can always
revise the seasonal adjustment factors for a while! [Laughter]

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, we may have to consider it; it may be
more important than lagged reserve accounting!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do think this is going to be troublesome
to explain, but we inevitably have to do it. Another complication,
which we don't have to face right now, but it is inherent in this

-45-



2/4-5/80

situation, is that basically the reason we have both M-1A and M-1B is
to allow for growth in NOW accounts, and that [dichotomy] is a
transitional device. The staff's judgment is that growth in M-1A and
M-1B will not be any different this year if the law legalizing NOW
accounts doesn't pass. But the high probability is that that law will
pass, presumably sometime during the spring, and that we will have to
re-estimate M-1A and M-1B to allow for that; I presume we would want
to make a technical adjustment in the targets. I don't think we have
to worry about that now--maybe we can wait until midyear for our
regular revision anyway--but I just warn you that sometime during the
spring, I suspect, if the law does pass, we think there will be a
significant difference between M-1A and M-1B and that some suitable
changes will have to made, if nothing else, consistent with what we
decide today.

On the substance of the matter, if it is true that we face a
wide disparity of views in what the outlook might bring and a high
degree of uncertainty, I suspect we are on an approach--whatever other
merits or demerits there may be--that will provide us with some fail-
safe protection. [By that I mean] that if the economy really goes
down hill, almost any figure within the range of what we have been
talking about should produce an easing in the outward externalities of
policy, but if the fears of a stronger economy and an inflationary
surge appear, the opposite ought to happen. And I presume that in a
very crude way, anyway, either of those results would be appropriate.
When we discussed this the last time, there was a consensus--and maybe
for a variety of reasons it was not quite unanimous--or a strongly
predominant view to maintain a 3 percentage point range, and all these
alternatives are couched that way. The ranges in the Bluebook fully
encompass all that people were talking about last time, I think. The
differences in the ranges are not very wide, as you know, and nobody
is bound by what he or she said last time. To orient you a bit: It
was not true for everybody but the predominance of views fell between
the alternative II and alternative III choices shown here; and there
was actually some plurality if not a majority for alternative III.
But people were talking in a preliminary way and rather loosely. My
own feeling is that we probably [should] end up in that area, and I
don't have enormous feelings that a difference of 1/2 percentage point
is of great significance. When we are in that area, the strength of
my views is not pronounced among [those alternatives]. But judging
from the discussion last time, we are predominantly in that area. So
with that introduction, who would like to be more precise in stating
their views about where we should be for the annual range in 1980?
Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, my feeling hasn't changed a lot
since our last meeting. It is true that the economic outlook has
changed somewhat from what most of us expected. In particular, the
government's demand on resources appears likely to be much greater
than we earlier thought. But far from providing the reason for
relaxing or delaying this long-run task of ours of lowering the rate
of growth in the aggregates, the inflationary dangers posed by this
fiscal stimulus suggest to me that the System needs to stick all the
more firmly to the goal that it has often stated in the past. The
midpoints of alternative II look good to me. I was one of those who
preferred the narrower ranges last time. I would much prefer a 1
percentage point range for M-1A and M-1B and a 2-point range for the
other aggregates, M2 and M3, because of their interest volatility.

-46-



2/4-5/80

Now, one can certainly argue that we need more flexibility since we
may be moving into a recession and we may be moving into more
inflation. I recognize the validity of that argument, but it seems to
me that the narrower range would do a lot to enhance our credibility.
Therefore, it would enhance a great deal the beneficial expectational
effects that I think we'll get if we do in fact announce lower targets
than what we have achieved in the past. I would be rather unhappy if
M-1A and M-1B, which are the two aggregates I consider most important,
came out at the top of their alternative II ranges. So, my figures
would translate to 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for M-1A, with a midpoint of
5 percent, the same as in alternative II. My other ranges would be:
M-lB, 5 to 6, with a midpoint of 5-1/2; M2, 6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with a
midpoint of 7-1/2; M3, 7 to 9 with a midpoint of 8; and bank credit,
6-1/2 to 8-1/2 with a midpoint of 7-1/2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word. You reminded me
about M2, M3, and bank credit. First of all, I'd just note that if
people feel strongly about the weight to be put on those numbers, they
ought to say so. Secondly, in the normal course of events, given the
way we are operating they may get a little less weight than they have
in the past because we won't have those figures as up to date. So far
as I am concerned, I take on faith the staff analyses of the
consistency of the particular ranges they put down for those numbers
as compared to Ml. I don't know of any strong reason why they should
be different from what the staff put down, but I have a little
residual suspicion that those are indeed more volatile numbers than
the M1 numbers because quite a lot does depend upon the evolution of
interest rates, and I don't know in which direction they will go.

MR. BLACK. Well, I have said most of what I felt along that
line. I would emphasize M-1B because it catches the transaction
balances better; M-1A has lost a lot of the transaction balances.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, Mr. Chairman, last time I indicated some
preliminary specifications that would have been consistent with
alternative II. I want to argue this morning for alternative I.
That's a difficult thing to do and I have always found myself
unsuccessful in such arguments in the past. But let me try it once
more. The staff projection for nominal GNP, fourth quarter-to-fourth
quarter, is for a 7 percent increase. The direction of thinking as we
went around the table was to convert that to a somewhat higher nominal
GNP increase because almost everyone thought inflation would be a bit
higher than the staff has projected, and quite a few people thought
that the decline might be a bit shallower than the staff has
projected. So I would say that the Committee view, as opposed to the
staff view, is that nominal GNP will increase at least 8 percent. And
I believe the Administration, Jim, has a 9 percent increase in nominal
GNP fourth quarter-to-fourth quarter. In drawing these long-term
ranges, the relationship between money growth and the nominal GNP is
of central importance because it really indicates the amount of
tension there's likely to be in markets as the year goes on. And even
7 percent [for nominal GNP growth] with a 5 percent midpoint on M-1A
and 5-1/2 percent on M-1B, which is alternative II, does imply an
increase in velocity of a couple of points. If, in fact, we think
nominal GNP [growth] is going to be a little higher than that--let's
say 8 percent instead of 7 percent--it seems to me that as a matter of

-47-



2/4-5/80

practicality and credibility in achieving the targets we set, we ought
to recognize that a bit in the specifications we pick. Going from
alternative II, which had been my former choice, to alternative I adds
1/2 point to the midpoint. It makes the midpoint for M-1A 5-1/2
percent and that for M-1B 6 percent, compared with, say, an 8 percent
nominal GNP, and I think it does suggest a very considerable tension
on markets throughout the year. And it's [a target] that we might be
able to achieve.

I would point out one more thing: Every private forecast
that I have looked at, and I just reviewed them yesterday, suggests a
federal funds rate at the end of this year of 10 percent or below.
The only exception might be Salomon Brothers, but they don't specify
the funds rate in their projection. We are suggesting something
around 13 percent. The difference, I think, is in the implied
increase in money in the private projections, which is stronger than
we have. Now, if we go through a recession and hold the interest rate
up throughout the recession--hold it pretty close to where it is now--
start a recovery, say, a year hence or thereabouts with a rising trend
of rates and high unemployment, we will have done really quite a lot
to restrain the economy [through] monetary policy compared with any
past cycle that I can recall. And I think that also argues for being
just a bit more liberal so that we'll have something we can achieve.
I understand fully what Bob says about narrowing the ranges, and I do
agree that there is quite a difference between, say, 4 percent and 7
percent in M-1A, [which are the limits] in alternative I. But in the
interest of again being able to achieve growth this year within the
ranges we specify, which we managed to do for the first time in our
history in 1979, I think we need to hold the width of 3 points that we
have had but try to [achieve] the midpoint of the range. So, I would
come out with alternative I for the reasons that I have explained, and
I would stay with the 3-point range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I agree with those who have argued, starting
with Governor Teeters and others, that in view of all the economic
uncertainty, we do need a lot of flexibility as the year unfolds. And
for reasons that Chuck has just reviewed, I would support the idea of
having a 3-point range. As I often do when we get to this time of the
year, I like to speak to the two faces of the ranges that we are
discussing here. The one face is the public reaction or the
announcement effects, for what they are worth. They may not be worth
a lot, but I can't believe they have no effects at all. I admit, as
Ted Truman pointed out to us yesterday, that the public pays more
attention to what we do than to what we say we are going to do. But
reverting to my earlier deep concern about an apparent re-escalation
of inflationary expectations over the last month--[manifested] in
various ways, especially in the rise of long-term bond yields to new
highs, as I pointed out--I think there is a lot to be said for picking
ranges just in terms of public announcement effects that are both
broad, because as I have already indicated we need the flexibility in
view of the economic uncertainty that lies ahead, and that would tend
to ensure that we do in fact get continued deceleration in monetary
growth. Our record since October has, in fact, been very good on
that. But I am afraid that there's some skepticism among market
participants and others that we may not persist. One way of putting
that skepticism to bed, or at least helping to diminish it, would be

-48-



2/4-5/80

to have upper limits on our ranges which even if hit would still
involve slightly less monetary growth in 1980 than in 1979. For that
reason, I would support alternative II with respect to both M-1A and
M-1B because even if we hit the upper end of 6-1/2 percent in the case
of M-1A, that would be less than the 6.8 percent growth of last year.
And even if we hit the upper end of the alternative II range of 4 to 7
percent for M-1B, growth would be less than the 8 percent growth we
had last year. And for the same reasons, I would choose the
alternative III ranges for M2 and M3. The upper end of the
alternative III range for M2 is 8-1/2 percent, below last year's 8.8
percent actual. In the case of M3, the alternative III range of 6 to
9 percent is below the 9-1/2 percent actual we had last year. So if
there is any sense at all in what I am saying about the public
perception of the maximum [rates of growth] we specify, assuming that
under our new operating procedures we didn't exceed the upper limits
of the ranges, those upper limits would involve at least a 1/2 point
decline from the actual rates of monetary growth in 1979. As for
whether we should target all four of these, Mr. Chairman, I have grave
doubts. I think M-1A is still so influenced--or perhaps contaminated,
to use a word my research staff is fond of using--by past and ongoing
institutional changes that I personally would be prepared to drop it
right now and put our faith in M-1B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's much difference
between M-1A and M-1B, barring this legislative change; the difference
is a small number.

MR. ROOS. I found more to the change [unintelligible]. I
think there was some confusion last time. Wouldn't M-1B--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They both will. The problem is that if we
get the law change, M-1B will rise both because it's taking [funds]
out of M-1A and out of M2.

MR. AXILROD. Only because it's taking funds out of M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it will only rise because it's taking
funds out of M2. M-1A will go down. [M-1B] will rise because it's
taking out of M2; and M-1A will decline because [funds will be taken]
out of that aggregate.

MR. BALLES. Well, in short, I would like to make a pitch for
targeting M-1B and M2 as opposed to targeting M-1A and M-1B, [as
suggested] in the draft directive language. Our own experience in the
past has led us to place somewhat more confidence, in terms of the old
definitions, in M2 as a predictor of inflation and real GNP. Of
course, it remains to be seen whether that is going to hold for the
new M2. But based on some of the statistical tests that we've done,
M-1A is certainly the least reliable predictor of real GNP of the four
aggregates mentioned. The differences are quite significant, and
that's why I am somewhat disillusioned about M-1A. We've tested it
retrospectively and view it as a considerably poor forecaster of
future real GNP. That is the main reason I would like to drop it.
Those are my recommendations, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

-49-



2/4-5/80

MR. WALLICH. I think we face more inflation and less
recession than would have been [the case] before recent changes in the
economy. Now the question is: How does one finance a higher nominal
GNP with a given amount of money supply? In Chuck's calculation you
have to look at the nominal GNP and ask how it can be financed from
the rise in money, and a rise in velocity is very logical. Moreover,
one can't say nowadays that we would get some rise in velocity out of
rising interest rates because presumably we wouldn't. So we're
dependent, really, on the amount of money growth in the effective
money supply--that is, the amount of money growth plus the regular
growth in velocity at a constant interest rate. And I think the staff
puts the drift in the demand function at about 2 percent.

Since we've opened up the question of the aggregates, I would
like to express some doubt not only about M-1A, on which I share what
others have said, but M-1B. In general I think we are not yet
including everything that acts like money, and we probably never will.
Money market accounts and mutual funds are not in M-l, although I
would suspect that they have a very strong effect on people's holdings
of demand balances. That is, they aren't used for transactions--their
velocity is low--but they are very good substitutes for a cash
balance. I hear that brokerage firms are now setting up, in effect,
zero balance overdraft facilities. If that takes over, one needs no
cash balance at all any more; one can just finance one's current needs
against one's stock holdings. There are Eurodollars, of which we
[include] what seems to be a small part in the aggregates. I don't
think we capture even all the Eurodollars owned by U.S. residents
because we don't know their total and we certainly don't include any
part of Eurodollars owned by nonresidents, even though one would think
some of those dollars are going to be used in the United States, not
for purchases of goods and services but for purchases of assets, which
influence our interest rates and so on. So, I think the monetary
aggregate [targets] are really symbols of restraint--orders of
magnitude, but not to be taken at face value. If we did take them at
face value, I'd say look at M2 and you will find that under
alternative I [the staff] projects [growth at] 9-1/2 percent, the
upper limit. That's more than [the projected] nominal GNP increase
for 1980, which I believe is about 8 percent, so we'd be over-
financing in those terms. This does not allow for any drift in the
money function.

MR. PARTEE. There's no drift on M2.

MR. WALLICH. There may be no drift in M2, but that depends
on how one believes these extraordinary items, Eurodollars and so
forth, impinge. Well, that leads me to alternative III. I think we
do need wide ranges because it's simply impossible to target several
aggregates and make them consistent using anything like a single
number. I would place a great deal of weight on M2 for the reasons I
have given. I think [alternative III] is consistent with financing [a
nominal] GNP increase of about 8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just couldn't
disagree more with some of the comments I have heard and I agree
entirely with some others. Chuck and I have this running discussion
about how we finance nominal GNP. He has his view. My view is that

-50-



2/4-5/80

if you try to do [it his way], you just chase your tail. If in fact
there is a relationship between money and inflation, by persistently
trying to finance nominal GNP we end up generating more inflation--
even at an accelerating rate--which therefore we have to finance and
so on. So I would hope we would not take that [route].

MR. PARTEE. Oh, I don't disagree with that. It's a question
of whether one thinks this [degree] of weakness in the economy is
reasonable.

MR. WILLES. That's right. Now, what I find most puzzling--
and I will copy one of Fred Schultz's lines, which I always thought
was mine, and that is that I have a very simple mind--

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, some of us will agree with that!

MR. WILLES. I would think, if we agree that the outlook is
very uncertain, that rather than arguing for more flexibility we would
argue for less. That's because if the time pattern of the economy is
very unpredictable, then there's no way we can respond to change it in
a predictable way and, therefore, we ought not to be responding. We
ought to respond less rather than more, the greater the uncertainty
about the outlook. As a consequence, unlike Nancy's and John's
earlier suggestion that we do all we can to preserve our flexibility,
I would say just the opposite. I think we ought to pick a path that
we want to follow for the long term and stick to that path as long as
we can unless we receive major information that suggests we're way out
of [line] for one reason or another. Of course, rational expectations
would say that even if we got such information, it's not clear we
could do anything about it and, therefore, we ought not to respond.
Having said all that, obviously, I would much prefer the
specifications of alternative III. That looks like a very large drop
for M-1B from [growth of] 8 percent in 1979 to [a range with an upper
limit of] 6-1/2 percent in 1980. But the Bluebook says on the
previous page that for the last six months M-1B growth has only been
6.1 percent, so the drop isn't as big as it might appear from the
[table] on page 6. So, I would go with alternative III. I must say I
am in the group that thinks the range is too wide. I would be
concerned if money [growth] dropped, assuming we are measuring
anything corresponding to money, down to 3 percent. On the other
hand, I would certainly hate to see it above 6 percent. So, I'd
prefer a narrower range but would not want growth to go above 6
percent on M-1A or 6-1/2 percent on M-1B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a [trickiness] of these figures.
I think it's fair to say that M-1A was artificially high last year
because we did get some transition [flows] into NOW and ATS accounts,
part of which came out of M2. Mr. Kimbrell.

MR. KIMBREL. Mr. Chairman, one specific thing I would like
to see is that the 1980 targets be related to the 1979 targets and not
the 1979 results. We are all [talking about] the uncertainties. Of
course, there does not seem to be much uncertainty about [the risks of
a] recession and all of us are accepting that there are going to be
inflationary tendencies and expectations. And I feel that our actions
should attempt not to provide any unnecessary opportunities for strong
money growth. I would hope that we indeed will begin to lower these
monetary goals gradually. For that reason I also accept the thesis of

-51-



2/4-5/80

narrower ranges, not more than 2 percentage points, and frankly with a
strong determination to achieve them and control [money growth]. So I
would [narrow] the alternative III ranges and I end up with 3-1/2 to
5-1/2 percent on M-1A, 4 to 6 percent on M-1B, and 6 to 8 percent for
M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.

MR. SMOOT. Governor Partee argued for alternative I, based
on the higher anticipated nominal GNP. Looking at my own staff's
projections, our nominal GNP figures would be somewhat higher than the
Board's. But they also encompass a money supply growth rate in the
4-1/2 to 5 percent range. Depending on which one of those I pick, I
am indifferent between alternative II and alternative III, which I
think is where you were, Chairman Volcker. If I had to choose, I
would choose alternative II based on the observation, which is made
quite clearly in the Bluebook, that all of these alternatives suggest
a lower rate of growth in money than occurred last year. And if we
pay any attention to the long-term trend in money growth, then we are
coming down from a higher trend level. I must say that I have faith,
as you do, that the staff's ranges are consistent; at least the
numbers for M-1B, M2, etc., appear to be consistent, and I wouldn't
quibble with those. So, based on that, we would be agreeable to
alternative II.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Mayo.

MR. MAYO. Mr. Chairman, unlike the humility of Mr. Schultz
and Mr. Willes about being somewhat simple-minded, I must be humble in
saying that my mind finds things very complicated. I have tried hard
to move toward being simple-minded on some of these things. We have
different approaches to some of these problems. However, I find that
the factors are so complicated and have such a margin of error that I
must stick to the 3-point range. Some people might accuse the Fed of
being a bit cowardly because the range is so wide. But the factors
that we are dealing with are indeed so complicated that we must allow
ourselves this flexibility. I feel, if anything, even more strongly
than John Balles put it that we are [making this] unduly complicated.
Again, I am striving toward being a little simpler. We are making it
hard, and even harder for you, Mr. Chairman, when you try to explain
to your audience on Thursday why we have decided to use both M-1A and
M-1B when both of them will need adjustment when we get NOW accounts.
And I agree we will get them nationwide. I think we'd look a lot more
sensible to forget M-1A--as I said last time and I'll say it again
this time--and call it Ml, show some change, and not give the
impression by stressing M-1A that the lion has labored and has
produced a mouse. There's too little change from the old M1 in what
we are proposing, and I would rather see us stick with M-1B and give
the explanation of the adjustment in NOW accounts in a simple-minded
fashion rather than try to adjust both M-1A and M-1B to NOW accounts
when they come. This is the way in which my attempt to be simple-
minded would direct us. I'd prefer alternative II with the 3-point
range. I'd obviously prefer to concentrate just on M-1B and call it
M1, [with a range of] 4 to 7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

-52-



2/4-5/80

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chuck Partee has moved
from one recommendation to another from last month to this month and
I will also, but going the other way. Last month we were looking at a
somewhat weaker economy and it seemed that perhaps the inflation rate
would fall off a bit through 1980. Also, the deceleration from what
actually happened in 1979 to what I would like to consider our target
--the midpoint [of any of] the ranges [we select]--from about 7
percent [growth] to 5 percent for M-1A, for example, seemed fairly
fast. And that is the reason last month that I would have opted for
what now appears to be alternative I. But things have changed, at
least to my mind. We're now looking at a bit stronger economy through
1980, as I tried to outline earlier today. Secondly, and more
importantly, inflation quite likely will stay at the present level or
even accelerate as we get into the latter part of next year. As a
result, what we do on the monetary side seems extremely important.
That leads me to say that I would go to alternative II, which has a
midpoint--what I [consider] the target--of 5 percent. Whatever we've
said about ranges, they are unimportant to me except in how the public
perceives them. I would hope whatever targets this Committee sets,
whether on the long run or the short run, that the Desk at least in
its month-to-month or day-to-day operations will look at the
midpoints. So, I am looking at 5 percent for M-1A or 5-1/2 percent
for M-1B. And I share Bob Mayo's view on going to M1 and doing away
with M-1A and M-1B. I think they will confuse more than we will be
able to explain.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen.

MR. TIMLEN. Mr. Chairman, I consider myself neither simple-
minded nor complicated-minded, but just poorly educated for this
forum. Having said that, I would have some preference on the
technical side for the wider 3-point range shown. In terms of the
aggregates to focus on, my preferences would be M-1A and M2. We have
commented around the table about growth in bank credit and I do think
the Desk should be asked to keep an eye on that number, which has
looked so high the past year. My position is no different than it was
last month. I look forward to having the yearly goals show a gradual
reduction in the aggregates. I am most impressed by the comments
Peter Sternlight made yesterday about inflationary expectations in the
market. I think there will be a great focus on these goals as you
announce them later this month; people will be looking for an
indication of the posture of the Federal Reserve at this particular
point in time. I might say, too, that as they look at our long-term
goals, they will [do so with] the immediate impression of economic
developments at the start of the year. January, I believe, will look
strong. It may have an impact on the entire first quarter; people may
not discount it, as Fred Schultz has suggested, as being all due to
good weather. So, my preference is alternative III as stated in the
Bluebook. And I would pick up the thought that Nancy Teeters noted
earlier: That we will have opportunities to change the ranges at
midyear in the event that some of the gloomy prospects do actually
come to fruition. But I don't share the gloomy prospects personally.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Coldwell.

MR. COLDWELL. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we have been
talking here about a series of figures which, quite frankly, I don't
completely understand and in which I have a great lack of confidence.

-53-



2/4-5/80

The redefinitions seem to have added about 2 percentage points to
these past figures. We are questioning the function; we are
questioning the seasonals. I think the expectations have shifted on
us. And if we are talking about supporting nominal GNP growth, I
would observe that we had a 6.8 percent growth in M-1A last year and,
if I read the correct line on this table, it supported an 11.3 percent
increase in nominal GNP.

MR. PARTEE. With a 300 to 400 basis point increase in
interest rates.

MR. COLDWELL. Yes, that's quite correct. In the coming year
it looks to me as if we're talking about a GNP increase anywhere in
the 8 to 10 percent range and maybe up to as high as 11 percent--that
encompasses most of the forecasts I heard this morning--and making
some progress in reducing the stimulation that both monetary and
fiscal policy have added these past few years. I have to come out in
favor of a much tighter monetary policy. And I would pick up on some
people's comments in that I would hate to see another 6 percent
increase in the monetary growth. So, I would put the target at 3 to 5
percent, centered on 4 percent with a 2-point spread.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's [alternative] III plus.

MR. BLACK. Is that for M-1A, Phil?

MR. COLDWELL. M-lA.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I am looking at where we want to be at
the end of the year. I can't conceive of our ending up at 11 percent
bill rates and a 7 to 8 percent unemployment rate. I would [be
inclined toward] an M1 target of 5 percent, but that implies 11
percent on the T-bill and that's only a drop of one percentage point
in that rate. So, I come out somewhere between alternatives I and II.
I also think that our primary problem this year is going to be keeping
above the minimum rather than going over the top of the monetary
growth [ranges]. So, I would prefer alternative I but I could settle
for alternative II.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're out of names.

MR. WINN. Paul, we have talked about the kind of minds we
have. I think we can all claim to have confused minds. And it's
clear that that's going to be the problem you face in your
presentation. I would urge that we be sure to have the contrast
between last year's targets and this year's targets on a similar basis
so that people can understand whether the policy formulation is an
increase or decrease or remains the same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I happen to agree with that. I am
confused. Were we going to present the comparable figures on the old
basis? Was that your intention, Mr. Axilrod, if I may interrupt?

MR. AXILROD. We hadn't intended to but we can.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I missed that in the Bluebook.

-54-



2/4-5/80

MR. AXILROD. We presented them in an appendix in the
Bluebook, giving the comparable figures to alternative II. That will
be a decision for someone to [make]. That does run the risk of adding
to the confusion, I might add.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand. I think you have to leave
that to us, but I personally have some sympathy for doing it this
particular time and then maybe forgetting about it.

MR. WINN. Those would be the figures on the same basis? We
won't present last year's on last year's basis and this year's on this
year's basis--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think we will do is present last
year on last year's basis and on this year's basis. The question is
whether to present this year's target on this year's basis and on last
year's basis, [showing] what the equivalent target is.

MR. WINN. It seems to me that we have to get this into
perspective.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no difference for M-1A.

MR. PARTEE. It sounds complicated, but it's just two
columns.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. There's no difference
for M-1A. That's the same as the old Ml, as I recall, for the year as
a whole.

MR. WINN. I have a tendency to want to eliminate the
confusion [caused] by too many numbers. We only add to the confusion.
So, I would be inclined to use M-1B at the moment as being the most
meaningful, although I share Henry's feeling that it's not a very good
measure still in terms of--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I could just interject a comment: I
understand the longing for simplicity, but I am afraid the reality is
complicated. And M-1B is the figure that is going to be most thrown
off by the uncertainty about NOW accounts. It is just a fact of life.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, just as a response to that: I
assume from the Bluebook, Steve, that these different alternatives
were set forth on the assumption that we would not get nationwide NOW
accounts.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, at this point.

MR. BALLES. If we do get them, we'll obviously have to go
back to the drawing board.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd have to make an estimate, and
the estimate that is likely to be most different is for M-1B.

MS. TEETERS. I think you should emphasize in the press
briefing that we are quite possibly going to have to change the
specifications.

-55-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we'd have to change the targets, not
the definitions. You see, the danger is that we could get a big
transfer from savings accounts into M-1B, and that's going to make
that figure look very peculiar. And we won't know it in advance.

MR. WINN. I think the admonition that we are not casting
these in concrete forever is a very important one at this stage. We
have a chance to look at these again based on [unintelligible]. The
inflation problem still dominates the public's attitude both toward
our policy and what we are trying to achieve, and I would certainly
want those numbers to look lower than last year's in terms of how they
are set up. I think I'd probably come out with alternative III.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative II with a range
of 3 percentage points. Given the outlook for inflation over the next
year, I think we're really going to have to show some reduction in the
rate of growth in the aggregates. While I agree with Governor Partee
that we want to be mindful of the amount of tension that we create in
the economy with respect to what we expect on nominal GNP growth, on
the other hand I also agree with Governor Wallich that we want to look
at this point at M2 with regard to the provision for nominal GNP.
That brings me to alternative II, with the range remaining at the
wider 3-point spread.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, last month I argued for
alternative III, but on further reflection that seems a bit too tight,
so I would move to alternative II. I would keep the 3-point range,
however, because I think it is important for our credibility that we
end up with a result that's within the range. I think the experience
of the last few months may have led us to believe that we can control
the money supply much more finely than in fact is going to be the
case. We have been very lucky, you know, in the last few months. In
this last month all of the misses in our estimates offset each other
nicely; that is, the deposit mix estimates were offset by the excess
reserve estimate. Furthermore, even though we came in low on M1, we
solved that problem by revising the seasonals. We're going to run
into times when we find we are not going to be able to control the
money supply quite as readily; and if we move to a very narrow range,
we may regret it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I am not opposed to some degree of
confusion. Last meeting it seems to me that we had a pretty hard time
being very precise about these things. At the last meeting, I made
mention of Heisenberg's theory of uncertainty, which in physics is a
theory that when you try to observe sub-atomic particles the act of
observation changes the way they act so you never know exactly where
they are. I think that some of the same principles apply here and it
seems to me that we should not try to be too precise at this point in
time. These numbers are going to be revised. That's clear. Some
time during the year, for some reason, we're going to have to engage
in some revision. So, I would agree with Mr. Winn that there is some

-56-



2/4-5/80

considerable impact in terms of [reactions to] the numbers we announce
and I would come down on alternative III.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Mr. Chairman, I am inclined pretty much along
the line on which Bob Black started this discussion in that narrower
ranges would seem desirable. And if we take a narrower range, then it
seems to me that alternative II is appropriate. If we retain the wide
range as stated in the Bluebook, which I am characterizing as wide,
then I would be inclined to alternative III so as to get the ceilings
down a bit. I am impressed also with Governor Wallich's comments. In
fact, I have been inclined to postulate that the pace at which money
substitutes or near monies are developed is quite possibly a function
of the degree of restraint that we are attempting to impose upon the
system. Consequently, the system may have substantial leakage or,
alternatively, substantial elasticity. And that would tend to argue
in favor of moving to pretty low numbers for the growth rates of the
items reported here. I rather expect that is what we will experience
as we move through the next two or three years and that we will have
to move to growth rates in these conventional measures well below any
that are currently contemplated if, in fact, we are going to make much
impact on inflation. In presenting your views, I would think you are
going to have to say something about 1981 as well as 1980. And it
seems to me some rationalization along that line may be required in
terms of fitting the growth rate numbers projected for 1980 with the
idea that we need to have an annual reduction in the growth rate
numbers until we do get to a non-inflationary environment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, I am a little at a loss to
understand why some of our colleagues, who I know are much more
economically sophisticated and learned than I am, express confusion
and concern as to whether or not we have a fundamental policy mandate
and whether or not we can accomplish that. If one looks at this in a
simplistic fashion, [one thing is] certain: We have told the world
that our primary objective is a reduction in inflation accomplished on
a gradual basis so as to avoid, if possible, drastic recessionary
consequences. And we have said we're going to accomplish that
objective by gradually reducing the rate of growth of the monetary
aggregates. It seems to me that there has been overwhelming approval,
both in the press and the public, and very little expression of
disapproval of this basic policy objective. To me the biggest problem
facing us, as I hear from people in our community, is a broad doubt or
skepticism as to our willingness or ability to accomplish these
objectives. I vehemently disagree with those of you who say that it
is questionable whether or not we can gradually reduce the growth of
the monetary aggregates. We can do it. We can do it either by
controlling the path of total reserves or controlling the monetary
base or a combination of both. I am a little concerned about the fact
that we don't spend more time reflecting on what the monetary base and
nonborrowed reserves and total reserves have done, as described on
page 2 [of the Bluebook], because these are specific ways whereby we
can accomplish our monetary aggregate growth [objectives]. In order
to do what we've said we're going to do, we have to strive for a 5 or
5-1/2 percent rate of growth in M-1A or M-1B over the next year. I
don't think we can react to short-term shortfalls or overruns on these

-57-



2/4-5/80

[aggregates]. Anybody who says what has happened in the last two or
three weeks is a cause for alarm just doesn't understand how this
process works. We have to set long-term targets and we have to stick
with those long-term targets unless and until there are fundamental
changes in public thinking and fundamental changes in our policy that
would [point] toward our retreating from these longer-term targets.

I would agree with Mark and others that it would be
preferable, if we could possibly swallow this enormous step, to narrow
our ranges so that we indeed can accomplish a 5 or 5-1/2 percent
growth. I don't think it's our job to try to position ourselves so
that our targets are so broad that we can always say we accomplished
our targets if the world [falls apart] while we're protecting our own
reputations. Our reputation is on the line. People totally and
broadly subscribe to what the Chairman has announced and I don't think
we can enjoy the luxury anymore of vacillating. The fat is in the
fire and I think a narrow range under either alternative II or III
around 5 percent for the M-1A and M-1B targets would be the best way
to accomplish this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's obviously a majority for retaining
a 3-point range, as there was last month. I would defend that in my
own mind by the uncertainty of the figures that Frank Morris and
others have referred to and the real uncertainty in the economy, which
goes in the direction of [our needing] a little leeway. I would note
in that regard that I don't know of another central bank in the world,
however monetarist oriented, that has a narrower target than 3
percentage points.

MR. PARTEE. The Bank of England?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. They have a 5 percentage point range,
as I recall, 4 or 5. Four, I guess.

MR. TRUMAN. The Swiss have just a point or two.

MR. BLACK. And a pretty good inflation record.

MR. WALLICH. But [their target] varies with the rate of
inflation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do the Swiss have a pretty good record?
They had something like a 15 percent increase in the money supply in
some recent year, and they abandoned the target.

MR. WALLICH. I mean the range has to be seen relative to the
rate of inflation. At 10 percent inflation, 3 percent [growth in
money] isn't much. At 2 percent [inflation] it would be a great deal.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think we can get off this subject.

MR. ROOS. The Swiss did that on a contrived basis, though,
to make their goods more competitive. It wasn't because the mechanism
is not workable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Be that as it may, the greatest single
view is for alternative III. There is a certain amount of clustering
at alternative II, and one for alternative I. And there are some in

-58-



2/4-5/80

between alternatives II and III and between II and I. One possible
approach would be to adopt the Balles approach, which he justified in
part in terms of the desirability of getting all the upper limits no
higher than the growth we had last year. He [suggested] a combination
between alternatives II and III, using the alternative II ranges on
the Mls and something like the ranges in alternative III on M2 and M3,
if I understood him correctly. I assume the staff judgment as to the
internal consistencies of these ranges is not so precise that that
becomes an impossible [combination].

MR. AXILROD. No, it doesn't become impossible, Mr. Chairman.
But I remember last year that the old M2 ran above the projection, and
that is the aggregate the Committee has come closest to cutting down
to just about the lowest that is economically sustainable. I would
just add that point. I think we gave very low, or conservative,
estimates for M2. So there is some danger in it.

MR. PARTEE. Remember, you have money--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which way is the risk more? If interest
rates decline, do you think M2 would balloon or not?

MR. AXILROD. Well, in the old days, I would have said it
would have ballooned. Nowadays, with interest rates so far above
ceiling rates, we don't have that effect. We have put the money
market funds into M2 and there is going to be a lot of
substitutability between the money market funds and other elements of
M2. The risk is for higher growth if interest rates decline, but I
don't think it is nearly as great a risk as it used to be.

MR. PARTEE. I might just point out that M2 [growth in 1979]
was very close to the upper limit on alternative II, John, and for M3
[actual growth] was the same as the upper limit on alternative II.
The aggregate that is really low is bank credit. I don't quite
understand that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are in my judgment very narrow
differences. Let me just try, after everybody has listened to all of
this, two alternatives: alternative III straight and alternative II
straight. I might say it didn't make much difference in clarifying
any strong preference to add the views of nonvoting members onto those
of the members; they're split in about the same way. So just for the
voting members, after hearing each other, how many would want
alternative III?

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, this will just be--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am just talking about a flat "III."

MR. BALLES. Really, between the one or the other--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now let me try "II." Who would find
alternative II "acceptable"? Four. Let me try the Balles alternative
and see how many would find that acceptable.

SPEAKER(?). Read it.

-59-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's alternative II for M-1A and M-1B, if
I understand it correctly, and alternative III for M2 and M3. Maybe
that would be the nicest, if we could achieve a consensus on that.

MR. PARTEE. What about bank credit? Is that alternative
III?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been implicitly assuming that bank
credit takes a subsidiary role in this as it indeed has in the past.

MR. PARTEE. It is, of course, one of the figures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One could argue about that, I suppose.

MR. COLDWELL. It's so violently different from [the actual
experience in] 1978 and 1979.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would like to have somebody explain the
Balles approach to me. I find Steve's comments important here. Why
shouldn't it be alternative III on M-1A and M-1B and alternative II on
M2 and M3? That would seem to me more consistent with what actually
happens in the economy. Am I looking at it the wrong way?

MR. BLACK. I would prefer that.

MR. PARTEE. John wants the top of the range below last
year's [actual].

MR. BALLES. I want the top of the range at least moderately
below.

MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what he proposed. He's just
taking a somewhat mechanistic approach. But I am thinking of what
actually happens in the economy. It seems to me that if we're going
to go away from alternative III, which is the alternative I continue
to prefer, where we should ease is in M2 and M3 rather than the other
way around. Is that the wrong way to look at it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be a bit in line with
Mr. Axilrod's suspicions, for whatever that's worth. On the other
hand, it doesn't achieve Mr. Balles's visual purpose.

MR. SCHULTZ. I don't understand that there's any particular
reason to ease on M-1A and M-1B because I have some real questions
about velocity. But if Mr. Axilrod is right, the figures on M2 and M3
are likely to be more stringent than those on M-1A and M-1B.

MS. TEETERS. Do you all realize that alternative III means
essentially no decline in interest rates this year?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what the staff says. I have a
little uncertainty about what that figure--

MR. RICE. Is that a proposal, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't have too many proposals on
the table at the same time. I don't know whether Mr. Balles wants to

-60-



2/4-5/80

retreat to Mr. Schultz. I am willing to try your original one and
just see [what support it commands].

MR. BALLES. I would be interested in the vote on my
proposal. I didn't see a show of hands yet.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we're talking about now is what is
acceptable to the biggest group we can get, I think. I can try the
Schultz alternative, too, to confuse the issue further, but let me try
the Balles alternative at this stage.

MR. COLDWELL. You got 3-1/2 votes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try the Schultz alternative.
This is exactly the opposite. Alternative III on M-1A and M-1B and
alternative II and M2 and M3.

MR. BLACK. This just means acceptable, not necessarily
preferable?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This means acceptable. That is precisely
right. Are we really saying nothing is acceptable here?

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I got more than he did!

SPEAKER(?). No, you didn't.

MR. SCHULTZ. I got 5 votes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I am convinced of is that
we are in a range where the differences are very difficult to
perceive.

MR. BLACK. It's [as if we] perceive more [differences] than
there really are.

MR. GUFFEY. You had 8 for alternative III, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BLACK. You sure did. And that was a preference, not
just acceptable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am a little reluctant to go to
alternative III. It is clear that that has a plurality, but whether
it is the one that maximizes the satisfaction around the table is
another question.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I can't really offer a compromise since I
was for alternative I.

MR. SCHULTZ. You were the only one. Maybe you're the only
one who can offer a compromise.

MR. COLDWELL. We can't possibly get close.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at what maximizes
satisfaction for all, I urge again the Balles approach with a more
sympathetic attitude by people around the table.

-61-



2/4-5/80

MR. PARTEE. Maybe somehow it will work out.

MR. TIMLEN. Is there any understanding as to where in the
range the Desk would be shooting for?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, theoretically, we are shooting for
the midpoint, based on what we know now. We may modify that in the
short-run decision; we haven't gotten there. But for the year as a
whole the implication is that the best judgment we can make is that
we're shooting at the middle of all of these, which gives us some
leeway on [M2 and M3] presumably, if we're really shooting at the
middle of the [target for Ml].

MR. BALLES. My presumption, Mr. Chairman, is that of course
we would aim for the midpoint, but I would also very quickly add that
in view of all the uncertainty we would want to be able to move either
way, including to the top of the range. I think we ought to keep that
flexibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would agree with that. But as of now I
think we are saying the central tendency is the midpoints of these
ranges, which gives us some potential leeway in deliberately moving
away from the midpoint and also gives us some leeway in the
reconciliation among these various numbers. I suppose the implication
of that, to sell [this] alternative now, is that if we were literally
aiming for the midpoints throughout the year and M2 and M3 prove to be
a little tight relative to the Mls, we would end up with a slightly
lower M1 and a slightly higher M2 and M3, relative to the midpoints.
If the staff estimate is correct and everything went perfectly, that's
presumably the way [it would turn out]. We would end up with the
midpoint, theoretically, halfway between alternative II and
alternative III.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, if the Committee is willing to
accept a range of 2-1/2 points, an almost perfect compromise is to
take the bottoms of alternative II and the tops of alternative III.

MR. BLACK. That's not a bad idea.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd feel more comfortable with that than with
the Balles approach.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you say leave these where they are?

MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're narrowing all the ranges.

MR. ALTMANN. The bottoms are from alternative II and the
tops are those in alternative III.

MR. BALLES. That runs counter to a clear majority view about
keeping a wide range.

MR. MAYO. Yes, it does.

MR. BLACK. But it appeases some of the rest of us.

-62-



2/4-5/80

MR. PARTEE. That results in odd midpoints.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You obviously know [the area we're in]. I
really am resistant to getting down to 1/4 points. If what we're
aiming at for M-1A is halfway between [the midpoints of] alternatives
II and III, [that difference is] 1/4 of a percentage point and I think
we're really there with the Balles approach as a practical matter.

MR. SCHULTZ. Are we not likely, though, to end up with a
situation in which we're going to miss on both sides with the Balles
approach? M2 and M3 may be strong and M-1A and M-1B could be pretty
weak.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably these are the best estimates we
have. I will not vouch for the inter-relationships between them.
[They represent] an unbiased estimate of the consistent--

MR. AXILROD. We rounded these to 1/2 points, by the way.
For M2 and M3 I think the [actual] differences are 1/4 points among
the alternatives.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're now unrounding them. Let me urge
upon you at this point the Balles alternative. How many find that
acceptable after this further [discussion]?

MR. SCHULTZ. To show you how weak I am, I'll vote for it.
As I do so, I am being dragged kicking and screaming into this. I
would much prefer the other.

MR. BALLES. How many was that, sir?

SPEAKER(?). Six.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I [add my vote], it's a majority. But
I can't believe that when we get down to a 1/4 point there is no
combination of numbers that does not provide a happier situation.

MR. TIMLEN. Could you try Steve's range, because its width
is 2-1/2 points as opposed to 3?

MR. ALTMANN. And not emphasize midpoints?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But there's no substantive difference
between them.

MR. BLACK. But it's the way it is perceived.

SPEAKER(?). It is the way it is perceived by the public,
Paul, that's important. I agree there isn't all that much difference
but the perception by the public--

SPEAKER(?). It's the top of the ranges that scares me to
death.

MR. COLDWELL. We could widen the range to 3 to 6-1/2.

-63-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we want to go in the
direction of widening the range. There are all sorts of ways we can
get a quarter peoint difference between the averages.

MR. WILLES. But the problem, Mr. Chairman, is not the
quarter point difference on the midpoint. Where people separate is on
where they think the bottom ought to be or where the top ought to be.
And that's why Steve's proposal, I think, will get most of the votes.
It's not the quarter point difference; it's where one is willing to
let it go on one side or the other.

MR. BLACK. I think that's a correct appraisal. I think the
market will look at it that way, too.

MR. PARTEE. We have a tremendous amount riding on our
ability to be within these ranges--

SEVERAL. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. --and to cut the range to 2-1/2 points makes it
rough. And the possibility of inconsistencies here, even though we
are within the staff's ranges--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are we talking about specifically?

MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent.

MR. MAYO. Why don't we just see what the vote is, Mr.
Chairman, on the bottom of alternative III and the top of alternative
II, widening the range by 1/2 percentage point.

MR. COLDWELL. That's what I suggested, but he--

MR. MAYO. It has some merit.

MS. TEETERS. If we want to compromise, we should go to 3-1/4
to 6-1/4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the straightforward compromise, but
I think we look foolish if we get into quarter points.

MR. PARTEE. We would bill the 3-1/2 percent [as appropriate]
on the grounds of the great uncertainty in the year ahead.

MR. WALLICH. We could accept Steve's [suggestion] as long as
we don't focus on the midpoint. The midpoint gives us a quarter point
and looks foolish. A narrower range, other things equal, looks
better. I see the risks; we might miss. We're much more likely to
miss on the up side than on the down side.

MR. PARTEE. What I foresee is the possibility of misses if
the relationships aren't right here. We may be within on M1 and out
on M2 and M3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we do it the other way, we have a
better chance of being within something.

-64-



2/4-5/80

MR. WILLES. But that's precisely why people care so much
about either the bottom or the top. Even though we may miss, if we're
going over the top, that raises the flag a lot faster than if we're
still within all the ranges.

MS. TEETERS. I have noticed that people worry less when we
go under than when we go over.

MR. MAYO. It depends on one's point of view.

MR. WINN. Well, I'll go back to my original question. What
are you going to say about last year's ranges?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About last year's ranges?

MR. WINN. People are going to compare ranges and ranges,
not--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what we're going to tell them is
that on M1, depending upon how you look at it, we were somewhere
around 5.5 or 6.8 percent.

MR. WINN. That's what we hit, but [the question is]: Are we
setting our objectives lower or higher?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All of these objectives, properly
interpreted, will be lower. It may take some interpretation.

MR. WINN. But didn't we say 3 to 6 percent last year on Ml?
Sure it has changed, and so forth--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we said 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent by
one interpretation, with 1-1/2 percent ATS--

MR. BLACK. That's really what it was, when you come right
down to it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't like this way of skinning
the cat, but do you want to do these 2-1/2 percentage point ranges?
Let's see who finds the 3-1/2--

MR. MAYO. What are we talking about? The 2-1/2 points?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

SPEAKER(?). John, I assume you'll go with this proposal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we get no more votes for that one
than the other one.

MR. SCHULTZ. Straight alternative III got the most votes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so.

MR. WILLES. Take an acceptable vote on alternative III; I
think you'll get 9 out of 12.

-65-



2/4-5/80

MR. HOLMES. Mr. Chairman, another compromise would be to
take a flexible midpoint. Take the [average of the] midpoints from
alternatives II and III and say you expect variations around that of
1-1/2 percentage points on either side, as we have in the past.

MR. BLACK. That would be 3-3/4 to [6-3/4 for M-1B].

MR. SCHULTZ. It gets us to quarters.

MR. COLDWELL. Would it help, Mr Chairman, if we used M-1B as
opposed to M-1A as the starting point?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the figures are supposed to be the
same. I don't know how to--

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but M-1B has the most potential for
fluctuation.

MR. COLDWELL. But M-1B has the most long-run potential.
M-1A, if you read it as "MIA," is "missing in action."

MR. BLACK. M-1B is "misinformed bunch."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that the logical thing,
without getting into tiny fractions, is either to do the Balles
approach or the reverse of the Balles approach, which is about as much
of a compromise as one can get, retaining the wider ranges. Now,
that avoids quarter percents on either the midpoints or the outside
[limits of the] ranges. Who do we have reconsidering? Or who wants
to make another proposal?

MR. MAYO. In the interest of simplicity, I am prepared to
shift my vote to alternative III.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with alternative III--frankly,
I have no particular problem with it--is that it's going to make some
people more unhappy than any of the other alternatives.

MR. MORRIS. But only 1/2 of 1 percent were unhappy!

MR. MAYO. There's a multiplier here, Paul.

MR. RICE. Let me put it this way: It makes me unhappy but
in the spirit of unanimity I would change my vote and go with
alternative III.

MS. TEETERS. It's a full percentage point drop in the growth
rates from last year. Doesn't it mean that we're going to have an
increase of 2 percentage points in the unemployment rate and no change
in interest rates?

MR. PARTEE. That's probably right.

MS. TEETERS. Where are interest rates in [that scenario]?

MR. RICE. Well, I surely share [that concern] with you.

-66-



2/4-5/80

MS. TEETERS. Even taking all the probabilities in the staff
estimate, the likely rate of [GNP] growth is between .8 and -2.2
percent. That is just not a very good economy, gentlemen, to have 12
percent interest rates.

MR. WALLICH. But, Nancy, on the other hand, we'd get a rise
in the rate of inflation.

MS. TEETERS. We're going to get that anyway, Henry, from
OPEC over the first three months of this year.

MR. COLDWELL. If we're going to get it anyway, you better be
down where I am.

MR. SCHULTZ. Actually, alternative III, you have to
remember, is much more lenient than where Governor Coldwell would like
to be. So that--

MR. KIMBREL. Associate me with that, too.

MR. PARTEE. Of course, he won't be here to--

MR. COLDWELL. No, I am going to be out in the ranks of the
unemployed with fixed incomes to pay the price--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would recommend to you the Balles
position. But if you're bound and determined to go to alternative
III, we'll go to alternative III. Let's try Balles once more.

SPEAKER(?). I'm not going to vote for it this time.

MR. SCHULTZ. Things are coming my way!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many did you get? What was the count?

MR. ALTMANN. Five.

MR. PARTEE & MR. TIMLEN. Five; we've lost one!

MR. BALLES. Well, I tried, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BLACK. That's the end of Balles, et al.

MR. MAYO. The "et als" are still around.

MR. BALLES. My next move would be to alternative III.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With great reluctance, I will try "III."

MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is a mistake.

MR. COLDWELL. Why, Paul? What's your principal reservation
about it?

-67-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My reservation is not the substance of it,
but that I don't think it correctly gets to the midpoint of the range
of opinion.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, go back and try the Schultz approach
again. That looks to me as if it buys a good share of those of us who
are concerned about--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By the Schultz approach you mean just
reversing--

MR. COLDWELL. Reversing the Balles points.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I am perfectly happy to do that.
Let's try that one.

MR. COLDWELL. Take M-1A and M-1B of "III" and M2 and M3 of
"II."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's see whether that captures--

MR. ALTMANN. Seven.

MR. BLACK. Seven? Doesn't it make you two even a little
happier?

MS. TEETERS. A 4-1/2 percent rate of growth for Ml? No.

MR. COLDWELL. Well, if that's the case, we better stay with
alternative III.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think everyone is stuck on III; that's
okay.

MR. ALTMANN. So, it's alternative III?

MR. TIMLEN. How would the chair vote?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

SPEAKER(?). You would vote for it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll vote for alternative III if
that's what everybody wants to vote for. I don't see the significance
in the 1/2 percentage point difference that some other people
apparently see.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't either, but it takes me a whole
point [lower].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I understand.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, is the staff to assume that in
making its GNP projections, it should take the 4-1/2 percent rate of
growth for M-1A as a center point? That is a lower rate of growth
than we had.

-68-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I presume that in some sense that must be
the implication.

MS. TEETERS. You realize we're already in trouble in terms
of being in conformity with the Administration's forecast. At least
you have to do the testifying on Humphrey-Hawkins. We're already
inconsistent; this is making it worse.

MR. COLDWELL. The President has given up on Humphrey-Hawkins
for this coming year anyway. He moved out [the time period in which
to reach the objectives].

MS. TEETERS. He may have moved it out but the
Administration's forecast is markedly different. And we will have to
go up to the Hill and say we're going to keep money so tight that
there is no way that the Administration's forecast can be realized.
That's about what it comes down to.

MR. SCHULTZ. I am really much more concerned about M2 and M3
than I am M-1A or M-1B because at these interest rates and these
inflation rates I am very unsure of the connection between the two.
And I think there is going to be a demand shift this year. The staff
indicates that they can see no indication yet, but--

MR. PARTEE. [It can] hardly be bigger than it was last year.
We already had a great big demand shift in the recorded figures for
last year. For M-1B, which I think a lot of people would support as
the better redefined money, our midpoint will be 3 points below what
we realized last year. Three points!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that figure is a little artificial
because we had the shift into ATS and NOW accounts.

MR. BALLES. This is a question of fact, Mr. Chairman. What
impressions do you have as to whether the Congressional Committee
considers the ranges as having a very strong implication that we'll
move toward the midpoint? I haven't gathered that that was true in
the past; we have ranges with the precise idea of being flexible. In-
house we may well aim for a midpoint. But in terms of the Congress,
is my impression wrong that they look on these as ranges we feel free
to utilize fully depending on unfolding conditions?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't answer that question. It probably
implies a degree of sophistication on the part of Congress that is
beyond any generalization.

MR. BALLES. There seems to be a feeling around the table
here that if we adopt alternative III, we're struck with the
midpoints. I don't think we are, frankly.

MS. TEETERS. What else is the Desk going to aim for?

MR. BALLES. What's the purpose of having the range?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd certainly have a tendency right now
to aim for the midpoint, not knowing anything else. That's pending
further information.

-69-



2/4-5/80

MR. MAYO. That is true in the short run, Paul, but as the
year moves on, we have that flexibility. We just finished using it
the last time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in the short run.

SPEAKER(?). We sure did.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if this will be
helpful, but one possibility--in the spirit of what has been discussed
--is to take the 3-point ranges for M-1A and M-1B of alternative II
and to lower the top ends of M2 and M3 by 1/2 point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was going to suggest the opposite.
If there's more of a concern about M2 and M3, maybe we should take a
1/2 percentage point off the top of the M1 ranges.

MR. AXILROD. Then you have more substitutability among the
deposits?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And it leaves us a little more leeway on
M2 and M3.

MR. PARTEE. I'd go for that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Presumably they are, theoretically, a
little more volatile anyway.

MR. COLDWELL. 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent on M-1A?

SPEAKER(?). No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For M-1A] 3-1/2 to 6 percent--a
compromise between alternatives II and III on both the Mls.

MR. SCHULTZ. All right. I'd go for that.

MR. ALTMANN. And 4 to 6-1/2--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's 4 to 6-1/2 percent on M-1B, which is
probably going to have to be revised anyway.

MR. PARTEE. I'd be happy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And leave the 6 to 9 percent and 6-1/2 to
9-1/2 percent [for M2 and M3, respectively].

MR. BALLES. What was M-1A, please?

MR. ALTMANN. 3-1/2 to 6 percent. And M-1B is 4 to 6-1/2.

MR. COLDWELL. What about M2 and M3?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're the same as in alternative II.

SPEAKER(?). There's something wrong.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a bit of logic in it, I think.

-70-



2/4-5/80

MR. SCHULTZ. That's logical, and I like that.

MR. BALLES. Just a comment on that, Mr. Chairman: The
reason I was turned off by alternative II for M2 and M3 is that if we
went for the upper end of that range, which I presume we could, that
would result in no decrease at all in the growth rates of those two
magnitudes for 1980 from what we experienced in 1979.

MR. PARTEE. If we go right to the top.

SPEAKER(?). We also have to recognize that they're rather
uncontrollable by us with money market funds and Eurodollars and
Caribbean dollars and RPs in there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We lose that visual effect, but it's
getting argued that the economics are a little against us in terms of
the uncertainty and it gives wider ranges. I think there's a certain
sense in doing that. It has the disadvantage that--

MR. COLDWELL. So the midpoint on M-1A would be 4-3/4
percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. [Unintelligible] mislead
with that quarter percent.

MR. WALLICH. That's just raising it, on average, because the
lower ends don't really mean anything.

MR. PARTEE. Well, they could.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's raising depending upon where we
begin.

MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems that we'd very likely do
something if it came out there. Even I would be prepared to do that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say raising on average. Depending on
what one is looking at, it's accepting the upper constraint of
alternative III on M1. That's the one you're worried about.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I was more worried about M2, and there we
have an increase. Raising the lower constraints on M-1A and M-1B
doesn't really accomplish anything.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's try this one. I appeal to
you: Anyone around this table who is good enough to know the
difference between 1/2 point, with great [conviction], is pretty good.

MR. TIMLEN. Is that for simple or complicated minds?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does it have any appeal?

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd vote for it.

MS. TEETERS. Want another straw vote?

MR. KIMBREL. Just to be sure I am with you, read those
numbers one more time.

-71-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are: 3-1/2 to 6 on M-1A; 4 to 6-1/2
on M-1B; 6 to 9 on M2; and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 on M3. Who finds that
acceptable?

SPEAKER(?). Here we go!

MR. ALTMANN. Eight.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And I make nine.

MR. COLDWELL. What did we finally get on the vote for
straight alternative III?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think about the same.

MR. ALTMANN. I had seven, not counting--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Seven, not counting me. So we got one
more vote out of this one, right? Let's go with that one then. All
the people who like narrow ranges ought to be enchanted by that 1/2
percent [reduction in the ranges for M-1A and M-1B].

MR. PARTEE. The narrower M1 range.

MR. GUFFEY. Which one did you go with, the last one?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. I thought we had more votes for alternative III.

MR. TIMLEN. I thought so, too.

SPEAKER(?). Try again.

MR. ALTMANN. No, I had seven not counting the Chairman.
Want to try it again?

MR. BALLES. What was the vote on the last one, Murray?

MR. ALTMANN. Eight plus the Chairman.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think the Chairman is saying that we may have
had more votes on that, but those who are the unhappiest would find
this last one acceptable. Is that your reasoning, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know quite what I will find at
this point, frankly.

MR. SCHULTZ. I can go either way.

MR. RICE. In light of this vote, I'll shift from my last
vote and make it even. I voted for alternative III in the spirit of
compromise, but now that I know we can get 8 votes for this, which is
more acceptable to me, I would like to switch my vote and make it [9].

SPEAKER(?). Let's have a vote on this compromise and see
what we get.

-72-



2/4-5/80

MR. BLACK. Maybe I ought to reactivate my proposal?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's take a vote on the latest proposal.
Is everybody clear about what we are voting on?

MR. MAYO. The same thing that we just voted on.

MR. ALTMANN. That's right, the 3-1/2 to 6, 4 to 6-1/2, 6 to
9, and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2.

MR. BLACK. What about bank credit? Are we going to have to
put that in?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bank credit, I guess, is 6 to 9 percent.

MR. ALTMANN. 6 to 9.

SPEAKER(?). What about M2?

MR. SCHULTZ. Henry thinks it's too high.

MR. PARTEE. If we expect to get it, we're going to have to
raise marginal reserves.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
President Balles
President Black
Governor Coldwell
President Kimbrel

President Mayo
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
Governor Schultz
Governor Teeters
First Vice President Timlen
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
It's mighty hard, but I vote
yes, too.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
In the spirit of compromise,
yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I appreciate your swallowing all
these 1/2 percentage point differences! I think it's probably more
important to swallow the 1/2 point differences than to achieve the 1/2
point.

MR. WALLICH. Well, can we swallow something real now?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. After all this time, we have a great
decision. How much problem are we going to have with our even
narrower differences on the short-run ranges? Do you want to try to
do this [before lunch]?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

MR. BLACK. Maybe we can just vote without any statement from
anybody. It might be better.

MS. TEETERS. Yes.

-73-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's see where we are without going
around the table. Do you want to say a few words, Mr. Axilrod--very
few?

MR. AXILROD. I will skip the introductory part, a page and a
half, which says that interest rates aren't projected to come down as
much as they used to be because the economy is projected to be
stronger. [Secretary's note: For the full text of Mr. Axilrod's
statement, see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand this precisely, your
alternative B, at least for M1, reiterates the target we already set
at the last meeting.

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And this can viewed as kind of a mid-
quarter relook at that.

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But M2 is a little below, right?

MR. AXILROD. The [new] M2 is a totally different concept.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We didn't set a target for that.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. It was the old M2--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That target was 7 percent; that's what
confused me.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. And it is in fact running a
little low relative to the target.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you think this 6-1/2 percent that you
have here for the new M2 is roughly consistent with the 7 percent that
we had on the old M2?

MR. AXILROD. I would guess it's a shade lower because the
old M2 is running a shade lower. It's either consistent or a shade
lower. I haven't worked it out in detail month by month on money
market funds.

MR. WALLICH. But it contains very different components.

MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, that's right. That's why. It has
money market funds--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it has been running higher than 6-1/2
percent, apparently, because you have the implied growth for January
to March of 5-3/4 percent.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. The actual growth in M2 is 8.3 percent
because, among other reasons, we had this very sharp expansion in
money market funds in January, which we've been expecting to slow.

-74-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's a question of procedure we have to
decide upon, which is whether to reiterate or change the targets that
we had for the first quarter. [We can comment on] any tentative
feeling that we have about the second quarter but we don't have to put
the second quarter into the directive, and I think it's probably
inappropriate to put the second quarter in the directive at this
point. So, if people agree with this, the only thing we have to have
in the directive is a number for the first quarter.

MR. AXILROD. To be clear, Mr. Chairman, alternative B, as we
construe it, is simply reiterating the Committee's policy of last time
with respect to M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

MR. AXILROD. That's in new terms and takes account of the
actual growth that occurred in January.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in both cases--just slightly in the
case of Ml and a little more than slightly in the case of M2--the rate
of growth in January was above our targets [for the quarter].

MR. AXILROD. Yes. But, again, this is a totally different
M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, after we translate them.

MR. AXILROD. But the old M2 is running a little lower
relative to target than we had expected.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So if we take alternative B, conceivably
we could shade it a bit in the light of our earlier discussion. But I
think we're talking--

MR. PARTEE. I think what we'd shade is the second quarter.
After all, the first quarter--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that would be my inclination.
Looking at this in view of what we just decided, the second quarter
figures may be a little high. But we don't have to decide upon that
now. Otherwise, what you're saying is that "B" is basically
reiterating what we said before, which does imply a little slower
growth rate in February and March than we in fact had in January.
That's because January was high in M2--and M1 came out a little bit on
the high side, but not very much--because of the money market fund
bulge. I would suggest to you, but I don't want to hasten you if
there's some vital question that I am missing, that just for the first
quarter "B" is reasonable. I think it's not only in line with what we
decided last time, but what we want to continue to decide.

MR. MAYO. Are we content with a point target here? Is that
the way we should read this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the central tendency, obviously.
Last time we worded it 4 to 5 percent on Ml. We could raise the
question again of whether we want to continue with that wording. We
said 4 to 5 percent on M1 and about 7 percent on M2. I suppose what
we'd be saying here is that the Committee reiterated--if you want to

-75-



2/4-5/80

word it that way--the 4 to 5 percent range on Ml. And on the new M2
basis, we'd shave the target a half point.

MR. MAYO. There could be some argument, Paul, that we're
farther along in the quarter and should narrow that range. Or we
could say 4-3/4 percent, which is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't feel strongly about that.
Even on the new technique we're not that close. This is a pure matter
of preference; we can word it either way. I don't have any--

MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it "4 to 5 percent."

MR. MORRIS. I think there's a lot to be said for stability
from month to month in these directives, unless there's a major reason
to change.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Particularly if we keep that same wording,
we'd be a little hard pressed to [rationalize] changing it by a
quarter percentage point, which one could argue we might want to do on
the basis of the long-term range, all else being equal. But that's
such a fine adjustment. More substantively one could argue, given
what's going on, that we might want to be tighter or easier.

MR. COLDWELL. I would argue for alternative C with a
borrowing level of $1.6 billion.

MR. PARTEE. 1.6?

MR. COLDWELL. That is about what they had, $1.5 billion, for
alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think "C" is clearly saying, given what
we know now that we didn't know last time, that you want to be a
little tighter.

MS. TEETERS. I think we should stick to where we were.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "B" says that we want to play it about
where we've been playing it; "A" says we distinctly want to be a
little easier. I think those are the choices here.

SPEAKER(?). I'd keep "B."

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think we ought to stay where we were
until we go off in a big way, which we'll do soon.

MR. TIMLEN. While I prefer what Phil Coldwell said, I would
vote for "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other comments? I really
don't want to rush this, but I think we ought to go to lunch if we
don't have a consensus here. If there's a lot of argument that we
should be distinctly tighter or if the differences are massive, [maybe
we should break for lunch]. In fact if we took "C," I think we would
have to raise the targeted level of borrowing. I don't know what is
consistent, but I--

-76-



2/4-5/80

MR. COLDWELL. They have $1.5 billion in the Bluebook.

MR. WALLICH. The measure of tightness in the face of higher
inflation is not the money supply. It is really the interest rate, or
the real interest rate. I see that as having come down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether you're looking at
the long-term or the short-term rates.

MR. WALLICH. It doesn't bother me to tighten the money
supply, not because I think that's the proper response but because I
think it will have the desired result.

MR. SCHULTZ. It will have a result all right. It will
really knock housing and autos in the head!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Willis.

MR. WINN. Paul, there's another question. Maybe this is not
relevant, but in view of our unwillingness to come to terms with the
lagged reserve question and in view of my nervousness with respect to
our luck in holding out on this setup, is this perhaps the appropriate
time to raise the question, given the fluctuations in borrowings and
the growing differential between market rates and the discount rate,
about changing the rate as part of this picture of [unintelligible]?

MR. SCHULTZ. You mean the discount rate?

MR. WINN. The discount rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's always a relevant policy variable.
But to some degree there's a choice. We can be easier on the reserve
provision and raise the discount rate. We can be tighter on the
reserve provision and not raise the discount rate.

MR. WINN. But the danger is that we will lose control in the
latter case.

MR. WALLICH. I think we should be clear on what overall
response we want and to me that is expressed in the funds rate.

MR. COLDWELL. I think we have a chance here to make a nibble
into that long-term range; and if we give that up now, we may not have
a chance later on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the funds rate is theoretically not
predictable under what we're doing. But if we go toward "C," we are
biasing it, presumably--

MR. COLDWELL. On the upper part of the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --on the upper part or for an increase
from where we are. Not knowing anything else, I don't know what would
actually happen. But presumably we would push the level of borrowings
up a bit, which might or might not push the funds rate up. In "B," we
would not push the borrowings up, which might or might not be
accompanied by stability in the funds rate.

-77-



2/4-5/80

MR. AXILROD. Initially.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Initially. And it's all going to be
looked at--. The last money supply figures we have are weak, right?

MR. AXILROD. I am a little hesitant because I haven't seen
the last [figures] on the new basis. On the old basis they were weak,
but I haven't seen the new ones on the new weekly seasonal pattern
yet. The old figures were weak, but we had expected a considerable
rebound.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible] foreign deposits.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know how to [interpret] the
silence of most people. But Governor Coldwell has expressed himself
for wanting to tighten up a little here.

MS. TEETERS. I would prefer alternative B.

MR. PARTEE. It seems to me that we might very well get a
bulge in money as we get into the spring, for one thing because of
those [tax] refunds. Isn't that the time to do the tightening if
there's going to be a tightening--when we have a demonstrated increase
in the money supply?

MR. WALLICH. It raises a problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given the most recent behavior of the
published money supply and given the value in some continuity and not
wanting a feeling of too much fine-tuning when nothing is clearly
going wrong, I would suggest that we reiterate the directive that we
had last time which says 4 to 5 percent [on Ml]. I think we have to
change the M2 figure because of the change in the definition of M2.

MR. AXILROD. Do you want to add M-1B into the directive
also?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could add M-1B into the directive, but
I think it ought to be done the same way, with a range, whatever the
consistent number is.

MR. AXILROD. In our view it's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think it's 3/4 of a point higher. I
am surprised there's that much difference.

MR. AXILROD. In that period it was 3/4 of a point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we could say 4 to 5 percent for M-1A
and 1/2 point higher for M-lB.

MR. AXILROD. About 1/2 point more.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 6-1/2 percent for M2. That looks a
little--

MR. PARTEE. As newly defined.

-78-



2/4-5/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we'd make it clear that these are the
newly defined numbers.

MR. COLDWELL. Your borrowing level for "B" would be $1
billion?

MR. AXILROD. The average borrowing for January was $1.2
billion, and that's what we were suggesting as the initial level. I
would add that, following that very sharp spurt in borrowing last
week, partly because the Desk is aiming at [a lower level], borrowing
has been running much lower this week; it's averaging about $892
million so far.

MR. COLDWELL. But consistent with "B," you're talking $1
billion?

MR. AXILROD. We mentioned $1.2 billion in the Bluebook.
Previously, at the last meeting, $1 billion was discussed; but
borrowing seemed to be running higher than that. So it's a fuzzy
question as to where precisely borrowing is going to want to end up.
But we suggested $1.2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The borrowing figure has been very fuzzy
recently, to say the least. Whatever figure we think about now might
be adjusted fairly promptly in the light of whatever numbers come in.
What I am saying, partly in the interest of consistency, is that we
are looking for M-1A between 4 and 5 percent and M-1B between 4-1/2
and 5-1/2--or we could say 1/2 point higher. I don't know if there's
any preference between those. Then there is somewhat of a technical
problem in that we don't get the M2 figure as early, but I think it
could be said that we believe this is consistent with an M2 figure, as
newly defined, of about 6-1/2 percent.

MR. COLDWELL. That says that nothing has happened since the
last time we discussed this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Basically, I think it does. That's the
issue: Whether we want to take this opportunity to make a change in
what we laid down a month ago.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there has been a distinct
perception of a higher rate of inflation by the public. And there has
been a challenge on whether or not we are still hanging in tough.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think alternative B represents some
restraint. Restraint is continuing and we're beginning to see it in
the things that I called attention to. I would not like to see us
change from alternative B.

MR. PARTEE. The only reason we don't have a considerable
shortfall is because of that seasonal adjustment. Otherwise, we are
hanging with a policy that gives us a shortfall.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the issue. It involves not
just what we want to do now but has some future implications as to how
much we want to fine-tune these numbers at monthly intervals or the
intervals at which we meet. Sometimes we are going to want to change

-79-



2/4-5/80

them, I think, so I am not completely allergic to it. This would be a
very small change between "B" and "C."

MR. COLDWELL. It's also partly a perception of front-end
loading.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Consistent with the decision we just made
for the long run, "B" has a very slight amount of front-end loading,
if you mean by front-end loading going below the--

MR. COLDWELL. More restraint.

MS. TEETERS. Well the January-to-March growth implied by "B"
is well below what happened in January. So, by definition, we're
going to get some tightening.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In any event, we will get a slight amount
if these numbers come out that precisely. All these numbers imply a
slightly slower rate of growth than what we actually had in January.
And I think we could say in the policy record at the very least that
that implication exists.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, if it's your preference to state
this as ranges of 4 to 5 percent and 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, is the
implication that the Desk would aim for the midpoint?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is true for this period.
I have a slight preference for a range just because we are never going
to hit the exact figure anyway--we're not that good--and it just
indicates that there's a little [flexibility]. But the implication
clearly is that for now we aim for the midpoint. Now, what we do as
the period [progresses] if we get outside it in either direction and
whether it's practical to get all the way back to the midpoint [is the
question]. There is some flexibility [with a range], but I don't feel
strongly as to whether it's stated as a midpoint or--

MR. BALLES. With the understanding, whether it's in the
record or not, that we would in fact [aim] for the midpoint, I for one
would find it acceptable. My preference would be to be a little more
precise in the instructions to the Desk as to what to aim for and
recognize that we might not be able to hit it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's separate these two questions.
Let me just get a show of hands. Who basically wants to keep the
midpoint where we had it, with the modification that means [given] a
change in the [M2] definition, but does not want to say that we want a
different basic [objective for] money growth in the first quarter?
This recognizes that that means a slightly lower rate of growth in
February and March than we in fact had in January.

MR. ALTMANN. Nine, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that seems to be the preference.
The subsidiary question--I think it is distinctly subsidiary--is
whether you want to word it the way we did last time, as I suggested
with the new definitions, or do you want to word it as 4-1/2 percent?

-80-



2/4-5/80

MS. TEETERS. I would prefer to word it the way we did last
time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Could we have a show of hands on that?

MR. ALTMANN. Five.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we want to word it the other way
then. It's about evenly split, but I--

MR. PARTEE. I think we're better off stating them all as
"abouts"--"about 5" and I guess "about 6-1/2."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. The alternative is saying
about 4-1/2 percent and--. Well, I think the 6-1/2 percent ought to
be worded differently because we don't have that number right away and
we can't have the implication that we're following that week by week
because we just don't have it. So, with that change in language, it's
4-1/2 percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, which I notice is
halfway between "B" and "C." And then "The Committee believes that is
consistent with about 6-1/2 percent for M2 as newly defined."

MR. MAYO. How do you explain, Paul, why we have a point
target even with the "about" in front of it for the short run and we
have a range for the long run?

MR. PARTEE. Because that's the way the Manager [operates].

MR. STERNLIGHT. We run on a reserve path. What we're aiming
for is a reserve path that's built on the midpoint if you pick a range
or the approximate point if you pick an approximate point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to introduce this again, but what
we did once was to say 4-1/2 percent--it happened to be 4-1/2
[unintelligible]--and it was clear in the record, though I forget just
how, that lower was better than higher.

MR. PARTEE. But that still seems to me an instruction to the
Manager.

MR. MAYO. It's an instruction to the Desk. Okay, I buy
that.

MR. PARTEE. The last paragraph still has [unintelligible]
but in the second [to last] paragraph the instruction is to run his
reserve [operations] so as to be consistent with growth of about 4-1/2
percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right.

MR. PARTEE. He's going to miss--maybe or probably.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't really think it makes any
difference what instruction will be given to the Manager [initially].
The [question] is whether or not to put people on notice that nobody
is good enough to meet [a precise] target, and we may imply that by
using a small range. But I don't think it's a very significant

-81-



2/4-5/80

question. Shall we vote? It's 4-1/2, 5, and 6-1/2 percent stated as
"abouts."

MR. PARTEE. Initial borrowing is at $1.2 billion or about
$1-1/4 billion?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Borrowing is at $1-1/4 billion, let's say.
Okay.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
President Balles Yes
President Black Yes
Governor Coldwell No
President Kimbrel Yes
President Mayo Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
First Vice President Timlen Yes
Governor Wallich No

Nine for, two against.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will take up the scheduling at lunch.
Thank you.

END OF MEETING

-82-




