









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 5, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday,

December 5, 1980, at 2:10 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those

participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,
Mr. Solomon,
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn

Chairman
Vice Chairman (New York)

(Kansas City)
(Boston)

(St. Louis)

(Cleveland)

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn
(Philadelphia), Mayo (Chicago), and Timlen (New York),
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Mr. Corrigan (Minneapolis), President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary

Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),
R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City),
Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir,
Kichline, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic
Operations, System Open Market Account



11/18/80

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Beck, Senior Economist, Banking Section, Division of

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Messrs. Boehne (Philadelphia), Burns (Dallas), Fousek
(New York), Keran (San Francisco), and Scheld,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia, Dallas, New York, San Francisco, and
Chicago, respectively

Mr. Meek (New York), Monetary Adviser, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Mrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago

Mr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
December 5, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're sending out a search party for
Governor Schultz. I don't know whether he is back in Florida or not.
I just wanted to [bring] you all up to date on the markets and have a
little group-think about where we are at the moment and whether we
want to do anything or not. I will make a suggestion on that after we
finish with the description that Mr. Axilrod will give you.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, on the latest data the aggregates
have been showing some signs of weakness, even on an overnight basis
since late yesterday. As of the moment we're planning to publish this
afternoon an increase of $1.1 billion for M-1A and of $1.2 billion for
M-1B for the week of November 26, in each case less than the
preliminary numbers had indicated. Preliminary numbers for the week
of [December] 3rd show a drop--more than we had expected as of late
yesterday--of about $1.8 billion for M-1A and about $1.7 billion for
M-1B. These numbers would give us estimates for November of a 6.8
percent rate of growth for M-1A and a 9.6 percent rate of growth for
M-1B. M2 remains strong, growing at a 12.2 percent annual rate, as
the weakness in the transactions components of M2 has been offset by
strength in the nontransactions components. We still expect growth in
December, despite the very weak number for the 3rd, at rates of 3.7
and 4.9 percent for M-1A and M-1B [respectively]. The weaker recent
numbers do, however, lower required reserves in this 5-week operating
period. And given the level of borrowings that we had achieved in
[the weeks of] November 26 and December 3, working through the paths
for total and nonborrowed reserves hitting the targets would imply a
level of borrowing for the current week and the next two weeks of
around $1760 million. So that's down somewhat from the $2.1 billion
level of borrowings that we actually had in the week of December 3rd.
Borrowing on Thursday, by the way, was $1.4 billion. So we are
starting off not too far away from these targets but on the low side
of them. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that updates the Committee on the
position of the aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Peter, do you want to fill us in on the
market?

MR. STERNLIGHT. As for the market reaction today, we started
out with a quite firm money market, Mr. Chairman. Funds opened
briefly at 19-3/4 percent, went up to 20 percent, and even touched 21
percent briefly this morning. They slipped back to about 20 and then
were 20-1/4 percent around 11 a.m. At that point we went in because,
having drawn up these reserve paths as Steve described, we had a need
for reserves in this week. We put in some repurchase agreement funds
over the weekend. We had some difference between the Board staff's
estimate and the New York staff's estimate, with New York seeing a
larger need. The amount [of repurchase agreements] that we did fully
met--in fact slightly more than met--the New York staff's estimate,
and we did that amount because funds were trading at 20-1/4 percent
then. I thought we were just experiencing a burst and a kind of
psychological lifting of the funds rate. Following those repurchase
agreements, the funds rate inched down to 20 and then to 19-3/4
percent. And then around 1:30 p.m. or so, the rate dropped off rather
sharply, and to me rather surprisingly, to 18 percent. It looked as
though the big buyers had their demands satisfied and they were seeing



12/05/80

some supply from agencies, banks, and regional banks around the
country.

I don't know if you want me to go into this, but I had given
an estimate at the time of our usual morning conference call that,
given this level of borrowing of around $1-3/4 billion, I would have
expected the funds rate to back [down] from the 20 percent plus level
to perhaps 19 to 20 percent. That would still be my feeling. I
remain somewhat puzzled as to the latest drift off to the 18 percent
area. As for the market reaction elsewhere to the discount rate
[increase], there was an initial very modest decline in the Treasury
market, with [a move in] the long end of the market of around 1/2
point and most of that has been recovered now. So there's about no
change on the day in the longer end of the market. The shorter coupon
had been off as much as 3/4 point, but has recovered some so those
[issues] are only off about 1/2 point. The greatest remaining change
is in the bill area, particularly the short-term bills; the 3-month
bill is up almost a full percentage point to about 15.80 percent.
Finally, CDs seem to be up about 1/2 percentage point; the 3-month CD
is around 18.40 percent and up. And the prime rate, I should mention,
is pretty generally becoming 19 percent now, [led] off by Citibank.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just for the purpose of completeness: You
have had a little action in the international area, Mr. Pardee, I take
it?

MR. PARDEE. Yes, we have. The dollar has continued to be up
a bit since the last FOMC meeting. It has advanced by about 2-1/2
percent against the Deutschemark and by similar amounts against other
currencies. We have continued to buy marks in a large amount. All of
that to this point has been [unintelligible] to the Treasury. The
Treasury now, however, on the day's business is covered as far as the
Carter notes are concerned. The presumption is that we will now
[revert] to even sharing [of purchases] between the Federal Reserve
and the Treasury; [we have bought] $400 million worth of [marks] out
of the $1.5 billion authorization to buy marks. The factors relating
directly to the [strength of the] dollar are mainly due to rising
interest rates in the United States. And in Europe we have a
situation in Poland which has led to a number of [unintelligible] in
the market [unintelligible] selling of the Deutschemark [and going]
into dollars.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to make any
decisions on [the international side] today, but I think we have to
review the domestic situation, to put it in a setting of the
Committee's decision on the directive. [At] the meeting, we made a
decision which [implied] a certain reserve path and we also made a
borrowing decision of $1-1/2 billion, as I recall. I think the
understanding was that if the actual money supply figures came in
somewhat higher than that, but not too much higher--then that would,
of course, be reflected in higher borrowing from the natural
consequences of the nonborrowed path in the short run. And if [the
borrowings] came in high enough, we would have to make an adjustment
in the nonborrowed reserve path. As has happened after other recent
meetings, they did indeed come in high, and they came in high enough
so that we did make an adjustment in the nonborrowed reserve path as
well as having the natural consequence of the higher money supply
figures. And we are left, I guess not certainly, but with the



12/05/80

probability that the 2-month numbers will look higher. On the present
estimates that Steve gave you they're certainly higher than the
Committee's decision. But there is a certain smell about this
situation at the moment of the money supply perhaps coming under
control. I say that not so much because I am so impressed by the most
recent figure of a projected decline next week, but largely because of
the way the figures have been coming in. For the first time this fall
we have been getting downward revisions instead of upward revisions.
I don't know why we have always had upward revisions before and I
don't know why there is a change now. But it has a slight smell to
it--I hope more than a slight smell--that we may be getting some
stability here. So there is a chance that we have in that sense done
enough. But in terms of the Committee decision we made at the
meeting--I forget, has it been modified since the meeting?

MR. ALTMANN. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it was modified once since the
meeting. So we have that 18 percent limit [on the funds rate] in any
event. And at the moment that is in jeopardy. Clearly, the Desk
doesn't have much maneuvering room--or any maneuvering room if that
[limit were viewed] literally. What I would suggest in this somewhat
uncertain situation is that we in effect temporize for the moment and
not make a decision to change that limit. We might have to do that,
or at least review it, next week. But for the moment I would propose
that the Desk be extended an understanding that, in the immediate wake
of the discount rate change, it has whatever maneuvering room it feels
is necessary to keep on the path--with the hope that that will not
mean a much higher federal funds rate than where it has been,
certainly not higher than the 20 percent area. But I can't guarantee
anything. Then we will see, looking a week from now when we will have
another week's preliminary figures on the money supply, whether it is
really desirable and necessary or not to operate within that
constraint of the 18 percent limit.

Now, the figure that Steve gave you is a projection for
December. If I recall correctly, it assumes a pretty big increase in
the money supply in the week of the 10th. We have no data on that
whatsoever. That's just a reflection of the belief that every other
month recently has had a big increase in the money supply at the
beginning of the month and that a cautious projection better assume
that. But we really have no specific information on it. And if we're
really getting a turn in things here, maybe that figure will not come
in so high, and then the December estimate would look quite different.
I obviously don't know that now, but that is a factor in my mind in
suggesting that we not make a permanent type of change in the upper
limit. It's not very permanent anyway in that we're meeting fairly
soon. But an explicit change in the upper limit may not prove to be
necessary or desirable in the light of what we will know by the middle
of next week. Meanwhile, the Desk needs some operating room and we
could have a note to that effect in the published record that comes
out after the next meeting. That is, in the wake of the discount rate
change the Committee had a consultation about the immediate
consequences in the money market and agreed that during the period of
immediate reaction the Desk should have sufficient operating leeway to
conduct its operations without being constrained by the 18 percent
rate, pending further consultation. The implication is that we will
come down to the 18 percent limit in the latter part of next week if



12/05/80

we do not by that time make an explicit decision to change [the
limit]. I haven't gotten precise here, but that is the substance of
what seems to me appropriate at the moment.

I might just add one further thought. If the money supply
figure came in very low for the weeks that we don't know anything
about, we've got to decide whether to drop [the borrowing path]
instead of the very decided increase [we were] talking about. It just
raises the normal question of whether that adjustment in the
nonborrowed reserve path that was made when it was high shouldn't be
reversed so that that's washed out, which would itself relieve
pressures on the market. But that's just a hypothesis based upon
something we don't know.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, do you want comments?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. I think this is a reasonable
proposal as long as it's going to be in the record. Otherwise the New
York Fed would be in danger of being [on the hot seat] for a greater
period of time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree. I think it has to be in the
record.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Sure, and we can see what the
situation is next week.

MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos. I have two questions and I
direct these toward Steve. First, what would the December M-1B figure
[have] to be [assuming] a 9.6 percent growth of M-1B in November to
get us to the top of our annual range? Do you know approximately?

MR. AXILROD. No, I couldn't answer that right now, Larry. I
can give you a figure that [might give you some perspective]: To be
perfectly consistent with the target path adopted at the previous
Committee meeting, it would have to be minus 6.1. But the--

MR. PARTEE. That's above, I think.

MR. AXILROD. And that target path led you to a rate above
the long-run range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would take a huge decrease to hit the
annual figure, Larry.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Unintelligible.]

MR. PARTEE. We could close a few banks.

MR. ROOS. Paul, do you [want to] talk about the [public]
relations [aspects] of an overshoot of those annual targets? In other
words, it seems to me that the issue of what we do in the next few
weeks really [involves] the alternatives of the fed funds rate rising,
perhaps significantly, or the [money growth] overshoot occurring
[unintelligible].



12/05/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have lost on the annual
target on M-1B explicitly, Larry. M-1B is almost certainly going to
be over [its annual target]. Of course, that target technically is a
little low but even if we adjusted it, we would almost certainly be
over it. But if we talk about the theoretical possibility of having a
big enough decline in M-1B in December to be within the range, I think
we would get a helluva lot of flak from the other direction for having
such a big decline in the number in one month. I don't know what the
rate would have to be [in order to come within our target range], but
my impression is that it must be a 10 percent annual rate of decline
or something like that.

MR. AXILROD. To hit the cone, so to speak, in December would
involve a lesser decline, but it would be huge. And to hit the
quarterly average that would [produce] a fourth quarter-over-fourth
quarter number at the upper end of the range would involve a massive
decline as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. We are 1 percent above it
with two-thirds of the quarter gone. Somebody's doing the arithmetic
here, but--

SPEAKER(?). To get to the top of the cone we'd have to have
a decline at about a 7 percent annual rate.

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's finish this point. I am just
getting some numbers and I can relay them to you.

SPEAKER(?). Okay, the top of the cone would be $411.6
billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

SPEAKER(?). And we're at $414-1/4 billion for M-1B. So we
would have to have a 7 percent annual rate of decline to reach the top
of that cone.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. But you haven't figured out the
quarterly figures?

SPEAKER(?). No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't give you the full answer.
But to hit the top of the cone in December, just looking at it monthly
not quarterly, takes a 7 percent decline. And it must take three
times that, I suppose, to hit it for the quarterly figures. So I
think for the quarterly figure we're talking about a change that is
out of sight. But even if [we got that], it would be a decline like
the one we had in April. And everybody would say, my God!

SPEAKER(?). Some people may say more than that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe it will happen. Who knows!

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. Isn't this a bit
academic? Given the lags, there isn't much we can do on December 5 to



12/05/80

impact the money supply in December. But I would add that I think
your "smell of things" is also supported by [the economic] statistics,
particularly the evidence of a decline in housing and reports of a
very sharp [slowing in] retail sales in November. So I support your
feeling.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Larry, I don't know whether you had
finished.

MR. ROOS. Yes, I have finished; that answers [my question].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But do you have an opinion on the
proposal?

MR. ROOS. On the proposal, I am fully in agreement with you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I, too, am in
agreement with the proposal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. MAYO. It sounds fine to Mayo.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. WINN. Paul, this is Willis. I haven't any objection to
the statement of the principle. I would feel a little more
comfortable if we [lifted] the federal funds range and told the Desk
not to go above 18 or 19 percent, except temporarily.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the proposal is that we leave it at
18 percent but tell the Desk it can be above that temporarily pending
further discussion next week.

MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I would just like to
be [a devil's advocate] for one minute. It's not clear to me what we
gain by [this] course. [Why not] increase the upper limit instead of
just telling the Desk it is permitted to exceed it for a week? Is it
substantive or procedural or are there public relations aspects to
this in terms of the public record later on or what? I don't quite
understand this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's nothing particularly [in the
realm of] public relations about it. My feeling is that the Desk
needs a little maneuvering room. But I suspect, looking at it over a
time horizon and given the uncertainty in the money supply, that it is
a question of whether people want to make a decision now that the
federal funds rate should be at any particular point. I don't know
whether explicitly for the next day or two, 19 percent gives the Desk
the maneuvering room. On the other hand, I am not crazy right at the
moment myself about making a decision that the 18 percent limit should
be raised until I see at least the following week's money supply data,
given my sense that the trend may be changing here. That may be wrong
and we may well have to raise the rate. But I don't know precisely
how much maneuvering room the Desk needs at the moment. I hope it is



12/05/80

not too much, but I don't want to have the Desk unduly inhibited
either.

MS. TEETERS. Is there a chance it will go to 19 percent and
just stick there? If we get--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters just came in. Let me
just catch her up to date. The latest information is that the federal
funds rate at the moment is at 18 percent, but it had been over 20
percent earlier in the day. So I don't know. It is not at 19 percent
at the moment anyway.

MR. PARTEE. This is Chuck Partee. Paul, one question I
would have is about the way you put it. You put it rather strictly
that the Manager would go about his reserve-supplying activities along
the path and see what was needed. That to me almost means that there
is no cap at all on the funds rate for this next week. And since I
have a sense of the market being in a crisis atmosphere, I have a
little concern about the possibility that, in fact, the rate might go
very high in this next week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would be concerned if I thought it
was going very high. I am a little less concerned [given] the most
recent trend--that [the market] is [not] fixing a 20 percent rate in
its mind. What I meant to imply is that the Manager knows the general
limit is still 18 percent. And while that is being suspended, he is
[to be] within the limits of what is feasible on the path. He is [to
be] a bit tender with the market this week, if that answers your
question.

MS. TEETERS. I have a question. If he sticks to the path,
will we be in a position of providing reserves this coming week or
withdrawing them, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we have differences in estimates, as
Peter reported earlier. We have to provide reserves. What Peter has
done today already provides more than our path had called for,
assuming that the estimates are accurate. So we are in a position
where we have already provided more than the amount called for and
unless there is a shortfall in the factors, we wouldn't be providing
more. And in response [to what we provided today] the funds rate did
drop down to 18 percent.

MS. TEETERS. I mean next week. Are we going to be in a
position [to add reserves] or have we done all we're going to do [as
of] today?

MR. AXILROD. It depends. If the factors break away from us
on Monday or Tuesday, then we might have to provide more.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. At the moment it looks as if we have done
all we have to do.

MR. AXILROD. The implied level of borrowing, Governor
Teeters, dropped to $1760 million from the $2 billion we had then. So
we are providing [reserves] on that assumption.



12/05/80

MR. STERNLIGHT. Could I [chime] in on something? I think
Steve is referring to the current statement week. Governor Teeters,
if you are asking about the following statement week, I believe we
would have to provide reserves then.

MS. TEETERS. Thank you, Peter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where [we were]. You raised
a question of clarification, Governor Partee. Do you have anything
further to add?

MR. PARTEE. I guess I share your feeling that the aggregates
are in the process of coming under control. Indeed, I think we are
now in the range where the great danger is that we will overshoot
quite a bit. Therefore, since I think the process is already under
way of giving us the numbers we want, I would like to avoid any sense
of true crisis in the market. So, I will buy your proposal, but I
would buy it with the reservation that we don't mean by it that we
would let the rate just escalate in these next few days to anything it
wished to do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I didn't mean to imply that in the
context of where we are. But I'd hate to say 19 percent is just the
right number.

MR. PARTEE. No, I agree. I think there may be a very real
chance that we can keep it within the 18 percent limit after a couple
of days--[it seems to be] settling down--but I am not sure of it.

MR. EASTBURN. Paul, this is Dave Eastburn. I think the more
crucial part of the Desk's problem will be how rapidly [to respond] as
the aggregates come in low, as I suspect they will. I would be
inclined to agree with what you said earlier, that we should respond
fairly rapidly and promptly to low aggregates figures if and when they
do develop.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that mean, Dave? If you
mean by [unintelligible] reserves?

MR. EASTBURN. I think we ought to let the rates come down
[if] the aggregates come in low. Does that answer your question?

MR. PARTEE. But we do have a range, Dave, with the bottom
being what--14 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I think we probably won't have to
face that question until the next Committee meeting at the earliest.
I think we are really talking about the degree of leeway we have on
the up side during what we hope is a period of transition here. It's
hard to believe that those numbers would come in so low in the next
two weeks that--. You know, the optimist would say that under those
conditions the federal funds rate would settle in the 17 to 18 percent
area. I don't think we are talking about anything lower than that in
this time period. And one has to be optimistic even on that score,
but that's what we will know next week.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I assume that we would accept the
period of undershooting, if we get to that point, for sufficiently



12/05/80

long that we correct some of the overshooting that we had in the
second half of this year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what the current directive says.

MR. EASTBURN. I guess what I was [saying], Tony, is that I
would agree with Chuck in that I think we are in great danger of
overkill here. I believe the market is very sensitive to the level of
interest rates, and to the extent that we can permit some easing when
we see the way clear to do so, I think we ought do it as promptly as
possible.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey. I would support
your proposal if I understand it, and I think I do. I would add just
one other point. It's puzzling to me, in view of the discussion here
and at least our view as to what is happening, why the discount rate
was increased yesterday. It would be helpful to me if somebody could
explain the rationale for it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will explain it to you as best I
can. I think it is rather interesting that perhaps for the first time
in some time we seem to have a real split in evaluations of the
Reserve Banks [regarding the appropriate level for the discount rate.]
Some of them felt pretty strongly that it should not be moved and
others felt very strongly that it should be moved. Some of that
flavor was reflected in our own discussions, and I think it's inherent
in the kind of situation we are in. It was a question of balancing
the risks of overkill, as it's sometimes put, against the risks of
underkill, as it is also sometimes put. In favor of doing it was the
fact that the aggregates as of the moment are still running high and
that this sense of things perhaps turning may or may not be real.
Even if it is real, the fact of the moment is that now the aggregates
are high and if they continue high, those problems of credibility and
so forth that you people keep telling me about are there. We are at a
very sensitive stage in terms of what has happened in the past in
terms of credibility and the current inflation problem and all the
rest. So that was balanced against the risk of either appearing to
contribute too harshly to a business downturn or even the possibility,
which begins to glimmer in one's eyes, that the money supply might
actually go down--and that it might actually go down faster than one
wants to see it go down. That case is far from proven, but those are
the two balancing factors. And I suppose the decision reflected the
fact that there was a feeling that there was a greater risk of
[overshoot] rather than [undershoot].

MR. GUFFEY(?). I guess I am really asking what was the
chance of--

MR. PARTEE. Greater damage. [Unintelligible] as a result of
it, whether or not it was merely an announcement effect that offset
some of these concerns, or whether or not the realization was that
unless other action was taken we would, indeed, increase the interest
rate levels.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, and I speak for myself, we weren't
looking for any great announcement effect. And if the money supply is



12/05/80

turning--but that's an if--there's a hope that there wouldn't be all
that much interest rate effect. If the money supply is not [turning]
for that or any other reason, we would get an interest rate effect.
But if the money supply really turns, maybe the interest rate effect
won't amount to much because we can relieve the borrowing pressure.
That is precisely the reason I put this decision today the way I did,
as "in the wake of the immediate impact" [of the discount rate
increase]. I don't want to prejudge that issue. And we do have this
immediate market reaction type of thing. We will give it a week to
see whether it settles down; that is what I am saying.

MR. GUFFEY(?). In that context, I would support the
proposal.

MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we took one
type of action yesterday, which was an effort to be consistent. We
shouldn't back away from taking further action that would be
consistent--that is, to raise the upper limit. Now, [if] it's true
that the aggregates are slowing and may be coming down, then there
isn't going to be any effect. On the other hand, if they are as
relentless and they continue to go up, we wouldn't have lost several
days' time in making that move. [I'd prefer that] we go up. I
presume we will have to make that move anyway.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but [we are not] preventing it from
going up at the moment, although the market is being treated
cautiously. That's--

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me it is a logical and consistent
action to have a discount rate increase and then to follow that up
with an increase in the funds rate range.

MS. TEETERS. And then you will argue for an increase in the
discount rate again to close the gap.

MR. PARTEE. It's going to catch up.

MR. WALLICH. The gap closes gradually; it doesn't close all
at once. But it certainly diminishes. We took a large step
yesterday; I don't see why we should back away from a small and
possibly quite inconsequential step now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what steps you are
proposing, because I don't know where the rate may fluctuate in the
next few days. All I am saying is the kind of consideration that you
are raising seems to me one that would appropriately be considered in
the middle of next week when we see whether it is necessary or whether
it isn't.

MR. WALLICH. Well, it certainly [would] be appropriate next
week. I would much rather take it now.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In answer to Henry, I think the chief
advantage of your approach, Paul, is that we don't know now whether to
raise it to 19 or 19-1/2 or 20 or even 21 percent for that matter.
This may be a very involved situation, and I think there is a chance
that it will settle down in the course of the week. If we were to
move [up] and raise it to 19 percent, we might have to meet again

-10-



12/05/80

Tuesday or Wednesday to raise it to 20 percent. So, there is some
advantage in this approach, even though normally I don't think it is a
good way of addressing a problem.

MR. WALLICH. Is it your thought that by letting it remain
undefined, that it might actually go higher than it would go if we set
a limit of, say, 19 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we set a limit of 19 percent,
presumably [Peter] is going to go out there and defend 19 percent
fairly precisely at the moment and I am not sure that is a good thing.

MR. WALLICH. But [not] on a daily basis, a weekly basis.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. But [if] it is already at
20 percent over the weekend, I don't know whether [a limit of] 19
percent means that he would have to go down to 18 percent after the
weekend if we adopted a strict construction--

MR. BAUGHMAN. This is Baughman. It seems to me that I am
sitting here listening to arguments for taking [the limit] off.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have. The proposal is to take it off
with a caveat that it is treated tenderly for one week.

MR. BAUGHMAN. The proposal is acceptable to me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who haven't we heard from?

MR. GRAMLEY. This is Lyle Gramley. I have said nothing yet,
and I am with you. I think it's a good way to handle the problem now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice has not said--

MR. RICE. I support you, Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Has anybody not been heard from?

MS. TEETERS. Me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters has not been heard from
[except] in asking a question.

MS. TEETERS. I voted against the discount rate increase
yesterday. I just think we are using this process to [ratchet] up the
rates now to where they should be or where they can be. Mainly for
consistency, I can't support this proposal because I think if it goes
wrong, you folks are going to come back and ask for a discount rate
increase again. And I think that is going too far. I can see the
advantage of letting it fluctuate for a week, but the experience that
we had last spring was that every time we added another percentage
point on the range, we went to the top of it and almost
instantaneously it stuck there. And then another week went by and we
had to raise it again. I would just like to see the ratchet stopped.
So, I will be consistent and vote the same way I did on the discount
rate.

-11-



12/05/80

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned a vote. I'm now talking to
the Secretary. There seems to be a consensus; do we also need a vote?
I think this has to be in the record. For general matters of
explanation it should be in the record, but also for the reason Tony
mentioned. We can have a vote. We can either have it now or we can
try to write this down in a sentence or two and send it around in a
telegram for a vote. I can try to phrase it now and we might as well
have a vote. But let me see what the Secretary says about this.

MR. ALTMANN. Well, if there is an objection to this
procedure, there really is no way to register a dissent apart from
having a vote on the issue of whether to maintain the current
directive or modify it in some way, which either raises the limit or
provides for a temporary exception.

MR. PARTEE. I think we need to have a vote, Murray, because
we had a vote on raising the limit a week ago or whenever it was. So
to accept [exceeding] that limit, since that limit was established by
vote, I think does require a vote.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with having a vote; it
may be appropriate. Let me just try to formulate something orally to
see whether it comes close enough to capture the spirit of this so we
can have the vote now instead of waiting for a telegram vote. I would
propose, in the light of the uncertainties surrounding the immediate
reaction to the discount rate change and the questions as to market
reaction in the ensuing days, that the open market Desk be given
latitude to pursue a reserve target without its operations being
confined by the existing 18 percent limitation [on the funds rate] in
the directive, pending further consultation if necessary--if in fact
the rate is exceeded in the middle of next week.

MS. TEETERS. How long is that to hold? Is it the next
calendar week or until the middle of next week?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't pin me down on whether the
[consultation] is Wednesday or Thursday. What I have in mind is that
I'd like to get a look at which direction the money supply is going in
and we won't know that until the middle of next week some time.

MR. PARTEE. Probably Thursday.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably Thursday is what we are talking
about. So basically this is carrying us through this statement week.

MR. WALLICH. Mr. Chairman, just to clarify my position: I
don't think it makes a great deal of difference in terms of the rates
likely to be achieved. The time period is very short, to be sure.
But it does seem to me that one of our problems has been a lack of
firm consistency on [timing]. And that is what we could demonstrate
here. We made one move; we make another move. It is not a very risky
or damaging move and I think it would enhance our posture.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not quite sure I understand that. If
you went all the way and said we should permanently take off the
limit, then I think you would be making a real postural change. I'm
not sure what the postural implications are to go to 19 percent, say,
if that turns out to be constraining this week.

-12-



12/05/80

MR. WALLICH. Well, it means that we take a move that is
logically consistent with the previous move. And what we sought to
[accomplish] would be missing in the record if we don't take it.

MR. PARTEE. I think you would need 20 percent, Henry.

MR. WALLICH. Even that aggressive?

MR. PARTEE. I mean to be logically consistent.

MR. WALLICH. When we moved only one percentage point [on the
discount rate]?

MS. TEETERS. To be logically consistent, Henry, I would take
the floor off also.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we are probably ready to vote if I
have sufficiently or adequately conveyed [the sense] of the sentence
that would appear in the Committee's record. Mr. Altmann, do you want
to call the roll?

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Guffey Yes
President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
President Solomon Yes
Governor Teeters No
Governor Wallich No
President Winn Yes

SPEAKER(?). Gee, we like these ballots don't we?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be interested to see how the
dissents read.

MR. ROOS. Paul, this is Larry and I have a question.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. ROOS. You indicated that at our next FOMC meeting we're
going to have a preliminary discussion of the 1981 ranges.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. ROOS. Shall we be prepared to discuss that in some
depth, or what are you planning to do on that?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know quite what you mean by
"some depth." I would anticipate a fairly considerable discussion
that would extend over some period of time. I think the discussion
can be a little wider--more free ranging--at this stage than it
probably can be at the [following] meeting when we are going to bore
into a very specific decision. So if anybody has radical thoughts,

-13-



12/05/80

you certainly ought to bring them up at that meeting and we can let
our minds roam a bit and have a kind of philosophical debate. I think
there are real questions here. We face the problem next year--and I
just don't know what we should do about it--regarding the
meaningfulness of the M-1A and M-1B targets. Abstracting from that, I
have a few ideas of my own on presentation that I am looking at; it's
purely presentational, but it is interesting. I am sure that no
presentation can solve the problem of judging the uncertainty about
M-1A and M-1B and their meaningfulness.

In that connection, I might say that the banks have gotten
quite excited about this decision of the DIDC--for the same reason
that we didn't like it much--to have the same rate on transactions
balances as on savings deposits for commercial banks. They have
visions dancing around in their heads that all their savings deposits
are going to turn into NOW accounts. And they don't like it because
it will cost them a 12 percent reserve requirement. But apart from
that, it certainly is going to make those M-1B figures look funny. We
may have to have a target of 32 percent for M-1B next year!

MR. MORRIS. This is Frank Morris. I suggest that we don't
have a target for the M-ls because we don't have any basis for making
projections.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is one of the things I think we
ought to be looking at at this next meeting. Do we end up with the
conclusion, whether we like it or not--maybe some people like it
anyway--that we have to put more weight on M2 and M3? I don't know;
it is a very difficult subject.

MR. PARTEE. M-1B plus savings accounts.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee was just saying maybe we
have to follow an M-1B plus savings accounts kind of figure. But the
trouble with that is that savings accounts have been going down so
precipitously that--

MR. PARTEE. So we put a [unintelligible] for that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't got an answer, but we ought to
be thinking about it before the next meeting. Any other questions or
comments? I guess the answer to your question, Larry, is that I would
use the term "in depth" [to describe the nature of our discussion next
time]. I would not assume, obviously, that we have to zero in on the
exact [growth rate] percentage of a target. But we ought to try in a
preliminary way to clear out as much of this underbrush, if that is
what it is, as we can, so we have the issues clearly in our minds and
have some possible approaches for dealing with them.

MR. ROOS. Fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, that's it if nobody else has any
questions or comments. Thank you.

END OF SESSION

-14-


