









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


Meeting of Federal Open Market Committee

March 7, 1980

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was

held on Friday, March 7, 1980. This was a telephone conference

meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C., except

as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list

of those participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich
Mr. Winn

(Kansas City)
(Boston)

(St. Louis)

(San Francisco)
(Cleveland)

Messrs. Baughman (Dallas), Eastburn (Philadelphia),
Timlen (New York), and Willes (Minneapolis),
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), and Kimbrel

(Atlanta), Presidents of the Federal Reserve

Banks of San Francisco and Atlanta, respectively

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Petersen, General Counsel
Oltman(New York), Deputy General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis (New York), Ettin, Keir,
Kichline, and Truman, Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for
Domestic Operations, System Open
Market Account

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign
Operations, System Market Account



3/7/80 - 2 -

Mr. Allison, Secretary, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of
Governors

Ms. Farar, Economist, Open Market
Secretariat, Board of Governors

Mr. Burger (St. Louis), Assistant Vice
President, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
March 7, 1980

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I doubt that we have to be here for very long. You know that in

general we've been putting pressure on the reserve positions of banks. That is in effect the implication

of carrying out the Committee decision. We're running high on total reserves, which is almost

automatic since we're running high on the money supply. The path of nonborrowed reserves has been

reduced under the circumstances from the tentative path worked out at the time of the Committee

meeting. Interest rates, including the federal funds rate, are up--both because of the pressure and

because of expectations, I think. We have a wide range between the discount rate and market rates at

the moment. We haven't acted on the discount rate for the reason I've suggested earlier. We have had

to raise the limit on the federal funds rate to 17-1/2 percent, which we did as a tentative decision until

we had time to confirm it or change it this afternoon.

I believe we are at a crucial point in market psychology and the effectiveness of what we are

trying to do. I think people in markets are nervous enough so that policy, maybe for the first time, is

beginning to bite outside the mortgage and consumer loan areas and some other areas where it began

biting some time ago. It's important that we not give a wrong signal at this point, and in my judgment

a wrong signal would be backing away from market developments in response to the greater pressure

on reserve positions. And that's what has required the increase in the federal funds rate. I have no

better idea than you do--or maybe you have better ideas than I do--as to how long this tension might

last or how much further it might go. In line with somebody's comment earlier, I think it's important

that the job get done. We all will be worse off if it doesn't get done now. The side effects are already

potentially serious if things don't go right. [The situation] could probably get more serious if there is

procrastination. At the moment I have nothing better to suggest to you than that, at the minimum, we



3/7/80

maintain the 17-1/2 percent limit [on the top of the funds rate range] and be prepared to raise it if we

have to. Or we can go ahead now and raise it to 18 percent, which will give us a little more leeway.

We still may have to raise it afterwards. I think I would, given the state of things and since we're

meeting anyway, provide us with a little margin and go to 18 percent. But we can do it either way. I

might say, too--I don't know whether all of you know it--that in 15 minutes we will be announcing a

decline of about $2.5 billion in Ml. Let me have Steve give you the precise figures.

MR. AXILROD. We'll be announcing--unless the numbers have changed in the last hour or

two, which is always possible--a $2.8 billion drop in M-1A from the level of [February] 2 0 th . So [the

level for February] 27th will be down to $374.7 billion. I might add that the prospective figure for

[March] 5th, which is highly tentative, suggests another drop of around $900 million. The growth rate

for February will be about 11-1/2 percent at an annual rate. We're projecting growth for March on the

order of zero.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The M2 and M3 figures seem to be running significantly above

their targets, even if we combine the months. The implied quarterly figure would be what--2 [points]

above [the Committee's path]?

MR. AXILROD. That's right. For the period from December 1979 to March 1980, the

Committee's path for M2 was around 6.6 percent and M2 growth is running 8.3 percent--about 1-3/4

or almost 2 percentage points above it. For M3 the Committee's path was 7.4 percent, and M3 growth

is running 9.5 percent using our projection for March--that is, a March projection with a lower growth

than in February. So M3 is running 2 points above [the Committee's target]. I might say that the

strength in M2 is essentially in money market funds. They are stronger than we had estimated, with no

compensating weakness in other time and saving deposits, and that's the essential factor strengthening

the M2 figure.



3/7/80

MR. EASTBURN. Steve, do you think that by now the February figure is pretty well

understood and discounted by the market?

MR. AXILROD. On the money supply?

MR. EASTBURN. Yes.

MR. AXILROD. I believe so. I don't know whether there will be any market reaction or

response to [the figures being released] this afternoon but I think it has been clear for a couple of

weeks that February would be a high number. And the market as a whole has adjusted to that, as has

the funds rate in fact.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might say, insofar as bank credit is concerned, that the January

figure was around 13 percent.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, I just got the bank credit figures earlier, Mr. Chairman. For January

our estimate on the total is 12.8 percent, with business loans up 21 percent of which Belridge Oil

Company, as I remember, is around 4 percentage points. For February our current estimate for bank

credit growth is around 18 percent, with business loans almost 24 percent and total loans around 19

percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Undoubtedly that February figure to some extent [reflects] the

anticipatory commitments and borrowing that we know have been going on for the last couple of

weeks.

MR. BAUGHMAN. Did I understand you to say, Steve, that the March money growth

[projection] is zero?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. If this number holds up for the 5th, it will start the month off at a

very low level. So, to reach a growth rate as high as zero money would have to grow over the course

of March. If money stayed at or just slightly above the estimated February 27th level or the March 5th



3/7/80

level, we'd have a negative growth rate. But we've assumed a reasonable pace of growth over the

course of March, which produces an average level that would be around zero [on the growth rate].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't help but comment that despite the diligence and

intelligence of our staff, that estimate is worth about as much as you paid for it, Ernie.

SPEAKER(?). We paid quite a bit for it.

MR. AXILROD. I'm not quite sure. I haven't figured out that one yet!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I meant] that he personally paid for it.

MS. TEETERS. But it could go negative, couldn't it, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Oh yes.

MS. TEETERS. We've had a drop so far in late February and early March and it could

keep going down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What it means is that if money stayed somewhere around the

level now projected for the next week that we haven't published yet, we'd have a very low March.

MR. AXILROD. I ought to add, President Baughman, even with zero we're getting closer

to target. We get a 5.1 percent December-to-March rate as against the 4-1-/2 percent target path for

M-1A. It's the broader aggregates, if our projections are right, that seem stronger relative to path than

the narrow aggregate.

MR. SCHULTZ. And we still could have very high bank credit growth.

MR. TIMLEN. Paul, do you want a motion on that 17-1/2 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 18 percent, whichever you prefer.

MR. TIMLEN. Paul, I have just a couple of comments. We had a session with about a

dozen businessmen a week and a half ago and they were very, very optimistic about the business

outlook for this year. They expressed a great deal of concern, though, about the high levels of interest



3/7/80

rates and about those high rates being built into the price structure. And they made particular

reference to prices being charged by the utilities. I must say that smaller banks are talking to us about

their inability to make a profit on new loans that they are putting on. So I would suspect that there is a

credit bite coming along now at, say, the medium and smaller size banks in terms of their earnings. I

can't help but add that in New York the earnings situation at savings banks is also a source of much

concern. Three or four of them actually posted losses in 1979, as you know. There is also a good deal

of concern regarding losses on consumer credit cards, but that's news to no one.

Getting back to the group of businessmen, there was a great deal of encouragement on their

part for the Federal Reserve to get into credit controls. But the credit controls they were proposing

were not on their own ability as businessmen to borrow but on the ability of consumers to borrow. I

have to say that it seems to me that these rates are all going to have to bite pretty soon. They have to

be slowing some people down. I'm most hopeful that the Administration package next week may be

seen as a good one so that the Federal Reserve doesn't have to continue carrying all the [burden] on its

side and we can be seen as firm but not prone to overkill on the interest [rate] side. I'd say the move

now to give Peter Sternlight a little room on the up side is fine, whether it's 17-1/2 or 18 percent. I

think the 17-1/2 is fine. As for the range, though, I would say that with either 17-1/2 or 18 percent I

would [want] some assurance that we're not going to flip-flop too far down the other way. I can even

see the floor being adjusted at this point, perhaps moving it up to 12-1/2 or 13 as a signal of our

continuing resolve--our resolve that rates are not going to go down very far. That's particularly

important I think for the Europeans, who in the foreign exchange markets are giving us a good deal of

credibility as our rates are hanging in there. And our rates are hanging in there, as you know, despite

massive intervention by [officials] in Tokyo and Germany. So basically, I'm all for the 17-1/2



3/7/80

percent. 1 could see being a little stronger or hawkish in that regard by going to 18 percent or even

raising the floor.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I hadn't even thought of raising the floor. I doubt that

that's going to be a binding limit before we meet [on March 18]. But I share much of what you had to

say in substance. Let me just make one point. I worried about building this rate structure into the

economy, too. But my sense of it both from the institutional standpoint--the strains on the institution--

and building a rate structure into the economy, which at this point I think is inflationary if [the rate

structure] doesn't bite, is that we better make sure that what we're doing bites at the moment.

MR. TIMLEN. I agree with that.

MR. ROOS. Larry Roos here. In order to get something on the floor, I move that we raise

the upper limit to 18 percent. If we don't have to use [the additional leeway] we won't, but it will be

there if the Desk needs it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree with Larry and Tom. I think we ought to raise the upper limit

to 18. I wouldn't want to raise the lower limit because it seems to me that we're determined to have a

policy here that will produce the aggregates we've said we would produce. Right now this seems to

call for much higher rates. It has called for higher rates and could call for still somewhat higher rates

in the period to come and we ought to have room to move if that's necessary. Looking a little further

ahead, as the financial panic leads to deep recession I think we'll need considerably lower rates and we

ought to keep open the room for doing that in order to get the aggregates that we've said we were

going to get.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll strike that last comment--[the "recession"] word in that

last comment.



3/7/80

MR. PARTEE. There is a little problem with M2 and M3 because I never thought we had

much control over them and I think that's now beginning to be apparent. But I would hope that the

other things that were discussed before might help a little in limiting the growth of M2 and M3 so that

looking over a somewhat longer period those, too, will come down more within the ranges. But I

think our main emphasis needs to be on our posture vis-a-vis the monetary aggregates. And the Desk

ought to have the room to move in working toward that goal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we should just go down the list here.

Who has not spoken? Mr. Guffey you spoke, didn't you?

MR. GUFFEY. No, I haven't spoken, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, Mr. Roos spoke.

MR. GUFFEY. [We 're on] the other side of Missouri, Mr.Chairman. I happen to believe

that we've come a long way so far and I think now is not the time to hesitate or lose our courage. As a

result, I think we ought to give the Desk whatever latitude seems necessary, and that would suggest an

18 percent upper limit. On the other hand, I would [not] agree with Governor Partee. I would like to

see us maintain the 4-point spread on that [funds rate] range. It can be moved, of course, if and when

we have to [move rates] down and that would suggest that the top [of the range] would come down at

the same time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris. I'm not sure what order I have these names in but

I'm going with the order that happens to be on the list I have in front of me.

MR. ALTMANN. It's alphabetical.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's alphabetical I'm told, except with Volcker first.

MR. MORRIS. I support the 18 percent, Paul, and I also support raising the lower limit to

14 percent. After all, we're only talking about what we're going to do between now and the time of



3/7/80

the meeting. It's not likely that we would ever use the [whole] range in the next week--that [the funds

rate] would be less than 14 percent. It seems to me that a range of 11-1/2 to 18 percent is verging on

the absurd. So I would vote for 14 to 18 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee spoke. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. I would favor raising the [upper] limit to 18 and leaving the lower limit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would favor the same thing. [I'd move the] upper limit to 18 and leave

the lower limit alone.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I would reluctantly raise [the upper limit] to 18 percent and I certainly

would not raise the lower limit at this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Timlen spoke. Governor Wallich. We have to get [his

views] over the other telephone.

MR. ALLISON for MR. WALLICH. Governor Wallich would prefer 14 and 18.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich would prefer 14 and 18, if you understood

that. Do we have John Balles out there at this point?

MR. ALTMANN. He's not a member.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, he's not a member.

MR. ALTMANN. Let's get Mr. Winn first.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're getting Mr. Winn's conclusion.

MR. ALLISON for MR. WALLICH. President Winn is in favor of 18 at the top and he's

indifferent on the bottom. Either way is all right with him on the bottom.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are the new members of the Committee.



3/7/80

MR. ALTMANN. That' s right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's go to the nonvoting [Presidents] now. Mr. Balles. Did

you all hear Mr. Winn's preference by the way?

SPEAKER(?). No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He favors 18 on the top and is indifferent on the bottom.

SPEAKER(?). John Balles is also in favor of 14 to 18.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles is 14 to 18. Mr. Baughman.

MR. BAUGHMAN. I would go with the 14 to. 18. In fact, I would go with taking [the

limits] off altogether.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Eastburn.

MR. EASTBURN. I would go to 18 percent and leave the bottom where it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kimbrel. Bones has disappeared. Mr. Willes.

MR. WILLES. I'd go to 18 and leave the bottom where it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would suggest that the only operative proposition really

is the top and we can discuss the bottom when we meet in a week. Do we need a formal vote, Mr.

Altmann?

MR. ALTMANN. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's put that proposition to a vote.

MR. TIMLEN. The top being 18 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The top being 18.

MR. ALTMANN. The lower limit remains at 11-1/2 percent and the upper limit is raised to

18 percent.

Chairman Volcker Yes
President Guffey Yes



3/7/80

President Morris Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
President Roos Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
First Vice President Timlen Yes
Governor Wallich (by remote) Yes
President Winn (by remote) Yes

Unanimous, with 11 votes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. We'll be back in touch with you one way or another

when we get a little firmer fix on timing and anything else that's relevant.

MR. GUFFEY. Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. We had a vote this morning by wire that is inconsistent

with what we just did. I would hope that the record would only show one vote today, that being the

[vote to raise the upper limit to] 18 percent. 1

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the record probably has to show both, but it will show

that the first vote was an interim decision made until we had a meeting. I think it was clear that that

vote was for the day, pending consultation. We'll make sure that's the way it appears.

MR. GUFFEY. Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Thank you very much.

END OF MEETING

1/ Secretary's note: Prior to this meeting, the Committee had approved by notation vote a
recommendation by Chairman Volcker to raise the upper limit for the federal funds rate from 16-1/2 to
17-1/2 percent, pending a discussion of the situation in a telephone conference call to be held in the
afternoon of March 7. Previously, by notation vote on February 22, 1980, the Committee, on the
Chairman's recommendation, had raised the upper limit from 15-1/2 percent to 16-1/2 percent. At the
Committee's regularly scheduled meeting on February 4-5, 1980 the full range for the intermeeting
period had been set at 11-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent.


