









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

December 21-22, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in

Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, December 21, 1981, at 3:30 p.m. and

continuing on Tuesday, December 22, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman

Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman

Mr. Boehne

Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan 1/

Mr. Gramley

Mr. Keehn

Mr. Partee

Mr. Rice

Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters

Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 2/
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, Duprey, Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman,
and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to ratify System Open Market trans-
actions in Government securities, agency obligations and bankers acceptances.

2/ Attended Tuesday session only.



12/21-22/81

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System 
Open Market Account 

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, 
System Open Market Account 

Mr. Wallace, First Vice President, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas 

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors 
Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors, Division 

of International Finance, Board of Governors 
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mr. Kohn, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat, 

Board of Governors 

Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Eisenmenger, Keran, Koch, 
and Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, Boston, 
San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectively 

Messrs. Burger and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston 

Ms. Lovett, Securities Trading Officer, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York 

- 2 -



 
 

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of                     
December 21-22, 1981 

 
December 21--Afternoon Session 

 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We can come to order and approve the 
minutes.  
 
 MR. SCHULTZ.  So moved.  
 
 SPEAKER(?).  Second.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  With a motion and a second we will 
approve the minutes, if there are no objections.  Then we will have a 
report on foreign currency operations or the lack thereof.  
 
 MR. CROSS.  [Statement--see Appendix.]  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Any comments or questions?  
 
 MR. GUFFEY.  I'd just like to ask this:  You mentioned that 
we had authority to intervene.  Authority from whom?  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  What was the question?  
 
 MR. CROSS.  The question was:  From where did the authority 
come to intervene?  The New York Federal Reserve Bank was instructed 
by the Chairman on the basis of discussions between the Treasury and 
the Federal Reserve.  
 
 MS. TEETERS.  What were the terms that the Treasury agreed 
to for us to begin [intervening]?  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, we would have intervened if the 
[mark] had continued to weaken.  I am sorry I missed whatever you 
said Sam, but we would [unintelligible].  After the Polish 
declaration of martial law, the mark was very weak and then it 
strengthened relative to [its level] in the Far East.  We would have 
intervened if it had retreated rapidly again after having 
strengthened at around the 2.30 level or a little lower, 
[unintelligible].  
 
 MR. CROSS.  The mark hit a peak in the Far Eastern trading 
of about 2.36-1/2 and the rates in terms of the other [currencies] 
were similar.  But in terms of DM it went down to about 2.33 when 
Europe began its operations.  Also, the Japanese intervened in their 
market. Then as the European markets opened there was intervention by 
the German authorities and also some profit-taking and the rate 
continued to come down to 2.30.  And then in the middle of the 
morning here it was down to about 2.28.  So, during the entire period 
when our markets were open, the rates were coming back into balance 
and the pressures were subsiding.  But we had the authority to step 
in had the movement gone the other way and had it looked as though 
the rates were beginning to spurt back up with the dollar getting 
stronger and the mark and yen and other currencies weakening.  But we 
did not use the authority.  
 
 MS. TEETERS.  Did the Treasury say in any specific way what 



 
 

it considered a disorderly market?  Did they say a certain percentage 
change or something like that would be--  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  Well, as Paul said, there was a 
feeling on that midmorning that if the mark reversed itself and the 
dollar weakened--the mark was up to about 2.29 or 2.30--then it might 
be appropriate [to intervene], depending on the conditions at that 
moment.  But that was in the context of the reaction to the Polish 
move.  I don't think that the Treasury or even you have a view as to 
what rate change [constitutes a disorderly market], devoid of the 
context in which the rate change comes about, unless maybe it comes 
about very abruptly.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Where's the rate now?  
 
 MR. CROSS.  2.28.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I still think that was fairly abrupt.  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  But we have had bigger moves than 
that.  
 
 MR. CROSS.  The market has been quite unsettled all week.  
On Friday the rate in terms of DM again--I hate to keep talking about 
that one, but it is convenient--hit 2.30 in the European markets.  It 
started at 2.27-1/2 on the previous trading day, went up to 2.30, and 
came back down to 2.27-1/2 during our trading day.  Then after the 
money supply figures were announced, it went up to 2.28-1/4 roughly. 
So there was an awful lot of movement during many of these days.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  My sense is that this market has been a 
very poor market--let me put it that way--right through this period. 
Is that still correct?  
 
 MR. CROSS.  That's correct.  It has been a very thin market, 
particularly coming as it does near the end of the year when we are 
told that not only the banks but the corporations are interested in 
getting their books cleaned up and don't want to take new positions 
and so forth.  There are not many operators out there making markets, 
so if anybody has something that he has to do in terms of business, 
it seems to move the rate by quite a substantial amount with a 
relatively small amount of activity.  I would agree with you that the 
markets have been quite unsettled.  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  The markets attribute that to our 
policy of nonintervention.  In fact, I gather at the Federal Advisory 
Council meeting you had in November that all the banks represented on 
that Council criticized the nonintervention policy.  At least that is 
what Don Platten told me.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I guess I said something.  I forget 
exactly what they said.  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  It wasn't that much.  
 
 MR. SCHULTZ.  Yes, it wasn't severe criticism.  
 
 MR. TRUMAN.  My memory is that he said there was 

12/21-22/81 -2-



 
 

disagreement among the banks.  He presented a view which said that 
[the FAC members] suspect this [nonintervention policy] has something 
to do with [the market unsettlement] but there are banks that have 
other views.  That is also my memory of the written report that they 
made to the Board at the time.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  But when we asked them, the Federal 
Advisory Committee members did say that banks not under the FAC might 
have other views.  I guess that is the way it was.  As I recall, that 
comment was in their written report but they weren't violent about 
it.  
 
 MR. SCHULTZ.  As a matter of fact, they also said that there 
was some general agreement that intervention policy should be used 
sparingly or something like that.  I didn't get the feeling that they 
had a strong position on that.  That's my recollection.  I didn't 
think it was a very vitriolic comment.  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  It is always interesting to hear two 
people report a conversation.  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  That is what I was thinking.  He thought he 
delivered a strong message and we didn't even hear it!  
 
 VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON.  That is what he told us [in New 
York].  
 
 MR. SCHULTZ.  Is my recollection wrong?  
 
 MR. PARTEE.  I can hardly remember [what was said].  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  Well, I'd forgotten it.  But it did come 
up and I guess they did put in their written report a positive 
recommendation that we ought to intervene.  They were not frothing at 
the mouth about it, but it was a positive recommendation.  I asked 
whether that view was generally held and they said they thought it 
was by a lot people, but not everybody.  And that was the extent of 
it.  
 
 MS. TEETERS.  What I'm trying to find out is:  Do we have 
some general guidelines from the Treasury as to when we intervene or 
don't intervene that you can speak to?  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  I don't know what you mean by general 
guidelines.  We always have this problem.  There is nothing I can 
recite that is good in all seasons.  We developed this interim 
guideline following the Polish [action], that if [the dollar] took a 
sudden jump up beyond where it was [against the mark], in essence 
we'd intervene.  That was after the dollar had already gone up; it 
was already up about 4 percent from where it had been trading.  
 
 MR. WALLICH.  At least it wasn't that an assassination 
attempt was needed to intervene.  
 
 CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.  We're developing case studies.  We 
intervene on assassinations and military takeovers!  
 
 MR. GRAMLEY.  Or we stand ready to intervene.  

12/21-22/81 -3-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, actually what happened is that we
were quite ready to intervene and at the time I thought it would
probably be necessary. But in every one of these occasions recently
the rate has reached its nadir in European trading rather than in the
United States. So every time we've gotten geared up to do something,
the rates have come off the peak or off the floor.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, people know what Beryl Sprinkel
and Don Regan mean by a crisis and, therefore, they probably expect
some intervention. That is obviously clear and, therefore, maybe that
is one reason the rates are--

MS. TEETERS. Or the Germans do it ahead of us, or for us.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is what has been happening.

MR. CROSS. Both the Germans and the Japanese intervened
during this latest spate of activities.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Japanese intervened very heavily.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We reserve the right to intervene when we
find it necessary. Sometimes our patience is more strained than at
other times. We also want to cooperate if possible. And we have been
cooperating, I guess. We have nothing to approve here. No
recommendations?

MR. WINN. The other Polish problem is their debt. Do we
have any feeling at all on when that will start to come to a head?

MR. CROSS. Well, I don't know when it is going to come to a
head. The banks were supposed to enter into an agreement, a prior
condition of which was that they should receive the arrears. But they
didn't receive the interest in arrears. They received a telegram
asking if they could make $350 million of loans available. The last
we heard is that the banks were talking to each other about what to
do. But there does not seem to be, at least among the people we talk
to, any great disposition to provide more money to the Poles.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Poles [were given] a rather clear
message just a couple days before martial law was imposed. They
calculated that they owed about $350 million of interest. They did
not have $350 million. So, [they were told] they could pay the
interest for 3 or 6 months, and then the rest of the agreement could
go into effect.

MR. CROSS. They requested what they called a bridge loan.
Some of [the banks] thought it looked more like a pier than a bridge.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that situation is very much up in
the air. I find it a little difficult to see that anything is going
to be done unless the Russians give them money to pay the debt and pay
the interest between now and the end of the year. I don't think they
will last.

MR. WINN. The end of the year is the due date, is it?



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there was a date earlier in
December, but now the end of the year is critical in that if [the
lenders] don't get paid by the end of the year, then they will have to
admit that the loan is in default--or at least that it is
questionable--on the day that they have to make up their books for the
end of the year and decide what to do about it.

MR. TRUMAN. Most of the interest started to be in arrears on
March 26.

MR. CROSS. This covers three-fourths of the year. The banks
and the Poles were supposed to meet on December 28, I think, to sign
the agreement; and they wanted the payment cleaned up two weeks early,
which was December 14, so they wouldn't sit down at a table and not be
able to sign. But that day passed and the payments weren't made.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The banks had told their committees
before the takeover that if the Poles did pay the interest,
sympathetic consideration--that was the term they used--would be given
to some new short-term trade credits of 60 to 90 days. Not all the
banks would do that, but that was the language they agreed on if the
Poles didn't default. And then everything got overtaken. Nothing
probably would have happened anyway, but any chance of a solution
being reached certainly got wiped out temporarily by that takeover.
So, everybody is in disarray. I don't know how many banks are going
to move to increase their loan loss write-offs. I checked around but
nobody that I am aware of has done more than 50 percent as write-offs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't aware anybody had done that much.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A couple of banks said that they had
increased their loan loss reserves by 50 percent of the Polish loans.

MR. WALLICH. They might have to proceed differently with
respect to the 1981 maturities that should have been rescheduled but
now have fallen through. They might have to write off 50 or even 100
percent. But most of it, of course, is into the future.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I also have a
recommendation to make: namely, that the leeway for changes in
holdings in the System Account, which the Committee voted to enlarge
to the $4 billion level, be left at that $4 billion level up to the
time of the next meeting. Our projections make it look as though we
might need to absorb something like $3 billion of reserves during
January, essentially reversing much of that seasonal need that we met
in the last several weeks. That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments?

MS. TEETERS. You used up $3.8 billion of the $4 billion? Is
that right, Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, and we may have done another $150
million today because we took some notes from one foreign account.



12/21-22/81

MS. TEETERS. Don't you feel you need a little more leeway on
that? You are pretty short at this point, aren't you?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, the leeway needed to last only through
today or tomorrow, so we were willing to run it right up to the line.
After this meeting a new leeway is established. We may have a little
more to add on an outright basis but as soon as we get into January
we'll have to swing around the other way. It is to provide the leeway
for a possibly large move in the other direction, a large absorption
of reserves, that I think it might be useful to leave that limit at
the $4 billion level.

MS. TEETERS. The $4 billion runs from when to when?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It would run, I believe, from the day after
this meeting--that would be Wednesday--through February 2.

MS. TEETERS. So you get a new $4 billion starting tomorrow.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.

MR. ALTMANN. It's $3 billion unless the Committee approves
this.

MS. TEETERS. It's $3 billion. Oh, I see what you mean.

MR. BOEHNE. Is there any thought in the market that the
strengthening in the money supply we've seen recently is due more to
the economy perhaps being not as weak as we thought versus the Fed
making an overt attempt to pump up the money supply? Is there any
sense of that?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think there's some puzzlement about the
strength that market analysts have seen. I don't have any sense that
they are associating it with the economy being stronger. Some of them
see other special reasons; some have the same sort of temporary
parking place idea that we've kicked around here.

MR. BOEHNE. A precautionary type--

MR. STERNLIGHT. A precautionary [move to] higher savings
rates. There are varying estimates about the strength of the economy,
but I haven't really gotten much sense of people relating the
aggregates to that.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, it is a strange bulge for this part of a
recession. It's out of character for this stage of a recession.

MR. ROOS. The Bluebook made reference to an anticipated
reduction in the rate of money growth for the last part of December.
Does that appear to be probable?

MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of people in the market expect that
also. Steve might want to comment on the particular Bluebook
reference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We look forward to it with our usual
conviction.

-6-



12/21-22/81

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ROOS. I didn't get an answer, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer is: Nobody knows.

MR. AXILROD. Two independent staffs within the Federal
Reserve System are projecting a decline of varying magnitude. So,
that might add a little to [one's conviction].

MR. STERNLIGHT. The New York staff has a little more of a
drop.

MS. TEETERS. Have you both been wrong before?

MR. AXILROD and CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe you can get a better answer if
you ask why they are projecting that, Larry. At least when I've asked
that specifically, the answer is: Because it has gone up so fast, it
ought to slow down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are there any other questions that can
have equally enlightening answers? No other comments? We have a
proposal on raising the [intermeeting] limit to $4 billion. Is that
acceptable? Hearing no objections--

MS. TEETERS. Is it symmetrical, plus or minus?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. That is accepted. We need to ratify
the operations. Without objection we will ratify the operations. On
my agenda I have next the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates
and then the economic situation. It seems to me that it may be a
little better to take up the economic situation first. If that seems
more logical to other people, we will call upon you first, Mr.
Kichline. Did I decide on the other order when we made up the agenda?

MR. KICHLINE. I was prepared, though. [Statement--see
Appendix.] I might note that the CPI should be available tomorrow
morning. And, unfortunately, new orders figures will be available
tomorrow afternoon.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just looking at the Greenbook. It has
national defense spending declining every quarter. Is that correct?

MR. KICHLINE. That's been corrected in the errata. I think
we reversed the lines for that and the state and local sector. State
and local spending was shown to be rising each and every quarter and
that should be negative. Those lines, unfortunately, were reversed.

MS. TEETERS. But the state and local sector is approximately
double the size or more of the defense sector, so those declines in
state and local are quite substantial, of course, in real terms.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, they are.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You said you assumed that retail
sales would be going up somewhat nominally both this month and in



12/21-22/81

January. The executive of a leading national retail chain said to me
that they think the reasonably satisfactory pre-Christmas sales are
the last gasp and that there is going to be a major fall in retail
sales in January. They had a poor October-November. Since then
they've done reasonably well with all these sales; they ran a 12
percent increase in nominal terms. But they expect January to be
extremely poor, for what it is worth. Generally speaking, the
business CEOs I've been speaking with, as distinguished from the
financial CEOs, are much gloomier and expect a greater-than-average
recession and, some of them [are especially gloomy]. I'm not talking
about the interest rate sensitive industries but, for example, car
loadings on the railroads. The head of one of those railway outfits
said that it was the worst he'd seen in--I forget the period of time--
many, many years; it was worse than in the 1974-75 drop. There is a
lot of gloom and doom in the business community, whereas I think in
the financial community there is an assumption that the recession will
be more or less an average one.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd be interested to know what people are
hearing about the labor situation. Jim puts together some tables on
wage concessions, every week or so I guess, and they are lengthening.
I was on the plane Friday with a fellow who recently retired as head
of one of the major trucking companies, and he said that a lot of the
Teamster locals are likely to go with just a cost of living increase
because the competition is just tremendous and, indeed, a lot of
unionized trucking companies look as if they are not going to make it.
What kind of noises do you hear as you talk to CEOs?

MR. BOEHNE. I hear throughout my District a sense that labor
negotiations are not going to be as tough--that there will be
concessions and that there may even be some inroads into cost of
living indices. But as far as the outlook goes, what I hear is that
they think the unemployment rate is going to go higher than in the
Greenbook forecast. I hear more and more stories of lay-offs; and it
is that fear of lay-offs that I think is affecting the climate in
which these wage negotiations are taking place. I share Tony's view
that there seems to be more pessimism in the manufacturing area than
in the retail and financial areas, but what I get is uncertainty. We
are in the phase of the business cycle where there is a downward slide
and nobody has a good feeling about whether that slide is going to
accelerate or taper off. There is a feeling that the economy will
recover in the middle of the year, but I would guess the sentiment is
that the recession will be average to worse. And that, too, is
contributing to a more favorable [climate for] wage negotiations.

MS. TEETERS. Are you going to report a lot of plant
closings?

MR. BOEHNE. I wouldn't say a lot more than we are used to in
my part of the country, but I am hearing of more cutbacks in the work
force in the plants that are operating--not outright shutdowns but
[reductions of] 450 here and 800 there. It is very common [to hear
such reports] in talking to people and they are very common in the
newspapers and radio reports. And it seems to be widespread; it is
even happening in parts of our District where they usually don't feel
recession as much. There is a part of Pennsylvania that is generally
fairly insulated from that, and reports from there are about as
pessimistic as elsewhere. So, it seems to be very widespread.



12/21-22/81

MR. PARTEE. Eastern Pennsylvania you mean?

MR. BOEHNE. There is an area around Lancaster and
Harrisburg, the South Central area, where generally the unemployment
rate is well under the national average. We have a director from
Armstrong Cork in that area and he says that even Lancaster is feeling
it this time around and they usually don't feel it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. On the specific question--I'll comment [on my
general views] later--I think there has been within the last 30 to 45
days a decided shift on the part of labor out our way. Their focus is
now shifting from concentration on the financial aspects of the
package to the job per se. For example, the UAW has indicated a
willingness to reopen the auto workers contract; the Teamsters have
reopened [their contract] and the trucking people that I talk to
expect some significant concessions there. The UAW has specifically
said they will reopen the Harvester contract; there they are going to
try to get rid of the last increase that was given in October and
there is going to be a discussion about the COLA increase coming up in
the next couple of months as well as the pension increase that is
scheduled for April. Harvester expects to get a hundred million
dollars a year out of the renegotiation the union has authorized. I
would echo Tony's comments; the industrial CEOs I have talked to are
extremely gloomy and are expecting a very difficult 1982--a far deeper
recession than most of the financial people I've talked to anticipate.
Therefore, I think they are going to go into negotiations with a
tougher attitude than they might have had six or eight months ago. I
think there has been a big change on that front.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On the other hand, notwithstanding
what I said earlier, I was talking with Citibank's board of directors
last week and I went around the table and asked them what wage
settlements each plant expected to make. I was surprised that every
single man at that table who headed a large company said between 9 and
9-1/2 percent.

MR. WALLICH. Were they unionized?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Most of them were unionized. But
when I asked them if they had any plants that were nonunion, because
some of them were very [diversified], they said it didn't make that
much difference in their company as a matter of policy. Quite a few
said, however, that they expected some productivity increases and that
the net increase in labor cost might come in around 7 percent.

MR. SCHULTZ. I have a comment on work rules. When John
Sagan was here for the Conference of Chairmen, he indicated that at
one Ford plant where they had 44 work rules they had gotten the number
down to 6 or something like that. There were some major changes in
the work rules which he thought was really significant. Are you
hearing that kind of noise too?

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. The scope of the cutbacks that General
Motors announced on Friday for their white collar workers was rather
astonishing. They are freezing pay, cutting back vacations from six



12/21-22/81

weeks to two weeks, and putting in a major cost-sharing provision in
their medical insurance programs--all three at once.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But where the threat is clearly
coming from imports in addition to the depressed economy, they tell me
management has a much stronger case in getting labor to--

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, obviously, in this case they chose to do
the [cutbacks of] white collar workers with a view toward trying to
influence the [labor union] negotiations. But doing that kind of
thing for 150,000 white collar workers is a big, big bite.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I think there is going to be a
significant divergence in the wage settlement between manufacturing
and service industries.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wonder whether this kind of thing is
ever reflected in the statistics.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, some of this is showing up now. There is
much more improvement in manufacturing wage increases this year than
anywhere else. That is where the big improvement has come; it's in
the average hourly earnings index.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. I don't see much in the
nonmanufacturing area. I was talking to some bankers out in Chicago
and they were all reporting that they have in their plans 11 percent
or more for wage increases. I think they are a little behind the
times, but so it is. Any other comment while we are on the subject?
Let's remain on this subject for a moment. Does anybody else have
anything?

SPEAKER(?). It's a form of rational expectations--that is,
the expectation that your employer may go bankrupt.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They wait for that expectation until he is
practically on the edge. That is true.

MS. TEETERS. Actually, Frank, the capacity utilization in
this [forecast] doesn't get down to where it was in 1974. It bottoms
out at 73 percent and in 1974 it was 69 percent.

MR. MORRIS. I thought the chart in the Greenbook showed that
we are already down to--

MR. SCHULTZ. No, I think Nancy's right.

MR. FORD. There is a revision that was passed out. Did you
see this here?

MR. MORRIS. This is a revised one. It says capacity
utilization, total manufacturing--

MR. SCHULTZ. That is for 1980, you see. Look back to the--

MR. MORRIS. All right. Okay.

-10-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment on the wage cost/price
situation?

MR. KEEHN. I think there have been some developments on the
price side as well. There is the price cutting in retail; with
Christmas sales it is hard to tell how it is going to work out but
there are clearly some price cuts there. In the automotive industry
it has been demonstrated that when the manufacturers go to rebates,
etc., that kind of price [cutting] tends to bring higher levels of
sales, and I think [price cutbacks] are beginning to [reach] back into
the raw materials. There is a very big overhang internationally in
aluminum ingots, for example; the book price, I think, is 74 cents a
pound and the trades are taking place at about 49 cents a pound. So
there's a very appreciable difference in some of the raw materials
areas, which ultimately ought to show up. So I think there has been
progress on that front as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are commodity prices still declining? I
haven't looked at that for a couple of weeks.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes they are, but much less than they had been
earlier.

MR. GRAMLEY. For raw industrial commodities, we are now back
to something like [the level of] the middle of 1978.

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

MS. TEETERS. Jim, will the CPI pick up the pre-Christmas
sales?

MR. [KICHLINE]?. This next one?

MS. TEETERS. Yes, the December CPI. Do they have a way of
[measuring] the widespread sales that are taking place?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, they are supposed to take into account
actual transactions prices, but there is a question as to how well
they can do that. The report tomorrow is going to be for November, so
in any event we wouldn't be picking up what is happening now until
later in January.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that exhausts our wisdom on wages and
prices, is there any other comment on the business outlook generally?

MR. WALLICH. In the midst of this gloom, there is one
substantial difference and that is that a major tax cut is already on
the books. I think this lends a certain support to the [expectation]
not in the first quarter, but looking to the second and third
quarters, that the economy is going to come--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Isn't there a law that when everybody
expects an upturn--if it looks unanimous--it isn't going to happen?

MR. PARTEE. I have a few butterflies about it myself.

MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of the business picture, this is a
bit of an outlier observation, but some of the business types that I

-11-



12/21-22/81

have been talking to, in the Minneapolis area at least, clearly are
already at the point where they are looking across the valley. Even
from the nonfinancial types I don't get that sense of gloom that Mr.
Solomon and Mr. Boehne are picking up. I think there is a recognition
that we have had a very, very steep decline; but they are already
clearly looking out to what they think is going to be a very strong
second half of next year.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a widespread feeling among
businessmen--they all volunteer it--that we have a dualistic economy:
that people are lucky to be in the service sector because they aren't
going to have it very tough. The head of IBM was telling me that
business is absolutely booming. They make a distinction between wage
increases in the service sector as against the manufacturing sector.
It is the manufacturing people and the people who ship the bulky stuff
who are talking about how serious they think the current situation is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What does Texas say, Mr. Boykin?

MR. BOYKIN. I reported at our last meeting that there seemed
to be a slight slowdown in the energy area, particularly in drilling
activity. I'm told now that that has reversed. There were two rigs
in the pen last time but those are out. They tell me that has turned
around a little, although they are expecting a bit of a slowdown in
the rate of increase for 1982. In the manufacturing end, we really
don't have all that much [change]; but in the semiconductor business,
which is a large employer, they are taking an extended Christmas
holiday. They are shutting down until January 11. The agricultural
area, though, is an area of concern. As we know, the prices to the
farmers are not good; the crops have been very good. We are told that
our agricultural banks probably are going to have to carry over more
farmers than they ever have. And they can probably carry them this
year, but without some improvement there are going to be some very
serious liquidation problems.

MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask you a [question]. The loan/deposit
ratios in agricultural banks, remember, had been pretty high in the
spring of 1980, at about 68 percent nationally. When we looked at
them here not too long ago, a couple months ago, they were down to 60
percent. Are your banks pretty much in that same situation--that
their loan/deposit ratios are pretty good? Do they have plenty of
room to make loans if they want to make them and carry them over?

MR. BOYKIN. Yes, they have the room. But the question is
how comfortable they feel, even though they have the money, about how
long can they stay with [agricultural borrowers] in the expectation of
a repayment because of the price problem.

MR. SCHULTZ. What about the land prices? Again, looking at
the places where most of the problem loans tend to be, people had
gotten pretty extended on land. Are you beginning to see a break in
your land prices?

MR. BOYKIN. I think so, a break in the sense that the sales
of farm lands are going down. I have heard of a few instances of a
little price concession, but there is not a lot moving right now.

-12-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the story I hear when people from
farm areas talk to me: that there isn't much movement in the price
but there sure aren't any sales, and don't try that price too hard.

MR. KEEHN. In our District, when land that was valued at
$3500 to $4000 an acre comes up for sale, the price goes down; and
they pull it off the market at $2700 or $2800 an acre. The price just
doesn't clear the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Obviously, things are relatively slow in our
District, but I think it is important to remember that part of it can
be attributed to the rather abrupt drop in the rate of money growth
during most of this year. As we look ahead into what next year will
bring, especially the second half of next year, it is awfully
important to keep in mind--unless I am the only one in this group who
sees it this way--that the decisions we make this afternoon and
tomorrow will have a direct bearing. They will have even a greater
bearing than what recent conversations with people in business might
indicate for the future. If we choose to set targets that imply a
faster rate of money growth than we are presently experiencing, we are
inevitably going to have a step-up in economic activity after a few
months. So, what we do will have a direct bearing, at least as we
look at it, rather than just psychological [effects on] decisions that
businessmen might be making.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. There are more than the Polish loans out there
that are in trouble. The insurance industry reports a considerable
increase in the amount of problem loans. Our Canadian friends have
come down and done a big real estate investment without taking out
financing, so some of the office building complexes are in a peculiar
status at the moment, and they may be coming on the market. My guess
is that the building boom has about run its course--well, it may go
another year--but that office space is starting to show up as a little
on the heavy side across the country.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. On some of the points you have mentioned, in our
end of the so-called Sun Belt things are not really all that sunny.
Specifically, for example, on Nancy's point about the pre-sales in the
retail area, we are definitely seeing a whole lot of that. We have 45
board members in our District and a number of them are retailers; they
have been telling us that their sales are flat to down in real terms.
They may have a nominal increase in dollar sales, but a lot of that is
coming on white sales that were taking place in December and November
instead of in January and later. So, they are a little depressed
about that. The tenants in the large Atlanta malls are concerned
about their inventories being high and are having to do heavy
promotions to keep their sales up. On the employment side, we are
seeing some rather heavy layoffs in the more industrialized areas of
our District, particularly in the housing-related carpet industry. We
produce half the carpets in the United States in northern Georgia and
they have experienced a 50 percent drop in production in the last few
months. So, we are seeing big problems there. Some of our major

-13-



12/21-22/81

employers, like Fruehof in Florida and even Excel in Orlando and the
Ford glass plant in Nashville, are all laying off big chunks of their
labor force. In the service industries, which someone else asked
about, we are finding some problems. Air Florida, one of the more
robust regional airlines, has had a very heavy cutback on its
employment, as some of you may have noticed in the newspapers. So, we
are seeing pretty much across the board in both the service and the
manufacturing industries that the recession is deepening throughout
our area. In some of the [most depressed] parts, in Alabama in the
industrialized areas, we have unemployment rates approaching 12 to 13
percent. They are a little [higher] than the northern version in
Detroit and that area. So, we are seeing the recession come down in
the Southeast pretty heavily.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Refresh my memory, Mr. Kichline, if you
can. In the 1974-75 recession did wage rate increases actually come
down appreciably?

MR. KICHLINE. Immediately after, as I remember--in 1975 and
1976--there was a sharp break in wages, and prices also came down
substantially.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I know prices did; I couldn't
remember how much wages did.

MR. WALLICH. They never had risen that much. Inflation had
not become imbedded in ways that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand that, too. I really don't
know whether--

MR. GRAMLEY. When we removed the wage and price controls in
the spring of 1974, what happened immediately thereafter was a catchup
burst of wages. If you look at a chart on wage rates, they were
rocketing upward and then the rate of increase came way, way down.
But a very large part of that reduction in the rate of increase in
wages was nothing more than a termination of the round of wage
increases that ensued after the wage and price controls were removed.
So, you can't look back at the 1974-75 experience.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wage and price controls were removed in
the spring of--?

MR. GRAMLEY. April 1974.

MR. BOEHNE. There were a number of phases, I think. The
final phase came off in 1974.

MR. PARTEE. There was a holdback on big companies that
extended to the spring of 1974.

MR. GRAMLEY. As I remember, by about the third quarter of
1975 the annual rate of wage increase got up to around the 12 to 14
percent range. There was actually an acceleration of wage increases
during the recession. It wasn't until afterwards, once the recession
was over, that it began coming down; then we began to get the big
downward adjustment in the rate of increases in wages.

-14-



12/21-22/81

MR. SCHULTZ. Do you have numbers down there, Mr. Kichline?

MR. KICHLINE. We have some numbers. Unfortunately, they are
annual numbers. On an annual basis 1975 still showed an increase and
1976 is the big year where there is a break. I would agree with
Governor Gramley that the whole period is confused; I think part of
the controls were off in 1973, and in 1974 we began to see the
acceleration of wages when we were in that recession.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A bunch of the controls came off in early
1973; I remember that very well. I remember very well when I thought
the great bulk of them were sneaking off in January of 1973.

MR. PARTEE. Employers with 5,000 or more--

MR. KICHLINE. It was continued on large firms as I remember.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't even remember that. What were
those annual numbers just for the heck of it?

MR. KICHLINE. In 1973 the average hourly earnings index had
a 6.1 percent increase; in 1974, 8.0 percent; in 1975, 8.3 percent;
and in 1976, 7.2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So it was just a 1 percent decline even
then?

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Then it went up again or held steady or--

MR. KICHLINE. It began edging up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. It used to be that second perhaps only to Texas,
the West was fairly recession proof, but that doesn't seem to be the
case today. Looking around for some elements of strength, I have been
hard pressed to put my finger on them. Alaska is the only one of our
nine states that still seems to be adding to payrolls. Nonresidential
construction, which has been very strong, is still above a year ago
but the growth is definitely slowing. And across a wide range of
areas there is developing weakness or a going downhill, even in the
aerospace industry, on balance, strangely enough. Lockheed just
announced getting out of the production of the 1011. They are hoping
to pick up something in defense orders. The semiconductor high-tech
business that had such a strong growth trend has turned sour. Some of
the semi-conductor firms from Silicon Valley and elsewhere in the West
are having extended shutdowns because of excessive inventories. Even
Boeing, which has a huge share of the commercial airline market, is
getting increasing numbers of cancellations. There is more
competition from the Airbus, etc., and even though they are rolling
out a couple of new models in the very near future--the 767 is about
to come out and the 757 is expected a year later--their sales are
definitely down and so is their employment. So, it is hard to see the
bottom being reached in the near future. The trend is still downward
across a pretty broad front.

-15-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. [I'd say] that, if anything, we are likely to
go through a recession this time which is worse, or somewhat worse at
least, than the average postwar decline. We are talking about
something that is quite pervasive and quite deep. If memory serves
me, the average postwar decline in real GNP is about 2-1/2 percent.
What we are looking at is a forecast of about a 2 percent decline,
which is a milder recession than the average in the postwar period.
Now, recessions come in all different sizes, so this is still a
classic recession; there's no question about that. But I have a hunch
that if things work out differently--and they always work out somewhat
differently than anybody expects--the area I worry about that
happening in is business fixed investment. And I think Mr. Kichline
is right that if we are in for a surprise there, it will be a surprise
in which the drop in business fixed investment is significantly worse
than the decline of about 4 percent we are now forecasting. I think
businessmen are very, very pessimistic for a variety of reasons. One
is that they look for a future of real interest rates that potentially
will stay up at extremely high levels because of huge deficits in the
federal budget. And they are pessimistic because they have been
through a 2- to 3-year period in which each time the economy has
gotten off the ground it has gotten slugged in the head again and gone
right back down. They are pessimistic because they are looking at
very, very low levels of capacity utilization. And they are
pessimistic because in some areas of the country we have had such
[economic] devastation. So, I think we are going to see a bigger drop
in business-fixed investment than this [forecast]. We are likely to
see a first quarter that looks very, very bad--considerably worse than
what we are now forecasting--and it may stretch out into the second
quarter before we begin seeing things turn up again.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I guess the tone of the conversation is
getting a little too gloomy for me. I would remind you that we are
having the largest tax cut in the postwar history of the country.
That will be taking effect in stages over a period of time. Henry
referred to the 10 percent cut next June 30. In addition, there is a
sizable relaxation that occurs as of January 1, just a few days away,
for a wide range of activities that well could have a little more
oomph in them as a result of the change in tax treatment. I would
point out that housing is very low. I suppose [starts] could drop
from 800,000 to zero--well, to 500,000 or something like that--but the
downside risk can't be very large at this level. Nor can domestic car
sales go very much below the [recent pace of] 5 million for very long,
given the fact that people still need cars in order to drive. And
inventories of cars on the road are depreciating and the stock, as
somebody said, is declining. Fred, I think you mentioned that a
decline in the stock of cars is occurring. So, some of the areas that
are customarily sources of weakness can't be that much of a source of
weakness from this point on, in my view.

I'd rather agree with Lyle that there is some exposure in
plant and equipment. We were talking about that this morning, and I
would be inclined to think that there might be a little larger decline
and perhaps a good deal larger decline than the staff has in its
forecast. But again, for every inch that you give there, the less

-16-



12/21-22/81

pressure there is on financial markets and money markets. And it
seems to me that we can almost, with a little lag, get a substitution
of housing for plant and equipment if in fact we get that much
weakness in the system. Also, this Christmas of 1981 is not good but,
on the other hand, it is not just abysmal. Let us not be too gloomy;
we ought to get a recovery, I think, sometime in 1982.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to [catch] you unawares, Mr.
Truman, but it might be appropriate for you to say just a word about
what is going on abroad.

MR. TRUMAN. Okay.

MR. SCHULTZ. To give you a little more time, would you like
to have a filibuster?

MR. WALLICH. Do you need your pipe?

MR. SCHULTZ. You just let the cat out of the bag, Henry!

MR. TRUMAN. The picture is broadly similar to what we have
seen here in the sense that the economies abroad have been growing,
although it has been small positive growth. It has been quite modest
on average over the last several quarters. There have been some signs
of a bottoming out: There were increases in the United Kingdom after
a very sharp decline; and the German GNP number that came in for the
third quarter, just released today finally on a seasonally adjusted
basis that one could understand, shows essentially zero growth rather
than negative [as it was] in the second quarter. So, there are some
signs of a bottoming out, though I think we have marked down the
extent to which we see real positive growth in this quarter. We
expect at best only a modest rate of acceleration in the course of
1982, reaching something on the order of 2-1/2 percent on average as I
recall for the last half of 1982. That is hardly a very robust
performance, when you factor in Japan, which in the past, even in the
first oil-shock environment, has had a fairly good growth rate
relative to the rest of us.

Generally speaking, unemployment is expected to continue to
rise abroad; and there may be some improvement--maybe a percentage
point or a little more--on the price side but not any rapid expansion.
One place where we have seen some shift in policies, or at least in
that direction relative to everybody else, is France, where a somewhat
rapid pickup is expected in both prices and real growth. I might
comment that Japan in particular seems to be a serious problem. They
had about 4 percent growth this year, which looks good from our
perspective, but even the official authorities are not looking for too
much next year, which clearly is one of the things that is causing the
problem on the external side, the current account side. They just
have very weak domestic demands, and that combined with the decline in
international commodity prices--imports are weighted in that direction
--is part of the reason why the number on their current account
position looks so astronomical. Although that might moderate
somewhat, it is likely to stay up in that range unless Japan
experiences a dramatic rebound, which no one at the moment is
particularly projecting.

-17-



12/21-22/81

MS. TEETERS. Ted, has the British price situation improved
very much?

MR. TRUMAN. It has not improved, particularly over the
recent period. The CPI in the second half of the year has been
running in the 11 to 12 percent range; it had come down to a plateau
and backed up. It actually got down almost to 10 percent on a year-
over-year basis and backed up a bit as the pound weakened in the
summer. So they are about back to where they started when Mrs.
Thatcher came into power.

MS. TEETERS. And they have had how many quarters of decline
in real growth?

MR. TRUMAN. Oh, I don't know. It is something astronomical,
off my chart here. I think it has been occurring since the end of
1979.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, something like that.

MR. SCHULTZ. Ted, why doesn't Japan stimulate [its economy]?
They have their inflation rate down to around 4 percent, as I remember
the figure, and the domestic economy is weak. The yen has been pretty
strong. The current account surplus is just--. What is the reason
they don't stimulate?

MR. TRUMAN. I think there are two major reasons. One is
that they found themselves burned badly in the past by excessive
stimulation, or they feel they have been burned badly. And they had
two rounds of rapid inflation--less the second time but it still was
worse than they expected--in the yen as you may recall in early 1980
when it went to 260 yen per dollar, which was as ridiculous a level in
some sense as the level of the mark in August. And that was partly an
inflation phenomenon. The second reason is just that they have this
maybe well deserved fear of fiscal deficits, and the stimulus to
domestic demand one might expect would come from the fiscal side.
They have taken some cautious steps on the monetary side though in
terms of the mix of policy, everything else being equal, that tends to
be a little negative from external perspectives. But their fear is of
their large budget deficit, which they see problems in financing; they
continue to have troubles with banks in Japan in placing their longer-
term debt. The banks have been gradually backing-off from this sort
of short placement system that they have run for years and that has
led to caution in fiscal policy. Now they have a new budget in the
process of being formulated; and from the indications I've seen, it
may be a little less contractionary than the rhetoric suggests. They
are talking about expenditure increases in nominal terms on the order
of 6 to 6-1/2 percent, which does show some slight positive increase
in real terms. But the rhetoric is going to be in the direction of
continued fiscal restraint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And they are very worried about their
exchange rate. They figure they are in a "no-win" situation if they
take a stimulative action, particularly in monetary policy. Their
exchange rate will weaken and they already think it is too weak. That
would get them in more trouble on exports, and they are already in a
lot of trouble on exports. So how do they stimulate is the question,
particularly when the budget deficit might--well, I don't know what it

-18-



12/21-22/81

will do to the exchange rate. But they feel they can't do it on the
budgetary side and they can't do it on the monetary side because of
the exchange rate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That is why when they implemented
that 1 percent reduction of the discount rate last month they combined
it with heavy intervention.

MR. ROOS. May I ask a question on the domestic end, of
either Chuck or Jim Kichline? This next round of tax reductions, the
ones that take effect in 1982, are those to a great extent offset by
payroll tax increases?

MR. PARTEE. There is hardly any increase, is there Jim?

MR. KICHLINE. No, it is not very--

MR. ROOS. Is that possible on these?

MR. KICHLINE. No, it is very small. On January 1st of 1982
the tax rate increase is only one-tenth of 1 percent compared with the
1 percent that went into effect in January of 1981. And the wage base
continues to rise; it goes up something like $3,000, I believe.

MR. ROOS. So it is not a cut?

MR. KICHLINE. No. In total the expected increase from
payroll taxes next year is something like $5-1/2 billion. The second
stage of the tax cut for individuals, when it goes into effect, is in
the range of $33 to $35 billion.

MR. ROOS. Thank you.

MR. BOEHNE. What does bracket creep do next year?

MR. FORD. That eats up another part of the $33 billion you
are talking about. You have $5 billion going for payroll taxes?

MR. KICHLINE. Right.

MR. FORD. The question is how much does bracket creep do?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, I haven't thought about that question,
so I don't have the answer. I think it is a factor but not--

MR. SCHULTZ. I think Otto Eckstein is using a figure of
around $15 billion or something like that.

MR. FORD. $15 billion? So it uses up a little more than
half? In other words, is there a real reduction in the effective tax
rates counting everything?

MR. KICHLINE. The effect is reduced by bracket creep, but
there is a net stimulative effect, a substantial one. We also have
low income growth next year and that will hold down the effect of
bracket creep.



12/21-22/81

MR. GRAMLEY. The staff's full employment budget calculations
show a switch of around $48 billion from the first half of '81 to the
last half of '82, with most of it coming in the latter half of '82.
And that is something like 1-1/2 percent of GNP. That is a pretty
good kick from the fiscal side. And I think Chuck was right that it
is something we need to keep in mind as a source of stimulus as the
year goes on. I don't think we really are too far apart, Chuck; I do
feel that the recession is going to end and we are going to have
recovery.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think we are either. We had such
a series of extremely gloomy comments that I thought I ought to say
something on the other side.

MR. GRAMLEY. Your point is very well taken.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think Mr. Boehne made the right comment. We
are at that stage of the cycle when one thinks it could just go
"whoosh" down. It doesn't do that, but it always looks terrible.

MR. BOEHNE. That is right. If you are at all pessimistic,
this is the time when it comes out.

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have lots of uncertainties and
concerns in the business outlook. And, I must say the mood in Europe
is extremely gloomy--more gloomy than the actual trends justify, it
seems to me, at the moment. But their unemployment is very high and
they are very aware of that; it is phenomenally high given past
records during the postwar period.

MR. TRUMAN. That is right. They have already exceeded the
1974-75 peaks, partly with the help of the United Kingdom. But all
the countries have generally higher [unemployment now].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, in many countries it is comparable to
ours or even higher, which is very unusual just taking their raw
figures. On the other hand, I have a feeling that there is more
movement here on prices than there has been for years, literally, in
terms of a change in trend. And that among other things could have
favorable impacts on financial markets if anybody believed it. I
don't think the financial markets believe it yet. I am not sure I
believe it yet, but I must admit there is more gestation and more
ferment and more talk about lower [wage] settlements than even that
reduction in 1976 or whenever it was indicates. [The staff has] some
fairly optimistic price figures in its forecast. We will see, but I
am not sure they are out of sight. Let's go to your commentary, Mr.
Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say I don't anticipate getting down
to anything very [specific] in the way of numbers on this particular
longer-range exercise this afternoon or tomorrow. There may even be
conceptual questions that people may want to raise about how to
present these, and I say that without having thought through any
change myself. So proceed, Mr. Axilrod.

-20-



12/21-22/81

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. On
the technical side, the possibility exists of some redefinition of M2.
What sounds logical is putting in retail RPs, which would raise M2
some historically. If we take out institutional money market funds,
it's practically a wash. That leaves us with some unknown amount of
institutional money market funds in money market funds that are not
labeled institutional and that we don't know how to break down. What
to do with IRA/Keogh accounts, which might change appreciably next
year, is a confused subject. I'll put it that way. It depends upon
what one thinks M2 is measuring and what a transition of money into
those accounts may mean. It might have been worth distributing, but I
forgot about it, a little set of charts that Mr. Truman's people
circulated this morning [at the Board meeting]. The charts were
notable for showing that currently none of the main countries was near
its monetary targets this year and that enormous discrepancies--larger
than for the United States by a considerable margin--had developed
between the different Ms. There were actual minus numbers for M1 in
some cases with 12, 14, 15 percent increases in M2 or M3 as the case
may be. The only country that showed a nice orderly pattern was the
country which doesn't have monetary targets. That was Japan. I don't
know what the lesson is to that. But it was an extremely erratic
picture. It was poor--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't have the innovation
and the technology--

MR. TRUMAN. They had gradually declining interest rates;
that is the thing that has helped.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, you wouldn't think some of these other
countries did either. They have not had the swings in interest rates
and they haven't had the swings in the economy, which may say
something too. These other countries have had some technological
innovation but the impression is that they haven't had as much as
ours. But the discrepancies in the numbers were even larger than we
had. It is a startling picture of the differences between the various
[Ms] in those countries.

MR. TRUMAN. We could have copies of those charts circulated
to the Committee tomorrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's have a little discussion in
the remaining time.

MS. TEETERS. I have a question. Given the tentative targets
that we established in July, are the various growth rates for the Ms
now consistent?

MR. AXILROD. Well, if our projections are right, we think M2
and M3 growth just at, or a shade below, the upper end of the ranges
is consistent with growth of M1 at the midpoint. That means the
margin of error on the up side [for M2 and M3] is above their ranges.

MS. TEETERS. Taking just the difference in the midpoints for
this year, a midpoint on M1 of, say, 4 percent, given a 2-1/2 to 5-1/2

-21-



12/21-22/81

percent range, would imply 11 percent for M2 and 12-1/2 percent for
M3?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, but our projection is for somewhat slower
growth in nominal GNP over the year, which tends to hold that down.

MS. TEETERS. And then you have interest rates beginning to
rise again in the latter half of the year. Won't that mean the same
forces that were operating this year will tend to expand the rate of
growth in the broader aggregates?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, to the degree that this year might have
had an unusual amount of shift into money market funds [from] market
instruments or back into depository institutions that would not
otherwise have been there, we would have less of that in store next
year. In any event, maybe somewhat optimistically, we worked our way
down to a growth of just under 9 percent for M2 and M3, but it could
very well be a little higher.

MR. WALLICH. But why is that?

MS. TEETERS. Essentially what you are saying is that we may
get a rerun of this year with M1 growth toward the bottom end and M2
and M3 constantly on the--

MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't have a strong feeling that way,
Governor Teeters. It is not too bad to think of the change in
velocity of M2 as normally about zero, or not much change. That would
give our present projection of M2 some credibility, and that is on
average what happens. My instincts are not that we have severely
underestimated it. But, obviously, there is not any room for error in
that, particularly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Steve used the word credibility several times.
I have been talking to market participants the last few weeks and that
term keeps coming up in their discussions as well. In particular,
just to give you three examples and names that might you remember: In
talking with Paul Boltz, who used to be with us and now is at
Continental, and George Henry who is now up on Wall Street, and John
Phalen from the NYSE, I asked the question about credibility. They
all said that the credibility of the Federal Reserve is much higher
than it has ever been before. There is a cost to that, however. The
cost is [related to] the second question I asked them: What do you
think would happen to financial markets if we were to change course
perceptibly? And they said they thought it would have enormous impact
on the financial markets. So, I think we have a situation in which we
have built up a lot of credibility, but the flip side of that is that
we have painted ourselves into a corner in that if we don't stay
pretty well on the course that we have generally outlined, it is going
to have a rather substantial market impact.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. To pick up on what Fred said about credibility
and going back to Steve's comments on it, we recently had our full
academic conference with about 35 professors from all around the West

-22-



12/21-22/81

who specialize in money, banking, and monetary policy research, etc.
While there are all different points of view and schools represented,
from various degrees of monetarists to Keynesians to a few supply
siders, the one overwhelming conclusion that they arrived at when we
solicited their advice on appropriate ranges for money growth in 1982
goes right to the credibility problem. It translated specifically
into a recommendation from that group, for what it's worth, that it
would be a serious blow to our long-term credibility if we didn't
follow through with something like the provisional ranges we announced
last July--that is, at least a fractional reduction as a part of a
multi-year program to get the rate of money growth down and, hence,
the rate of inflation. So, that came across loud and clear.

The other point I wanted to make, having supported Steve's
view on the vital nature of the credibility problem, with your
permission Steve, is to take a contrary view with respect to the
3-point range that we provisionally decided on for M1 in July for
which you have again argued cogently here today. Looking back at the
July minutes, just to refresh my own recollection, we considered three
alternatives for M1. Two of them involved a 2-1/2-point spread
between the upper and lower [ends]; the third one, which we adopted,
had a 3-point spread. And for reasons that were set forth by Steve,
it has been the usual Fed policy to widen the range of long-term
targets when we perceive increased uncertainty in the economy. Now,
that made sense as I thought about it under our former operating
procedures, which had in effect tended to accommodate changes in money
demand more or less automatically. In fact, I think the big problem
in those days was that we accommodated too much, which is probably the
main reason we changed the procedures. But with the new approach that
has been in effect since the fall of 1979, and particularly with our
record this year--and I might add that we got plaudits from this
academic group for what we had done in 1981 [whereas] last year we had
a lot of scar tissue as you might imagine and you have heard that
yourself--we are doing a better job of keeping within our target
ranges and that has [helped] the credibility problem. We don't
automatically accommodate changes in money demand. I suspect most of
us are uncertain about money demand in 1982. For example, our staff
thinks, and I tend to share this view, that if anything there is
likely to be a further downward shift in money demand in 1982. But
that could be wrong. In the Bluebook Steve brought out the
possibility that it could go the other way. And to allow for that
possibility, since we really don't know which way it is going to go, I
would argue that, if anything, we ought to go back to the 2-1/2-point
spread for the following reasons: If money demand should shift
downward, obviously the effective money supply is going to be greater
than the actual observed money growth; on the other hand, even though
I don't expect that this will happen, if the demand for money should
shift upward, then the effective money demand of course will be less
than observed money growth. Net, bottom line, if we are uncertain, as
I am, about what might happen to money demand next year, I think we
should narrow the range of possible effective money by narrowing the
range of observed money growth, which is the only thing that we can
control. So, at this moment, without hearing other views, I am
leaning toward going back to that spread of 2-1/2 points that we had
before.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where would you cut the half point,
from the top or the bottom?

-23-



12/21-22/81

MR. BALLES. Well, if I had to commit myself today, I'd go
for 3 to 5-1/2 percent instead of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, but that is
just provisional until we have had a lot more discussion.

MS. TEETERS. 3 to 5-1/2 is only 2 percentage points.

MR. PARTEE. No.

MR. BALLES. 3 to 5-1/2 is 2-1/2 points.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that I think we can agree. Governor
Partee.

MR. PARTEE. One of my problems with talking about money
demand is, as you say, that we don't know what it will be beforehand.
I never know what it was afterwards! It seems to me that what we say
was a change of money demand is just the residual that one can't
explain. So I am a little reluctant to do a lot of changing on the
basis of that, although I suppose one could say that this year there
seems to have been a better economy until recently than one would have
expected, given the very low money growth that we had in M1-B. I
assume you are talking about M1-B.

MR. BALLES. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. When you are talking about money demand, you are
not talking about the [broader measures]?

MR. BALLES. No, all my remarks were on M1-B at this point.

MR. PARTEE. On the technical side, I don't really understand
M2 either, but one thing that has disturbed me about it is that it
seems to me to be subject to the possibility of coming in higher as a
result of the structural changes. Steve mentioned it. We have IRA
and Keogh accounts, and nobody really knows how they are going to go
over the next year. They involve a very long-term commitment of
funds, but there is a very desirable tax effect from [getting into
them]. I just don't know how it will go. In addition, we have the
fact that people who are uncertain about the future at least now have
the option of going to money market funds from the market itself. We
have seen continued rapid growth in recent months in the money market
funds, partly because of the uncertainty, and that could continue in
the period ahead. But even more broadly, all of the efforts on the
part of the government and the administration to stimulate savings
could be successful. That is, we have IRA/Keoghs, the tax [cut], the
all savers certificate, and the reduction in the maximum rate on
earned income from 70 to 50 percent. And if [such saving] were to
materialize, it seems to me it would tend to show up in the M2 number.
Now, you have projected an increase in the personal saving rate for
next year. You mentioned the decline in the increase in nominal GNP--
there is an increase of 1/2 percentage point, I think--but there is
also a 1/2 point increase in the saving rate projected from 1981 to
1982. So I wonder whether, in fact, we don't need in that broader
aggregate to allow for the possibility at least that there is going to
be a larger gross flow that makes up the picture of the new economy.
Now, I don't think what I say applies to M1-B. There may be some
downward drift in the demand function. But it is associated mainly
with transactions except for very, very temporary periods such as

-24-



12/21-22/81

right now when maybe NOW accounts have some extra money in them as a
parking place. I am not saying anything about numbers because I think
it is too early to do that, but as we look ahead I think we should
take into account not only what Nancy said about a tendency to miss on
the M1 versus M2 and M3, but also what the effect of a changing
structure of the economy would be on the comparison between M1 and M2
and M3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am concerned about the
assumptions the staff is making with respect to the NOW accounts in
1982 in that they assume that the adjustment is largely behind us.
That goes against the experience of the NOW accounts in New England,
where it took several years to make the adjustment fully. And it
seems to me--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is an assumption the Committee made
rather than the staff, if I may just put in a footnote.

MR. MORRIS. Well, if the Committee made it, I also question
that. I would call the Committee's attention to the recent rate of
growth in other checkable deposits. In November it was 46.2 percent.
In the second week of December, when total M1-B was up $800 million,
other checkable deposits were up $2.9 billion. To me, this does not
lend a lot of credence to the idea that the adjustment is behind us.
Apparently it still does to you, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Well, yes. I think that particular
[development] has another explanation. We are adjusting essentially
for shifts out of existing demand deposits into NOW accounts because
of the opening of NOW accounts. But the big increase in November and
presumably in early December was also associated with the fact that
savings deposits, which had been dropping at a 20 percent or more
annual rate month-after-month, stopped dropping. And it is not
implausible that this is an aspect of the same phenomenon. That is,
for precautionary reasons or what have you, people have increased
their saving rate as they did in the fourth quarter and some of that
money has spilled over into what they think of as the safest form one
can find that has a little interest paid on it. The turnaround in
savings accounts and the increase in NOW accounts are--in my mind in
any event--aspects of the same phenomenon. So I don't take that as
evidence that the shift is not over. The only evidence we have that
the shift is over, of course, is that the data we got on the number of
NOW accounts--my memory may be off in terms of the exact numbers--was
that they increased at something like a 67 percent annual rate through
May. And the data we now have for May through November at banks, and
I think also at other depository institutions but I am not sure about
the latter, show an increase in the number of accounts at only about a
12 percent annual rate. So, there has been a marked, clear, and
definite [deceleration]. While the increase for the year is about as
we had projected in July, though much more than we projected in
February, the bulk of it came early in the year. And then there was
this marked slowing in the increase in the accounts. We can never say
that some inflow isn't [going into] some account that it has taken a
person a year to learn about. But given the publicity this past year
and given these data, I feel that it is reasonable enough to say that
the shift is over. The risk we are open to is the risk that interest

-25-



12/21-22/81

rates may get a little lower than the staff is projecting and people
may say: "Well, I'll just put my money in the NOW account,
particularly if that interest rate is permitted to rise some, rather
than the money market fund. It is insured as a NOW account; it is
safe; and what do I care about 2 percentage points?" Then we would
get a sharp rise. But I don't think there will be a shift.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that happens, then what? I am
getting--

MR. AXILROD. I don't think that is a structural shift in
the same sense that we were talking about this year. It's a shift,
and you probably should accommodate it, but it is a different kind of
shift.

MR. MORRIS. Well, there are two aspects that could get us in
trouble. One is that it is entirely possible that we could get
continued shifts out of savings accounts into NOW accounts. Certainly
it would be at a slower rate, but it could be at a big enough rate to
have a substantial impact on the rate of growth of the new M1 and
perhaps lead us to set too low a target for M1. That is what I am
concerned about for 1982.

MR. AXILROD. I wouldn't say that is not [possible]; it is,
certainly.

MR. MORRIS(?). It is complicated also by people using their
NOW account as a savings vehicle--that is, by adding savings to their
transactions balances. This would again lead us to way overshooting
our M1 targets.

MR. AXILROD. I think the latter, too, is also a real risk.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right. There is a risk on that
side. But what do you do about the risk that Visa, Master Charge, and
a bunch of other money market fund people will introduce sweeping of
demand accounts and NOW accounts into money market funds next year?

MS. TEETERS. That will only widen the spread between M1 and
M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It will widen the spread between M1 and
M2, but--

MR. MORRIS. I think sooner or later we have to recognize
that we can't measure transactions accounts anymore. We ought to
start looking at other things. I think that is a clear message.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley, I don't want to go on
too long on this scene here.

MR. GRAMLEY. I just want to say a word about credibility and
what it means in terms of selecting targets for next year. I think
credibility is terribly important. I do think we have improved our
credibility enormously but we ought to understand why and what that
has to do with the selection of targets next year. We have gone
through a two-year period in which the first year M1-B ran way over
the target and the second year it ran way under the target. M2 ran

-26-



12/21-22/81

over in both years. The fluctuations in the money stock have been
greater since October of 1979 than they ever were before; so have the
fluctuations in interest rates. And somehow we have come out ahead.
I think the reason we have come out ahead is because in the pre-
October 1979 period, whenever the System was faced with a choice of
erring on the side of opting for a lower unemployment rate and more
inflation or the reverse, it opted for the former; and in the post-
October 1979 period, we have said we are going to opt to hold the line
on prices and take a higher unemployment rate. That is basically what
the markets are telling us. That is basically why we have had the
improvement in confidence. We have run a much, much tighter policy.

So, what we ought to do is try to figure out what sorts of
targets we need for 1982 to run the kind of monetary policy we think
is sensible and worry less about the announcement effects or the
reactions of the financial markets or the public. On M1-B, although
Frank has a point that we need to worry about the possibility that
demand for M1-B will run over a 5-1/2 percent upper end, I think the
bigger likelihood is that we will have trouble holding M1 growth up to
2-1/2 percent because so many of these innovations, which have just
gotten started, will continue. So, I would be prepared to live with
the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range [adopted tentatively in July]. And
if it runs below, I don't think that is going to hurt our credibility.
On M2, though, so many things are happening that to hold to a 6 to 9
percent range runs the danger of having an M2 figure that is again
way, way above the target. And I think we could raise that range to 7
to 10 percent or 6 to 10 percent or something like that without doing
our credibility any damage at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I share to a great extent what Lyle has just said.
It seems to me that we would sharpen this discussion if we were able
to agree upon and accept for ourselves certain basic targets related
to those objectives that we really are charged with achieving. The
two principal objectives we should have are to achieve certain targets
of output growth as well as targets for the reduction of [inflation]
and concurrently to consider what effect achieving those targets might
have on the unemployment rate. Now, for what it is worth, [let me
tell you what] our people projected [would happen] if we were to come
down on a broad conceptual objective of maybe a 5 percent rate of
growth for M1-B in 1982 and 1983--assuming just theoretically that
that was achievable by us and assuming a moderate slowing in the
growth of federal spending and the tax policy as presently enacted.
They projected that fourth quarter of 1981 to fourth quarter 1982
nominal GNP would be something in the vicinity of 7-1/2 percent to 9
percent; real GNP would be 1 to 2 percent; prices as measured by the
deflator would be 6-1/2 to 7 percent; and this would result in an
unemployment rate of maybe 8-1/2 to 9 percent. And in 1983 if these
assumptions were held to, we again would see growth of nominal GNP of
7-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, with a bit higher real GNP of 2 to 3 percent,
price [increases of] 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent--that is, a reduction of
about another point--and unemployment still 8-1/2 to 9 percent. I
don't know whether these objectives are what the Committee would opt
for, but it seems to me that it is important, and should be important
when we discuss this tomorrow, for us to try to agree on what we think
are the tolerable ranges of output growth, what price objectives we
would like to achieve, and what unemployment rate we would be willing

-27-



12/21-22/81

to tolerate and then try to establish money growth rates that we think
would achieve those objectives.

Probably some of you would part from the rationale that I am
trying to present by saying that money growth does not have a precise
effect or even a meaningful effect on output or on prices. I think
what seems to be happening on prices is more than a reflection of the
whims of the people who are negotiating wage settlements and that it
really is a reflection of the reduction in money growth that we have
achieved either purposely or otherwise. So, in thinking about these
things, I believe we should try to define our objectives and then
regardless of how we come toward those--whether it is through money
growth control or interest rates--try to agree on what we think are
the decisions that would lead to the output growth and price targets
that we agree on and the unemployment consequences.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have three more names on my list. I
will not accept any more. And if any of the three on the list--
Messrs. Wallich, Solomon, and Black--wish to wait until tomorrow, that
would be acceptable. If you have an urge to say something, Governor
Wallich is first.

MR. WALLICH. I am perfectly willing to wait 'til tomorrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon, do you have an urge?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I just was going to ask you a
question if you have the urge to answer. I can understand the case
for not including retail RPs and I can understand the case for not
including IRA and Keogh accounts [in M2]. I don't understand what the
rationale would be, though, if I understood you right, for [not
including] institutional money market funds.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Because they are more like [components of]
M3 than M2.

MR. AXILROD. The average size of those accounts is about
$125,000. The average size of accounts of the others is between
$12,000 and $16,000. So, there is a sharp distinction in the holder
and it is our thought that the holders of the institutional funds
would otherwise be putting their money in CDs or market instruments
and not otherwise be putting their money in M2-type instruments.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black, do you want to--

MR. BLACK. No, I'll withdraw, Mr. Chairman, until tomorrow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, we will meet again tomorrow at
whatever time--

MR. ALTMANN. 9:30 a.m. tomorrow morning.

MR. PARTEE. Weather permitting.

[Meeting recessed]

-28-



12/21-22/81

December 22, 1981--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can proceed with the
discussion of the longer-term ranges in a very tentative way.
Governor Wallich, you were cut off before.

MR. WALLICH. Yes, I was. All I can think about as I look at
what we are proposing to do [is whether we are] setting very tight
targets. We are proposing to finance a 7 percent growth in nominal
GNP, which is all inflation and has a little minus in real growth,
with a 4 percent rise in M1-B, [using] the midpoint of the target. In
other words, we are relying on a shift in the demand function for
M1-B. We are also accepting some base drift that we are carrying over
from 1981, which adds to the tightness. But the fact is that we have
had base drift from time to time and sometimes in very durable form.
And the reason that our policy in the mid-1970s, for instance, now
looks so poor is not that the targets were not very tight; they looked
extremely tight. But we got an amount of shift in the demand function
that made them very loose. The growth of effective money was much
higher than we realized. It was again much higher than we realized in
1981. We got a very large shift in the demand function, on the order
of 6 percent, which meant that the very modest nominal GNP growth that
we got was financeable.

So I would say that our main risk is really on the side of
getting new additional shifts in the demand function. We have
analyzed these and how they work. We have a theory that they come
after peaks in interest rates. We can now foresee them
institutionally, with the sweeps out of demand and NOW accounts into
money market mutual funds. All that suggests that we are going to
see, if anything, greater economies in M1 than we have seen in the
past and that, therefore, the seemingly very tight targets ex post
will not look nearly so tight. One can see the same thing if one
looks simply at what is in M1. It does not contain that part of money
market mutual funds that clearly serves as transactions balances
today, which I think must be quite considerable. And it doesn't take
account fully either of the liquidity enhancing effect of the
existence of money market mutual funds that people can write one check
a month on; that saves them half their normal bank balance in that
they can replenish their bank balance in the middle of the month out
of their money market mutual fund. So, again, I think one can see
that in practice that makes the tight M1 target of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2
percent much less tight than it seems.

Now, I think the wide range that we are proposing is all
right because there is so much uncertainty here that one cannot
operate with a very tight target. We do have to realize that these
tight targets probably condemn us to quick, short swings in business.
If we follow a tight money supply track and stay on it, interest rates
will move up and down sharply. We have not accepted the full decline
in interest rates that would have come had we stayed exactly on M1-B,
and we didn't because we knew that in 1980 when we came close to doing
that we got a very sharp drop but then a very quick snapback. It
didn't do us any good against inflation this time by not allowing
quite [as] extreme a [shortfall from our] money supply target.
Hopefully we will get a more lasting effect. We do need a period of
slack in the economy if we want to wind out the inflation. Our
problem is whether we are going to bounce back and forth going up and

-29-



12/21-22/81

down to the very top peak of the ceiling and then to the floor as a
result of these techniques; to the extent that we can avoid that, we
clearly should.

Now, just a word about M2. M2 [growth] has usually been in
line very roughly with [that of] nominal GNP. So I would view with
alarm any increase in [the] M2 [range]. It is true that there are
some practices [in train] that may make M2 rise abnormally, for
instance the IRA and Keogh expansion that may be ahead. But broadly
speaking, M2 tends to expand faster in contractions and expands more
slowly than nominal GNP in expansions because of the way the fixed
rate deposit interest rates compete with market instruments. So, we
are going to go through eventually a period of expansion. I would
think that would hold M2 down, and I don't see much harm in a
relatively tight M2 ceiling. I think the removal of institutional
money market mutual funds and addition of retail RPs would be a
reasonable adjustment. We shouldn't be in the posture of never
mending the structure of our aggregates. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Well, I think the recession that we are in might
well be more severe than a number of other people seem to believe.
Nevertheless, there is a real limit as to what we can do in monetary
policy to cushion the decline. We have tried a lot of times in the
past to do this and we have gotten ourselves into a progressively more
vexing web of problems in the process. Really, the difficulties that
we will have for the next few months are foreordained, so to speak,
and inflation is still the underlying problem that we have to deal
with. So it seems to me that if we make any significant moves toward
trying to accelerate the aggregates, we run a very high risk of
reintensification of inflationary pressures and another debacle in the
long-term bond markets. That would be very, very bad for some
companies that need to tap that market fairly soon and [would lead], I
believe, eventually to a deeper recession and more unemployment down
the road than we otherwise would have.

But there are two issues that I do think deserve some special
priorities that haven't been [addressed] in exactly this way by
anyone. One is the issue of multiple targets; [the other is] the
width of the target ranges. My feeling is that the combination of
these multiple targets and wide target ranges quite legitimately
raises doubts in the minds of quite a few of our critics about the
seriousness of our efforts to control the rate of growth in the money
supply. I continue to believe that M1 is the best of the aggregates
to target on and I really would prefer to target on that one alone,
although I realize I won't get you all to agree with that. Further, I
would favor setting a relatively narrow range for M1 and then if we
should find that there is a significant change in the demand for money
and we can agree that that has in fact taken place--although I share
Chuck's apprehensions about that--I think the best way to handle that
is with an overt and publicly announced change in our targets. Now, I
recognize that there are some technical problems in moving from an
adjusted M1 range to an unadjusted range. It seems to me that this
target problem is reasonably manageable. Actually M1-B looks as if it
will grow about 4.7 percent from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the
fourth quarter of 1981, and it seems to me that that should be about
the upper limit for 1982. So, I am thinking in terms of something

-30-



12/21-22/81

like 3 to 5 percent. But I would want to aim at the midpoint of that
and make a determined effort to hit it. That midpoint, incidentally,
is the same as the midpoint of the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range that
we tentatively adopted in July.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I hope I'm in better voice this
morning than I was yesterday. I would like to say a few words about
credibility. I agree with most of the varying earlier comments on the
importance of credibility. However, it seems to me that credibility
has several dimensions--certainly more than one. Many people I have
talked to feel that it was the high interest rate policy of the
Federal Reserve that caused the current recession and they wonder what
kind of institution this is that really wants to cause a recession.
On unemployment there are some credibilities involved, too, except
that it is negative credibility. In the long run, not necessarily in
the short run, we have to take account of this negative credibility.
I agree with a good part of Governor Gramley's observation that some
part of the current credibility that we seem to be enjoying,
especially from the investor community, is based on the perception
that we are willing to accept very high rates of unemployment as a
means of fighting inflation. However, over time we ought not leave
the impression with the public that we are indifferent to high rates
of unemployment. It seems to me possible over time to accommodate
both the need to fight inflation, which is the primary objective, and
to consider as well the effects of our policy on the economy.

As to the target ranges for the aggregates for 1982, Bob
Black said much of what I wanted to say about that. In the period
immediately ahead, i.e. 1982, we should in the process of maintaining
our credibility try to ensure that we do not starve the economy for
money and that there will be enough money around to provide for a
recovery, which we need. Therefore, I would favor narrowing the
target range for M1 somewhat. I would favor raising the lower limit
of the range from 2-1/2 to 3 percent and keeping the upper limit at 5-
1/2 percent. I think that was the proposal made by John Balles. That
would tend to keep our performance closer to the target and reduce the
possibility that there will be a repeat of this year's performance,
where growth of M1 fell very, very short of the target range. If we
set the lower limit higher, it would be more likely that the shortfall
in money growth would not be substantial. So, I would propose a range
of 3 to 5-1/2 percent; and 5-1/2 percent for the upper limit, of
course, demonstrates that we are sticking with our policy of gradually
reducing the rate of money growth. But increasing the lower band also
will reduce the likelihood that we would starve the economy for money
during the period immediately ahead. I would also say that we don't
want to be too much influenced, in my judgment, by notions of growth
in effective money. Particularly we should not be in a position of
trying to place too much confidence in our ability to predict shifts
in money demand. I think we should concentrate on the money growth
that we can measure. With regard to M2, I would stick with the range
of 6 to 9 percent that we had set earlier and hope that that range
will turn out to be more consistent with the target we set for M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

-31-



12/21-22/81

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it is ironic that
the Federal Reserve has switched to monetarism at the very time when
our ability to measure the money supply has eroded dramatically and
our ability to differentiate money from liquid assets is rapidly
disappearing. And, therefore, the relationship between what we call
money and nominal GNP, which is really what we are after, is becoming
increasingly unstable. I think we've lucked out [this past] year. We
have one target below [our objective] and a couple above and bank
credit barely within. I hope we luck out this year, but I wouldn't
know what set of numbers--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. By this year do you mean 1982?

MR. MORRIS. Yes, in 1982. I wouldn't know what set of
numbers presented to the Committee would assure us that we will luck
out in 1982. We are seeing very strange phenomena in both the numbers
that we call money. We had something happen in November that I think
has never happened before in a recession. We got a sharp deceleration
in the economy accompanied by a sharp acceleration in our money
measures. That has never happened before, at least to my knowledge.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me linger on that point for a second.
[Let me ask] our staff experts: Has it ever happened before? The
same question has occurred to me. We only have a month and a half of
experience--

MR. AXILROD. I have not made a thorough research of the past
records. I would have to do that.

MR. MORRIS. Take all months where industrial production
dropped by more than 2 percent.

MR. ROOS. I don't think any monetarist ever maintained that
a 1- or 2-month trend, upward or downward, will have an effect on GNP.

MR. MORRIS. It is more than that, Larry. If you look at
M1-B last year, its relationship to nominal GNP is not what one would
have forecast at the beginning of the year by any model that I know
of. And it seems to me that the situation is going to get more
difficult in the future as banks begin sweeping consumer deposits into
money market funds. So, it seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that the time
is ripe to appoint a new committee on the directive. That committee
should be charged with finding some target for monetary policy which
is more stably related to GNP than the targets we are currently
struggling with.

MR. GRAMLEY. And if they can't?

MR. MORRIS(?). Well, I don't think we ought to conclude at
the outset that they can't.

MR. PARTEE. Maybe it's currency.

MR. MORRIS. It seems to me it could be currency or what is
left of it.

MR. FORD. That is half of it.

-32-



12/21-22/81

MR. MORRIS. Currency has become very unstable.

MR. RICE. Do you think we have given monetarism a fair test?

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think we could have given it a much
better test 50 years ago, or 30 years ago, than we can now.
Monetarism does require that we are able to measure accurately the
money supply. That is absolutely essential to the monetarist
approach. And once you take the position that you can no longer
differentiate money from liquid assets, you are in real trouble trying
to pursue a monetarist course. Now, if we don't find an alternative,
then we are suddenly going to shift back to targeting on interest
rates. Looking at the short-term options the Committee has been
presented with, I suspect very strongly that such a trend is already
under way because of the fact that we had a shortfall in M1 in 1981,
which we prized because it offset the overruns in the other
aggregates. We have an extremely weak economy and for December
through March we are presented in alternative B with a target of 2
percent for M1 and in alternative C with a target of zero. Now, it
doesn't seem to me that either of those suggests any great
determination to give a lot of priority to controlling M1. But there
is something in the description of alternative B that makes sense to
me. We used to call it around this table "maintaining prevailing
money market conditions." It seems to me that it says the case for a
2 percent growth rate as in alternative B is that it would be
associated with maintaining roughly the present level of interest
rates for another month. Maybe I am reading more between the lines
than Steve meant to write in there, but that--

MR. PARTEE. Well, he certainly wrote an analysis I am sure.

MR. MORRIS. But the less confidence we have in these
numbers, the more we are going to drift back to controlling interest
rates. And I would prefer that we find some other option.

MR. ROOS. May I ask Frank a question very quickly, Mr.
Chairman? If we had a shortfall in M1-B this year and we have a weak
economy, how does that add up to the conclusion that there is little
relationship between the growth of M1-B and output? I think that
strengthens the case for the fact that M1-B is a predictor of economic
activity.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I would like to see the model that a year
ago would have forecast the kind of nominal GNP growth we had in 1981
as being associated with the kind of M1-B growth we had.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which M1-B?

MR. ROOS. You are invited to St. Louis, my good friend!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, given all that has been said
here about the problems with M1-B, I would point out a little
arithmetic exercise we did. I had my people go all the way back to
October of 1979 and construct from the fourth quarter of 1979 the
level of M1-B that we should have in the fourth quarter of this year

-33-



12/21-22/81

assuming that we had achieved the midpoints of all the targets that
the Committee has had for that whole period of almost 2-1/2 years.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you are talking about the short-run
targets or the long-run targets?

MR. CORRIGAN. No, the long-run targets.

MR. PARTEE. From the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth
quarter of 1981?

MR. CORRIGAN. Right.

MR. PARTEE. Two years?

MR. CORRIGAN. Right.

MR. GRAMLEY. Shift-adjusted?

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. Now, doing these numbers gets a little
tricky, but let me just point out for the record that the target level
of M1-B that comes out of that exercise is $429.2 billion. The actual
level, leaving aside the last two weeks in December, is $428.6
billion, a whopping difference of $600 million. Perhaps things aren't
quite as bad as we make them out to be.

MR. MORRIS. But do you believe in compensating errors as a
basic--

MR. CORRIGAN. My own view, Frank, would be that the errors
over the period haven't been all that big. There has been some luck
and there have been some ups and downs, but when you look at the
performance of policy over the whole period, I don't think it is all
that bad. It could be better, but certainly it isn't something that
one has to be ashamed of by any stretch of the imagination. That is
where I start from. I am under no illusions, of course, that we can
measure M1-B right now. I don't think we can. And I think these
discussions about what model would say what really miss the point
because in order to have a model you still have to plug in the money
supply number to get the GNP out the other end. And quite apart from
one's views about monetarism, models, or anything else, there is a
legitimate question as to what to put in on the money assumptions.

My instinct, however, in thinking about the 1982 targets, is
to leave them where they are. In the case of M1, I think the
likelihood is great that we will continue to see strong forces working
in the direction of a continuation of the so-called downward shift in
the demand for M1-B. I don't see those forces lessening; as a matter
of fact, if anything, I think they will remain as strong or maybe
strengthen further. But even if that is the case, I still have some
concern that later in the year the targets that we have for M1-B, even
allowing for some further shift adjustment, could prove very difficult
to hit if the economy were to pick up the way the staff is projecting,
recognizing that there are an awful lot of private forecasts around
that would place the economy stronger in the second half of the year
than the staff has. So, my point here is that even under the best of
circumstances those targets for narrow money, particularly as we get
out in the year, will prove to be ambitious. And in fact it may be

-34-



12/21-22/81

that the only way they will prove workable in that timeframe is in
association with a price performance that is a little better perhaps
than is currently being forecast. Incidentally, Jim, what was the CPI
this morning?

MR. KICHLINE. It is up 0.5 [for November] compared to the
0.4 in October. Food prices rose 0.2, the same as in October. And
housing performed very well; it was only up 0.4, and that reflects the
sizable increase in the mortgage rate and a 3/4 percent decline in
home prices. On average, it is a good report.

MR. CORRIGAN. Anyway, as I said, unless we get a little
luckier on prices, I think those targets could be ambitious even
allowing for demand shifts. On M2 I find myself attracted to Governor
Partee's comments yesterday. I think there is a possibility that we
could see some rebound in savings in the fundamental underlying sense
next year. At least as far out as one can reasonably see, cash-type
investments are probably going to continue to look pretty good. And
I, at least, am inclined to the view that the IRA account could be a
bigger factor than most of the discussion around the table has
suggested so far. It is very attractive to begin with, but the fact
that so many companies are going ahead with payroll deduction plans
will make it such a simple thing and so attractive from an ease of
transactions point of view that that could really generate some
momentum in these accounts as the year unfolds. I must say I am
perplexed as to what that means. I might even be prepared to make an
argument that IRA accounts don't belong in M2 because they are a much
more permanent type of savings than are the other [components of] M2.
I get that feeling a little more so when I recognize that it is only
the pure coincidence of who is managing an IRA account that is going
to determine whether it ends up in the banking system or someplace
else. The distinction is pretty arbitrary as to whether a particular
IRA ends up as a component of M2 or in a money market instrument of
some kind or another. And I would at least raise the question of
whether they belong in M2 at all. But if we have them in M2, they
alone could create some real problems in terms of the upper limit of
the target for M2. That would lead me a bit in the direction that
Governor Gramley suggested yesterday even though I am hesitant, to put
it mildly, to change any of these targets, although they were only
tentatively agreed upon by the Committee in July. That is it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. With regard to M1-B, based on the results for
this year as a whole and the expectations for next year, I fail to see
any compelling reason to expand the width of the target range. And
lacking any compelling reason to do it, in my view we would make a
mistake to do that. Therefore, I would be in favor of keeping the
spread at 2-1/2 percentage points as it is currently. Lending
credence to the credibility theme that any change might be regarded as
tinkering at this point, I would keep the spread at the same
magnitude. But I would continue the program of restraint, which I
think has been effectively established and, therefore, I would be in
favor of moving the range down to, say, 3 to 5-1/2 percent.

With regard to M2, again given the results of this year--with
growth running at or near the top of the range all year long--it seems
to me that the relationship between M1-B and M2 this year has [not]



12/21-22/81

been terribly tight. And because of the questions about what is
likely to occur next year in the components of M2, which we have
talked about a good deal, and the fact that we have established enough
press regarding the "noise," if you will, in M2, I think this would be
an appropriate time to make a change. Therefore, I would be in favor
of maintaining the 3-point spread but moving the range up a bit to,
say, 7 to 10 percent as a way of trying to get it back to a more
comfortable level for an uncertain year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have heard good reasons why a
wider range in M1-B makes sense. There is uncertainty due to the
innovation in technology impact, which is likely to continue. On
balance, weighing the pros and cons, I would leave M1-B where it is.
And I would leave M2 where it is rather than raise it if the Committee
were to agree that we have to show a greater willingness to make a
midyear adjustment if innovation in technology continues to bring
about these shifts. It seems to me that there might be some advantage
in terms of this famous or infamous credibility problem, in
foreshadowing that adjustment in the policy record of this meeting or
a subsequent meeting as well as in the Chairman's presentation in
February. We can put everybody on notice and give it some
concreteness and say it is not just a cop-out. We can point to the
divergence between M1-B and M2 and say that if this divergence widened
because of innovation in technology, then we would be prepared to make
an adjustment in the targets at midyear. I think it would be a
mistake for us to shrink from that. If I thought we were going to
shrink from that, then I'd say we really should go with Lyle Gramley's
suggestion and raise the M2 target. I should add, since I didn't make
myself 100 percent clear yesterday, that I strongly support taking IRA
and Keogh accounts out of M2. I guess they would go into M3; I am not
quite sure whether they would go into M3 or into something else, maybe
L.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They may even vary L.

MR. CORRIGAN. That is right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I still have some difficulty in
understanding the rationale for excluding institutionally held,
corporation held, money market balances in money market funds. The
fact that they average $125,000 whereas the average household balance
averages $12,000 is logical; one is a business and the other is a
household. The motivation or the potential use of it as money--it is
liquidity--is still the same. So I am not quite sure I understand
fully why one can make that distinction or what the rationale is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are treading on delicate
questions of what M2 and M3 mean anyway. But I think [unintelligible]
the rationale [is that] M2 is more a household kind of liquid asset.
And there is no difference between any institutional money market fund
and [an institutional] CD, let's say, which is in M3 and not in M2.
You'd certainly put it in M3.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But an institutional CD, even if
negotiable, does have a fixed maturity. It's locked in for a period
of time.



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Three months, four--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whereas this money in the money
market fund can move in 24 hours.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But where does it move to? It moves to a
CD or 20-day commercial paper.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or it moves to a checking account to
finance transactions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Conceivably, yes. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. Before I make my comments, I'd say on that last
point that I have heard, but I haven't seen evidence, that a lot of
smaller businesses tend to use these money market funds as a demand
account. That reinforces Tony's point, I would think. I don't know
how prevalent that is but certainly in the partnership areas a number
of professionals tell me that they just use their Merrill Lynch
account for all the bills of over $500 that they have to pay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Nobody knows. There is some of that, but
I don't think they would tend to be the ones that label themselves
institutional funds. These are the Merrill Lynch accounts or Fidelity
accounts or whatever.

MR. FORD. Yes, maybe they are putting in the--

MS. TEETERS. We are going to undertake a special survey of
the money market mutual funds at the beginning of next year, isn't
that the timing, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. It might be a little later than that, but it
will be early next year.

MS. TEETERS. And we'll try to find out what the transaction
use is and what the turnover is on them.

MR. BALLES. Oh, good.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to find out. We can try.

MS. TEETERS. We can try.

MR. FORD. Well, that then leads into another suggestion I
have but first, with regard to M1-B, we feel we can be comfortable
with the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent tentative target we announced or with
2-1/2 to 5 percent, either one. I don't think the 1/2 point makes a
big difference. I have some sympathy with what Si said, certainly, of
not making the range too much wider. Dropping the NOW account
adjustment seems to make lots of sense. So, we would say: Let's go
from the end of year [and use] the last quarterly average as the base,
as we normally do and as I think is recommended in the Bluebook, and
go with perhaps the 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range. But we are very
concerned about the nature of the innovations that will be coming
along, some of which we hope will be at least partly visible by the
time of the next meeting. Nancy just mentioned that she thought we
ought to do some more research on some of these things such as the

-37-



12/21-22/81

MMFs. I would suggest that we gear up either at the Washington level
and/or at some of the Reserve Banks to get on top of the IRA
developments, because the potential there is tremendous. If you take
the number of American households and even if you assume that only 10
percent of them go into a $2,000 IRA, it comes to something on the
order of just under $15 billion that could be moved around. And if
you assume it is 20 percent or--

MR. PARTEE. I just figured 10 million accounts at $2,000 is
$20 billion.

MR. FORD. Yes. Okay, there you go.

MR. AXILROD. For sure, President Ford, we are going to be
developing and suggesting a data system to capture the flows as much
as possible.

MR. FORD. Right, [that needs to be done] early on. I would
say even before that if there is any way to find out intentions--that
might be too romantic for research--it would be interesting to find
out not just how many households but obviously the source [of the
funds]. If people shift out of NOWs, obviously that is one thing; if
they shift among M-2 type assets, then it is less scary. I'd be
curious to know whether people are just going to take a large
percentage of the funds out of their NOW accounts or whether they will
shift out of other M2 assets or whether the funds will come from
things outside of M2, all of which have very different implications.
I'd just encourage everybody, especially our Washington leadership, to
look at the early returns on IRAs.

MR. PARTEE. Or [it could] raise the saving rate.

MR. CORRIGAN. That is right.

MR. PARTEE. It could.

MR. CORRIGAN. That is what the payroll deduction could do.

MR. FORD. While we are at it, if we could find out anything
about these sweep accounts, they, too, as a financial innovation have
tremendous potential for bombing us on M1-B. So we should take a look
at whether among some of the major institutions there really will be
an outbreak of virulent competition in that area, which could further
put us in the box of having undershoots on the M1-B target and
possibly overshoots on M2. What concerns me most is the fact that all
year long--while Jerry's calculation was a very elegant one and speaks
well for how we actually came out on M1-B--I've had the feeling that
we were undershooting one target and overshooting the other. And for
the next year we ought to try to figure out a way, if we can, to get
out of that box so that we are not always damned on the one side for
being too tight and damned on the other side for being too loose.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How do you suggest we do that?

MR. FORD. Well, if the research supports it and if the early
returns on IRAs give any evidence that we should expect M2 to get
looser and wider, I'm leaning to the view that we ought to consider
just biting the bullet and raising the upper end of that target while

-38-



12/21-22/81

doing other things to indicate that it is consistent with a lower or
tighter target on M1-B. For example, we might choose a base that
involves a little less drift--take the year-end M1-B figure if it
happens to be lower than the quarterly average. Or if there is some
other way we could start from a lower point, keep it down at 5-1/2
percent and do something which in combination says we are anticipating
that M1-B already is going to be overshooting, so we are tightening up
in that area and we think financial innovations really are going to
make M2 behave in a way that suggests we can anticipate a higher upper
end if the research supports it. That is why I hope we [won't] wait
until--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I interjected my question because I
am not sure the research supports anything. And I am not sure we will
have the research that is going to support anything. The nature of
the problem is that we don't know.

MR. FORD. We can't know, but don't you think we can learn a
little about IRAs because by the middle of February we will--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can learn a little something, [but]
experience not only here but internationally suggests that we are not
very good at predicting this [kind of development].

MR. FORD. Then maybe we have to go to Mr. Morris' idea that
we look at some other things, although my thrust in the research would
probably be different than his. I'd say, if we are going to reexamine
what we shoot for, that we ought to pull out the monetary base and
total reserves as possibilities, along with whatever [measures] he has
in mind, although those two present difficulties that everybody here
has commented on at one time or another. Where we are presently
structured, as I see it, is that we are making ourselves subject to
the same problems we had this year. And I would be inclined not to
give up so easily, Paul, on being able to find out something about the
trend in financial innovation. You may well end up being right, but I
would want to come down on the research to see if we can find out
something about IRAs and sweep accounts at least.

MR. SCHULTZ. Some information on the payroll plans probably
would be the best indicator that we could get, if there is a way to
find that out relatively soon. I think that would give us some real
indication.

MR. FORD. I don't know about the public sector, but our own
benefits people are putting it into our plan to make it easy, in line
with the comment that Jerry made.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, we are proposing to do that.

MR. FORD. It may be that if all other government agencies
are going to do that, we might have a big chunk [of employers doing
that]. I don't know.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think so.

MR. FORD. Maybe we ought to do a little survey of major
employers or something like that.

-39-



12/21-22/81

MR. RICE. But we don't know what the [employee] reception
would be.

MR. BLACK. We don't know when it would [go into effect]
either, do we?

MR. RICE. Yes and no.

MR. BLACK. It won't be until April or May sometime.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't know where the money comes from.

MR. CORRIGAN. This really gets murky because people can
[wait to put in the] money all the way out until April of 1983.

MR. BLACK. That's right.

MR. FORD. Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. They can put it in [then] and get the tax
deduction for 1982.

MR. BLACK. I bet a lot of people will borrow money in April
of 1983.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think it is useful to
speculate on this at great length at this point. Are you finished,
Mr. Ford?

MR. FORD. Yes, I'm sorry. I just hope you are not right
about it, Paul; you might well be right. But I would hate to give up
so easily on saying we can't foresee innovation in the financial
markets.

MR. RICE. I don't think we ought to give up on the principle
of how to treat these various [monetary measures]. We ought to decide
where they ought to be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I agree with that and I agree we ought to
do all we can to understand what is going on. Mrs. Teeters.

MR. PARTEE. I wonder where the thrift plan is in these Ms?

MR. RICE. It is harder to understand what is going on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I simply want to support maintaining the M1-B
target. I have a lot of sympathy with what Frank has said. I think
we do need to see whether we can find something else. It may be in
between the two ways that we operate but I am not satisfied with what
we have. I am really very concerned about the M2 target because we
had a 7 percentage point gap between the growth of M1-B shift-adjusted
and M2. We got ourselves into this situation where we are below one
[target] and at or above the other. I would guess that the midpoint
of M2 that is consistent with the midpoint of M1-B at 4 percent is 9
percent so that we are going to find that we will do again what we did
last year. If we hit the 4 percent midpoint of the M1-B target, we

-40-



12/21-22/81

will hit M2 at 9 percent or above. So it seems to me this is a
perfect time to adjust it. We have a history of a 7-point gap. If we
aim for a midpoint of 9 percent or thereabouts for M2, that is only a
5-point differential instead of 7, so we are not repeating completely
what we did last year. And we'd have a better chance, I think, of
staying within the targets and not agonizing all year long about which
one is the most important and which one is going over. So, I would
associate myself with those who would accept the existing M1-B target,
increase the M2 target, and remove the IRAs and Keoghs [from M2]. We
don't have a record of changing in midstream, Tony. We have never
changed a target.

MR. PARTEE. Never?

MS. TEETERS. We never have, from the time we [established
the tentative ranges] on down.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's because we are always afraid
our credibility will be injured if we change. But if we foreshadow
it--put people on notice that we have a very clear, honest case on
innovation in technology--and everybody is aware of it, we can begin
to educate people more and make it easier for us.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but then when we get down to doing it, we
always say we won't do it.

MR. WALLICH. Or we make another shift adjustment.

MS. TEETERS. We'd rather overshoot than change the target.
That is why establishing them in July a year ahead of time is such a
mistake. We have no idea what the next year is going to be like. And
this is not a very good forecast. As of the fourth quarter of this
year, we will be exactly where we were in the fourth quarter of 1979.
And if the forecast is accurate for next year, in the fourth quarter
of 1982 we will be exactly where we were in the first quarter of 1981.
That is really a galloping economy over two years!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I would like to join the chorus of those who are
calling for a re-examination of these measurements because I think we
are just playing mumbo-jumbo with the numbers game now. I think we
can do a better job of providing measurements of what money is all
about. And until we do that, Fed targets don't make much sense to me
because we just explain them away by all these deviations. In
Columbus, for example, our money market fund clearings have gone from
25,000 a day to 115,000; that gives you some idea of the kind of
activity that is going on in that area. This is the Merrill Lynch
clearing setup. And here is a backward way of getting into that
measurement.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the number of checks or--?

MR. WINN. On the money market funds.

MR. PARTEE. It certainly is the most active.



12/21-22/81

MR. WINN. I think we have to get on with the measurements.
[As for] Frank's point on seeking other measurements, unless we have
some measure of the reserve base or something else, we don't really
have reserveable assets involved in the money concept. I just think
we must get on with an attempt to remeasure some of these magnitudes.
They may not be very accurate, but they are a lot better than reaching
in the dark for some numbers that really don't mean anything. And
then if we don't hit them, we explain it away because of all these
deviations. In view of that uncertainty, I would prefer to stay right
where we are with these targets but to get on with the recalculation
of some of these numbers. Unless we do that, we won't have any way of
establishing a reserve basis for these items. We are playing more and
more an inequitable game in terms of those who participate in the
conventional forms. It just behooves us to get on with the problem of
measurements. I don't think we have any real basis for our shift
adjustment; it [involves] numbers that we had some time ago but I
don't think those are accurate. I urge that we get on with the
problem of a re-examination of these targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, instead of urging, I would suggest
that if you have some practical way of going about this, reduce that
to a piece of paper and tell us.

MR. WINN. Yes, I will make an effort.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Back to the credibility problem: In terms of
the long-term ranges, it seems to me that the tentative ranges that we
have published and that have been discussed and seem to be understood
on the outside probably should not be changed at this point simply
because I don't think we know enough to improve that in any way. I am
not saying they are the best; I doubt that we know what is the best
right now. But M1-B and M2 at least as of midyear seemed to be giving
more consistency in terms of a relationship. Whether that will hold
up remains to be seen. I think we should hold to [seeking] a gradual
reduction [of these ranges] over time; it's a perception that I still
think is very important, particularly to those who are less
sophisticated, and we should hold to that. What is actually going to
happen with regard to the innovation that is coming is mere
speculation on our part, as we can tell from going around the table
here. And I agree very much with Tony Solomon that the time to make
an adjustment is when we have some pretty firm facts or a basis for
doing it and doing it in a supportable way rather than by conjecture.
The idea of giving the first signal that this will be rethought has a
lot of appeal to me. I don't think the fact that we have never made a
midyear shift should [mean] that we never would, if the facts are
there and a change is supportable. So, I would be inclined to stay
where we said tentatively we were going to be and let events unfold;
and I'd be ready to make adjustments or changes in definitions, or
whatever will be necessary, but based on more knowledge than we have
now.

MS. TEETERS. It is not just a midyear shift; it is a mid-18
month shift or any shift in announced ranges. We just don't do it.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, whether we do it at midyear or do it
before then or after, it seems to me that it would be incumbent upon

-42-



12/21-22/81

the Committee to reach a judgment and make a determination when the
facts support it, whatever point in time that is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I have just a couple of comments, Paul. I share
Frank's frustration on knowing what money is these days. He proposed
a new Committee on the directive. A couple of months ago I think I
spoiled Steve's whole day by suggesting that maybe first and foremost
we needed a major restudy of the monetary aggregates. And that is why
I was so glad to hear Governor Teeters say that we are going to do
something about money market funds early in the year. Could I ask a
little more about that? For example, Steve, we know that some of the
investment houses are arbitrarily adding to observed M1-B either 10
percent or 20 percent of money market funds on the assumption that
some of these must be transactions balances. I would like to ask the
question whether our look-see is really going to zero in on what
percentage of these [funds] are turning over at the rate of normal
transactions balances. I think we really need that kind of study
before we need a Committee on the directive, Frank.

MR. AXILROD. That is our hope. In response to a Board
discussion, we are in the initial stages of outlining a one-time
survey; whether it will be a sample or complete [coverage] we are not
certain yet. For the money market funds, we have attempted to
determine in more detail than we now have the various characteristics
of the account: the ownership, size, turnover, and other
[characteristics] we may think of. We would expect to have a draft of
the survey in a few weeks to bring before the Board. That is the
stage where we are now and we hope to have it in the field relatively
promptly. Whether it could be done and accomplished before the
February meeting, I don't know; that seems like a very tight schedule,
but we are trying to [meet it].

MS. TEETERS. Steve, I am fascinated by Willis' observation.
Can we get at some of this from the clearings [data]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have data on some of this and we
have done some analysis, good or bad, that takes as its point of
departure how many checks, the value of checks written, or the value
of turnover and says: If that is representative of a transactions
account and has a normal turnover of an individual's checking account,
x amount of the money market funds are like M1. And it came out to
about a little less than 2 percent the last time we--

MR. KOHN. It was 4 percent, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 4 percent of the money market funds,
but adding 2 percent or a little less than 2 percent or a little less
than 1 percent is a very [unintelligible]. There are all kinds of
questions that can be raised about the methodology. There is some
turnover to savings accounts that we don't put in at all; there is
some turnover to CDs that we don't count at all. On the other hand,
it makes no allowance for the fact that if somebody owns a money
market fund, even if he doesn't write any checks on it or doesn't take
the money out except rarely, the fact that he has it and knows he can
write a check on it induces him to hold a lower cash balance than he
would otherwise keep. Now, how do we measure that? I think it is

-43-



12/21-22/81

basically immeasurable, and it is undoubtedly there. We have a
spectrum of assets and we are trying to draw an arbitrary line through
it and say this much is M1 and that much is M2 or M3; in fact the
arbitrary line doesn't mean anything because it's a spectrum. I
understand the frustration. We ought to know all that we can know
about it; but in fact we are dealing with a spectrum and there isn't
any answer. Nothing is going to fall neatly into what is M1 and M2
and M3. We'd have a little trouble if we sat around this table trying
to rationalize the distinction between M2 and M3 and M3 and L. Any
sense that after that discussion we're going to get a clean,
conceptual difference between these Ms I'm afraid is an illusion.

MS. TEETERS. But the troublesome thing about the money
market mutual funds is that the data we're getting on low turnover and
all the rest goes against what all of us hear that people are using
these funds as checking accounts. My own sample indicated that 99
percent were using them as checking accounts.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, that's the problem with turnover. One
of the ways that people use the money market mutual funds is that they
write a check at the end of the month against them and put it in their
checking account and then write 20 checks against the one check. And
if you just measure turnover, you get one check.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it's a big check in that case. The
only explanation I have for the phenomenon that I think you correctly
observed is that it is a mixture. A large portion of that is
basically savings or investment in the broader sense. Some fraction
of it is transactions accounts. That is the nature of it. M1 is only
$400 billion and M3 is $2 trillion or whatever it is. And money
market funds are an indistinguishable blend of the two.

MS. TEETERS. Then what do we do when everything becomes
money market funds?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Precisely, we don't know. I am saying
that I think it's a little difficult, however much study we give this,
to say we're going to come up with a number that says this portion of
it is M1 and this portion of it is M2 because it doesn't come that
way. It doesn't come in that kind of package.

MR. WALLICH. It doesn't have to come into the money market
fund. Merrill Lynch lets you draw checks against your securities and
puts the money into a bank account that has a money market fund
associated with it; that fund is up to $12 billion now. You can draw
a check for fifteen cents.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not arguing at all over this;
obviously, we should get as much information about this phenomenon as
we can. I just think people are suggesting more than is practically
feasible to say that we are going to have some great study and somehow
the numbers are going to come fluttering down and on this half of the
table they are going to be M1 and on the other half they are going to
be M2.

MR. PARTEE. I couldn't agree more, Paul. It is very
analogous to our difficulty in dealing with savings accounts over
time. Savings accounts have more turnover than money market funds and

-44-



12/21-22/81

yet we never put any portion of savings accounts in M1. Indeed, we
didn't even blink an eye when [depository institutions] went from
interest figured on the minimum balance to interest from day of
deposit to day of withdrawal, which was a big change in savings
accounts. We never did a thing about it. I don't think we have ever
handled the notion of savings accounts at all well in research that I
can recall, extending back into the 1950s, in terms of what to do with
savings accounts and how to treat their "moneyness" in looking at
monetary expansion. So, I think it is not really the turnover but
[their use as a] backup that's terribly important. The difference
between a money market fund which you can have immediate access to and
an IRA account which you can't draw on until you're 59-1/2 years old
is really phenomenal, and yet they are both in M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just inject a thought on
IRAs. Conceptually, the argument is very strong, as I see it, to take
those out of M2 on liquidity grounds. But suppose we went ahead and
did that. What we don't know is how much money is going into IRA
accounts that otherwise would have been in M2 or is already in M2, so
we'd get an artificial deflation of M2 in an attempt to improve the
figure. In some long run sense it probably would be an improved
figure, but it is not going to help us in 1982 in understanding M2, I
suspect.

MR. WALLICH. You'd turn it into another M1-A.

MR. CORRIGAN. You'd have a shift-adjusted M2.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's inherent in almost anything we
look at. Where's the money coming from, right?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It can't stop us from--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But this is a reflection of a change in
law. It's like the M1 adjustment problem.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's so clearly understandable by
everybody that there's a rationale for taking it out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not arguing against taking it out.
I'm just arguing against the notion that it will give us a clean
analytically nice figure when we take it out.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, one more observation: I'd just
like to remind you that back in the mid-1970s we had one of the
several Committees on the directive--some of us at this table served
on it--chaired first by Bob Holland and later by Chuck Partee. We
took a long, hard look at optimal control, working on the ultimate
variables and not using money as the intermediate target. And the net
of that was a dry hole. It just didn't prove to be doable in
practice. So, despite all of our frustrations about what money is,
how it behaves, and what should be in M1 and M2, it is still the only
game in town as far as I am concerned. Some of the academics--and it
is a real minority--are urging us to target on real interest rates or
to target on nominal GNP. They get little, if any, support from their
peers. That came out loud and clear in this recent academic

-45-



12/21-22/81

conference that I mentioned yesterday. Despite the frustrations about
the money supply--will the real money supply please stand up!--I think
it's the only hope we have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With that comforting thought, Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Taking into account all this frustration,
uncertainty, and credibility, which I don't think I can add to after
this dinstinguished discussion, we still have to set some targets for
next year. I think John is right that we still have to deal with
these. I come down for lowering the M1 range to 2-1/2 to 5-1/2
percent, which is what we tentatively agreed on in July. And I am
sympathetic to the notion of raising M2. It does seem to me that we
ought to make these as consistent as we can. I don't think it adds to
or subtracts from our credibility if we make an adjustment in M2 to
make it consistent with M1. So, I would favor such an adjustment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, just so we have everything in front of us,
I also would like to point out that there is the problem of choosing
the base in doing next year's targeting. We've rather easily slipped
over the fact that there was a considerable shortfall in M1-B this
year. In fact, Jerry had an interesting explanation for it--and I
think it's something we ought to work on--that involves a 2-year look
at the expansion of M1-B. But there are a good many people who have
been greatly afflicted by high interest rates and poor business and
bankruptcy who won't quite understand why it is that we just disregard
the shortfall entirely and go on and assign the same old lower growth
rate to M1 in the year to come. I think it is a very serious problem
that we have to deal with in explaining, if that is what we want to
do, why it is what we want to do. Most people would say we ought to
add our shortfall in 1981 into the 1982 expectations.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But last year didn't you accept the
base drift in Ml?

MR. PARTEE. Yes, but it didn't involve bankruptcy the way it
does now. I am talking about builders and realtors and people like
that who just aren't going to understand it and quite a few
Congressmen who already have begun to focus on this issue in looking
at 1982.

MR. WINN. Chuck, what do you do with M2, then?

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think most people would regard M2 as a
very much lesser target of policy. That hasn't been the emphasis at
all, for a very good reason in my view. Of course, we differ on that,
but it is a problem we have to take into account now. It happens to
be most pointed in this particular Bluebook because in this Bluebook
we have the sense--and it was referred to earlier, I think, by Frank
in a somewhat negative way--that we have a year in which we've fallen
progressively short in M1-B and we finally got 2 or 3 months that are
up. October was a normative or maybe a slightly more than normative
month; November was a little strong; and December is another sort of
normative month. But choosing the fourth quarter as the base means
that December is above the fourth-quarter average so that when we ask
"How are we going to be on track for the first quarter?" we get very

-46-



12/21-22/81

low money rate objectives, and everyone notices that. [Growth] is
only 1/2 or 2 percent, depending on which alternative one takes; the
fact is that it is very hard to explain. We are still below target
and now we are talking about getting down to the new target in this
very meeting, in the second part of this meeting that we are going to
have. It seems to me that's a very [unintelligible] representation of
the problem we have.

MR. ROOS. Chuck, doesn't the law say that we have to use the
fourth quarter as a [base]?

MR. PARTEE. No, the law doesn't say that. It says the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would observe in this connection that I
like to look at a somewhat longer perspective than these fourth-
quarter [measures]. This doesn't deal with the short-run problem of
what to do when we have a sudden increase such as we have now. We end
up with a high December and all the rest. But on an annual basis the
table on page 6 [of the Bluebook] in a sense is another way of looking
at what Jerry Corrigan was looking at; it overlaps, anyway. If you
look at these annual [growth rates] year over year, which are the
number 2 figures here, [for M1-B] it's 8.2 percent in '78, down
slightly in '79, down more in '80, and down more in '81. It's a
fairly smooth pattern, though you can argue that it's too much, too
little, or whatever. But it doesn't give that extreme movement we get
with the fourth quarter figures because that reflects the obvious; in
fact we started high this year and ended up low [given] the declining
trend during the year. Last year we did the opposite. When you
average through the 12 months you get a reasonably smooth pattern.

MR. PARTEE. Well, if we wanted to take that 4-1/2 percent
[year-over-year growth] for '81 and have, say, 4 percent for '82 for
the annual average, I think we'd find that the quarterly growth rate
would have to be quite a bit more than that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve has done that calculation. If I
understand it correctly, if we stayed exactly on the target quarter by
quarter at the 4 percent midpoint of this tentative range, the annual
average also comes out to 4 percent.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, it's tricky because that's the actual M1
not shift-adjusted over last year's regular M1, so it works out
fortuitously that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But what's the meaning of that? It comes
out considerably higher if you measure the actual M1 in '82 over the
shift-adjusted in '81.

MR. AXILROD. No, in '81 the year over year not shift-
adjusted so-called M1 grew [6.9] percent, so we would get that going
down to 4.0 percent. And the shift-adjusted M1 grew 4-1/2 percent,
and we get that going down to 4.0 percent. So we really are getting a
year-over-year drop.

MR. PARTEE. I see.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I fully understand how we
come out on the number 2 basis but any way we do it I take it that if

-47-



12/21-22/81

we stayed on path, we'd come out with another drop year over year on
this tentative target.

MR. AXILROD. If it was exactly a 4 percent increase month by
month after the first quarter, with a little slower growth in the
first quarter, it would come out at 4 percent on this measure.

MR. GRAMLEY. I wonder if anybody has noticed how beautifully
we have come out by way of the performance of nominal GNP in terms of
deceleration. Page I-V in the Greenbook shows the fourth-quarter
changes. Starting from 1979 it shows 9.9 to 9.4 to 9.1 to 8.6
percent. Now, that is about as good a target for nominal GNP as one
can possibly imagine--fortuitous, but very well balanced.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where am I here? Has everybody said all
they want to say on this particular subject? I am not sure I heard an
enormous range of opinion on the targets themselves. There is some
disagreement about what to do with M2. I have a great deal of
sympathy with the subject that Frank particularly emphasized and
others have too. I must say I have a great deal of sympathy with the
frustrations in defining the numbers and knowing what they mean. I
don't extend my sympathy to a great antipathy about or not worrying
about interest rates. I think that is the obvious modification that
one might introduce into our procedures in the absence of some magical
other statistic. I think we have had a problem with interest rates.
If anything, we probably should have paid more attention to them
rather than less, I'd say. That's a personal reaction anyway. It
certainly is not driving me back to being more precise about numbers
that I don't understand.

Let me give you the nature of the problem that I see in M1. I
think some day, conceptually, if we didn't have any statistical
problems, this demand shift that we keep talking about might go in
reverse. If people had more confidence in the currency and lower
interest rates and we got interest rates paid on transactions accounts
that would be by regulation or in practice much closer to market
rates, we might find some day that we had to have a decidedly faster
growth of M1 relative to nominal increases in GNP or other magnitudes.
I don't think we are there yet. But some day that is going to happen.
Apart from that, what do we say about M1 next year? I could see it
repeating [this year's experience] as some people have said, but it
could go either way so far as I know, for purely institutional
reasons. If interest rates continue to decline, if the economy were
somewhat on the soft, depressed side, if the ceiling rates go up on
transaction-type accounts, we might get a big expansion in M1 relative
to what we otherwise would contemplate or relative to past patterns
because of money flows, particularly into NOW accounts, that otherwise
might have been lodged elsewhere. [That assumes] we don't get the
aggressive competition from money market funds, we have a [markedly
upward sloping] yield curve, and short-term rates are getting down
toward what institutions can pay. On the other hand, if interest
rates remain relatively high, which might occur with a fairly strong
economy relative to projections, we could get a great spread of sweeps
into money market fund accounts, with practically every bank in the
country offering that service. M1 could get very depressed relative
to other economic magnitudes. I don't know which way it will go.

-48-



12/21-22/81

We all want to be very precise about the money supply target
and that's fine. The effectiveness of that target may be more altered
by a decision that we have to make as to whether we are going to
permit sweeping of accounts or not than by the decision we make as to
where to put the precise target. We have to face that decision, which
will be a very difficult one. But I think we probably will have quite
a different situation if there is no sweeping than if this [practice]
catches on like wildfire. There was something in the paper this
morning about the Fidelity fund being all set up to do this with a
large group of Midwestern banks. I don't know what the implications
of that will be but I suspect things will be different whether it's
permitted to take place or not to take place. I have a rather strong
bias under these circumstances not to be more precise than we really
can be in setting the targets and not to put all the weight on one
monetary aggregate either because I find it very useful to look at
more than one, whatever we say about the targets, in trying to
understand what is going on in these very complex and difficult
circumstances in which we live.

On the substantive side, where I think greater problems lie,
we may have an insoluble problem. It is not impossible and may even
be likely, apart from the short-run question, that we will have the
immediate problem of a recession and not want to aggravate that and
want to facilitate recovery and all the rest. In that process, I
don't think we can forget about what happens when the economy turns
around and begins to rise again. If it does, we will just run into
another blank wall on sharply rising interest rates--with precipitous
increases in money market rates and long-term rates, not just
reflecting what is going on but in anticipation of budgetary deficits
and economic recovery and restrictive monetary policy--and I'm not
sure we will have served the country well. We have to think a bit
about strategies to minimize that possibility; we can't eliminate it.
The reason the problem may be insoluble is that the only way we are
really going to deal with this, I suspect, apart from the budgetary
consideration, is to convince people that we have a hold on inflation
and have created a climate in which interest rates, particularly long-
term rates, will tend to go down. But how do we create that climate
and that expectation without in some sense risking being overly tight
in the short run? And because people are so skeptical about whether
that is going to happen, the long-term rates won't come down fast
enough to facilitate the recovery we want. To what degree can we
overcome that by being "easier" in terms of the money supply? Maybe
that will scare people even more and work against the objective of
creating a climate in which interest rates aren't going to bounce up
again as soon as the economy turns around. I am not entirely
discouraged about this because I think, particularly starting where we
are with interest rates so high, there is a possibility that
confidence will return more rapidly than we could imagine now. So we
could get a situation where the economy could turn around consistent
with declines in interest rates, if we can get the economy turned
around at all. But I think that is the chance we have to play for.

Well, I don't know that we are going to be all that far apart
in the mechanics. On this question that Governor Partee raised, we
could broaden that a little as to whether there is any better way of
presenting our targets. How we deal with base drift is one aspect of
that. I don't have any brilliant suggestions but it may be worth a
little further thought. We have to deal with this immediate problem

-49-



12/21-22/81

in setting the short-run target. I don't know that we can go any
further on the discussion of the long run. This has been useful in
some ways. We will obviously return to it and will have to resolve it
in early February. Why don't you present the short-term issues,
Steve, and then we'll have a coffee break.

MR. AXILROD. If I might take a minute before I do that, I
did look up the answer to the question that President Morris raised of
whether we have ever had rapid growth in M1, such as the 4-1/2 percent
rate of growth we are having in the fourth quarter, with a marked
deceleration of the economy, where it is going down as it is this
quarter at a 5-1/2 percent rate. There are a surprising number of
quarters of negative growth in the economy and positive growth in
money--I am talking about on a quarterly average basis. There were
even quarters where we had a deceleration and then an acceleration of
money, surprisingly enough. For example, in the second quarter of
1979 real GNP was [minus] 1-3/4 percent after being plus [3.9] percent
in the first quarter, and money growth went from 5-1/2 in the first
quarter to 10 percent in the second quarter. Similarly, in the the
first quarter of '74 real GNP had dropped at around a 4 percent annual
rate after rising at a 3-1/4 percent rate in the fourth quarter of
'73, and money growth accelerated from 4.8 to 6.7 percent. So it is
not an extremely infrequent occurrence that something like that
happens and, of course, we are aiming at it this time.

MR. WALLICH. Money is supposed to lead the economy with a
long and variable lag.

MR. AXILROD. This is only quarter to quarter. I didn't
trace out the averages. I was just responding to the question.

MR. MORRIS. The examples you gave were all relatively
recent.

MR. AXILROD. But it's even the case going back.

MR. ROOS. I wonder, Steve, if you compared the quarterly
rate of money growth to the trend rate, if there is any instance where
we had two quarters of M1-B growth falling below the trend rate where
we haven't had a significant downturn in economic activity.

MR. AXILROD. Well, that is a different question. I was just
responding to the question that President Morris raised of whether
within a quarter we had had this kind of movement. Our observation is
that it's not as rare as one might have thought it would be.

Mr. Chairman, we designed the short-run alternatives on the
basis of the tentative range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent that the
Committee had set for M1-B and on the basis of the Committee's
previous practice of, in effect, shifting the base to the actual level
of money. Alternative A was designed to hit the upper end of that
2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range, alternative C to hit the lower end, and
alternative B to be in between by March. It is a fairly mechanical
setting of the ranges. Thus, from the fourth-quarter average that we
suggested as a base, the growth rate for alternative A is 5-1/2
percent, the upper end of the range. That [took account of] how the
Committee has set short-run ranges before. Our thought was that
December as a base is somewhat unstable because we don't know the

-50-



12/21-22/81

number yet. If it did come out as we are projecting, the implied
growth rates are so low that they raise the possibility of being
subject to some misinterpretation when put out in the directive. An
alternative way of doing it would be to make the base November, which
the Committee has done before, and the growth rates for alternatives
A, B, and C would be about 0.3 lower. That is, the 5-1/2 percent with
November as a base would be 5.2 percent to hit the upper end of the
range; and that 0.3 would extend across all of the other alternatives.
That, as I say, the Committee has done one time before.

MR. CORRIGAN. That would be November-to-March then, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. With regard to the implications of these
alternatives for credit markets (and assuming less of a demand shift,
so to speak, than took place in 1981) our analysis suggested that the
odds were--unless the economy was considerably weaker than is being
projected--that there would be not much room for further interest rate
declines under either alternatives B or C, which call for really quite
modest growth in money consistent with the Committee's long-run range.
Under alternative A it looked to us as if there was more of a
possibility for declines in interest rates given the GNP projection.
So, in a sense, one way of putting it is that the Committee's choice
would be to set a target depending on how it tends to lean in its
attitude toward credit markets at this time, before the recovery has
started. To the degree that the Committee wishes to give a little
impetus to easing in credit markets in order to encourage the
recovery, that tends to argue, of course, for the more liberal [fourth
quarter to March] alternative within the Committee's range. To the
degree that the Committee would want to leave more room for expansion
later and believes the recovery has enough momentum and can turn
around on its own, that tends to argue for an alternative of lower
growth, leaving a little more room later to finance the expansion as
it develops.

I should mention one other point, Mr. Chairman, with regard
to the borrowing assumption. We have assumed borrowing in alternative
B of around $450 million, which is a little higher than we have
actually attained in recent weeks. Again, to the degree that the
Committee wants to lean toward a little easing in credit markets in
setting its monetary target, consideration could be given to lowering
that more toward the levels of borrowing that are suggested for
alternative A, which would be around $250 million. That leaves a
range, obviously, in between.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make a couple of quick comments
just in terms of presentation. I am not crazy about that first
alternative in the Bluebook, [shifting the base] from a quarterly
average to a monthly number. That looks a little awkward to me and I
recoil a bit. I don't like the December-to-March approach
particularly because we don't yet know December. It seems to me we
have done that before and then gotten mixed up by the fact that
December, or whatever the last month in the quarter was, didn't come
in the way we expected. This leaves me thinking that maybe the
November-to-March method of looking at it is the most fruitful. This
is just arithmetic in presentation.

On the substance, I find myself thinking these numbers mean
something quite different if in fact we continue to get sizable growth

-51-



12/21-22/81

because NOW accounts are bulging--and we don't quite know why but it
may be [related to] this interpretation of a temporary parking place--
than if NOW accounts are not bulging the way they have been in the
last few weeks. I guess that's all I have in the way of preliminary
comments. Why don't we have coffee.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me make one other comment just to set
the stage for what we're talking about and to give us a due sense of
humility. If I recall the discussion correctly at the last meeting, I
don't think anybody around the table--I certainly speak for myself--
had any conviction that, almost regardless of what we did, we were
going to have high money supply figures in the period from the last
meeting to this meeting. Everybody was worried that whatever number
we put down we might fall way short even if interest rates declined.
Instead, we had interest rates tending to be under a little more
pressure in the money market and the money supply figures moving
significantly in excess of the target we put down. I don't think that
is a tragedy. I am just saying that is an indication of the [limited]
degree of precision that we have in setting the target for a one-month
period; whatever effects there will be on the money supply in the next
month are probably already [determined] in the market, rather than by
what we do today. But we are setting a money supply target here for a
quarter. Let's proceed with the discussion. Is there a general
agreement that we ought to use November as a presentational base?

SEVERAL. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It may just make it a bit less confusing
if we--

MR. MORRIS. Paul, how would that influence the money growth
numbers?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's just what Steve said. If
you're looking at the fourth quarter-to-March numbers, take off 0.3 to
get the equivalent number on M1. I don't know what it does--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. On M2 the numbers are 9.8, 8.9, and
8.1 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Those are the equivalent numbers?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Those are the equivalent numbers
according to our calculations.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just write those down.

MR. BALLES. Say them again.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Taking the November base to March,
for alternative A M2 is 9.8 percent, alternative B is 8.9 percent, and
alternative C is 8.1 percent.

MR. BALLES. How about M1?

-52-



12/21-22/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. M1, as Steve said, is 5.2, 3.7, and
2.2 percent.

MR. BALLES. Right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I would recommend, Mr. Chairman,
is taking the November base and liberalizing alternative B somewhat by
rounding up the 3.7 to 4 percent. I'd start with around $350 million
of initial borrowing and lower the fed funds rate range by 1 point,
which would bring it down to 10 to 14 percent or we could use 10 to
15 percent if we want to go back to the 5-point spread.

MR. PARTEE. Tony, the 4 percent is the quarterly average?
Is that what you're explaining?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, it's November to March.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Which is a liberalization of "B."

MR. FORD. You're saying make the fed funds range 10 to 15
percent, Tony?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or 10 to 14 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either 10 to 14 or 10 to 15 percent,
I don't care. There's some advantage in changing that range from time
to time whether it's 4 points or 5 points. I don't feel strongly
about that. But I do think the lower end of it ought to be lowered by
1 point and that the initial borrowing ought to be around $350
million.

MR. MORRIS. Sounds like a Solomonic judgment!

MR. SCHULTZ. I'll vote for that.

MR. PARTEE. What was your M2 number?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, the M2 number then becomes
around 9 percent. It's 8.9 percent technically, but if we round up
the 3.7 on M1-B to 4 percent then it would be shading M2 to a little
more than 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to say first that I don't think
anything we do here today is going to help this recession come to an
end soon. It's going to run its course for a while. I do believe
that if we are not careful in the selection of where we go, we could
draw out the recession and make it longer. Therefore, I want to avoid
any alternative that would result in rising interest rates at this
stage. I think that would be a grave mistake. What we ought to be
aiming for is to set the stage for a recovery later this spring but
one of moderate dimensions. We ought to be very careful to avoid the
kind of problems we got into in 1980. I'm cognizant of the enormous

-53-



12/21-22/81

uncertainties we face in interpreting the monetary aggregates, not
only in the long run because of these tremendous innovational changes
but also the point you made earlier, Mr. Chairman, that we have
something going on here in the OCD area that we ought to be awfully
careful with. I would opt for alternative B. I could live with a
somewhat lower borrowing level, but $450 million or $400 to $450
million is acceptable. I would say, however, that in addition to
adopting the specs of "B" for growth rates of M1 and M2 we ought to be
willing to live with a larger increase in M1-B if it results from the
kind of increase in OCDs we've been seeing recently, which we have a
reasonable basis for interpreting. This parking of funds while there
is uncertainty is clear.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just as a matter of clarification, when
you say "B," are you willing to accept something like Mr. Solomon's
[numbers]?

MR. GRAMLEY. Yes, that's all right; I would go with that.

MR. WALLICH. You know that when we set something and accept
a higher amount that it has the effect, really, of pegging the funds
rate. Is that what you want?

MR. GRAMLEY. I tried not to use--

MR. PARTEE. He doesn't want interest rates to go up.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think there's a difference of
view among the technical people as to whether initial borrowing of
$350 million means a lower rate or the same rate as we've been seeing
lately. Borrowings have been running on average less than the $450
million. We might ask both Steve and Peter to comment on what they
think the implications are.

MR. AXILROD. We've assumed in the Bluebook that if the path
were $450 million and it was successfully hit, probably there would be
some little upward tick in the funds rate, but maybe not a lot. I
would assume that $350 million at a minimum would probably avoid that;
whether that would cause the funds rate to drop initially, I feel more
agnostic about.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't disagree with that. I would tend
to think of something like $250 million of borrowing as perhaps likely
to keep the funds rate just around the discount rate, $350 million
maybe 1/4 percentage point over it, and $450 million a little more--
maybe 1/2 point--over it.

MS. TEETERS. To what extent does the discount rate act as a
floor?

MR. STERNLIGHT. The discount rate becomes a kind of anchor
around which the funds rate clusters once there's enough borrowing to
make that discount rate meaningful. If there's so little borrowing
that a great majority of banks hardly ever [come to] the discount
window, then the discount rate isn't too meaningful and we fall into
this zone of indeterminacy. I don't know whether it's $200 or $250
million or what, but once there's something like that level of
borrowing then there will be enough borrowing so that the discount

-54-



12/21-22/81

window is a meaningful alternative that a number of banks want to
avoid; they will be willing to pay the rate in the funds market rather
than come to the window. And the more of that borrowing gap there is,
the more demand for funds there will be by banks that want to stay
away from the window; so, they'd be willing to pay up a little higher
in order to stay away [from the window].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I find very little to disagree with
in either Lyle's or Tony's statement, and since it sounds a little
poetic I'll say that I'll just go with the wisdom of Solomon.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. I want everybody to know that I am the one who
first said that I don't think anybody here is wise enough to determine
interest rates except Solomon! I, too, tend to agree with him. This
is getting to be easy except that I'd like to reinforce one point he
made and that relates to the fed funds rate range. If I read the
Greenbook forecast correctly, the staff is saying that in the first
quarter of next year we're going to have a negative GNP of 2.2
percent, a GNP deflator of under 7 percent, and unemployment
approaching 9 percent. And with a GNP deflator that low, other price
indexes are probably going to be down. We're talking about real
interest rates on average in those three alternatives of 5 percent on
"A," 6 percent on "B," and 7 percent on "C." I think we should at
least allow the possibility of seeing [real] interest rates get into
the single digit range at the nadir of this deep recession. So, I'd
argue for "B" with a wider fed funds range, maybe going from [a lower
limit of] 9 percent and centering on the present rate, which I
understand is just over 12 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I am comfortable with Mr. Solomon's variation
of "B," although I'd like to think of the initial borrowing as more
like $400 million or maybe a bit higher rather than the $350 million
that Tony suggested just because I'd still like to leave a little room
down the road. But, basically, I'd go along with something like Mr.
Solomon's suggestion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I have no difficulty with the funds range
that you specified Tony, of 10 to 14 percent. We're right about at
the midpoint of it now and that assumes that it might drift a little
lower but not very much, at least initially. I don't know but I think
either $350 or $400 million on borrowing would be all right. I'd
certainly accept the $350 million. I do think that your objectives
for M1 and M2 are pretty stingy. Page 2 of the Bluebook shows a
September-to-Deceber increase in M1-B shift-adjusted of 6.3 percent.
Now, that has benefitted some from the shift adjustment; that is, I
don't have an M1 figure here. But if it weren't shift-adjusted, it
would be somewhat higher than that--7-1/2 percent or something like
that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you looking at?

-55-



12/21-22/81

MR. PARTEE. I am looking at page 2; I can't work with these
alternatives which don't have the correct figures on that. So I am
trying to look at what experience has been recently as against what
we're plotting for the period ahead. It shows an increase from
September to December--but if anything December is raising it just a
little--and that goes into our numbers that we're calculating looking
ahead as maybe something like 7-1/2 percent in M1 as newly defined and
12-1/2 percent in M2. You are cutting those to 4 and 9 percent.
That's a pretty sharp cut in the growth rate compared with what we
have been experiencing recently. And I think that's too abrupt. I
would prefer an M1 of 5 percent and an M2 of 10 percent as a center
point for November to March. I don't think anybody would be surprised
at that or regard it as being unduly expansive; in fact they might
regard it as being pretty restrictive compared with recent experience
and [given] the shortfall we've had.

MR. BOEHNE. What was your M1, Chuck?

MR. PARTEE. Five. I am just picking it almost out of the
air but a 5 percent M1 seems to me like a normative M1; and if we took
5 percent and 10 percent for the two numbers, that's really quite a
bit less [growth] than we've had recently in both M1 and M2.

MS. TEETERS. Well, if we have a big December; this is a
November-to-March number.

MR. PARTEE. That will mean even less in the course [of the
4-month period]; and we'll review it again in early February. The
other thing I'd just comment on is that I don't know what to make of
those NOW accounts. I'm inclined to think it is an error in the
seasonal adjustment but I am not sure. It could be that there is a
big build-up in precautionary balances in NOW accounts, as the staff
says, and that might well continue right on through the winter if that
is the case.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it might be temporary parking
for Christmas.

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's right. And that is why I think
[the explanation] may be the seasonal. The seasonal doesn't have the
advantage of knowing what those household accounts have done in past
years.

MR. SCHULTZ. Or a temporary parking for IRA-Keoghs.

MR. PARTEE. Or just temporary parking because people are
scared they may lose their jobs.

MR. BLACK. That is right.

MR. PARTEE. You know, it makes a difference. I think Lyle
is right that we want to watch that carefully to see whether [NOW
accounts] continue to be the source of strength in M1 and regard that
a little differently than if it is in corporate balances or in
traditional demand accounts where one might think that a build-up
would be a predecessor, as Larry likes to say, to an expansion in
activity, which also could be the case. We might be right on the edge
of a recovery in the economy and not know it. But it is just not

-56



12/21-22/81

clear to me which is the case. Nevertheless, my basic point is that 4
and 9 percent are so far below what we recently have had that they are
too low to shoot for, and I would rather have 5 and 10 percent but
with your parameters on the funds rate and initial borrowings, Tony.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I'd prefer something between "A" and "B," and I
can't get excited whether it's Tony's or Chuck's [formulation]. I do
have stronger feelings about the funds range; I think it ought to be
10 to 14 percent. I would look with considerable disfavor if the
funds rate rose; I could accept some decline. And somewhere between
the $350 and $400 million range on borrowings makes sense.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Generally I come out in favor of "B+," about
halfway between those two revised numbers, starting with November [as
the base]. I share the concern that Lyle and some others have
expressed that this recession might be worse than the staff is now
forecasting. If there is an error, it is likely to be on the side of
the recession being deeper through the first quarter than both our
staff and the Board's staff have suggested. And for that reason I
would agree with Bill Ford on the federal funds rate range. I'd
prefer to see the bottom of it as low as 9 percent, and I would not
like to see us strongly resist the decline in interest rates that
would accompany a really soft economy. So I'd accept either 9 to 14
or 9 to 15 percent on the funds rate range. And as far as the
borrowing assumption is concerned, $350 to $400 million would be okay
with me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I find myself leaning toward the easy
side this time because what we have done is to avoid following the
aggregates as far as we might; had we done so, interest rates would be
a lot lower. Not having done that, I think we ought to give the
economy a chance to recover at this interest rate level and try to
string that [level] out as long as it will last, giving [firms] a
chance to issue more bonds and so on. I would not welcome a further
drop unless the economy weakens substantially because that would
simply be what I think has been the error that we have avoided in the
first place. But we have to compensate somewhat for not having let
rates drop that far by now smoothing them out for the future. So, I
would go with the higher aggregate [growth rates] proposed--that is M1
at 5 percent and M2 at 10 percent, a low borrowing assumption of $250
or $300 million, and a funds rate range of 10 to 14 percent. I
wouldn't see any advantage in letting fed funds get into the single-
digit range; I'd try to hold it here for a while if circumstances
permit. There is a cost to this; later in the year we may have to
accept higher interest rates to stick by our overall targets. That
cost I think we have to be prepared to pay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I'd be comfortable with Mr. Solomon's proposal
for both M1 and M2, given the current state of the economy, with the
thought that a little reduction in the fed funds rate might provide

-57-



12/21-22/81

some encouragement. I'd be in favor of a $350 to $400 million
borrowing range and a federal funds target range of 10 to 14 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. I'd be comfortable with Mr. Solomon's proposal
with one exception. It is maybe a fence-riding caveat. I am
concerned about interest rates rising and, to ensure against that, I
would like to suggest that we adopt the modified "B" as Tony has
suggested, with $400 million borrowing but by the same token have an
understanding that if money in January begins to come in a bit
stronger than projected, there wouldn't be any overt action taken that
would result in higher interest rates until we got to [M1 growth] at
about the "A" level. In other words, we'd have a range, if you will,
of 4 to 5 percent M1 growth under that kind of proposal before the
Desk would alter the path that was set based upon a November base.
Also I'd favor a federal funds range of 10 to 14 percent, which
provides a bit of insurance that we would have a consultation if the
funds rate begins to rise early in the period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I can endorse Tony's suggestion, which
was modified by Roger, Chuck, and others. If you look at it visually,
we need something more than 4 percent [M1 growth] to come in on
target. So, if we take Roger's suggestion of 4 percent for M1 and use
9 percent for M2, a funds range of 10 to 14 percent, and borrowing of
$350 million with the understanding that if M1 growth begins to go up
we won't try to restrain it if it means a rise in interest rates, that
would be a perfectly acceptable decision for me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not quite sure about one comment you
made. What you are suggesting is low relative to the targets, as I
understand this, because if you are talking about next year's target,
it is right on it.

MS. TEETERS. No, I am talking about Chuck's point that by
going from November to March we have a December which is probably
going to be above November and we have a high first month in there so
we may need a little leeway to accommodate for the fact that December
is coming in above the November level.

MR. PARTEE. If you look specifically at the staff's numbers
on page 12 for M1 under alternative B, which is about what Tony had in
mind, that calls for a December of 8 percent and then a January and
February of 2.2 percent in each month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, that's reflected in the second
part of page 11.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I should say that New York, for what
it's worth, has a lower projection for December.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it is very hard to know what December will
be. There is some exposure here to having to seek quite low numbers.

MS. TEETERS. If we need a little leeway, we could have a
conference.

-58-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. As a means of achieving growth in M1 next year of
5 percent, for the reasons I attempted to enunciate yesterday, I would
favor the alternative A choice. I wouldn't jump off the bridge if you
adopted Tony Solomon's "B+;" I would be happier on Christmas Eve if we
did widen that funds range a little, maybe to 9 to 14 percent or
something like that. A $350 to $400 million borrowing assumption
would be consistent with this, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I would want to rush to support
Governor Wallich's proposal while I can, for the reasons given by
Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. It seldom happens!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends.

MR. PARTEE. I want to be associated with those remarks and
I'd like to join Governor Wallich, too.

MR. RICE. I would say 5 percent for M1 and 10 percent for
M2, borrowing of, say, $350 million, and on the funds range 10 to 14
percent.

MR. FORD. I didn't hear that. Could somebody repeat it?

MR. RICE. I said borrowing at $350 million and a funds range
of 10 to 14. Did you hear what I said about M1 and M2?

MR. FORD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have no more volunteers. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I would take to heart your caution that we better
look down the road in terms of the short-term target as well as just
the immediate problem. And I would go along with the 4 and 9 percent
on the aggregates because they're in line with our longer-range
targets. [For the funds range] 10 to 14 percent is fine. On the
other hand, if the aggregates should come in stronger, a little
increase in the rates, not a major one, would not bother me as a
warning in terms of what lies ahead. So, I would not be upset, if the
aggregates were strong, to see a little firming in rates as a warning
to what the fall may hold for us.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a few precincts that haven't been
heard from.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I'll do it quickly. The $350 million and
the 10 to 14 percent I think are fine. I prefer 4 and 9 percent [for
the aggregates] because I don't believe we're going to have a great
deal of problem with that. My feeling is that there's a risk in the
economy that tends to be on the down side and I just don't understand
the OCDs. I don't know, but my gut feeling is that [the recession] is
not going to continue forever, so I don't feel that we are going to
have much of a problem. On the other hand, if we do have some

-59-



12/21-22/81

problem, I wouldn't mind seeing us have a little leeway on the up side
there. I am perfectly willing to tolerate a little stronger growth
depending upon what happens in the economy and what happens to
interest rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I'm trying to remember the numbers Tony gave
originally. I don't think I got them down right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You want all the decimals?

MR. BOYKIN. No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [For M1 and M2] 4 and 9 percent and 10 to
14 [for the funds range].

MR. BOYKIN. Okay. That's what I wanted to be sure of. Yes,
I would find that acceptable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is for November to March, right?

MR. BOYKIN. Yes, I would find that acceptable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris and Mr. Black haven't been
heard from. No, I have Mr. Morris and Mr. Black down.

MR. BLACK. I've said something but apparently it didn't--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm ahead of the Secretary. I guess
everybody has been heard from. We obviously don't have any very big
differences here. Where has borrowing been in the last three weeks?

MR. AXILROD. I'll give you the precise numbers in just a
second. It has been running about $340 million this week so far and
that would be about the average. For the week of the 16th it was $268
million; for the 9th, $493 million; for the 2nd, $192 million; and
before that, $214 million. [For that period] we were expecting
borrowing of $400 million or higher.

MR. GRAMLEY. Wasn't this partly a consequence of very little
demand for excess reserves?

MR. AXILROD. Well, initially. But excess reserves were
revised upward successively as the weeks passed. They ran a little
low in two out of the first three weeks and were very high in one of
them, so they averaged [close to expectations] in the first three
weeks and then were very low last week. Last week [excess] was
negative; I don't how it's coming out this week. It didn't turn out
to be nearly as low as it looked at the beginning because we got "as-
of" adjustments subsequently.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I only have some very limited substantive
comments to add to what has been said. A premise of a lot of the
comments was that nobody's dying to see interest rates rise at this
point. And there's a certain sense that people would feel a little
more comfortable with a decline, I suppose, if I can summarize the
atmosphere. In that connection a number of people commented that they

-60-



12/21-22/81

are not going to be upset by a slightly higher growth rate in the
aggregates. Nobody mentioned the opposite, which I would now mention.
If interest rates really softened, I wouldn't be all that disturbed
about some shortfall from any of these numbers we are talking about
if, and I emphasize this, interest rates were declining in any very
pronounced way during this particular period.

MS. TEETERS. What if the decline in the real economy in the
first quarter continues at the rate in the fourth quarter? [Interest
rates] undoubtedly would be softer.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it didn't happen in the last part of
November and December. I just don't know. It depends upon that funny
demand for money that we can't fully explain in the very short run. I
would agree with you that it is not likely [to continue] over a longer
period of time, but I don't know what is going to happen in the very
short run.

I wonder whether [my summary] is consistent in substance with
what everybody in varying degrees seems to be saying. Well, let me
approach the funds rate first, where there isn't much disagreement. I
would think 10 to 14 percent makes a lot of sense just in terms of the
form. We're about in the middle of that now range and it allows [a
decline of] 2 percentage point or slightly more in the federal funds
rate. I don't say that with any feeling that 10 percent ought to be
an absolute floor in any sense; it hasn't been in the past and this
seems a logical range to put down. Almost everybody has said that
with some exceptions. I guess everybody on the Committee has said
that. I have no problem with that. I wonder a little whether the
borrowing level that people were talking about isn't a little high in
terms of the balance of risks and possibilities here. I'd be a little
more comfortable with, let's say, a $300 million number than the $350
or $350 to $400 million that people mentioned, considering where we
are now and considering this average pattern in the past, in order to
provide a little more assurance that rates are not going to rise even
if these numbers come in more or less as projected. So, I would raise
that question.

We have a clear majority for around 4 and 9 percent [for M1
and M2] on a November-to-March basis. In any event, I think that
would be interpreted, if that's where we alight, as our not being
unduly concerned by a somewhat higher number than that. If we put
down a higher number, I'd feel more strongly that if it came in lower
and interest rates were declining appreciably, we shouldn't push any
harder than necessary just to hit the 5 and 10 percent numbers. But
the 4 and 9 percent numbers suit me all right with the understanding
that we're not going to be very upset by some overrun and starting
with a slightly lower borrowing number than the weight of opinion has
suggested here. I'm just a little worried about that borrowing number
being a bit too high. And I think we do [need to] interpret these
numbers--I don't know how to put that in the directive--somehow in the
light of what is going on in NOW accounts, if we can make any sense of
it, as opposed to a general increase.

MR. PARTEE. We have been carrying 7 percent for months as
our objective on Ml-B.

MS. TEETERS. You feel so sure on this.

-61-



12/21-22/81

MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's some room to bring it down.

MR. SCHULTZ. That [depends on] the initial borrowing number.
What happens initially with that borrowing?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I don't think much.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anything much would happen.

MR. AXILROD. I think the funds rate would stay somewhat
above the discount rate at that level of borrowing. When borrowing in
the first two weeks of this intermeeting period was around $200
million, the funds rate was a little below the then discount rate.
And in the next week borrowing was $493 million, followed by $268
million and thus far this week $330 million or so, and the funds rate
has been about 1/2 point above the discount rate. So, it's probably a
little above--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is obviously a fine judgment, but I'd
worry a little about forcing the funds rate on the high side of where
it has been or maybe even a little higher than where it has been, as
opposed to making sure it doesn't rise in the very short run. I'm not
even sure $300 million makes that [certain], but it's just a question
of where we want to take the risks. My feel for the situation is that
it is more consistent with the comments I hear around the table about
not wanting an increase in the funds rate right out of the box or not
even wanting it if money growth gets a little higher.

MR. CORRIGAN. So 4 and 9 percent would be the numbers in the
directive?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in that interpretation, I think we'd
say something in the directive--I haven't got any wording--

MR. BOEHNE. Or somewhat higher?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I want to bias it to that
extent but [I'd include] some language that this takes careful
interpretation of the NOW account situation. Maybe that's hard to do;
I haven't worked out any language. But whatever the directive says,
that is what we mean.

MS. TEETERS. We could do it by saying "around" 4 and 9
percent and let that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, having "around" is fine with me and
taking account of or analyzing the figures in light of the fact that
these are not shift-adjusted and have a big NOW account component.
That's not good language, but that's--

MR. BLACK. And praying a lot!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. On the other hand, if we went with a
slightly higher number, I'd also put in the directive that this is
taking account of the fact--and we can do it this way too--that we are
not using a shift-adjusted number and that the discrepancy has been
quite large recently and we assume it's going to continue to be
sizable. So, theoretically, we can do it either way. It will be hard

-62-



12/21-22/81

to get that language in there but [we need] some allusion to the
problem that we're moving from a shift-adjusted number. We have had a
long [explanation in] parentheses in the directive that we were
talking about a shift-adjusted number; now I think we need a long [one
in] parentheses that we're not.

MR. CORRIGAN. Is that an illusion or elusion?

MR. PARTEE. It made a three point difference in November.

MR. SCHULTZ. From a perception point of view, I think we're
a little better off with 4 and 9 percent and tolerating somewhat
higher growth than with 5 and 10 percent, tolerating somewhat lower.

MR. PARTEE. From the perception of whom? From the financial
markets or the people who are unemployed?

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I don't want to get into that one! I
have some rather strong feelings about the fact that the critical
thing we have to do is to find a way to get long-term interest rates
down. So when we target on that sort of thing, the perception of what
we do has considerable importance since expectations are so much [a
factor] in those long-term rates. But I don't want to get off on a
diatribe on that issue.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little bothered by the 5 and 10--
more by the 10 than the 5--which is above our long-range target and,
unlike M1, coming off a high number not a low number.

MR. BLACK. True.

MS. TEETERS. What do we have for the long-term range?

MR. PARTEE. But what is going to bring down M2 growth in the
period?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was just going to ask. What, if
anything, is your estimate of M2 based upon here, Mr. Axilrod? What
is the estimate for December?

MR. AXILROD. Well, for December, the M2 growth estimate is
rather high, given [the data] we now have. In the last week growth of
money market funds was a little slower. That's not much to base [your
decision] upon. But [flows into money funds] have usually slowed
down, with a lag, following a period of declining market rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And there is a chance that money market
funds will really slow down now, because the money market certificate
rate is at--and in the next couple of weeks may even be above--the
money market fund rate for the first in a long time.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's not going to help M2, though.

MR. PARTEE. Won't that shift into another component of M2?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe.

-63-



12/21-22/81

MR. AXILROD. We really have not allowed for the savings
accounts to show the same kind of strength, so to speak, that they've
shown. If they showed that kind of strength, it would spill over also
into NOW accounts, I think. We haven't allowed for that continuing.
Those are the two principal factors.

MR. PARTEE. You have a December estimate of 12.6 percent in
the Bluebook?

MR. AXILROD. That's right, and a very marked slowing in
January.

MR. PARTEE. You have it dropping to 7.3 percent in January.
I don't quite see what is going to bring about that slowing from 12 to
7 percent, if we don't really care what the figures are.

MR. AXILROD. Well, those are the two factors, Governor
Partee. The only thing I could offer is to look at October, which was
8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't realize the December estimate was
quite that high.

MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble, you see; that really pinches
it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Assuming you go ahead with one or
more of these three conceptual changes in the definition of M2, that
would be effective at the beginning of January or what?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can make the two we're talking
about effective right away, I guess, because we have the numbers. I
don't think we have the numbers for--

MR. AXILROD. Well, we were assuming that at the beginning of
January we would switch over to M1 as is and do away with M1-A and M1-
B. But we had hoped to make the other changes effective in February
when we've [typically] done the seasonals and the benchmarking and do
it all at once. Because there are other--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And making it retroactive?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can you even do the IRA/Keoghs in
February?

MR. AXILROD. That I don't know. That depends.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You raised another question, now that I
think of it.

MR. AXILROD. No, I was thinking of the other ones.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a period here, [November to
March], which encompasses a period of time when we used M1 shift-
adjusted, and there is quite a difference. What are we talking about
here? A shift-adjusted figure for one month and a--

-64-



12/21-22/81

MR. AXILROD. Well, I was assuming you'd start in January
with regular M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what is this number we put down--
the 4 or 5 percent or whatever?

MR. AXILROD. M1.

MR. BLACK. It's M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For December too?

MR. AXILROD. Well, you're comparing it with old M1-B, which
is in effect M1. That's right. M1-B not shift-adjusted is M1.

MR. FORD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the only difference is what might
happen in December. How much difference is that?

MR. AXILROD. Well, there's roughly a 12--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We have to be consistent. If the
base is going to be M1-B unadjusted, then December has to be treated
that way.

MR. AXILROD.

MR. SCHULTZ.
precision?

You take off from the regular M1-B series.

Isn't it wonderful to be able to deal in such

MR. BLACK. That's why we all--

MR. AXILROD. Well, that number we know. It's the shift-
adjusted number that's a little doubtful.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's really M1 that's 8 percent.

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

MR. PARTEE. And then it has to drop to 2 percent.

MR. AXILROD. Well, it rose from 3 percent to 11 percent in
one month.

MR. PARTEE. I know.

MR. GRAMLEY. As long as we have this around 4 percent, I'd--

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, that may be the more critical point.
"Around" means anything from 0 to 10.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me take this in an orderly way.
The funds rate range is 10 to 14 percent; it was at least among the
members of the Committee. I'm not sure there was any disagreement
with that. That is where we are on the funds rate, I think. The
borrowing really is the only operating decision we're making today. I

-65-



12/21-22/81

gave you a little case for $300 million. The great majority was for
$350 to $400 million.

MS. TEETERS. I can buy $300 million.

MR. RICE. Me too.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If $300 million is going to produce
what Steve thinks it will produce--namely, [a fed funds rate] a shade
over the 12 percent discount rate--then I'd go with that. That's
basically what I was targeting for when I said $350 million. So it
doesn't bother me if--

MR. BOEHNE. That's the way I feel about it too.

MR. SCHULTZ. If it doesn't work out that way, we'll kill the
messenger! I was going to say put it in--

MR. BOEHNE. If it doesn't work out that way, raise the
borrowings.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's the way it will work
out. I wouldn't die if the federal funds rate was 11-7/8 percent or
even 11-3/4 percent. We're at $300 million on the borrowing?

MR. WALLICH. Suits me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, Now we'll talk about the
cosmetics.

MR. SCHULTZ. You're being a little too frank!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The range here is not huge. We can cut
through it all if you want and say 4-1/2 and 9-1/2 percent.

MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I think that gives a feeling of greater
precision [than is warranted]; really that's nitpicking it.

MR. WALLICH. Well, there were some who wanted to accept an
overshoot.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've often used "1/2" and we're--

MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Not that often, it seems to me, in
the time I've been on [the Committee]. It certainly makes us look a
little sillier when we miss by a big amount if we put our targets in
terms of halves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have a long record of putting
them in terms of halves, in my memory, but I--

MR. CORRIGAN. And missing them by a large amount

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd rather go with either 4 or 5 with some
appropriate language than with 4-1/2. I continue to prefer 4 and 9.

-66-



12/21-22/81

MR. PARTEE. How about both: "about 4 to 5 percent" and
"about 9 to 10 percent"?

MR. AXILROD. I think the Committee once did have [something
like] that in the directive, too, for some reason.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't see how we can target over 9
percent unless we more or less agree that we are going to raise [the
long-run target for] M2.

MR. FORD. That is exactly what was going through my mind.
MR. PARTEE. Well, I am going to vote to raise [the target

for] M2 at the next meeting. We are starting in 1982.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your mind is supposed to be open for a
while. It is supposed to be open for [unintelligible] too.

MR. SCHULTZ. There are some who would feel strongly--

MR. CORRIGAN. I like "about 4 and 9."

MR. PARTEE. Get it down.

MR. SCHULTZ. Me too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's all right with me. But in any case
we have an understanding that if it goes a little higher than that, we
will not be too bothered.

MR. WALLICH. I would prefer 5 and 10 percent with no such
understanding, even though it may produce what I don't want--a rise in
interest rates. I think it is just bad in principle that we have
fallen into implicitly targeting the funds rate only.

MR. PARTEE. That's a very bad principle but I thought we had
gotten away from that.

MR. WALLICH. We've done that repeatedly.

MR. SCHULTZ. We're going to have to get Henry a red suit and
a beard here! I sense a conversion in process here.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 1982 brings a new Henry Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I'm just being consistent. I didn't want to
let [rates] drop too far; I don't want them to rise too fast.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I agree.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how to interpret that comment
but.... The only reason I hesitate a little on the 5 and 10 percent
is that the 10 looks a little high to me, just visually. I think that
is what we are talking about here.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, you said it was cosmetic, so 4
and 9 percent with the appropriate language would--

-67-



12/21-22/81

MR. GRAMLEY. An alternative is 5 and 9 percent with an
understanding that we may get even more than that.

MR. PARTEE. I would be happier with 5 and 9.

MS. TEETERS. They're not consistent.

SPEAKER(?). We aren't compromising.

MR. GRAMLEY. I think Chuck's point is very well taken.
We're looking at a growth rate of M1-B shift-adjusted in our thinking
whereas we are now targeting on non shift-adjusted. The difference
was 3 percentage points. That is quite--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right at the moment.

MR. GRAMLEY. It was 11.1 versus 8.8 percent in the month of
November, and that is a huge difference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and [consider] the problem we've got
if that reverses itself. We don't know what is going on here.
Suppose that suddenly reverses itself in January.

We'll just try to arrive at the greatest consensus here. If
I get preferences, I'll know the answer. Who prefers 4 and 9?

MS. TEETERS. Wait a minute. What are our chances of hitting
9 percent on M2 if we have 5 percent on M1?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think these are very small differences,
Governor Teeters, given our track record in predicting these
relationships. I don't think it is a matter of strong significance
for the Committee, actually.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These differences are small. What we're
assuming is that we're going to continue to have a pretty big
discrepancy if we shift adjust it, which we're not going to do
anymore. I think what we're saying with the 5 percent is that it
[involves] an assumption in substance that there is a lot of NOW
account [growth] in this.

MR. BOEHNE. One possible way to break this is to say:
"seeks behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and
M2 in a range of about 4 to 5 percent and 9 to 10 percent." It gives
both numbers and has a range and has "about."

MR. CORRIGAN. We still have to draw the path, which makes a
difference.

MR. BOEHNE. Draw the path somewhere in between [that range
for M1].

MR. PARTEE. Yes, put it at 4-1/2. That is a way of doing
4-1/2 percent.

MR. BOEHNE. Without being too precise.

-68-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that. The only drawback I see
is that in some ways one could argue that it sounds more precise--that
somehow we're willing to tolerate 4 to 5 percent but we'd get very
upset if it's outside. But I don't know that that's such a big deal.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In New York the market participants
seeing "around 4 to 5 percent" will tend to assume that the "around"
refers to the area between 4 and 5 percent. And it gets us a little
less precision if we just say "around 4" or "around 5."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know; that really doesn't
sound too bad to me. But I think a disadvantage of saying "around 4
to 5 percent" is--

MR. BLACK. Well, M1 for last year is estimated to come out
at 4.7 percent, and some little downward movement looks a little
better cosmetically. I think the 4 percent is a little better than 5
percent and I am forced to settle on it for that reason. But I
wouldn't be disturbed if it hit 5 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, whatever we decide upon, we have to
say here someplace in the directive or elsewhere that we have this
problem with the fact that we think December is coming in high. So
whatever number we have here is in a sense not as high for January,
February, and March as it appears on the face of it because we think
we're operating off a high December number. I think that ought to be
clarified somehow in the record. Mr. Axilrod is trying to fiddle
around with this language and it is so obscure that I don't understand
what it means.

MR. SCHULTZ. That is the best kind!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you like to read it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Taking account of the significance of
shifts as they may develop between NOW and similar accounts and other
assets..."

MR. PARTEE. NOW and similar accounts?

MR. BLACK. And other unknown phenomena!

MR. BALLES. UFOs!

MR. BOEHNE. No, UMOs: unidentified monetary objects!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's not obscure, that's just--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My quick reaction is that we're not going
to be able to do it in a parenthetic sentence. We've got to write
another sentence in there after the one that talks about "seeks
behavior" etc. Then we could say: "In reaching this decision the
Committee recognized that the target had to be evaluated in the light
of the fact that shift adjustment was no longer being made and that
the performance of the aggregates would have to evaluated in the light
of NOW accounts, which have been exceptionally large recently," or
some such thing.

-69-



12/21-22/81

MR. AXILROD. I was trying, Mr. Chairman, to make that apply
also to M2 to allow for savings deposits which have been very strong
as well. And we're not predicting any strength here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's decide upon what we want to say
first before we decide upon what, in effect, the footnote says. How
does the around 4 to 5 percent and around 9 to 10 percent strike you?

MR. SCHULTZ. I'm less happy with it than I am with a precise
number.

MS. TEETERS. You want 4.7 percent?

MR. SCHULTZ. No, I want a [single] digit.

MR. BALLES. Well, there is virtue in the Chairman's
proposal. We've missed every short-term path this year by a
considerable margin and I don't know why we should insist on misplaced
precision when we will be lucky to come even close to the intermeeting
path, if the past record is any indication.

MR. SCHULTZ. The problem with it is that I think Tony is
right. The Fed watchers will misinterpret if given any opportunity to
do so. And I think it gives them a greater opportunity to
misinterpret if we say "around 4 to 5 percent" in that they will in
fact look at that as a range in which we're trying to operate, with a
degree of precision that we don't have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's what I thought in a way, too.
But when I think about it more, I am not sure what your objection is
to "around 4 to 5." Is it in substance that it is too high?

MR. SCHULTZ. No, my objection to it is that I prefer 4 and 9
percent and a willingness to tolerate somewhat higher growth. It is
easier to draw the path and I just think it works better than your--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, clearly, we'd draw the path at 4-1/2
percent if we had "around 4 to 5 percent" initially.

MR. SCHULTZ. I still prefer 4 and 9.

MR. PARTEE. This would be published when, Murray, February
5th?

MR. ALTMANN. February 5th.

MR. PARTEE. And when do you [testify], do you know?

MS. TEETERS. Probably February 20th with Proxmire.

MR. CORRIGAN. I have a preference for 4 and 9 percent, but
not on the cosmetics. It is a small distinction but I still think the
economy will turn around, and I would like to have the leeway down the
road rather than now. But the initial borrowing of $300 million is
fine with me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how do we reconcile this small
difference? After listening to all of this, how many still prefer 4

-70-



12/21-22/81

and 9? How many prefer around 4 to 5 and around 9 to 10? We haven't
seen all the hands up.

MR. PARTEE. You haven't asked about who would prefer 5 and
10.

MR. ROOS. You wanted just voting members?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, just voting members at this point.
That leaves two with a preference for 5 to 10, I assume.

MR. RICE. I have a preference. I didn't know how you were
going--

MR. PARTEE. And I thought you were going to say "prefer" and
"live with."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all right. [Our preferences] are
almost symmetrical. It sounds to me as if everybody ought to be able
to live with the "around 4 to 5."

MS. TEETERS. And the 9 to 10?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And 9 to 10.

MR. WALLICH. It is the principle of it that bothers me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the principle?

MR. WALLICH. That we're now beginning to fudge the
difference between 4 and 5 by saying "around." The next time it will
be around 4 to 6 and then around 4 to 7.

MR. FORD. Suddenly, it becomes our long-term forecast.

MR. WALLICH. It becomes increasingly realistic.

MR. BLACK. I think Henry has detected a trend.

MR. ROOS. Anything that is a departure from customary
terminology leads market people to read things into it, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have we ever given a range before?

MR. AXILROD. I know we did once before.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I am pretty sure we did.

MR. AXILROD. I am not sure if it was for both M1 and M2. It
certainly was on M1.

MR. CORRIGAN. In this particular case we can probably get
away with it a little more easily simply because of this problem of
going from shift-adjusted to non shift-adjusted. I hadn't thought of
that. That really does make a difference in terms of our transition.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I just expressed my preference, but I'm
not going to fall on my sword about this.

-71-



12/21-22/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many can live with the 4 to 5 and 9 to
10 [formulation]?

MS. TEETERS. Do you want a show of hands?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Again, I just want to say that if we
do 9 to 10 percent, then that does imply very strongly a case--and I
think the markets will definitely read it that way--that we're going
to come out in February with a revised figure that is somewhat higher
than 9 percent on M2.

MR. GRAMLEY. I don't think that interpretation is necessary
any more than it meant we were going to revise the targets on M1-B
when we put a number like 7 percent for M1-B shift-adjusted during the
summer or early fall.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I say this, somehow we are going to
get in here that we think the December number is going to be higher
than either of these numbers.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We don't want to say that
specifically. Suppose we're wrong?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can be wrong. Well, we
could be wrong, but it would take a very sharp drop in both of them to
come in below 4 to 5 percent on M1. It's now estimated at 8.8
percent, I think.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. The policy record in that light, Mr.
Chairman, with regard to M2--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anything is possible. I wouldn't promise
you that it couldn't come in within that range but it would take a
very sharp drop in the last two weeks of December.

MR. AXILROD. With regard to M2--and also M1, more
tentatively--the policy record [for the November meeting] clearly
indicates that the Committee expected a slower growth rate in the
course of the quarter. That is, the 9 to 10 is really consistent--it
wouldn't be that specific with something like 7 to 8 percent [for
M1-B].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This figure is between alternatives A and
B; what does that imply for quarterly growth rates?

MR. AXILROD. For M1 it would be somewhere between 4-1/2 and
5-3/4 percent on a quarterly average basis, and for M2 somewhere
between 9-3/4 and 10-1/2 percent. They are fairly high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just taking the midpoint, the growth rates
are a little over 5 percent and around 10 percent on a quarterly
average basis, which is the nearest thing to a long-term target.
Whatever we put down will be high in relation to the long-term targets
interpreted on a quarter-to-quarter basis.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, the monthly growth rates are slow.

-72-



12/21-22/81

MR. BOYKIN. [If we say] 4 to 5 percent and 9 to 10 percent,
I have a little problem with the understanding that we are not going
to be that concerned if it comes out higher. That is a bit of a
difficult bridge for me to get across because I would find acceptable
the 4 and 9 percent with the understanding that you talked about
earlier but I am a little uncomfortable with it. So, to go to 4 to 5
and 9 to 10 makes me even more uncomfortable.

MR. GUFFEY. Just to follow on that, Bob, I would prefer that
the Desk, without regard to how it comes out in the directive, start
targeting with 4 percent rather than 4 to 5 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, we are now talking about very
small differences here. I am inclined to think that we are best off
with the 4 to 5 and 9 to 10 [formulation]. Whether we set that path
at 4 or 4-1/2 percent is going to make what--a $50 million difference
by 3 or 4 weeks from now?

MR. AXILROD. Something like that. [No], by March it is that
big, so it is less [for the next few weeks].

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My concern is not with the substance.
We all know the difference is very small. My concern is that I think
we are loosing a certain sense of respect because of how outside
people see these things. They see an overrun in M2. They see us
targeting 9 to 10 percent, which is over our preliminary M2 target.
It seems to me that there will be an immediate feeling in the market--
I don't see how we could avoid that--that we probably will move the M2
target up in February and there will be talk about some easing. If we
are willing to do that, all right; but I don't see how we can avoid
that impression. If we had had a shortfall in M2, sure, we could get
away with 9 to 10 percent. I don't see how we can escape that market
reaction; if that market reaction doesn't bother you, all right, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But there will be an explanation in there
that we were high in December, which encompasses this period.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, we could say that the growth rates
implied for January and February, given the present estimates, would
be below 9 percent. I really think we can handle that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can find a handle on that, too,
Lyle.

MR. BALLES. Tony, the present directive calls for M2 at an
annual rate of around 11 percent. So what is different about this?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You are talking about the short term.

MR. BALLES. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we are talking about the short term here.
The M2 growth rate was 16 percent for the month of November. And how
are we going to bring it down?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's go ahead with the 4 to 5 and 9
to 10 and see what comes up. Before we vote, there is this question
[of the precise language to use]. I am afraid we are not going to be

-73-



12/21-22/81

able to draft this very well sitting here. I may exceed the limits of
your confidence and trust, but if you would delegate to me in
consultation with the staff the task of putting another sentence in
the directive, I would be pleased to undertake that responsibility.
It would say we are moving from a shift-adjusted number to a non
shift-adjusted number and M1 growth running a little high in December
because of this NOW account bulge. We would get a little flavor of
that in another sentence in the directive.

MR. SCHULTZ. I have great confidence that between you and
Mr. Axilrod you can make it properly obscure!

MR. BOEHNE. I second that vote of confidence.

MR. GRAMLEY. You are full of Christmas spirit!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the alternative is putting it in
the policy record, which the staff will do anyway in other language.
This would be in the directive. Is that agreeable? With that
understanding, let us vote.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon No
President Boehne Yes
President Boykin No
President Corrigan Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Keehn Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. BALLES. Now that this has been decided, I wonder if I
can return for just a second to your comments a while ago that I found
very interesting, to put it mildly, that once we had decided that the
only real operational decision this time was the borrowing assumption,
we could now deal with the cosmetics. That brings to my mind the
question: Why don't we in the Bluebook, Steve, have some more
analysis on this borrowing assumption that goes with the various
alternatives and its implications? This is a very key part of what we
decide at a meeting. And I, for one, would like to see some text,
analysis, and recommendations. Is there some reason that it is not
desirable or what?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we could certainly expand on it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interpret my comment. I do
not interpret my comment as meaning at all that these aggregate
figures are not important. The problem I talked about is that within
a 1-month perspective what we do operationally to affect our reaching
those targets is to set the path. It doesn't mean that these other
numbers are not very important in a longer-term perspective. But the
connection in any 1-month or 6-week period between meetings is very

-74-



12/21-22/81

loose. It does in an operational sense come down to setting that
reserve path--to state it more accurately--rather than the borrowing
assumption. The borrowing assumption is part of it. It does not mean
that we are operating on the basis of ignoring these numbers. But the
numbers are cosmetic. They are not cosmetic at all in a longer
perspective. I just want that clarification in the record.

MR. BALLES. Even if you had not made that comment, I was
still going to bring this point up. There is a hidden variable
running around loose here on these borrowing assumptions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, the point is still--

MR. BALLES. And I would very strongly urge that we get
something on it in the text in the Bluebook, unless I am missing some
reason why they don't do it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it is in the Bluebook, isn't it? I
thought you were raising a question of whether it should be in the
directive.

MR. AXILROD. Maybe I could explain, President Balles. We
could develop it further, of course. But one of the things that came
out of that study we did last year was that in terms of analysis and
achievement of targets, the best kind of borrowing assumption to
assume at the beginning of our path is the borrowing assumption that
seemed to be consistent with the interest rates that come out of the
money supply target. So, generally what we try to put down is what
the Committee in reaching its decision may wish to use as an initial
borrowing figure. Heaven alone knows what the final borrowing will be
because that depends on how the money supply actually behaves.
Presumably what the Committee makes its decision on, in some sense, is
first whether it believes those relationships, and second, how it
might wish to tilt, if it wishes to tilt, the initial starting point.
But after the initial starting point, this borrowing is pretty well
dominated by what happens to the money supply.

MR. WALLICH. But the borrowing assumption is generally
viewed by people who look at these things at all as a proxy for the
funds rate. So, if we put this into the directive, it will be
interpreted as having taken a step in the direction of at least
initially targeting on the funds rate. Now, it is true that borrowing
shifts thereafter; but quite often we take steps to prevent that, like
forgiving low volumes of borrowing or redistributing borrowing over a
period of weeks. These are all ways of focusing more fully on the
funds rate than a pure money supply target.

MR. BALLES. Henry, I was never suggesting that we ought to
put the borrowing assumption in the published directive as part of the
specifications. I was urging that there be more analysis and sets of
assumptions about different borrowing levels as part of [the Bluebook]
for the benefit of the decisionmakers.

MR. WALLICH. Well, that would reassure me. The second thing
that would reassure me is if we left the borrowing more fully to find
its own level during the period.

MR. PARTEE. We have to start someplace, though, Henry.

-75-



12/21-22/81

MR. WALLICH. Oh yes, we need a starting point.

MR. PARTEE. That is all we are talking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand what you are saying--I
don't know what you have in mind in substance--in principle I think
what you are saying is fine. Whatever analysis we need we should have
in there. Maybe you should talk to Steve a bit more concretely about
what you might have in mind. I thought he did put in what he thought
was consistent with these numbers. The Committee has modified it a
little today and on other days, on the basis of where we wanted to
take the risk, so to speak. But why don't you talk to Steve about
putting something in.

The Secretary raises the question of whether we are going to
have a Monday afternoon session at the next meeting. Normally we
would in the light of the fact that we have to settle on the long-
range targets. So, I think you ought to assume that.

MR. PARTEE. There will be a longer projection [horizon],
too, won't there? You will have to give us some look at 1983?

MR. AXILROD. We also plan to have alternative strategies, if
the Committee wishes, as we have put it at other times, on
implications for phasing down or staying the same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The other item that we have is the release
of the memoranda of discussion for early '76. Maybe you ought to
describe this situation, Mr. Altmann.

MR. ALTMANN. Well, as we said in the memo to you, these
memoranda for the first three meetings of 1976 are described as
unofficial because they have never been presented to the Committee for
review or acceptance as we did in the old days. We were under a court
order to accede to requests for the segregable factual portions of the
memoranda and the Committee made the decision in May of 1976 to
discontinue the memoranda of discussion after the memorandum for
March. Those three memoranda were not presented because the drafting
of them was given a low priority and they were not completed until
some years later and by then the composition of the Committee had
changed. That is essentially the issue. They could be withheld as
being unofficial documents. They could be withheld, I suppose, even
if they were regarded as official memoranda.

There is one other issue that I brought to the attention of
the Chairman because I thought he should be aware of it before we put
these out. At both the February and March meetings there was an
executive session which concerned the Merrill case--that is, the suit
under the Freedom of Information Act. And at the February meeting
there was a report by the General Counsel on the oral decision that
had been handed down by the District Court at that time, which was
against the Committee, on release of the directive immediately and on
release of the segregable facts in the memoranda of discussion. At
the February meeting the Committee agreed to the appointment of a
subcommittee to consider what to do with the memoranda of discussion
in light of this court decision, which was obviously troublesome in
many ways. At the March meeting, which was after the written decision
of the court, the General Counsel again reviewed the options and the

-76-



12/21-22/81

Committee agreed to appeal the decision on the directive, but not on
the memoranda of discussion. As you all probably know, that case went
to the Supreme Court and back to the District Court, and the District
Court ruled in June of this year that the Committee or the Board did
not have to release the directive immediately. That was not appealed,
so that is a dead issue at this point. But this would probably be the
first time that the System has acknowledged the link between the
Merrill case and the discontinuance of the memoranda of discussion. I
think everyone connected with the case assumed that was the fact. And
in testimony before Congressional committees starting in 1977 with
Chairman Burns on new legislation to require some detailed minutes, it
was said that the Board would go along with that legislation provided
there was an explicit relief from the requirements of the Freedom of
Information Act. Later testimony of Governor Coldwell and then Vice
Chairman Schultz made the same points. I think it was generally
assumed that there was a link between the Merrill case and the
discontinuation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You said something that confused me a bit,
if I understood you. I thought we were releasing these minutes in the
past as entirely a voluntary act.

MR. ALTMANN. Well, it began as a voluntary act and continued
to be so in the sense that the court order only required that we
provide the segregable portions of the memoranda that were factual.
We would have had to provide that on request. But we continued to
publish the entire memoranda with only those deletions made in
accordance with our guidelines.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but on this segregable facts issue,
there was a case about that. The only reason we haven't released the
segregable facts is that nobody has asked?

MR. ALTMANN. I think that is the case. Mr. Mannion may have
another--

MR. PARTEE. Did you ever see that draft with the segregable
facts?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I remember that discussion, but I
thought the whole thing was dropped.

MS. TEETERS. But we have only released these with a 5-year
delay, is that correct?

MR. ALTMANN. That is correct. I should have stated at the
outset that in releasing these memoranda for early 1976 we would be
following the schedule that we had followed for a number of years.
The only thing about them that is different is that they are
"unofficial."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought the only issue here was
basically that we are releasing them now, though it is questionable
whether we have to. But if we release them now, we have continued the
practice we had in the past. Nobody can raise any question of our
holding back something that we have. On the other hand, if we release
them, it calls attention to the fact that we no longer [prepare] these

-77-



12/21-22/81

documents. And it may engender some discussion instead of letting the
sleeping dogs lie. What do you have to say?

MR. MANNION. Everyone realizes that we don't prepare the
memoranda of discussion any longer. If you are ever challenged, you
always would have to release segregable facts; those are not subject
to any privilege under the Freedom of Information Act. What the
Committee has been doing on this 5-year delay basis is releasing the
entire memorandum of discussion for each meeting except for certain
items that may relate to a foreign country or central bank or some
concern of the Treasury Department.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that has been entirely voluntary?

MR. MANNION. That is correct, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question before us is: Do we persist
in our entirely voluntary policy, recognizing these three haven't been
checked the way the others have been checked by individual members of
the Committee? And we will just say that these three months are all
we have. Or do we forget about it on the basis that nobody has asked
and who cares? I don't have a strong feeling one way or the other,
but I don't think this will attract much attention. Is Mr. Coyne
here? We put these out without an announcement as I recall.

MR. ALTMANN. We have not put out an--

MR. COYNE. I think they will go completely unnoticed. I
would bet that you would not get one request.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hoping that Mr. Coyne is correct, I have
no trouble myself in putting these out with a notice that they haven't
been checked the way the others have but this completes [the release
of] what we have and is in accordance with [past practice].

MR. COYNE. Even when we have announced--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is this discussion of the Merrill
case in them, but that doesn't bother me much.

MR. BALLES. Can you possibly remember what you said back in
1976? I couldn't.

MR. MORRIS. I am the only one here who was at those meetings
and I couldn't.

MR. FORD. Nobody can spot something he wishes he never said?

MR. MORRIS. That is a long time to remember what we said.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I was there, too, and--

MR. GRAMLEY. It is better not to start down that route
because if we do, then we do have to stamp them as official.

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

-78-



12/21-22/81

MR. GRAMLEY. Put them out now and if [no member of the
Committee] has looked at them, they are purely staff documents. I
think we are safer that way than to start trying to hunt down those
people who might remember.

MR. ALTMANN. We have a prefatory note which states the
situation in terms of their being called "unofficial" because they
were prepared after a time lag and had not gone through the [usual
review] procedure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if there is no objection or no
contrary concern, we will just put them out as quietly as possible,
which has been the case.

MR. ALTMANN. We don't issue a press release on this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While we are making them available, we are
not announcing that they are available, if I understand this
correctly. That means if somebody asks, he gets it. If nobody asks,
I guess nothing will ever happen. With that understanding we shall
proceed. I believe that is all the business we have. Do we have
lunch out there?

MR. ALTMANN. Yes, lunch is available in the anteroom for
Governors and Presidents and those who have been invited to stay.

END OF MEETING

-79-




