









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

August 18, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, August 18, 1981, at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman

Mr. Boykin

Mr. Corrigan

Mr. Gramley

Mr. Keehn

Mr. Partee

Mr. Rice

Mr. Schultz

Mrs. Teeters

Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, and Winn, Alternate Members of the

Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Morris and Roos, Presidents of the Federal Reserve

Banks of Boston and St. Louis, respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary

Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel

Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel

Messrs. Burns, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld, and Zeisel,
Associate Economists

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System

Open Market Account

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors

Messrs. Gemmill and Siegman, Associate Directors,

Division of International Finance, Board of
Governors



8/18/8

Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research

and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,

Board of Governors

Messrs. Czerwinski, Forrestal, McIntosh, and Smoot, First

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas

City, Atlanta, Boston, and Philadelphia, respectively

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Fousek, and Koch, Senior

Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,
Kansas City, New York, and Atlanta, respectively

Messrs. Bisignano, Broaddus, and Syron, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,

and Boston, respectively

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis

Mr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of

Philadelphia

Mr. Levin, Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 18, 1981

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We welcome Mr. Cross as a new participant.

MR. CROSS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?

MR. WALLICH. Sam, in describing the concerted intervention
of the Germans as "organized," do you have any information as to
whether there was anything more than their urging others to do
something? Were there rate ideas or quantity ideas put out?

MR. CROSS. Not that I'm aware of. As I understand it, and
of course we don't really have a great deal of information about it,
it was more in the nature of urging all the participants to act and to
act promptly.

MR. WALLICH. Does it look as though they have started
something, so to speak--a kind of [organized effort] that can be
revived any time?

MR. CROSS. Well, it involved the EMS and the Swiss. In
addition, the Germans did talk to the Japanese. I didn't mention the
Japanese. The Japanese did undertake some intervention but it wasn't
entirely clear whether they would have done so anyhow or whether it
was part of the German's attempt to mobilize a general effort.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the fact that the Germans are
claiming it was successful implies that they would like to use it as a
precedent from time to time when it's necessary to have what they call
a common dollar policy, particularly since we don't seem to intervene
in what they consider a disorderly market.

MR. CROSS. If we [encountered] another one of these
situations, it would be perfectly reasonable to expect them to do the
same thing. Some of the Germans, as you know, have not been very keen
on a coordinated dollar policy; they've changed their views on that
subject. So it is significant in that respect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Sam, you spoke of the possibility of a free
fall. I don't know exactly what you mean by that, but suppose there's
a 10 or 15 percent drop in the value of the dollar in the next month,
say, which I guess might be a free fall--

MR. CROSS. That fits my definition.

MR. PARTEE. There has been a great deal of speculation in
the dollar. Just making an analogy with domestic markets, when there
is a great deal of speculation in one direction, naturally the end of
it comes and when it does there is a stock adjustment. So, I would
think you're quite right that there could be a 10 or 15 percent drop--



8/18/81

using my figure. But what harm would it do if there were a 10 or 15
percent drop in the dollar?

MR. CROSS. I was really thinking in terms of a sudden
decline of a very major amount. For one thing, it does develop among
the participants of the market [a recognition of] the fact that this
kind of thing can happen. It would make the participants, I would
think, quite chary about the extent to which they would get in there
and make a market, if it's going to be subject to that kind of
movement. Even pork bellies have a limit on how much the price can
decline. It might in a sense undermine the strength of the market.

MR. PARTEE. The market mechanism itself could be harmed, you
think?

MR. CROSS. I would think so, yes.

MR. SCHULTZ. If 10 or 15 percent is a free fall, would it
also be considered a disorderly market?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Normally we would have thought that.

MR. SCHULTZ. We might have before.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In fact, normally we would consider a
2 percent drop in half an hour disorderly [unless] there's a special
reason.

MR. PARTEE. Well, at an annual rate that's a very high rate
of decline.

MR. WALLICH. Could we get a little more information on this
disorderly market? Were you able to observe whether spreads widened
drastically, whether the two-way market just disappeared and there
were no bids at all?

MR. CROSS. Spreads widened and there was a kind of
discontinuous market. It moved down to a point and then the next
transaction would move down the next step, all in the space of a very
few minutes. There have been newspaper articles on it. People in the
market described it as "madness" and various other lurid words, but
apparently it was, at least to participants in the market, something
that did shake them up considerably.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The market is very broad and efficient.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Most of the time.

MR. RICE. Did I hear you say that the Germans considered
their operation a success?

MR. CROSS. Yes.

MR. RICE. Why did they consider it a success?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They did check the dollar from moving

-2-



8/18/81

MR. RICE. The dollar moved up afterwards.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, it didn't move up after that. At
that point it was close to 2.57 and it has been down mostly around the
2.50 to 2.52 range. And there were a couple drops down to around
2.47.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But it did move up.

MR. CROSS. It moved up once after the German effort; it went
up from about 2.52 to 2.54 and then I think it went up a little
higher. But it's now 2.47, so it has declined substantially since
they first made the effort, and they regard it as a very successful
move.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Since they asked for the concerted
intervention, they have to consider it a successful move in a certain
sense. It was sufficiently successful, I suppose it could be argued,
that one can get away with calling it that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's very hard to argue that this foreign
exchange market is operating very effectively at the moment. It has
some analogies with the domestic market in terms of the uncertainties
and the discontinuities and a lack of confidence.

MR. CROSS. Yes, it seems to have the same problem of not
having anything it can really hold on to. There are no verities on
which to operate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And no conviction in it.

MR. PARTEE. The last verity I can remember us discussing at
length was the question of the viability of the dollar/mark rate when
it was 2.00.

MR. CROSS. [Unintelligible.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Actually, it was 1.70.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we thought it was very low when it was
1.70, but as it got back to 2.00 we thought that was about right. And
as it got above 2.00, as I recall, we were doing quite a lot of
intervening. So, maybe 2.00 is the right rate rather than 2.47.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We calculate that just the movement
in July alone probably worsened our current account deficit next year
by a further $8 billion. Everybody is looking at this. The Treasury
and the New York Fed and the Board's staff are looking at a projection
in the mid $30 billion area for the current account deficit for next
year. That's very, very substantial. The largest one we've had was,
I think, $18 billion; when I was over at the Treasury it was between
$15 and $18 billion. And even though markets now are not paying a
whole lot of attention to current account surpluses and deficits, when
the fashion and the mood change and they go against the dollar, we're
going to see a lot of stories about this enormous deficit and our
export orders just going [up].



8/18/81

MR. PARTEE. That's why I asked the question, Tony. It
seems to me that most analysts would say that the dollar is way too
high. And it has been bid up there by speculation in these markets.
Therefore, why not get the adjustment over with and have a free fall?
Wouldn't it be better perhaps to get the rate down to a more credible
level quickly rather than very gradually? That's why I raised the
question.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it would have been better. It
can keep American industry more consistently export oriented if we
don't have such enormous swings, but that requires leaning against the
wind. And if we're not going to lean against the wind and we have
[the dollar at] these high levels, when a decline comes, it may be
better from a purely export competitive point of view if it comes in a
month rather than over six months. On the other hand, [a sharp move]
is very demoralizing to financial flows and financial markets and
politically as well, because it doesn't look as if there's much
cooperation left in the system. I think there are tradeoffs on that,
Chuck. There are a lot of people who will feel that a rapidly
plunging dollar shows mismanagement by the Administration, and to some
degree by the Federal Reserve, and is an indication that things are
not right in the United States. There is that view.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's something we ought to do if
we get that kind of fluctuation in either direction in my opinion, but
we're not going to solve that this morning. Do you have a
recommendation for us, Mr. Cross?

MR. CROSS. [Recommendation--see Appendix.]

SPEAKER(?). So, the proposal is to give us enough room to
accommodate the interest receipts for about the next six months?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're close to the German mark limit,
how close are you to the overall limit of $4-1/4 billion?

MR. SIEGMAN. Let me see. We have $3.4 billion in total
holdings at current market value.

MR. CROSS. We're way below.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I raise the question: Why do we have to
increase that limit? I understand the German mark limit, but with
that much leeway in the total, one doesn't follow the other, does it?

MR. CROSS. The figure of $4.25 billion is made up of $1
billion in yen, $2.75 billion in DM, and $500 million in other
currencies. I assume it would be legal, I'm not sure, to modify the
makeup of that in some way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't increase the total, we're
implicitly reducing the yen limit or the other currencies limit. Is
that what you're saying?

MR. CROSS. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't remember the details. Isn't
there a distinction between the rigidity of the overall ceiling and



8/18/81

the informal ones? The informal limits are somewhat less legally
[binding].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I understand it, all we're talking
about are the informal limits and this doesn't require any vote. The
formal limit is actually $8 billion.

MR. CROSS. That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Which we're far from.

MR. AXILROD. The Commiteee had established [informal] limits
for each of the currencies, so there is an implicit--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we kept the others the same, then the
overall limit would follow [the increase for German marks]. I don't
think it would make much difference. Unless we're going to sell some
currencies, we have to increase the [informal] mark limit anyway.

MS. TEETERS. Do you [need] a formal vote on it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but I think we need an understanding.

MR. WALLICH. Did we ever make clear that this means at book
value and not at market value?

MS. TEETERS. They're recorded at cost.

MR. WALLICH. At cost, yes. If we didn't [use cost], we
wouldn't have to raise the D-mark limit, but we might at some time
have to raise it without--

MR. CROSS. I assume this is not anything that gets
announced; it's just an informal [understanding].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's right. All we have to do
is confirm that there's an informal understanding that we'll increase
these limits by $1/4 billion in order to allow for interest payments.
If that's acceptable, we will assume that that is done. There aren't
any transactions to be ratified because there weren't any
transactions. I'm reminded that we forgot to approve the minutes of
the last meeting at the beginning of this meeting. Could I have a
motion to approve them?

SPEAKER(?). So moved.

SPEAKER(?). Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there's no objection, we'll approve the
minutes. We have approved informally that increase in the limits [on
our foreign currency holdings]. Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments or questions?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is a significant point or
observation--at least it seems to me significant--that even though it



8/18/81

was grudging, the fed funds rate did come down somewhat while at the
same time the whole spectrum of [other] short-term interest rates went
in the opposite direction. We don't seem to have as much direct
influence over short-term rates as we did before. There was a
movement of the fed funds rate. It's not clear what is causing this
situation except I suppose some of the factors that Peter mentioned.
Not all of them apply at this particular point. But I guess the heavy
volume of Treasury borrowing is probably the biggest single factor.

MR. WALLICH. I'd be inclined to welcome that, wouldn't you?
If the funds rate were more detached from other rates, the immediate
impact of [a move] in the funds rate resulting from tighter monetary
control wouldn't communicate itself so fast and so strongly to the
rest of the market. It happens that in this case the rest of the
market went in a very expensive direction for the Treasury, and that's
not good. But I think there's no damage in looseness.

MS. TEETERS. But [now] they're really coming back together.
I think other rates anticipated a drop [in the funds rate], which
didn't occur. And now the federal funds rate and the other short-term
rates are coming together again. The other rates were an aberration
for a period of about four weeks.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But aren't the other short-term rates
still on the high side?

MS. TEETERS. They're back to the relationship they normally
have. The federal funds rate has come back and [other rates] have
come up, so they're together again.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I'd like to put a [question] to Peter: If
you're following a nonborrowed path that requires a substantial amount
of borrowing at the window, and if the surcharge on the discount rate
is 18 percent, why should you expect the federal funds rate to fall
below 18 percent? It seems to me that it has to stay above.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think it depends on what that amount
of borrowing is, President Morris. If borrowing were up toward that
$2 billion level, as it was at the beginning of July, then I would
think that 18 percent is very much a solid floor that would be hard to
penetrate. As borrowing gets down more toward $1 or $1-1/4 billion,
somewhere around that area, there's enough borrowing done by banks
that don't encounter the surcharge that there could be penetration
[below] the surcharge rate.

MR. AXILROD. Some econometric work we've done recently
suggests that the basic rate in some sense is 3/4 of the surcharge and
1/4 of the basic rate, in terms of weight. So the basic rate, if we
didn't have a surcharge, was more like, say, 17 [unintelligible] not
18 percent.

MR. GRAMLEY. Governor Wallich, I'm not sure at all that one
ought to accept the view that a looser relationship between the fed
funds rate and other rates of interest is desirable. If one could
argue that what we're trying to do in the short run is make reserve
demand and reserve supply come into balance and one can do that with
the federal funds rate alone, then I would perceive the wisdom of your
argument. But I doubt that that's the case, because very

-6-



8/18/81

fundamentally the demand for reserves depends on the demand for
deposits. And the demand for deposits will depend on a whole spectrum
of short-term interest rates other than just the federal funds rate.
So, I'm a little concerned about our ability to get where we want to
go, not just in the longer term but even in the shorter run, in regard
to control of the monetary aggregates if the relationship gets too
loose.

MR. WALLICH. Yes, I'm aware of that point. If there were no
movement of other short-term rates in response to the funds rate, it
would be more difficult to control the aggregates.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it was a very brief period and an awful
lot was going on. I don't know that there has been any great change.

MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could comment just a little further on
that: I think Governor Teeters put her finger on a very important
part of the reason. By that late June/early July period the short
market and the long market, too, to some degree, had gotten ahead of
themselves, anticipating declines in the funds rate that didn't come
about. To an important degree it was the disappointment in not seeing
that develop that permitted this apparent anomaly of the funds rate
giving some grudging ground but short rates moving up because the
market had expected more of a decline in the funds rate.

MR. SCHULTZ. I asked for an analysis of 1974 not too long
ago and just got it this morning. In looking at it, it indicates that
in periods of volatility such as that the relationship among the
various interest rates changes considerably and very rapidly. So, I
think Governor Partee's point is accurate. It really hasn't happened
for very long and it's the kind of thing we probably should expect,
particularly at these very high rates with all the volatility going
on. I'm not sure one can read that much into it.

MR. PARTEE. Peter, you mentioned that the premium for agency
issues, particularly those of FNMA and the Home Loan Banks, has been
going up. Has it gone notably higher in the last six weeks or so?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Most of the widening had already occurred by
six weeks ago, but there was some further widening, maybe another 1/4
percentage point or so.

MR. PARTEE. There has been some further widening?

MR. STERNLIGHT. We just had a long FNMA issue that sold
about 140 to 150 basis points above the [comparable] Treasury issue.
I think six weeks earlier their premium might have been more in the
area of a little over 100 basis points. A more normal [spread], going
back six or nine months ago, might have been more in the area of 1/4
to 1/2 percentage point.

MR. PARTEE. So it's very much more than it has been
traditionally.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. And it also has gone up some [more recently].



8/18/81

MS. TEETERS. Would you explain why you're counting the
thrift extended borrowing as nonborrowed reserves?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we are.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but why?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it is borrowing that's not really
subject to the pressure on discount window usage that is associated
with adjustment borrowing. And it's a source of reserves to the
banking system just as though it came out of float or from an addition
to Fed holdings of securities.

MS. TEETERS. So, if we get a large volume of extended
borrowing, you'll take that into account as you mark out your
nonborrowed reserve path.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.

MR. BLACK. This is just the way you treated First
Pennsylvania.

MR. STERNLIGHT. That is right, yes.

MR. BALLES. Peter, one question I'm curious about: As we
look around the country--certainly in our District and I believe
nationwide--there's virtually no bank paying the surcharge, as you
know. What I can't quite figure out is why the federal funds rate can
get much above 18 percent. As it goes to 19, 20 percent, it's rather
curious, isn't it, that a few more banks wouldn't step in and incur
the surcharge?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think there's an attitude among
banks that there's something rather shameful about having to pay the
surcharge. It's like being caught with your hands in the cookie jar
or something. So, it's true that there hasn't been very much. There
was one week or two when there was a fair amount of such surcharge
borrowing. But banks making an effort to avoid that is what tends to
keep the funds rate around the surcharge level. And when they are
trying hard to avoid it, as banks seem to have been doing yesterday,
for example, they're willing to pay 19 and 20 percent just to stay
away.

MR. BALLES. The money desk managers get brownie points for
not incurring the surcharge, but they're not given demerits for paying
a point or two above the surcharge. That's a rather curious world.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, it is.

MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's why Frank Morris is right,
though, when he suggests that even at fairly moderate levels of
borrowing the surcharge rate becomes a de facto floor in terms of the
federal funds rate. The other thing that I think is going on here,
and I at least don't fully understand it, is the way that these banks
continue to manage their reserve positions. If you look at the daily
federal funds rate over the past three months, we get almost a perfect
10-day cycle. It just repeats itself as if it's drawn with a machine.
Obviously, that has something to do with the way they're playing the



8/18/81

game in terms of either letting their deficiency build up or avoiding
the window or something. But the pattern is just incredible.

MS. TEETERS. 10 working days, Jerry?

MR. CORRIGAN. These are business days, yes.

MS. TEETERS. So it's a two-week cycle.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's a perfect two-week cycle.

MR. GRAMLEY. How long has it been going on?

MR. CORRIGAN. I just took it back to May.

MR. BLACK. Is it two weeks or ten days?

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, the way I have it plotted is ten
business days.

MR. BLACK. Ten business days.

MR. CORRIGAN. But it's a two-week cycle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we appear to get, for whatever
reason, is a low federal funds rate, and banks underborrow one week
and then get trapped at the end of the week and that sets up a higher
rate. So they say "Oops, the funds rate is higher," so they
overborrow for a while.

MR. GRAMLEY. Even the corn-hog cycle is supposed to be
damped!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] the explosive corn-hog
cycle. But this one is neither damped nor otherwise on the chart.

MR. WALLICH. Peter, without implying anything untoward in
the future, what is the part of your portfolio that is reasonably
saleable without great loss or without market disturbance?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Out of a total portfolio of about $130
billion, $49 billion is in Treasury bills, most of them short-term
bills. Another sizable amount--I don't have the number at hand--would
be short-term coupon issues due within a year. But I would think we'd
look mostly to the bill area if there were a need, for example, to
allow for a substantial amount of extended credit borrowing by
thrifts.

MR. WALLICH. That seems to imply [unintelligible] that is
something on the order of 1/2 of the portfolio.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The coupons that are under one year, as I
remember, amount to about $12 billion or something like that, right?

MR. AXILROD. Something like that.

MR. STERNLIGHT. That sounds about right.



8/18/81

MR. WALLICH. Well, that would get us about there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Coupons are not too easy to get rid of.

MR. PARTEE. The Federal Reserve does not have the authority
to borrow, is that right?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Borrow from whom?

MR. PARTEE. From the public. Issue its notes in the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, but we can do--

MR. AXILROD. We only sell with an agreement to buy back.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do reverse RPs with the other--

MR. BLACK. We'd have to call them something other than
Federal Reserve notes!

MR. PARTEE. Well, I didn't mean that.

MR. BLACK. Commercial paper.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comment or questions?

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, just as a point of interest:
Have we established a rate on the thrift borrowing?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we have not; we'll discuss that at
lunch. We have to ratify the transactions.

MS. TEETERS. So moved.

SPEAKER(?). Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, that is ratified.

SPEAKER(?). It should be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Zeisel.

MR. ZEISEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe you can go ahead, Mr. Axilrod, and
then we'll discuss the two reports together.

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments? Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Steve, in setting both M-1B and M2 targets, which
apparently currently increases [our exposure to] certain incompatible
situations, aren't we putting ourselves in an almost impossible
position? Let me phrase it differently. Listening to you, I thought
you made a strong case that even though M-1B has some imperfections,



8/18/81

its imperfections are not overwhelming and that even if we wanted to
control M2, certain parts of M2 are beyond our control. What would
happen if we just abandoned M2 and told the world why we were
abandoning it and concentrated on M-1B, even though it has some
problems?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm afraid we're not in a position to
come to that conclusion, President Roos, in my view in any event,
because we know that M-1B is not really measuring transactions
balances--and that's what we're seeking--and we know that M2 is
measuring a lot more. We don't have an institutional structure that
would enable us to sharply distinguish transactions accounts from
other accounts. In that environment, I'm afraid there's probably
little choice but to continue to make judgments about each of the
aggregates as we view them and as time goes on--in my view, still
paying somewhat more attention to M-1B, after making proper allowance
for how one thinks the public is economizing [its holdings of
transactions accounts], but not ignoring the others because we know
there are shifts occurring between transactions accounts out of M-1B
into nontransactions accounts in M2.

MR. ROOS. Hasn't the NOW account phenomenon pretty well
washed itself out?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, but what I had much more in mind were
money market funds and overnight RPs; all those sorts of things do
have a transactions account element. One can run a zero balance
demand deposit through these other items. One might even run it
through things other than what we're measuring. That's one of the
problems. It's very difficult, of course, to distinguish the
investment element of those very short-term [instruments] from the
transactions element, but they have both.

MR. SCHULTZ. I would tend to argue the other way, Larry,
that if we were to target very precisely on just one aggregate, it
would put us even more in a box. The object of trying to target on
any aggregate is that it's a proxy for GNP. But the problem is
clearly that those relationships are not very tight any more; they are
getting looser and looser. It seems to me that the events that are
taking place argue for looking at a broader range of aggregates and
for having wider target ranges for the aggregates that we look at.
Now, that may give us some difficulty in terms of the precision of
monetary control on a day-to-day or week-to-week basis, but it seems
to me that we'd get into a bigger box if we tried to target on any
single aggregate and tried to be very precise about it because these
relationships are changing. We could easily get into a situation such
as the British got themselves into by targeting on sterling M3;
suddenly they were just way outside of the target ranges and they had
very serious problems. I, for one, would argue for looking at more
aggregates with broader ranges than for looking at a single aggregate
or a very narrow range.

MR. ROOS. I was under the impression, Fred, that the
research studies that have been done indicate that there is a closer
relationship between M-1B and real output than there is between--

MR. SCHULTZ. That's right. But that relationship seems to
be getting looser all the time.

-11-



8/18/81

MR. ROOS. What bothers me--and I may see it totally
incorrectly--is that a couple of our targets seem somewhat
incompatible, just as years ago our interest rate targets were
frequently incompatible with the aggregates targets. One can't steer
with two compasses if those compasses aren't reconcilable.

MR. WALLICH. But then one would really have to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Still, [would we] be better off with one
bad compass? Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. I don't want to interrupt this ideological
discussion because I don't want to participate in it except to say
that the work I have seen doesn't indicate that much additional
information is gained as we move from M1, or in this case M-1B, to M2.
So, I'm inclined to be sympathetic with Larry's point of view. The
Committee has had very good political reasons for not wanting to be
tied to one aggregate, and that's another element that would have to
be discussed if we were to go just to M-1B. But I am concerned about
M2, and particularly the Committee's decision last time to make it a
constraint, because I think there is very substantial exposure here to
missing by a fairly large margin even what the staff now says the M2
prospects may be. It's true that we didn't get the wild card
[certificate], although we may. I don't know how long it will be
until there's another court test of that. We did get the small saver
certificate, and the early information is that it's selling quite
well. Now, not every dollar of that money has come from other bank
deposits. It just can't be so. It's a good instrument--a 2-1/2-year
term yielding a high rate of return--and will tend, without any
economic meaning, to raise M2 somewhat. But much more important now
is the all saver certificate, which will be sold for three full months
[at the end] of this year, October, November, and December. We had
some off-the-wall staff estimates that I saw that assumed sales of a
hundred billion dollars of those certificates. I would think most of
those would be sold early in the period because of the tax exemption
feature; one would want to have the full tax exemption period. So
we're exposed to the possibility of one [M2] element going up like
gangbusters in the fourth quarter. True, quite a bit of it will come
from passbook savings, quite a bit will come from MMCs, and some may
come from money market funds. But, again, I would argue that not all
of it will. And that will be another factor tending to raise the
nontransactions component of M2 in the remainder of this year. My
concern last time, and even more so this time, is that if we have a
constraint of that kind, we may find that it is running the ball game
because it's going up at 13, 14, 15 percent in the latter part of the
year, yet it doesn't really mean anything in terms of the economy. We
used to cite both aggregates and give more or less equal weight to
both aggregates, and I think that was the better position for the
Committee to be in. That's sort of a policy comment, and I'm sorry
about that, but I was responding directly to the content of Steve's
talk.

MR. BLACK. Well, as a practical matter, does the Humphrey-
Hawkins legislation really give us the right to abandon one of them
completely?

MR. PARTEE. I think we could abandon it and explain it.

-12-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd like to ask a question of either Steve or
Jerry, or both, relating to what interest rates are implied by the
forecast not just for the next few months but on into 1982. How do
they relate to the interest rates assumed a month ago, particularly if
we're looking at a situation in which our projections of real interest
rates are continuing to get higher and higher and higher?

MR. ZEISEL. Well, we have the expert here, Mike Prell. Our
interest rate assumptions are for relatively little change from the
current rates but Mike can elaborate on that.

MR. PRELL. Well, there isn't really much more to be said
than that. We have essentially the same interest rate assumptions in
our forecast as we did the last time. In essence, for the current
year we had some offsetting developments of greater weakness in the
second quarter than we thought, which lowered GNP for the year in our
forecast, and a lower money stock for this year in light of the
Committee's decision to shoot for the lower end of the M-1B range.
And those effects were largely offsetting. We do have on the long-
term side some small decline but nothing very meaningful in terms of
real interest rates.

MR. AXILROD. I should add, Governor Gramley, that this again
assumes that the Committee wouldn't be rigid in relation to M2. But
if the Committee made M2 the predominant target, let's say, we're not
certain that we could hit even the low end of the M-1B range. And
under that assumption, I think interest rates would be higher in the
short run and nominal GNP lower in the long run.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Lyle is getting at the
heart of the issue. If we should get some change in inflationary
expectations and lower rates, we could see a much lower rate of growth
in M2 than we're projecting, although I'm a little fearful that what
Chuck suggested might really happen. But it is dependent upon an
interest rate assumption that probably will not hold. If we convince
the public [unintelligible] that we're really serious, I think some of
those rates will come down.

MR. PARTEE. Why would lower market rates bring a reduction
in M2 growth when it has so many interest-sensitive components?

MR. BLACK. Well, if the rates were lower, I don't think
people would be quite as anxious to go into [M2 deposits]. They would
just as soon--

MR. PARTEE. They would spend instead of save?

MR. BLACK. Yes, or they'd hold money. There wouldn't be as
much incentive to--

MR. PARTEE. I see. There'd be more M1 relative to M2.

MR. BLACK. That's what I was thinking.

-13-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Smoot.

MR. SMOOT. Steve, a question: In the directive language,
can you define a little more precisely for me what "around the upper
limit" of the M2 range means? Is 11-1/2 percent M2 growth, for
example, consistent--

MR. AXILROD. That's a policy decision on M2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's getting a little premature.
We'll worry about that when we get to the directive.

MR. SMOOT. Well, let me raise a second question if I could.
From the standpoint of looking at the federal funds rate, what do you
think the likelihood is under these alternatives of seeing the lower
ends of these interest rate ranges--15, 16 percent?

MR. AXILROD. Well, assuming that the economy doesn't just
fall on its face, a very low likelihood.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. In a recent update of some of our staff work, we
seem to get the results that M-1B is a better predictor of prices and
that real M2 is a better predictor of real economic growth. It seems
in a way that we have the best of all worlds: undershooting M-1B and
overshooting M2. I'm trying to inject some optimism in here. But
having said that, I'm really very suspicious of those results. Number
one, I would associate myself with Chuck's comments in that I think we
went a step too far last time in making M2 a constraint on M-1B, and I
would like to revert to at least the equal weighting that we used to
use. I'd also like to ask Steve if the time may be close at hand when
we should be going back to the drawing board trying to put some flesh
on the skeleton that you mentioned on the point that we really ought
to be aiming at a transactions account. I couldn't agree with that
more. In principle, that's clearly what we ought to do. Has enough
time elapsed in your opinion, Steve, to be thinking about redefining
the content of these aggregates, as awful as that proposal may sound?

MR. AXILROD. Without going into any detail, President
Balles, I think developments in the institutional structure of the
depository system in the country are such as to make that almost
impossible at the moment. I don't want to sound pessimistic, but it's
almost impossible because we don't have a way of separating out
transactions accounts from other accounts. For example, if we forbade
anything to be issued anywhere that was under 14 days in maturity,
then we might begin to separate out transactions accounts from other
accounts. If it was under 14 days, it would be a demand deposit and
have a reserve requirement--to give an extreme example of how we could
make a separation. But the way things are going now, it's very
difficult to make the separation. We don't even have reserve
requirements on money market funds transactions use; that would give
us some automatic separation. But now if money starts flowing out of
money market funds, I wouldn't be tempted to think that was demand
deposits flowing out; I would be more tempted to think it was
investment money going out. But I wouldn't know. So, we just don't
have any basis for doing that.

-14-



8/18/81

MR. BALLES. Well, if the Chairman's suggestions on how to
treat money market funds were adopted, would that at least help
alleviate the problems of--?

MR. AXILROD. If they behave as it seems likely they would;
that is, if they separate accounts that are primarily transactions and
subject to reserve requirements from those that are primarily
investment and are not, then we would have a basis for putting those
separated accounts into M1, very clearly. That would be an
institutional change that would help.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, is there any prospect of that
getting adopted?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't think so. Just to amplify and
emphasize Mr. Axilrod's point, we got a proposal for establishing a
money market fund which would be marketed by VISA but conducted by all
the bank members of VISA, which is about--I don't know if I can
remember--6,000 banks or more. They would all be able to run this
money market fund, if they wanted to, on an in-and-out, automatic,
daily basis. People could hold their demand deposit at zero or any
other arbitrary figure; there would be no fluctuation in the demand
account and all the ups and downs would go into the money market fund
in half, or much more than half, of the banking system.

MR. BRADFIELD. Plus VISA would place the resulting
investments back with the originating bank--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I guess it would be in M3; it wouldn't
even be in M2. It would go right from a transactions account into M3,
as presently defined. I can cite you the example of my famous banker
in Tennessee whom I happened to be sitting beside at a dinner some
months ago--this is a $500 million bank--and he said: "Do you count
repurchase agreements in transactions accounts?" I said: "No, but
it's a narrow question." And he said they had only begun this two
years ago in his bank but they have quite a few corporate accounts and
those corporate accounts are swept every day at noon. If they have a
balance over the suggested amount, the excess is put into an RP
overnight. In two years the RPs were up to 30 percent of their demand
deposits. This was some months ago; the figure is undoubtedly bigger
now.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though it's very crude, suppose,
based on a sample survey, we were to make an estimate periodically of
the percentage of money market funds that really represents
transactions balances. And we'd do it for all these other new
instruments. Even though it obviously would be only a rough estimate,
adding that by either folding it into M-1B or putting it out as a
separate line--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We made an estimate of this sort for money
market funds, not on a short-term basis, but looking at the whole
first half of the year. We made some arbitrary assumptions--well, not
entirely arbitrary, but based upon whatever evidence there was from
surveys, etcetera--as to how much of that could be said to be used
straightforwardly as transactions accounts, meaning that checks were
written on them. And the velocity assumptions were such as to make
them, say, comparable to a NOW account. Then we tried to make some

-15-



8/18/81

calculation of how much that affected M-1B and we got 0.9. I forget
whether that is an annual rate or the actual--

MR. AXILROD. An annual rate for the first half of the year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that made no allowance at all for the
degree to which the holding of a money market fund enabled people to
economize on a transactions account merely by the fact that they held
the money fund and had that reserve available for instantaneous
transfer. So, undoubtedly, it's an underestimate in terms of its
substitution effect for transactions balances. That was an arbitrary
thing which gave us a general order of magnitude perhaps. But we
never get at that second kind of influence. What is a transactions
balance? I don't know; one can't define it that clearly. But this
direct substitution effect is even harder to get at than the direct
transfer effect, so to speak. So what do we know? It was enough so
that it brought M-1B roughly to the lower end of the target in the
first half; that just allowed for the increase in money market funds
from December through June or the 6-month period in the first half of
the year. I don't know whether it's quarterly or monthly at this
point. We can make estimates of that sort, but what confidence do we
have in them and what does it tell us in the end? We have a figure
that's increasingly an artificial construct to start with, even when
we just take the numbers; and then we begin making these adjustments.
The adjustment for NOW account transfers is becoming increasingly
problematical. I think it was appropriate during the initial stage of
big transfers; it gave us a much better feel for what was going on.
But after six months these transfers have diminished substantially,
and I don't know what it means anymore to make this adjustment because
I'm sure we're now getting transfers out of NOW accounts into money
market funds or something as well as transfers in.

MR. BALLES. On that score, Paul, even in the most extreme
case--if all our sample surveys were off and it turned out that in
practice 100 percent of NOW accounts were coming from demand deposits
--the actual M-1B is almost smack in the middle of our range for the
shift adjusted M-1B.

MR. PARTEE. For the shift adjusted M-1B?.

MR. BALLES. Yes.

MR. BLACK. That's what our small bankers think is happening.
At every one of our board meetings the two small bankers say people
are fooling themselves if they think it's coming partly out of
savings; it's all out of demand. Of course, that's based on their own
experience and nothing else.

MR. BALLES. My point is that even if that were true, we're
not in bad shape.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I just wanted to point out that as I look at
the shifts and the money issues, the things that we can control
directly are either interest rates or reserves. And we really ought
to turn back to looking more directly at reserves and seeing how they
stand out for all these new instruments that are developing and not

-16-



8/18/81

try to get back to actual transactions accounts. That would take a
lot of research and a lot of education on our part to find out just
what we would want to do in terms of reserves. We're targeting now,
hopefully, on M-1B. Because we don't control M2 directly, it doesn't
seem to me wise to [target M2]. If we get to control M2, we only do
it through M-1B, so to make that our major target simply submerges the
decision on M-1B rather than doing it directly. The other thing I
wanted to point out to you is--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are you saying we should target total
reserves?

MS. TEETERS. I think I'm moving slowly in that direction,
frankly, simply because I don't know how to cope with all these other
things. That is the one thing that we do have some [control]--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with all respect--I don't want to
prolong this discussion--I don't understand the point analytically
because the reserves are simply a reflection of currency and M-1B.

MS. TEETERS. I realize that. On the other hand, it also
gets us out of having to judge between what we're going to target on.
But, with all due respect, may I point out that in February the [long-
run] targets for M-1B and M2 were not consistent and they've become
even more inconsistent. Relative to the midpoint of M-1B, [the
Committee] put the M2 midpoint too low. It's not at all surprising
that one is at the bottom and one is at the top. It's just that they
are more at the bottom and more at the top than we anticipated they
were going to be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there is some way of looking at
M-1B and trying to find out how much it is misleading us. The
adjustments one can make by adding the money market mutual funds in
some degree and overnight RPs and Eurodollars are pretty arbitrary,
but they give us some guide. But more than that, if we assume that
velocity is moving at a reasonable rate with respect to what M-1B
really is effectively--that is, after adjustments--by holding velocity
on a constant trend, allowing for interest rate changes, then we would
find out what M-1B would be if there weren't these shifts; and the
rest I think logically should be ascribed to a demand shift. Steve
has described that something like this may well be going on. It seems
very characteristic that when M2 is very high and M1 very low, there
obviously is something happening to one of the two; normally they move
closely together. Something could be distorting both, but it does not
seem implausible that it's M-1B that is being distorted by a rapid
velocity change, a reduction in demand due to the substitution of
other assets, and that, therefore, we have to treat M-1B very
cautiously.

Another check of the same question is to look at interest
rates. If interest rates were behaving in a totally outlandish way,
one would assume that they were being pulled away by the aggregates.
But that doesn't seem to be happening; they're very high, but not all
that out of line with projections. So, whatever is distorted about
the aggregates is probably a distortion of the aggregates and not a
real effect, if I may put it that way. Now, the rates we have

-17-



8/18/81

evidently are too high for some sectors of the economy and are not
very restraining on others. That is what leads me to think that
they're not outlandish and may be regarded as about normal for this
level of inflation. Lyle makes the point that at falling rates of
inflation these same nominal rates are becoming heavier in real terms;
and that's certainly true if inflation is coming down. Against that I
would look at the expectations seemingly embodied in rising bond
yields; the buyers and also the sellers of those bonds don't seem to
have much confidence that inflation is coming down, so they're
prepared to tie themselves to what seem to be very high real rates,
possibly on the expectation of rising inflation. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had no comments on the business
situation, which I would suggest we have to look at a bit in order to
resolve these imponderables about which direction we want to go.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, we have been sitting around waiting
for a recession to happen now for a good many years, and I couldn't
help but notice driving down yesterday that Lordstown, which is one of
the large GM operations, had probably the fullest parking lot I've
seen in the last five or six years in terms of employees' cars.

MR. PARTEE. The employees having the new ones?

MR. WINN. That's right. This may just be a temporary build-
up, which could be shut off quickly when the cars don't sell, but I
was interested in the obvious employment there. Secondly, I am
surprised in talking with my business friends how few of them
appreciate that the corporate tax benefits are effective in 1981, not
1982. They were effective on January 1, 1981 and we may have some
realizations on that score that give rise to some activity in the
fall. On the other hand, when the realization hits of the size of the
deficit inherent in the present tax and spending programs, we may get
some reactions the other way based upon the amount of budget cuts that
still have to be made, if they are going to be anywhere close to it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had no comment on the budgetary deficit
in the presentation, as I recall. You might say a word about that,
Mr. Zeisel.

MR. ZEISEL. The budgetary deficit is not one of all joy.
The Administration has moved to adjust upward its estimate of the
fiscal '82 budget [deficit] to about $60 billion from what had earlier
been $40 plus billion. Our estimate is a deficit of about $88 billion
for that period. The major differences are the assumptions, or shall
we say conclusions, regarding the state of the economy and its
implications for spending and receipts, and we have some higher
assumptions for interest rates as well. On an NIA basis, as we move
to the second half of '82 calendar year, we really begin to see the
effect of the second stage of the tax cut--that is, the 10 percent
phase that comes in on July 1 of '82. And we have a deficit that runs
about $150 billion on an NIA basis for the second half of '82. That's
a very substantial shift in those terms and in high employment terms
as well.

MR. CORRIGAN. You have total borrowings, including the
agencies, next year at what: $108 billion or something like that?

-18-



8/18/81

MR. ZEISEL. $106 billion.

MR. GRAMLEY. It's $106 billion. That's fiscal year?

MR. ZEISEL. That's fiscal year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, you invited some comments about
the economy and I just asked a question earlier. I would like to say
a few things about where the economy is going. Basically, the staff
has the right handle on the immediate future. I'm not so sure about
the longer-term future, but then I really don't see how the kinds of
real interest rates we're projecting can be tolerated for that long a
period of time. But quite clearly, there is not a recession under
way. We have an economy that is quite flat, with a lot of mixed
signals coming in from different sectors and a lot of geographical
diversity. I see evidence of substantial improvement on the inflation
front, a good deal more than I had expected over the course of this
past year. I don't think we can say anymore that we don't have any
signs of improvement in the underlying rate. We are seeing
significant signs of wage moderation. I'm going to reserve judgment
until I see the employment cost index for the second quarter before I
decide how much, but there is quite clearly improvement under way.
And I think expectations about inflation are changing; I just don't
think one can look at what has been happening or talk to the business
community and say that they aren't changing. I don't get the same
impression from talking to businessmen now that I did six months ago.
And when you put those--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You talk to different businessmen than I
do.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, that may be. I put this evidence
together and I don't come to the conclusion that Governor Wallich
does: That because bond rates got high, we shouldn't worry too much
about that because that means expectations of inflation are still
strong. If expectations of inflation are improving and our operations
are keeping short-term rates at historic peaks, then one has to expect
that long-term rates will stay there too, until such time as short-
term interest rates begin to come down. So I think we ought to be
looking more carefully now at what is happening to interest rates than
perhaps we have needed to up to this point because the behavior of the
money aggregates is becoming increasingly difficult to interpret. And
when we have difficulty interpreting the aggregates, I think it's
incumbent upon us to see what signals interest rates suggest about the
impact of monetary policy on the economy.

MR. SCHULTZ. How do we do anything about interest rates when
credit demands are the way they are? What did you estimate that the
Treasury has to [raise] in the fourth quarter, counting sponsored
agencies--$41 billion? These credit demands are very disturbing. I
don't know how in the world we make--

MR. GRAMLEY. I bet our staff's estimates of total credit
flows for the last half of this year as a proportion of GNP are
nowhere near the peaks that we have seen in past years. Isn't that
right? These numbers look big because we have a huge deficit in the

-19-



8/18/81

federal budget. And one of the major reasons, though not the only
reason, we have a huge deficit in the federal budget is because the
economy has been very sluggish and revenue growth has been slow. I
can recall the same sort of argumentation going on in the first part
of 1975 when people said it was impossible to bring interest rates
down because the federal deficit was so big. The federal deficit is
not the only factor that affects the interest rate. It's one of them.
But a major reason why interest rates are high is because we have had
a monetary policy that has been very, very tight in the context of an
economy that has been relatively strong. But it's an economy that is
showing a lot more signs of weakness, an economy that is looking--

MR. SCHULTZ. That's the point, though: Unless the economy
slows or the deficit comes down, how do we get the credit demands
down? I don't see how there is much--

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, you work on the supply side; that's the
answer.

MR. PARTEE. The funds raised by nonfinancial sectors in the
third quarter are estimated at 12 percent of GNP. That was 15-1/2
percent in the fourth quarter of last year and it was 18 percent in
1979; it's really quite a low number.

MR. WALLICH. It doesn't seem to correlate very well with
interest rates.

MR. SCHULTZ. But, Governor Gramley, would you not agree then
that if the Fed were to be seen as pumping out reserves at a rapid
rate, it would have a severe expectational impact and would, in fact,
put upward pressure on interest rates?

MR. GRAMLEY. I don't agree with that. What I believe has
happened in the past that has led people to that thought is that when
we've had very, very large increases in the stock of money, it has
primarily come from the demand side. And the markets have reckoned
with the fact that they know we are going to lean hard against that
and, therefore, that interest rates will begin to move up.

MR. WALLICH. There is one factor in the level of interest
rates that we seem to overlook sometimes. At the time we set these
targets [for the aggregates], we looked at GNP projections. We first
made these decisions in July of 1980. The projections were under [the
actual outcome] for the first half of '81 by about $170 billion, of
which $50 billion was due to a revision in the numbers. The other
$120 billion or thereabouts was the result of a stronger economy in
the fall of '80 and early '81. So, the economy is much bigger [than
we projected]. And the money supply also has slipped because we used
the base drift at the end of 1980 to start from a higher base than we
could have anticipated when we set those targets. Nevertheless, the
economy has moved well beyond the targets as we thought of them when
we set the ranges in July 1980, so that has probably introduced some
continuing interest rate pressure. I say that just as a comment on
why the rates are so high.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

-20-



8/18/81

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'll just make a couple of
comments on inflation and the business situation. On inflation, I
would align myself with Governor Gramley; if anything, I think we have
been guilty perhaps of underselling even where we are, much less where
we might be. In that regard, I would point to food and energy prices
where there is a tendency to pass them off as transitory technical
factors; but even in those areas monetary policy and high interest
rates have had a bearing and have reinforced the underlying market
forces that have been working. So, I do feel better on that score.
Looking [ahead] on the inflation situation, I get the clear sense from
both my own staff and from some of the people in the District that the
food prices, while they will show some acceleration, may not show the
kind of acceleration that the staff is suggesting over the balance of
the year. Certainly, I can't find anybody who agrees with the latest
Agricultural Department estimates of food prices over the balance of
the year. So we may have a little more good fortune going our way in
that respect than some are suggesting. There is another aspect of the
staff's analysis of prices that I just can't reconcile, and that is
the data that they are still finding on home prices. Nothing that I
run into of an anecdotal nature supports anything like the 8-1/2 or 9
percent increases in home prices that your raw statistics are still
pointing to. So there, too, things may be a little better.

A couple of other developments have come to my attention. I
am beginning to see a lot of scrambling in state and local governments
as they begin to assess the implications of this change in budget
policy on their problems in the near term, both in terms of taxation
and their own spending policies. I would also say that the high
technology firms in the Minneapolis area report to me that there has
been a very, very sharp increase in defense activity, even over the
last month. None of that has yet gotten to the point of contract
signing, but there is a tremendous increase in the amount of
discussion and negotiation on what seem to them to be major
commitments in the defense area. On this deficit question, I would
just add that while we can all dance on the head of a pin here as to
what it means and what percent it is and all the rest, to me it is a
major overhang both in the markets and in the perceptions of business
people and consumers in the public at large in terms of what is going
to happen to the economy and interest rates over the next 6 to 12
months. Notwithstanding whether the economics and the theory of it
are quite right, that clearly is the impression I get, no matter whom
I talk to.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Zeisel, we have gotten some retail
trade figures recently and some inventory figures since the GNP
figures came out. Do you have assumptions regarding that? When do
the new GNP figures come out--next week?

MR. ZEISEL. Yes, it should be next week. Well, GNP comes
out on the 19th, which is tomorrow. The retail sales figures came out
with a 1.3 percent increase, but a very substantial amount of that
gain was a rebound in car sales from the very low post-rebate level of
activity. The sales rate in any realistic sense is still very weak.
It is sufficiently weak to result in producers adjusting down their
assembly rates significantly. Excluding automobiles and household
repair kinds of expenditures, retail sales were about unchanged in
current dollar terms between--

-21-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The numbers were higher than what the BEA
staff thought when they made the [first] GNP estimates. I'm just
asking a technical question: Are they likely to revise the GNP number
up or down or sideways?

MR. ZEISEL. It looks as if there is about a balance as far
as the GNP figures are concerned. There were some upward revisions in
retail sales, and some downward revisions in housing are likely; in
general it appears as though it might well be a wash and end up close
to what we have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as we look around our District
and talk to directors and other business people about business
activity, we see a very mixed picture. It's pretty clear that the
economy in the Sixth District is softening, as I suppose it is in most
other parts of the country, but it's not entirely clear that that is
true throughout every sector of economic activity. For example, total
employment and retail sales have been fairly buoyant in the very
recent past. Nobody I have talked to expects any kind of major
recession at all and, in fact, there is some feeling that business
activity is going to pick up in the fourth quarter and certainly in
the first and second quarters of next year. Part of this reflects a
sense of optimism now on the part of business people and bankers as a
result of the President's tax cut victories in Congress.

On the inflation front, we certainly have made a lot of
progress and people do tend to recognize that progress, but I think
inflationary psychology and expectations are still very much in the
forefront of people's minds. And to a large extent they are taking a
wait-and-see attitude toward what the Federal Reserve is going to do.
On that score, just looking ahead a little to the policy decision, on
the basis of my conversations with people, I think any interpretation
by business people and the markets that we are easing either on M-1B
or M2 is going to continue to fuel inflationary expectations. I think
our credibility is very much on the line at this particular point.

One of the things that really troubles people in our area of
the country, and I suppose other places too, is the plight of the
thrift institutions. There is a good deal of concern, particularly on
the part of bankers, that there is going to be a spillover effect if
even smaller institutions get into trouble. The S&Ls themselves in
the Sixth District are in a little better position, I believe, than
those in other parts of the nation. But even so, it's a matter of
time; they are looking down the barrel of the rifle, as they put it.
So, that is a source of real concern in our area.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are approaching 11:30 a.m. I have
about four people on the list at this point: Governor Partee,
Governor Rice, Mr. Winn, and Mr. Balles. Do you have short statements
or long statements?

MR. PARTEE. I don't have it written down. I don't know how
long it will be.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're next on the list, so you ought to
make up your mind right now.

-22-



8/18/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, I just wanted to agree with Lyle, in that
I don't think there's evidence of a cumulative decline in business now
setting in. It's very difficult to tell whether we are in a recession
or not because we have had zero growth for ages, and we have it
projected for ages to come. Of course, that is made up of stronger
sectors and weaker sectors; if you happen to be in a weaker sector you
surely think there's a recession. But the fact is that I don't see a
cumulative decline taking place, barring a financial catastrophe of
the kind Bob Forrestal mentioned. That is, assuming we can hold the
financial system together, I don't think there's a major recession at
hand. The big thing is this fiscal change, which I just want to
emphasize again. There's a tremendous amount of fiscal stimulus in
prospect; it starts right now and grows and grows and grows over time.
And people will come to recognize that, as Willis says, and will take
it into account in their spending plans. So, what we get is a
difference in the fiscal/monetary policy mix, as we used to refer to
it, which is quite a bit wider than anything I can recall. I think it
means that the areas that are affected by monetary policy are going to
be in a permanent depression and the areas that benefit by tax cuts--
and they are a little harder to tell than just the specific spending
things--will be supported by that. But I think the staff's view of
about a zero rate of gain in real activity for some considerable while
in the future is a pretty good basis for the Committee to operate on
in deciding its policy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we better quit for a short coffee
break.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, most of what I'd planned to say has
already been said, so I can be very brief. I agree with earlier
comments that the staff's projection seems to be the most probable
outcome. The only area where I could imagine some possible deviation
is in the consumer spending projection. It seems to me possible that,
based on expectational and improved confidence factors, there could be
higher growth in consumer spending than is forecast. Despite the
recent data on employment, retail sales, and industrial production, it
appears that there is still considerable slack in the economy, even
sluggishness. At the same time, as has already been pointed out,
there is no evidence of any marked tendency toward deterioration or
further weakening or of cumulative weakness. With the unemployment
rate stable at the present time and perhaps even declining most
recently and with inflation easing as it certainly appears to be, the
economy would seem to be behaving pretty much as I think one would
like. The trick seems to be how to keep it behaving this way. And in
my judgment we wouldn't keep it behaving this way by further
restraining growth in the aggregates, nor would we keep it behaving
this way if we try to force interest rates down. Now, that doesn't
mean that I would not like to see interest rates come down; I would.
But I don't think they should come down as a result of changing our
short-run or even longer-run monetary objectives. Rather, I would
prefer to see them come down as a result of developments in the
economy. I think the best chance of keeping things delicately
balanced, as I believe it was described, is to stay with the monetary

-23-



8/18/81

objectives we've stated in the targets and try to maintain Federal
Reserve credibility to the extent possible.

Obviously, at the present time we don't think we can keep
both M1 and M2 within our target ranges. I would favor, at this time
at least, giving at least equal weight to M-1B [and M2] and not having
M2 as a constraint. If we tried to constrain the growth of M2, that
would further restrict our monetary growth objectives and would of
course run the risk of significantly higher interest rates--higher
interest rates that we do not need at the present time. So, I would
for the moment try to stick with the objectives that we adopted at the
last meeting. I would not restrict them further. That has the effect
of pushing M-1B closer to the lower bounds of the target range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Just one comment, Mr. Chairman: I'm not sure I
understand completely the economic implications of the redistribution
of the retail sales figures, in which the upper end of the price range
is the big factor in supporting sales and the lower end is having a
real struggle. When you add on to that the implications of the tax
bill, I think we're seeing a rather widespread shift in the
distribution of income and I'm not sure I understand all the economic
implications of that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, with that confession of ignorance--
widely shared, I'm sure--we'll go to Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. You asked for some comments on business
conditions. Just to give you a thumbnail sketch as far as the West
Coast is concerned--Governor Gramley really put his finger on it a
little while ago for the whole country--we have big geographical
differences and big industry differences. I would underscore that by
saying that the crosscurrents that exist on the West Coast are just
about as strong as I have ever seen. Our lumber and forest products
concerns are in very poor shape, obviously, and they are just
screaming for some kind of relief. The auto industry, of course, is
in very bad shape as it is around the rest of the country. In pretty
good shape are companies that are active in defense work, energy
companies, and commercial construction in some of our bigger cities.
Electronics firms are going strong and the aerospace business is in
stable condition right now, neither going uphill nor downhill. In
California, agriculture, the biggest single industry--about a $14
billion industry--is under an extremely serious threat from the
Mediterranean fruit fly. It has us all pretty darn concerned, with
the recent action of Japan, for example, of putting an embargo on our
exports of fruits and vegetables. California supplies about half of
all the fruits and vegetables in the country. The rest of you might
find prices going up a little if we don't get this problem under
control. It's a very serious problem. I don't know if it's going to
get licked or not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. To add a very negative note, but certainly one
you've heard with some consistency from the Middle West, our basic
industries continue to be very, very hard hit and are really
deteriorating further. I'll just comment on a few. On the automotive

-24-



8/18/81

side, which we've talked about at some length, I think any improvement
that has occurred in auto sales really is a result of rebates. I'm
told that the rebate structures that now exist and will be put in
place in the near future cannot be afforded by the industry but they
simply have to use them. On the capital goods side, machine tools are
very, very soft; farm equipment is down again, of course;
construction equipment is grim and I'm told that among some of the
smaller companies in that industry bankruptcies are coming because
enough has taken place that nothing can really turn them [around].
Railroad equipment [manufacturing] isn't just slow, it has all but
stopped. It's an industry that is in really deep trouble. On the
agricultural side, though production is up, which ought to bode well
for prices, interest rates are having a negative impact on the cost of
carry for that industry as well. Net, with regard to the Middle West,
there's a growing fragility, if you will, in the system. At some
point I think we are going to see some bankruptcies erupt across some
of the industries that are the most troubled, and the fabric will be
torn in such a way that it's very possible we will not get the kind of
recovery that we need for good sustained growth. So, the word from
the Middle West is really one of a very somber outlook.

MR. SCHULTZ. What's the story on International Harvester
right now?

MR. KEEHN. If you're asking about the credit, they have not
completed the renegotiation of credit. Some banks are giving them a
very difficult time on it.

MR. RICE. If things are so bad in the Middle West, why
haven't they fired more people?

MR. KEEHN. Well, employment is down.

MR. RICE. Is it down substantially?

MR. KEEHN. It's down 4 percent as compared to '79, and that
would be substantially lower than the rest of the country.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you see declining house prices in
California, John?

MR. BALLES. Not absolute declines; we see a severe tapering
off of the rate of increase.

MS. TEETERS. How about Chicago? Do you see house price
declines in Chicago?

MR. KEEHN. I can give you an anecdote: I just bought a
house and there has been no decline in the prices! Seriously, I think
the rate of increase is clearly being tempered. Sales of houses,
particularly in the middle price sector, are very, very slow and the
prices are beginning to come down.

MS. TEETERS. What kind of financing is going on?

MR. KEEHN. 17 percent plus 3 points.

-25-



8/18/81

MR. BALLES. In California we had that court decision called
Wellenkemp which precluded the enforcement of due-on-sale contracts.
There is a lot of creative financing going on; it's the only thing
that's keeping things alive at all--[that and] the assumption of old,
low rate mortgages.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've been a little puzzled by these
various statistics showing more strength than I [anticipated]. It
seems to me that both consumer and business pessimism is at a fairly
high level right now. I know it was particularly marked at our
directors meeting this last time; almost everybody there was
pessimistic for some reason or other. And there was a very somber
note in the Redbook this time. Also, the point that Si just made
about bankruptcies is part of the tip of the iceberg; there may be
some repercussions when some of these begin to appear, as they
inevitably have to, with the small business situation and the high
rates that people are paying. So, my guess is that the apparent
strength in employment and sales in July may be temporary. We've had
a pretty sharp deceleration in the aggregates, and real interest rates
are pretty darn high, so I would expect the economy to weaken somewhat
further in the third quarter. I think the staff's forecast of an
essentially flat economy in the third quarter is about the best that
we could expect and my guess is that it will be a little weaker than
that. But looking at it out a little further, I think we might get a
little more rebound than they are projecting, too, particularly if
inflation continues to moderate. If this sluggishness in economic
activity that I think might happen does materialize, there ought to be
some downward pressure on interest rates and that ought to help. And
if we can get any significant move toward deregulation, that's a
further factor. So, I guess I'm pessimistic in the short run but
maybe a little more optimistic in the long run than [the staff].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. In the Eleventh District, we continue to enjoy a
little stronger economy than other parts of the country. In terms of
housing, houses are still selling down our way. Of course, we have
people coming in all the time. I've not seen anything that would
resemble a price decline. Commercial construction has been very
strong, as you know. The interesting thing there is that for the
first time I have heard a couple of fairly large developers say they
are beginning to wonder if there might be a bit of overbuilding in
Houston and Dallas, and I haven't heard that kind of comment at all in
the last several years. Automobile sales are not all that strong but
they're probably not as weak as in other parts of the country. On the
agricultural side, I have been told, particularly in regard to the
[feed]lots, that the cattle going in are going to come out at loss
situations now. On the big ticket items you talked about on retail
sales, that's the business is in; he calls me
about once a month and he says nothing is slowing down. Their sales
are really still going strong.

MR. SCHULTZ. What does say about
commercial construction?

-26-



8/18/81

MR. BOYKIN. He is one of the ones who is thinking out loud
that we may be into an overbuilt situation for a year or two. I don't
think it's interfering with what he is doing. He's completing a

We have 7 buildings under
construction in downtown Dallas that are 40 stories and above. Two
more have been announced that are going to be 70 stories each plus
about a thousand room hotel along with it. Plaza of the Americas,
which you're familiar with, has just announced that they're going to
start a new office tower next month.

MR. BLACK. Well, action in going from
is probably significant.

MR. BOYKIN. Yes, but then there's another 60-story building
being built in Greenway Plaza by a competitor.

MR. BLACK. They're thinking in terms of 60 stories and not
75; that is what I was--

MR. BOYKIN. Well, the height is limited by FFA regulations
because they are in the flight path. The two 70-story buildings in
Dallas are across the street, so they are going to squeeze by.

MS. TEETERS. Have you any idea what your in-migration is?

MR. BOYKIN. No, Governor, I don't. I'm trying to recall the
figure for the new cars hitting the streets of Dallas every day.

MR. BLACK. How many strange new accents do you hear in
Dallas?

MR. BOYKIN. Well, there are very few people I can talk to
anymore who can understand me!

MR. BLACK. That's a good indicator, I think!

MR. MORRIS. Before this gets out of perspective, I should
point out that if you look at the Boston Globe's business page today
you'll see that most of the states in New England have a lower
unemployment rate than Texas.

MR. BOYKIN. We had an aberration for one month in that the
statistics showed 6-1/2 percent [unemployment]. We corrected that
very, very quickly.

MR. MORRIS. Since we export a large part of our manufactured
products, our people are very concerned about the big jump in the
value of the dollar, which is hitting new orders very hard. And
they'd love to see that free fall that Sam talked about.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So would our hotel owners in New York
City. Tourism has dropped by about 25 percent; hotel occupancy is way
down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you in the Eleventh District, Mr.
Czerwinski?

-27-



8/18/81

MR. CZERWINSKI. No sir, the Tenth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I was going to speak to the Tenth
District, just having been there.

MR. CZERWINSKI. I'll let you have that privilege, sir.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Having observed Denver, if they are not
becoming overbuilt, something is the matter because they certainly are
building. I don't know what is going to happen when they complete it
all. There are lots of beautiful people in Aspen who seem to have a
lot of money to spend and I'm sure that's characteristic of the
country.

MR. PARTEE. Do you suppose things are ever bad in Aspen?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. They'd be a little worse if
[unintelligible]. If you want to make a real estate investment, you
can go to Aspen and get on the muddy side of the mountain and buy a
half acre lot for $200,000!

Well, I think we'd better get to our policy decision. It
isn't any great secret that we're in a difficult period here; we
shouldn't have expected otherwise, I guess. The industry differences
that have been alluded to seem to continue. I don't know what to make
out of the latest figures, but the economy surely doesn't seem to be
falling apart, despite the Midwest and some other gloomy reports that
there are enormous pressure on some sectors of the economy. Some
concern has been expressed here about a tearing of the financial
fabric and bankruptcies and all the rest. I think those are very real
and legitimate concerns. On the other hand, I guess one has to
question whether we can get through this kind of period and deal with
inflation without running into at least the threat, and maybe the
actuality, of that. That is what we've been struggling with all
along, and I suppose past history is that we were never willing to
face up to this. We're facing up to it already, more than I think we
have for many years, but we're going to remain in this extremely
uneasy position for some time.

I wish there were some refuge in mechanics, of following one
figure or another assiduously and feeling that this was going to solve
our problems for us. I have no confidence that we can take such
refuge in mechanics against the palpable knowledge that any one of
those figures is potentially, and probably actually, distorted. We're
in one of those periods for which we get paid--some of us better than
others--for making a few judgments about what is going on. And I
think those judgments do encompass what is going on in a most general
view of the financial world and the business world when we get mixed
signals from the more mechanical indicators of policy. We're
obviously high on some and low on others. And I don't find any very
convincing stories, looking at the past and putting together what we
know of the distortions of those figures, that we can make much of a
choice between relying on those that are high or those that are low.

When we look at the business picture, there is a lot of talk
about recession. It's a political fact of life. We're going to get a
lot of talk about recession every time the economy deviates below a
zero growth pattern for a short period such as a quarter. Then people

-28-



8/18/81

say, "Is the next quarter going to be below zero?" and that makes a
recession. We've been on an even trend, as a number of people have
pointed out, for several years. If you're on an even trend, half the
quarters, roughly, have to be below zero and presumably half above.
I'm not sure it's a significant recession if you put together two
quarters in a row below zero; I'm not even sure it's entitled to be
called a recession if [the deviation below zero] is a very small
number. In that context, the business picture isn't very bright, I
guess we all agree. On the other hand, the latest data don't suggest,
as many people have said and as I just said, that it's falling apart.

On the inflation side, I don't fully share--maybe out of
natural caution--some of the optimism that has been expressed around
the table. It's not that I'm unhappy to see the indications of lower
prices. I think prices certainly have been affected, even on those
things that tend to be called accidentals such as food and energy
prices, by monetary policy. But it seems to me that we're at a stage
where monetary policy has squeezed in an obvious way the things that
can be squeezed and has helped affect the price numbers. What I'm not
at all confident of yet--and I say not confident of yet to express my
strongest optimism because I actually feel a little weaker than that--
is whether lower price trends and lower price expectations have really
been built into behavior. In a way that has to be built into behavior
if the favorable price trends are going to continue when interest
rates do come down and there's a sense of more monetary availability.
I think what has happened so far is a reflection of the intense
pressures on financial markets. If they were relaxed--if we waved our
hand and relaxed them in the next two months--that favorable price
impact on commodity markets, on food, to the extent it has been
influenced, oil with a little greater lag, and that kind of thing,
would dissipate very rapidly and we'd be back where we started.
[Although] we see some glimmerings on the wage side, I think that
could be reversed pretty quickly, too, if there were a sense of no
restraint on the economy at this point. We have to play the game long
enough so that we have a degree of confidence in the price outlook
that begins to be inbred in behavior, including wage negotiations; I
don't believe we're there yet. But there is a better chance than we
have had in a long, long time, I think, that we can get there in the
fullness of time. How much time it will take is another matter.

As for policy: I don't know how you measure it but in terms
of the aggregates, the reserve aggregates in particular, the fact is
that, taking into account the very latest money numbers, we've gotten
easier again. I think there is some appreciation in the market that
we've gotten easier. That will be reinforced by the announcement that
comes out at the end of the week as to what our objectives were last
time and people see whatever it was--9 percent growth in Ml?

MR. AXILROD. 7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Growth of 7 percent, which is much bigger
than what it has been running. I don't know whether that will attract
much attention or not. While we've been getting easier in that
quantitative sense, interest rates haven't reflected it. I take it
they're up again today. I guess there's a lesson in that: That we
literally don't know how to affect interest rates these days. We
don't know all the things at least in the market that are affecting
interest rates. We don't know how that interacts with our policy to

-29-



8/18/81

get any very reliable change in interest rates, assuming we want that.
There certainly is an enormous desire on the part of the country to
have lower interest rates at this point. That pressure is building
and it's going to build further. I'm sure the Congressmen are getting
an earful as they go around the country during their recess--unless
they're all at Aspen, and I didn't see any there. And that background
is going to become more difficult.

Looking at this problem, which is reflected I suppose in the
projections of the staff, right or wrong--and not many people have
said they can make a better forecast this month, in contrast to last
month when everybody seemed to be more optimistic and saw interest
rates down--it seems to me that this is not a period we're going to be
out of in a hurry, if you take that as a benchmark. The staff is
projecting that with policies of anything like what we have the
current interest rate structure is going to continue indefinitely
without killing the economy in any sense; [in the forecast] the
economy stumbles along anyway at a level course, gradually building up
if we go out enough quarters. It's not a very happy picture for us to
be in, looking ahead. Given that we are in the early stages, if I can
put it that way, of any success in the anti-inflationary effort--given
that kind of outlook and given the demonstrated apparent resilience of
the economy in the face of very high interest rates despite the
distortions in the economy and the very different impacts on different
sectors--it seems to me that there is still a considerable danger, and
maybe an overriding danger, of underkill rather than overkill. [I
think that's true] whether one looks at it in short-term economic
terms or in terms of the longer-range problem we foresee over the next
year, 18 months, or two years, with the fiscal stimulus that's coming
along and has been remarked upon here, the big government deficits,
and the demonstrated resilience of the economy. It would be lovely to
steer those interest rates down if we knew how to steer them, which I
don't think we do. But if we did, what are the risks that in a few
months we will [witness] another rebound in the economy and Henry
Kaufman's [unintelligible] scenario will come true? Then we will be
in an even more difficult period, losing time at the very least in the
fundamental fight on inflation; and we will [face] a more awkward
market and I suppose a [worse] political situation not very many
months down the road, with higher interest rates, more concern about
financial institutions, bankruptcies, the outlook for the economy, and
all the rest.

When I add this together [I come out] with a posture that is
not overriding but is convenient at the least, and makes some sense at
the best. We are in a mid-quarter meeting; we set some objectives
after some careful consideration at the beginning of the quarter and
I'd say that unless there's a pretty strong reason for changing, let's
stay where we are in terms of the directive. Where we are in terms of
the directive is not bad. If these recent M1 figures hold up--while
they look big in the short run and that has some unfortunate
repercussions and shows the other side of our dilemma--it brings us at
the moment anyway about on track in terms of the M1 figures that we
set forth in the directive last month, taking July and August
together. The M2 figure was slightly lower in July than was
consistent with the directive. It didn't bring any pressure on us to
tighten up. There is a fear and a concern, which is understandable,
that the M2 figure will bulge at least in August because of some
figures we have for the first week or so in August. And with M1 going

-30-



8/18/81

up more rapidly, that also tends to support M2. So there is some
danger, if danger is the right word, of overshooting in the narrower
sense on M2 in August anyway. Part of that, but a fairly small part
depending upon how big the overshoot is, can simply be looked at as
making up for a slightly low figure in July. So, while we are more
uncomfortable on M2, the discomfiture is not yet at least at an acute
stage. And I have some question as to whether fine-tuning at a mid-
quarter meeting--to do too much tinkering on the basis of short-term
expectations about M2--is worth it.

In terms of the expectational and imagery question, we have
to maintain the policy course. We have not yet had whatever public
impact there will be, if any, of the apparent raising of the M1
target, depending upon how one interprets it. It obviously hasn't
been raised in the broader sense of the target for the year; indeed,
it has been lowered by one interpretation. Regardless of that, I
don't know how people will interpret both a higher rate of increase in
the directive and a higher rate of increase that seems to be in store
for August nor what that's going to do to expectations. But I
wouldn't want to press our luck, if indeed we have luck on that score,
of not being interpreted as having overtly eased policy by taking
another step now that for two months in a row would seem to push in an
expansionary direction, when nothing much has happened during this
month to suggest that that's appropriate other than that people are
sick and tired of high interest rates, which I well understand. But
the business news, in fact, in this past month has been better than
anything that was expected when we last met. I think almost every
business figure has been better than one would have anticipated at
that time. So, I would suggest to you that the most prudent course of
action at this particular meeting is just to write a directive which
continues the wording we had the last time and in effect says the
Committee continues to seek what we sought a meeting ago, which is
equivalent roughly to alternative A, the more liberal alternative
given in the Bluebook.

MS. TEETERS. Are you going to leave the M2 part in it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Yes.] At this stage I have not discussed
questions of tactics and interpretation in a fine way, regarding just
what we would do if one of these figures goes off. We've already had
some discussion at this meeting, which the record will make clear,
that we are aware that M2 may be distorted by these all saver
certificates and the other kind of saver certificates. The difference
between the all saver certificate and the small saver certificate is
"SM" and I think this whole thing is somewhat of a sadomasochistic
operation, so maybe that's appropriate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we hit the 14 percent increase for
M2 for August that the Board and New York staff are projecting, that
takes growth up for the year to 9-1/2 percent? Or is it higher?

MR. AXILROD. I don't have in mind a QIV-to-August growth
rate, but it would be somewhat above 9 percent. I don't have the
exact number.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be worth getting that number when
we get to tactics, because my sense is that it wouldn't carry us way
above these targets and we could talk about generally being around the

-31-



8/18/81

upper end of the range. But how far it carries us would come to the
question of tactics and how September looks and all the rest. The
current projection--and I put as little stock in these projections as
anybody--shows a much slower growth in September after this bulge in
August. If that [were to materialize], the bulge in August wouldn't
look all that enormous.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, whenever there is some strong
growth, I'm told it means that weaker growth will always be projected
in the subsequent period as a smoothing of the path. I don't think it
means anything at all, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends, I suppose, how much this early
August growth is affected by these small saver certificates. I don't
know whether [the staff] projection for August is right. They had a
big jump in these small saver certificates; whether that's a one-week
phenomenon or whether it will continue--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Anyway, what you are saying I gather
is this: That if we got this kind of growth in August and we are
running, say, 9-1/2 or 9-3/4 percent on M2, you wouldn't see any need
to call for a consultation and a change in the signals. But if M2
started exceeding what--10 percent--you would? What is your thinking
here?

MR. GRAMLEY. Alternative A has 10-1/2 percent for M2.

MR. AXILROD. That's the growth from June to September.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm talking about the long-term
target, fourth quarter '81 over fourth quarter '80.

MR. GRAMLEY. But we wouldn't know whether what was happening
in August is going to make that much difference in the Q4-over-Q4
increase.

MR. AXILROD. Governor Gramley, we are calculating that if
August came out as we are projecting, while it would look strong
relative to the path the Committee adopted last time, relative to the
longer-run target the growth from, say, Q4 to August--the answer we
were working on--would be something like 9.2 percent. It's a tad
above 9 percent just because of the longer--

MR. GRAMLEY. But we would presumably be looking at an M-1B
that is equally below the lower end of its bound. Your projection for
August is what--$424 or $424.5 billion or something like that for
shift adjusted M-1B?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, $424 billion.

MR. GRAMLEY. That's still $4.5 billion below the lower end.

MR. AXILROD. Oh yes, it's below the lower end for that.

MR. GRAMLEY. If M2 crept up above or up to the upper band
from Q4 to August, I wouldn't think one would be unduly excited about
that.

-32-



8/18/81

MR. PARTEE. The problem is interpreting that directive. It
has an absolute proviso on M2.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, that's what I was trying to get
from Paul. At what point does he feel that the caveat bites? Is it
at 9-1/2, 9-3/4, or 10 percent? It may not be triggered at all. He
may not have to face up to it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can't give you a precise answer.
You have to tell me what is happening in M1 at the same time and what
is happening otherwise. It obviously makes us more restrictive than
we would otherwise be. It would have some influence if M2 were moving
well above its range. If it's moving slightly above--I don't know
what the exact--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It says "provided that growth in M2
remains around the upper limit." We should have said, I think,
"remains substantially around the upper limit," but I don't think we
can change it now.

MR. MORRIS. [The Bluebook] is projecting 11-1/2 percent for
the next two months under alternative A. The proviso was in terms of
the upper limit for the year as a whole, basically. There was a
chance that it would have an influence last month. I don't think it
did have an influence last month because M2 came in fairly low. If it
appears to be coming in high and persisting, it has an influence.
That's the purpose of the proviso.

MS. TEETERS. And then what would you do--call a conference?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I'd necessarily call a
conference. It's in the directive.

MR. BLACK. And if we are wrong about rates--

MR. PARTEE. That's the trouble. I think it's an automatic
instruction to the Manager. You could intervene and say we better
have a conference. But it is an instruction. The Manager is to
provide nonborrowed reserves below the path he otherwise would if M2
is at the point where the proviso takes hold.

MS. TEETERS. But it also depends on what is causing M2 to be
high.

MR. PARTEE. Not in the directive.

MS. TEETERS. That's why I think it would be better to talk
about why M2 is high rather than to automatically--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as I say, I think that requires some
interpretation, which we would reflect in the discussion at the least.
But there's nothing that's going to affect M2 that we didn't know
about last month when we put this [proviso] in the directive.

MR. GRAMLEY. Except that last month we were looking at a
situation in which we thought that nominal interest rates were going
to end up somewhat lower than they were at the time of the FOMC
meeting. In fact, they've ended up somewhat higher with the exception

-33-



8/18/81

of the funds rate. That's something, it seems to me, that we ought to
take into account in thinking about where we want to be. I agree with
your general prescription of what we ought to be aiming for. I don't
think we know enough about the trends in the economy to make any
significant change from what we wanted a month ago. But what we
wanted a month ago was not higher nominal interest rates. And that
colors my thinking. It seems to me that we ought to do something like
Tony is suggesting and put in a "significantly" above the upper limit
for M2 to give us a little flexibility there, particularly in light of
these developments regarding the small savers and all savers
certificates, which are going to have effects on M2 that are awfully
hard to predict.

MR. ROOS. Paul, I would agree totally with your analysis of
policy. One thing bothers me, though. It seems to me that what we do
and how the world generally perceives what we do may be two totally
different things. With the sensitivity of the markets and with the
enormous importance of what we want to achieve and how we are trying
to [affect] people's expectations, is it conceivable that the
directive, which is a pretty formal, cold, delayed statement of what
we do, could be supplemented with a more foreceful explanation of what
we are doing? Do these times call for something like that rather than
relying to the extent we do on the directive? In the early segment of
your remarks a little while ago, you said, for example, that the
policy record that is going to come out at the end of this week might
be interpreted as some easing in policy. Now, it seems to me that if
we stick by our annual target, which we are doing, that nobody who
knows or who receives an explanation of what we're doing could imply
that the Fed has all of a sudden eased in the sense of abandoning its
anti-inflationary policy of restraint. Is it possible under these
circumstances, where everybody hangs on every little hint or signal of
what we are trying to do, to say occasionally in a white paper form
the sort of thing you just told us, which in effect says: "Look the
Fed hasn't eased up." Would that be in order? Are we so tied to the
tradition of a central bank sending signals in a rather obscure way
through directives that that's the best we can do in communicating?

MR. SCHULTZ. The Chairman is going on the MacNeil Lehrer
program tomorrow night. There are some of us around here who hope
very strongly that he would be willing to go not only on MacNeil
Lehrer tomorrow night but that there will be a couple of other
opportunities for him to speak over the next month or two. Those of
us who feel that expectations are absolutely critical are trying to
push him to do a couple more public appearances.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a little more modest view of my
capabilities.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope you wouldn't tell them
that we increased nonborrowed reserves at the annual rate of 23
percent!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think this is the problem Larry:
There's nothing we can tell people that is going to convince them
because everybody will have different interpretations. I can assert
that [we haven't eased] but somebody can come back with a different
viewpoint and say that's a lot of baloney. I think it's right in our
terms; I'm not saying it's wrong. But somebody will say that he looks

-34-



8/18/81

at reserves and at nonborrowed reserves--and that's what they do most
immediately--and those measures have gone up at an annual rate of 20
percent for two months. Or someone will say: "I look at the reserve
base and the Fed had that under control for a while, but now at the
end of August for two months in a row growth in the base has been 9 to
10 percent. So, he's blowing a lot of smoke because those are the
indicators I look at and they've eased [because] total reserves are
going up by whatever." There's nothing we can say to convince a
person who looks at those indicators that we haven't eased. This is
the state of the confusion we have in the markets, even though in my
terms it's a misinterpretation. There it is. And they are not going
to change their minds because we issue a white paper or anything else.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The sustainable monetary policy
should have only half the country against you instead of everybody.

MR. ROOS. I hope that the gentleman sitting at your left,
Governor Schultz, will convince you to get on; I think you undersell
the impact of your ability.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying I'm not going to get on.
All I am saying is that I don't think that's going to solve in any
complete sense the kind of problem that you suggest. We are stuck
with it in this peculiar period, when so many people operate on
different theories and they are all uncertain. There is no action to
be taken that everybody is going to interpret the same way.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree with that substantially.
But the directive will be released on Friday and I would like us to
authorize you to explain that 7 percent when you go on MacNeil Lehrer
--to point out that the 7 percent on the face of it looks higher, but
it would only take us to the low point of the range.

MR. PARTEE. It doesn't get us to the low point of the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it does, but by the end of the year.

MR. BLACK. But it did from last month. Now we've got to
have 8-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is consistent with getting to the low
point by the end of the year.

MR. PARTEE. By the end of the year.

MR. BLACK. By the end of the year. That's all I meant.

MR. PARTEE. Let me remind you that the directive has a
bracketed phrase, which says "resulting in a quarterly average of less
than 2 percent" or something like that. So, it's already there.

MR. BLACK. That's right. But the 7 percent is what they are
going to look at, Chuck. And if the Chairman can say the 7 percent is
not a ridiculous number--and in fact I would have preferred it to be
higher than that myself and I'm usually quite tight--

MR. GRAMLEY. The markets surely are going to remember the
decision to aim toward the lower end of the range for '81 and to

-35-



8/18/81

revise down the figure and establish a target for '82 which was still
lower. It occurred at the same meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You know, the really sophisticated people
won't have this interpretation. But I would suggest that there is
nothing much we can do. I am very sensitive to the fact that last
July I pronounced in all splendor that M1 was low, we weren't
uncomfortable about it being low, and we weren't going to force it up.
And I think that's true; we did not in those terms "force it up." But
the market remembers that we had a couple of months of big increases
and a lot of momentum and we ended up slightly overshooting the
target. A lot of people will go look at that; I hope it's not the
predominant view, but I just can't project it.

MS. TEETERS. But don't forget rates dropped very sharply
before that happened. Rates haven't dropped this year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Rates did not drop. They dropped before.
At the time I made that statement they were at the bottom, as it
turned out, and we had the great overshoot while rates were rising
very rapidly.

MS. TEETERS. From a relatively low base.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not saying that it's going to repeat
itself. All I am saying is that there are a lot of skeptics in the
market who are going to say that it's going to repeat itself.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I think there's some reason for thinking
that because if the growth acquires any momentum, it will take more
effort to break that momentum. If we now have 8 percent growth, let's
say, for a month or two in order to get that down, interest rates will
have to go up. So, I think we have a choice possibly of being a
little tighter now or being a little less tight later on.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think this makes a lot of
difference, frankly, on what we talked about--the most you could
assume is that those of us who are more sensitive to interest rates
might like to see them a point or a point and a half lower--because
one can't have an impression that the Federal Reserve is sharply
easing monetary policy. I don't think the real crunch is coming now.
The real crunch is going to be next year when, basically, I think we
are going to be blown out of the water. Unless we can show an
inflation rate decline to 5 percent, when the Administration is
disappointed in all of its projections and we have a stagnant economy
and the supply-siders are beginning to turn against us and everybody
else is turning against us, it's quite clear that people will not
understand why we are still continuing with such a high level of
interest rates. And it's going to be very hard to explain unless we
can show an inflation rate of 5 to 6 percent and say "Yes, we have a
stagnant economy but look at what we achieved, and we achieved it in
the face of huge budgetary deficits." Aside from that kind of
defense, I don't think we will be able to sustain this kind of
monetary policy next year. I don't think we are at the crunch yet,
and I think it's a very minor decision whether we do--. If we really
want to get interest rates down a point to a point and a half, we have
to put in an initial borrowing assumption of about $1.2 billion or
maybe even a fraction lower. If we put it at $1.4 billion, then I

-36-



8/18/81

think we will have to add--and we probably wouldn't want to add--a 1
percent cut in the discount surcharge in order to get it down there.
But then we would be giving a policy signal. We wouldn't appear to be
following the market. So, I don't have any problem in a certain sense
with Paul's taking such a hard line as he is, but I just don't think
this [policy stance] is going to be sustainable well into next year if
we continue running such a stable, stagnant economy with certain
sectors getting into a crisis situation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you're worried about next year, and
there's a certain legitimacy in that, surely your best defense is not
to be easy prematurely this year. There will be some tradeoff between
lower interest rates now and lower interest rates then. I don't
consider my line a particularly hard one. It seems to me it's on the
upper crust of the choices given us. But whatever that interpretation
is, my general point is: What has happened between last month and
now, except better employment figures, better retail sales figures,
and less concern about an immediate deterioration in the economy that
induces us to change the directive in a way that will be interpreted
as an easier mode?

MR. PARTEE. A one percentage point increase in interest
rates.

MR. RICE. Higher interest rates.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the difference is this. This
is the same point that Lyle has made, that Emmett has made, and that
Chuck has made, I think. We assumed last month when we set these
targets that short-term interest rates would ease--very, very
slightly, but somewhat. Instead, short-term interest rates are higher
even though the fed funds rate has erratically come down. But even
that is not down now; it has been running over 20 percent in the last
couple of days, although the average is about 18-1/4 percent. So,
basically, we miscalculated the interest rate effect of the targets we
set last time. Now, I don't think we can set a target [that differs
from] 7 percent, but we could--if we wanted to see some slight easing
of interest rates--set an initial borrowing of about $1.2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are assuming that the object of policy
somehow is to try to manipulate the short-term interest rate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I keep one eye on it.

MR. PARTEE. It's a traditional New York view; I agree with
it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't object to keeping one eye on it,
but it's a pretty old bird.

MR. GRAMLEY. My concern is not so much that we adopt
something by way of a directive that will assure a drop in interest
rates. What I would like to see adopted is a directive that makes
sure that we don't have a rocketing upward of interest rates just
because M2 is above the upper end of the range. If your concern is
that you don't want to change the wording of the directive now because
of the signals that may send, that I can understand. If we can just
have an understanding among ourselves that we will tighten if M2 is

-37-



8/18/81

significantly above its range--if that's in our minds--then, fine. I
would be very reluctant to see a marked further increase in interest
rates just because we have one month of big money supply numbers.
This is a projection. You've said that many, many times yourself. As
yet we only have one week's data for August; we have some partial data
for the second week. We don't really know what is going to happen.
We may have a sudden reversal. And I just don't think we ought to
jump to hasty conclusions about the need for tightening just because
an M2 number happens to go above the upper end of the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anybody is jumping to hasty
conclusions, from anything I know now.

MS. TEETERS. The wording has been changed to that effect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know. We're operating on a directive
that now produces borrowings of $1.4 billion and produces an increase
in reserves in August of what, Mr. Axilrod?

MR. AXILROD. That's a projection, but total reserves in
August could grow at around 10 percent and nonborrowed reserves could
grow at around 18 percent or something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see anything now that suggests we
should change that technical path that we are now on, which implies at
the moment $1.4 billion of borrowing.

MR. SCHULTZ. It's not quite $1.4 billion, is it, Steve?
What is the target, $1.37 billion? I understand that's pretty close.

MR. AXILROD. That's this week, and for the three-week
average we have about $1.285 billion or so.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's 1-1/2 basis points!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think you are right: We ought
to keep the same directive for the reasons you suggested. On this
issue of M-1B and M2 and their divergent behavior, I think there's
nothing in economic theory that suggests to us which one of these we
ought to be pursuing. Therefore, not having a theory, we are thrown
back on common sense and I am beginning to think common sense suggests
that we shouldn't be trying to control either one of those. But
that's a subject for the future, it seems to me. If we are going to
be governed by common sense, we ought to start looking at the state of
the economy and the state of real interest rates. And it's clear that
the economy is flattening and that real interest rates, if we knew how
to measure them, are at the highest level since the 1920s.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's not true.

MR. MORRIS. That's not true?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [No,] having made a little study of it
recently--

MR. MORRIS. When were they higher?

-38-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. First of all, heaven knows what real
interest rates are. After taxes, they're half what they appear to be.
And if you cut them in half, they're not even up to the inflation
rate. Now that [assessment] is legitimate for some people and it's
not legitimate for other people. But it's a very mixed up picture.

MR. PARTEE. After taxes they are more than they were a month
ago because the tax bill reduced the tax rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is fair. I think this tax reduction
will have some impact on this. Somebody put together for me the
existing studies on real interest rates. And the one that was most
impressive--it went back to 1791 and covered just the United States
because the picture is very erratic if you look abroad--shows no
consistency of real interest rates at all. And I thought the
concluding comment from this study was rather interesting. It said,
in effect: "If there is a law of economics that the real interest
rate must be maintained at a positive 2 or 3 percent or something like
that, it is a law that Moses must have brought down from Mt. Sinai
about 1950 and retreated back up on Mt. Sinai a few years ago" because
there is no evidence for it at all before 1950. The rate goes all
over the place. Forgetting about the tax issues--and that makes a big
difference because we never had these kinds of income taxes earlier in
history--there are quite a few periods, which look short on a long-
term chart but were periods of a year or two, of high interest rates
that were [at current levels or higher]. What is unusual about this
period, and quite unusual, is that those periods of high real interest
rates in the past typically accompanied a period of declining prices.
We had enormously high real interest rates from 1929 to 1933 and in
similar periods of recession. You can't find, I think, without
examining these charts more carefully, any time when real interest
rates, forgetting about taxes, were so high during a period of
inflation. Typically, the opposite happened: Real interest rates
became negative during inflationary periods as was true in the '70s up
until fairly recently. It's all consistent with an explanation of
what we've had, maybe for the first time in history during peacetime,
which is an expectation of a continuing peacetime inflation. That was
never built into expectations before. Before when we've had
inflation--including in the postwar period--people thought that prices
would subside, so real interest rates went negative during
inflationary periods, as they began to do in the '70s. But we've had
a heck of a difference in the interest rate structure since '79, in
those terms, which one can interpret as the American people giving up
on the idea that we were ever going to return to price stability. I
don't think we get a lot of wisdom from looking at real interest
rates, even though I don't object to the theory that there ought to be
some tendency to go toward a low real positive rate.

MR. MORRIS. Well, if you look at nominal rates, I would have
the same conclusion, because we have a flat economy and we have
nominal interest rates at historic highs. It seems to me that
alternative B would suggest a deliberate policy of needing still
higher interest rates, which to me is a policy that is pretty hard to
sustain at the present time. So, I think alternative A with the same
directive, which you are proposing, is correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But can we talk about the initial
borrowing assumption?

-39-



8/18/81

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I would like to [correct my
earlier comment]. Borrowing is not $1.370 billion; it is $1.409
billion this week.

MS. TEETERS. That's for this week?

MR. SCHULTZ. That changes the whole situation!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I, too, am fairly comfortable with "A," but I
may look at this a bit differently than [implied by] a lot of the
comments that have been made so far. I do think that M-1B growth in a
real sense is artificially low and that the equivalent of what it
should be is probably growth at a rate of more than the 0.9 percentage
point measured rate that we can attribute to the direct effect of
money market shares. I also still think that in some sense interest
rates are either artificially high or technically poised to come down,
partly because of the view that I happen to take regarding what that
surcharge rate is doing to behavior. So to me it is still conceivable
that we could get some give, particularly in short-term interest
rates, under either of the scenarios that are being talked about here,
particularly if we could find a time slot within which that surcharge
rate could be changed. But that's not easy to do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought everybody wanted a penalty
discount rate.

MR. CORRIGAN. At the surcharge rate, which now could be
lower.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not put it at a penalty?

MR. CORRIGAN. No.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What do you mean by "everybody"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was a generalization.

MR. CORRIGAN. The other thing is that there is some upside
danger here in terms of these money growth rates. We're looking at
two months where we'll have pretty steep growth with a clear need
later for such growth to come back down. That's where this tradeoff
between interest rates and the problems we have now has to be viewed
in the context of similar problems later on. So, while I think you
are right in suggesting that we would be ill advised in the current
circumstances to change the directive, I for one am sensitive to the
potential for an overshoot now in terms of money growth and other
things. And, as I suggested, I think we may at least in the short run
be able to have the best of both worlds. If we can, I wouldn't mind
that at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's the best of both worlds?

MR. CORRIGAN. The best of all worlds in the short run would
be to get some give in short-term interest rates while having money
growth rates that are perhaps not as steep as those associated with
alternative A.

-40-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know what is going to happen
to M1. I don't think it's inconceivable, looking at the July pattern
which is the most recent we have, that we could get a decline in the
second half of August that would bring M1 below the growth pattern
implied here and would be consistent, then, with some easing in the
borrowing level. But I don't know whether that's going to happen.

MR. CORRIGAN. Neither do I.

MR. PARTEE. For M-1B we only have the first part of August.
What is given for the whole quarter is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And we know that that has some funny money
in it from this merger business, which should be out by the following
week, I guess.

MS. TEETERS. But it might be into M2 by that time.

MR. WALLICH. When it does, they're [unintelligible].

MR. BLACK. To some extent.

MS. TEETERS. [Unintelligible.]

MR. CORRIGAN. Back to Europe.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if there'd be much in M2;
there'd be [some] in M3 at least. What would be in M2?

MS. TEETERS. They might park it temporarily in money market
mutual funds.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think Dupont--

MR. AXILROD. But we can't identify the money that the
stockholders got. We're identifying the money that Dupont and
Seagrams were keeping for making payments. When that disappears, it
ought to go into M3 or other type assets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Stockholders' money could go into M2.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought that's what you were talking
about. You're talking about the other side of the transaction.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that is another caveat on
the M2 numbers, if we had some sense that this merger was affecting
it. It's swelling up both sides of the balance sheet and I would
suggest some caution on M2. I think all of these concerns ought to be
reflected in the record somewhere.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, there's a lull in the conversation, and
it's a good time for me to comment. I continue to think that we must
not lose sight of what we're trying to do long term. We just have to
get inflation down this time. If we don't, I'm afraid that we will
have an awful period ahead of us lasting a great many years. We're
making some real progress. I get concerned, as Tony does, about
getting blown out of the water next year. I get concerned about it
maybe even from a little different point of view. I get concerned

-41-



8/18/81

that if this economy continues to hold up and doesn't break--and it's
remarkably resilient--and if the Administration doesn't do something
to stretch out defense expenditures or hold down spending in some way
or find some way to cut the budget further, these interest rates are
going to stay very high. Next year is an election year, and I think
we could easily get blown out of the water because I think the
Administration could well come under enough pressure at some point
early next year either to go for credit controls or to cut and run on
supporting a firm monetary policy. So, I think we have a tough, tough
period to go through here.

What we're trying to do is to walk a rather fine line. It
strikes me that we do have some restraint on the economy at this point
in time. These interest rates do seem to be high enough to bite, but
they don't seem to be high enough to bite as badly as everybody thinks
they ought to. I continue to be amazed at how well small businesses
are holding up, at how well they continue to be able to be viable
entities. They're learning how to price; everybody is learning how to
adapt. I would not like to see further restraint on the economy, but
I certainly would be afraid to start letting up. I don't know about
the rest of you, but I look at those retail sales and I hear my wife
talk, and we haven't changed any consumer's ideas about [inflation];
they all still talk the same way. They say: "I better buy it now
because it's going to cost more next year." We haven't changed many
of those perceptions in the marketplace. All those market
participants are still [behaving] the same way. They've been burned
and burned; it took us 15 years to change their expectations and we
aren't going to change them back very fast. It's going to be a slow
process. So, it seems to me that we ought to continue to move on the
course we're on. Things might clear up a little after Labor Day.
Governor Gramley, as you say, things do tend to get a little clearer
in the economy after that time. But they're murky enough right now
that I think that we ought to continue with the course we're on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just remind you of something that I
think is true. I don't know what to do about it, but it isn't going
to make life any more comfortable. If the expectations that Fred
Schultz is talking about do change, it's going to have some impact on
the economy. What is holding up house prices? The expectation that
house prices are going to rise. What's holding up farm land prices?
The expectation that farm land prices are going to rise. What's
holding up retail sales? To some extent, I assume it is the
assumption that prices are going to be higher next year. If we could
snap our fingers and have that perfect world in which nobody expected
prices to rise next year, I think the inevitable implication is that
house prices would decline, farm land prices would decline, there'd be
less construction activity in the short run, and retail sales might
take a short-term nose dive. I don't know how to avoid that. That's
assuming our policy was a great success in terms of inflation.

MR. PARTEE. That, of course, is a reason for trying to
follow a middle course, Paul. I continue to be impressed by the
potential for monetary growth to fall below our specified ranges. And
I think that could be very harmful, particularly if in the course of
this the economy begins to weaken.

-42-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure there is a middle course.
That's my concern. I don't think there is. I don't see any way to
fine-tune this situation.

MR. SCHULTZ. Scylla and Charybdis have overlapped.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I have no desire to raise interest rates
at this time. I think they're high enough now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly, we've achieved something!

MR. WALLICH. I'd like to qualify that [by adding] "but
barely."

MR. BOYKIN. After tax.

MR. WALLICH. They're high enough, but barely, because the
economy is bearing up very well under these interest rates. There is
one sector that is very badly damaged and it is bearing up poorly.
But the rest are curiously unaffected and on the whole the economy is
standing up remarkably well. So, I can see no grounds for going down
on interest rates. I can see the danger of a great boom as these tax
cuts take hold later in '82, and I think we'd be a lot better off if
before then the economy had been slow rather than beginning to move,
because it will get enough or more than enough movement out of that
tax stimulation. So, keeping [economic growth] at zero seems to me
about right. One can't positively look for a reduction and feel good
about it, but we certainly ought not [foster] any stimulation at this
time. We just have to sit with the high interest rates, painful as
that is.

Now, I am concerned about a repetition, on a small scale, of
last year: namely, that we start below the lower end of the M-1B band
and shoot through the band. It would be the third time that we've
done that. It doesn't seem likely at this time, but it has happened
twice before. And that makes me concerned about anything that looks
like a rapid growth of M-1B, suspect as that variable is. I'm also
concerned, if we imparted to it any degree of momentum, about how we
would bring [that pickup] to a halt once growth has gotten more or
less back on track. At that time we'd have to have higher interest
rates. And that's something we had better avoid. So, I lean toward a
low growth rate for M-1B, as described in alternative B. One could
mitigate the interest rate consequences of that by being cautious
about setting the borrowing requirement. In any case, I think the
setting of the borrowing requirement is a much more powerful
instrument than the change of the path by 1 percentage point up or
down. That would get me to alternative B, possibly rephrased as it is
in the second version of the directive [shown in the Bluebook] where
the possibility of accelerating M-1B is allowed. I'm really not happy
about the acceleration. I just don't want to put too much of a burden
on M2 because of the doubts that are attached to it at this time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'd like to clarify something with
Steve. My understanding of the wording of the M2 constraint in
alternative II is that it's completely different than the meaning of
the M2 constraint in alternative I. As I read alternative II, it says

-43-



8/18/81

"Provided that growth of M2 remains around the upper limit of, or
moves within, its range for the year, growth of M-1B at an annual rate
somewhat higher than the _ percent specified above would be
acceptable..." In other words, it permits an easier monetary policy
on M-1B. It does not say, though, the way alternative I does, which
tracks what we did last month, that it's a cap. Is that deliberate?

MR. AXILROD. Well, alternative II was written only to
provide an alternative in case the Committee did not want to continue
specifying the third-quarter growth rate it adopted at the last
meeting for M-1B. That is, if the Committee wanted to adopt a lower
rate, this is written so you could have a lower growth rate that is
consistent with alternative A, what you adopted last time, but permits
it to rise in case M2 happened to come in all right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.

MR. AXILROD. It's just written to start off with a lower
M-1B growth rate, should the Committee wish to do that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I understand that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I just want to say very briefly
that I wouldn't have any trouble with maintaining the status quo
policy. But, as you indicated earlier, I think we've already had some
easing in terms of the increases in total reserves and the monetary
base. As I look at alternative A, and even alternative B, I think
they could be interpreted as being somewhat stimulative, particularly
with respect to M2. The concern that I'd like to express is: Will
the market interpret an action such as you've indicated as being
stimulative with respect to M2 [since there is no provision for]
bringing the growth of that aggregate down and thus question the will
of the Fed to tackle that particular aggregate?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll find out on Friday, I guess, when it
is published.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, the question is: Would that action
excite the market to the extent that interest rates could go up?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know. In answer to that question,
I don't feel so confident that it won't [excite the market] that I
would want to take another action here that a month from now is going
to be interpreted as further easing.

MR. FORRESTAL. What I was coming to is suggesting that
perhaps at some point the Committee ought to look at an alternative
that would be even more restrictive than alternative B with the
purpose of bringing M2 growth down further into the range and not
leave it above the range set by the Committee.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have had a variety of opinions
expressed. But I detect, with some prejudice, a willingness to live
with last month's directive, though with some concern about how it's
going to be implemented. I don't find entirely answerable those

-44-



8/18/81

questions because [they require] too many assumptions about what is
going on. In the immediate sense, [an unchanged directive] doesn't
imply anything but staying on the path that we're now on. That
involves borrowings of around $1.4 billion, as I understand it, and in
the first instance borrowings would be reduced if M-1B comes in weaker
than now projected for the month. Presumably, they would tend to go
higher if M-1B came in higher than projected for the month. But those
judgments would be shaded by what is happening to M2, particularly.
If after several weeks M2 appeared to have a lot of momentum and was
continuing high into September, we would shade the decisions on the
tighter side. And if the reverse happened, we would not.

MR. GRAMLEY. What is the projection for M-1B for August? Is
it the same as in the Bluebook, 11 percent? Is that what we're
talking about?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, alternative A is essentially the
projection.

MR. GRAMLEY. It is a current projection as well as a target?

MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. It works out, of course,
that alternative A, August to September, is consistent with that 7
percent [for the quarter], so that September growth would have to come
down.

MS. TEETERS. Does that mean in alternative I, in the wording
that relates to M2 remaining around the upper limit of its range for
year, that you're going to take out the words "or moves within"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I would not, but we can do that. I
wouldn't just because everybody reads these things with an electron
microscope and will say: "Why did they do that?"

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm with you one hundred percent on
this but I wonder if it wouldn't make some sense--this is the point I
was trying to develop awhile ago--if we added a sentence in the draft
directive right after that sentence at the top of page 12 in the
Bluebook that said something like "In view of the shortfall in M-1B in
July, this would imply growth in M-1B at an annual rate of 8-1/2
percent between July and September."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why do you want to say that?

MR. BLACK. Well, I think we ought to tell the public more
about what we're doing. If they see 8-1/2 percent growth coming in,
they're going to interpret that as easing unless they understand
that's what it takes to get to the low point of the range by the end
of the year. It's the same reason I suggested awhile ago that we ask
you to say on the McNeil-Lehrer program that we adopted a 7 percent
rate [for the third quarter] but people must not think that that is an
easing of policy because all that would do, if it's achieved, is get
us to the lower limits of the long-run range we indicated in the
testimony in July.

MR. WALLICH. We seem to get very little credit for our
earlier shortfalls. All the public sees is the rapid rise in that
particular month.

-45-



8/18/81

MR. BLACK. I think that's partly because we have never said
as clearly as we should what this implies month by month.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I respectfully disagree. I can't
think of anything worse than starting to use numbers on public
television aside from the year-over-year number. If we start talking
about intermeeting numbers of 7-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent, or whatever it
is, I just don't think people would understand that. I think it's
much more convincing if we talk in somewhat more general
nonquantitative terms.

MR. BLACK. I think they will understand it a whale of a lot
better than if we get 8-1/2 percent growth [over August and September]
and we haven't put that in the proper perspective.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we may get 11 percent right here in
August. What do we do with that? That will come out before the
policy record is [made public].

MR. BLACK. Unless we've said something about what those
numbers are ahead of time, I think we'll scare people to death.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But you're assuming that we're going
to get it. Suppose Paul says it's 7 percent or 8-1/2 percent and then
we get something completely different, lower or higher?

MR. BLACK. What I'm saying is that I don't want someone to
think that in choosing 7 percent last month we made a move toward
ease. I don't think we did.

MR. PARTEE. No, I think we tightened.

MR. BLACK. I think we tightened, too; I would rather it had
been above 7 percent. But when the market sees 7 percent, unless we
say why it is 7 percent, they are going to oversimplify things and
look at that one number. I'm trying to say we should tell them how we
look at those numbers so that they'll interpret them right.

MR. SCHULTZ. I hate to tell you, Mr. Black, but I really
don't believe there are very many people out there who understand the
difference between these kinds of numbers you're talking about. I
would hope the Chairman would not speak in these specific terms but
would give, in effect, a broad overview of what is going on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we have to worry right
now about what I'm going to say on McNeil-Lehrer tomorrow. We have to
resolve this directive.

MR. BLACK. I agree they don't understand, Fred, but that's
why I think we ought to be trying to explain it to them. And that's
where we differ. I think this will help a sensible person understand
it whereas [now] they misunderstand it in every possible way, as the
Chairman indicated awhile ago.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a slightly different
suggestion. I think we can say something along the lines of what
you're saying in the policy record someplace. I don't know that we
have to put it in the directive just after it says that it implies 7

-46-



8/18/81

percent for the quarter as a whole. That sounds awfully fine-tuned to
say it implies 8-1/2 percent for two months out of the quarter. We're
probably not going to come anywhere near the figure anyway.

MR. BLACK. Paul, are you going to stick that number in the
first part? No, I guess not; in this version we have 7 percent.
Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The problem revolves around the M2 issue
and I don't think I can fully resolve it. There should be some
discussion in the policy record about the problems, of which we have
several. What was the last one? Oh, this takeover thing. We have
the takeover, the new institutional thing, and that was all in my
statement. Well, the takeover was not, but my statement in July
mentioned the other things. And we did not say it was going to make
us terribly happy with a big overshoot in M2 only three weeks earlier.

MR. PARTEE. And then in the fourth quarter we have the tax
exempt certificates, which could blow this aggregate out of the water.

MR. AXILROD. Well, there is evidence of somewhat more
interest in the small savers certificates than had been expected.

MR. SCHULTZ. New technical differences.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no problem with reflecting in
the policy record that these things may have unexpected results that
we can't anticipate and that they would have to be taken into account
in judging M2. I would prefer to keep it out of the directive just in
the interest of continuity. But if we made any change in the
directive, I'd make it in that next artificial sentence, which is put
in there routinely, that says shifts in the NOW accounts will distort
measured growth. We could say other things will distort measured
growth in M1 or M2 and we will take account of those distortions. But
I think we could say the same thing in the discussion within the body
of the policy record text. That's what I would prefer, just in the
interest of not complicating this further.

MR. GRAMLEY. It's okay with me. I think there's a broad
agreement with this sort of formulation so long as we have some
understanding that the mere fact that M2 is starting above the upper
end doesn't lead to an unusual--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am not saying that because M2 is
projected high at the moment for August we would do anything but
remain on the path that we're now on.

MS. TEETERS. So it's not going to automatically trigger any
reaction?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not right now.

MS. TEETERS. Not right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. Things will change and M1 will be
higher or lower or M2 will be higher or lower; and we just have to
look at it as time passes. I don't know what other answer I can give
you. If the growth in M2 is high but that in M1 is low, it obviously

-47-



8/18/81

has a different implication than if they are both running high. If M1
is right on the bottom and M2 is beginning to run still higher than we
project now and it begins to look [high] in September, then I think it
does have some implications.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think that's all we can expect.

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we're ready to vote. I would make
one change in the directive. I would say "In the short run the
Committee continues to seek..." just to emphasize that we're not
changing anything.

MS. TEETERS. This implies initial borrowing of $1.4 billion?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or "In the short run, as decided at the
last meeting, the Committee will seek..." I'd use one of those two.

MR. CORRIGAN. There's no thought here that we would be
implicitly tolerant of short-run money growth of a little less than
perhaps these 8-1/2 and 11-1/2 percent numbers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think it's consistent with what I
just said. If we have a significant drop in the second half of August
beyond what is anticipated now and the M2 figures are just what we
anticipate now, that would have at least a modest effect of reducing
the borrowings. If M2 were coming in high at the same time--by high I
mean higher than now projected--we'd probably shade that judgment.

MR. CORRIGAN. I have some predisposition or a mild prejudice
in the direction of money growth being a little slower, if it turns
out that way, simply because I still think it's in our better long-run
interest to have it work that way than the other way. But I am
comfortable with the overall formulation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And consistent with not changing anything,
we just repeat the current federal funds range of 15 to 21 percent.
Am I right? We're somewhere in the middle of it.

MS. TEETERS. And add this language in the sentence that
starts "It is recognized that shifts..."?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I was not going to add that. I'd put
that in the text, in the discussion about adopting the same [short-run
objectives].

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean in the policy record, not
the directive.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we're getting awfully close to having a
cooked directive. It doesn't really mean that [in] the directive.
That's a bothersome fact, Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that I--

-48-



8/18/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, if you read the directive it says one
thing, but there's some side agreement that we'll do it a different
way. I just think that's a very bad procedure.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's your interpretation, not
mine. The directive says "provided that M2 growth remains around the
upper limit." The current projection, as I understand it, meets [the
description] "around the upper limit."

MR. AXILROD. I ought to correct what I said: The
calculations with the hand computer came to 9.4 percent for August.

MR. PARTEE. And what's the upper limit?

MS. TEETERS. 9 percent.

MR. AXILROD. But I don't know whether it's 9.3 or 9.4.

MR. PARTEE. It says "remains around or moves within." You
want to leave that phrase in there. Now, I suggest that 9.4 percent
is certainly right on the very border of violating, if it doesn't
already violate, the directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I think 9.4 percent is "around the
upper limit." That 9.4 percent is for August?

MR. AXILROD. From Q4 1980 [to August].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And in September on the current projection
M2 growth would come down. I think that is around the upper limit. I
don't disagree with that, but I don't think it's beyond it; that's all
I'm saying.

MR. BLACK. We're leaving the "or moves within" in there, Mr.
Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd just leave it in on the basis that it
may well move within, though I don't know, by the time we get to
September. Why change it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, if we leave it out, a lot of the
Fed watchers are going to think that that's a significant easing. And
I don't know--

MR. CORRIGAN. Then they will think we've eased.

MS. TEETERS. But in reality, we're not going to follow this.
That's Chuck's point, that it's a violation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think that's right.
Obviously, it's a question of interpretation. But "around the upper
limit" does not mean the upper limit.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. I'm almost surprised, Chuck,
that you say that. If we're talking about something like 9.3, 9.4
percent, isn't that around the upper limit?

-49-



8/18/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, I had the impression that one would read
the whole phrase, "moves within or remains around the upper limit."
And I think that gives less tolerance to being above the upper limit
than it does being below.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, there's no question about that. I
think it gives less tolerance for above than below.

MR. PARTEE. It's difficult. There has been over the years a
tendency for the Committee to want to have things [in the decision]
that we don't say in the directive. I think that needs to be resisted
because the directive is our only record of what we've done. We don't
have minutes of the meeting that go through all this discussion and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I proposed this on the basis that we're
not changing anything from last time. We knew about the special
[small] savers certificates and we knew about the all savers
certificates. We didn't know maybe quite so much about the takeovers.
What we didn't know was that we'd have a bulge in the beginning of
August. But presumably that's what we were forewarning ourselves
against.

MR. PARTEE. Just to clarify, we didn't know that the all
savers certificates would become law.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [On] October 1st.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that is true. We did not know.
We were only 99-1/2 percent sure.

MR. PARTEE. I just wanted to repeat that position so that
you can change it next time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, when we hit the two-year
anniversary of October 6th or 8th or whenever--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the all savers certificate is
probably reducing M2 at the moment because the savings banks are all
offering RPs in the anticipation of the all savers certificates.
Instead of putting money in a money market certificate people are
using RPs, which are not in M2 and the money market certificate is.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I know the passbook savings at least are
going up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we may be getting an artificially low
M2 at the moment.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to raise an
important technical question. In this material that was passed out
called the general paragraphs, in the operational paragraph on page 3
line 57, I hope the language there is a mistake. It says "provided
that growth of M2 remains at the upper limit."

"about."
MR. AXILROD. Yes, that was a mistake. That should say

-50-



8/18/81

MR. BALLES. Okay, if it's still "about," then there's some
leeway.

MR. AXILROD. That was a mistake. It's a transcription
error. [The intended wording] should be exactly as it was in the
Bluebook.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Around" is the right word.

MR. BALLES. Okay, otherwise we would be taking--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm just wondering. This part is not the
part where we can put in some sentences about the possible artificial
factors affecting M2.

MR. BALLES. That might be a good idea.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Artificial factors affect M-1B too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that's mentioned. I think it's
alluded to, yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we come in at the end of the year
within the target range on M-1B, we may not want to stress the
artificial factors that much.

MR. CORRIGAN. Then we can say we're really in the middle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I agree. I wouldn't
suggest to you any more emphasis. This says "...the shortfall in M-1B
growth in the first half of the year partly reflected a shift in
public preferences"--that's good Federal Reserve language--"toward
other highly liquid assets." It adds that growth in the broader
aggregates has been running somewhat above the upper end of the ranges
for 1981, but "in light of its desire to maintain moderate growth in
money over the balance of the year the Committee expected that growth
in M-1B for the year would be near the lower end of its range." Is
there any reason why we can't insert a phrase there? We could add "at
the same time, growth in the broader aggregates might be high in their
ranges, an expectation reinforced by..." Or let's put in another
sentence. "It was recognized that changes in the institutional
setting might have an effect on M2 and M3 in the second half of the
year" or some such language. Is this language sacred? Do we have to
repeat exactly what we had the last time?

MS. TEETERS. Well, it was [sacred] two minutes ago.

MR. PARTEE. No, we're not talking about that part. We're
talking about the longer run. It's page 2, around lines numbered 39
to 40. Is that where you are, Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Well, I'm on line 44. I just don't
know if that's a more convenient place to insert it.

MR. BALLES. Paul, as an alternative to putting it at line
44--

-51-



8/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble is that this says what we did
last time, which doesn't--

MR. BALLES. I was going to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that if we
want to add an extra sentence that would call attention to artificial
distorting factors in M2, we might slip it into the sentence that now
begins on line 58. "It was recognized that shifts in NOW accounts
would continue to distort measured growth in M-1B and..."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I was suggesting before, but
that gets into the operational part of the directive. It could be put
there, but--

MR. BALLES. Just add a phrase there that M2 may be similarly
distorted by recent developments in new savings instruments. Insert a
phrase that we would then follow an operational reserve path to be
developed in light of evaluations of those distortions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is the place we can put it if we want
to change the operational paragraph. If we don't put it there, I
guess the best place to put it, if we put it in the directive at all,
is in line 25. That discusses what happened in July. Growth in M2
accelerated; the level wasn't very high. The level of M2 was slightly
below the upper end of the range. "It is recognized that during
August and potentially in October the introduction of new certificates
may..."

MR. AXILROD. Well, we once had a sentence in there which we
took out because it included the early estimates for the week of
August 12th. But we could easily say: "Available data for early
August suggest acceleration in growth of M-1B and M2, in the case of
M2 reflecting..." It depends on some of our preliminary estimates,
but that would be a reasonable sentence to put in there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we can put it in there and then
put in the body of the [policy record] discussion again our concern
about this factor. Let's assume we will do that and let's vote.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, I hate to do this, but I have one
other small technical point on line 6, where it says the increase in
retail sales reflected some recovery in sales of new cars. It's
probably more used cars than new. I would suggest it say "some
recovery in sales at automotive dealers," which is more likely to be
the case.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that will be accepted. Well, with
all that, I would propose just sticking in the word "continues" on
line 52: "In the short run the Committee continues to seek..." Are
we ready to vote? Vote.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Boykin Yes
President Corrigan Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Keehn Yes

-52-



8/18/81

Governor Partee Well, I have to vote against
it again since I voted against it the last time and it is exactly the
same as it was before.

MR. WALLICH. You could have changed your mind.

MR. PARTEE. No, I haven't changed my mind. I think more
than I did the last time that it's the wrong thing to do.

MR. ALTMANN.
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich Yes
President Black Yes

Eleven to one, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. We have some sandwiches
out there. Do we have anything else? The next meeting is October
6th. There's nothing else on the agenda for this meeting.

END OF MEETING

-53-




