









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

February 24, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Tuesday,

February 24, 1981, at 12:00 noon, at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was

a telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those

participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon 1/, Vice Chairman
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Morris
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Roos
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Winn

(New York)

(Kansas City)
(Boston)

(St. Louis)

(Cleveland)

Messrs. Boykin (Dallas), and Mayo (Chicago), Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Black (Richmond), and Corrigan (Minneapolis),
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond

and Minneapolis, respectively

Altmann, Secretary
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Oltman (New York), Deputy General Counsel
Axilrod, Economist

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),
R. Davis (New York), T. Davis (Kansas City),
Eisenmenger (Boston), Ettin, Henry, Keir, Kichline,
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Left the meeting prior to the vote to adopt a modification of the domestic
policy directive.



2/24/81

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic
Operations, System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Prell, Associate Director, Division of Research and

Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Steele, Economist, Open Market Secretariat, Board

of Governors

Mr. Smoot (Philadelphia), First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

Messrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis) Keran
(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), Parthemos (Richmond),
Scheld and Syron, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal

Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, San Francisco,
Atlanta, Richmond, Chicago, and Boston, respectively

Mrs. Nichols (Chicago), Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago

Mr. Campbell (New York), Assistant Secretary, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
February 24, 1981

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Kichline, do you want to give us a
very brief update on the economy?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, employment, production, and sales were
all well maintained in January. Housing starts in January continued
surprisingly strong, and the incoming data generally point to even
leaner inventories than we had anticipated earlier. So, briefly, as
of now we would expect that real growth in the current quarter will be
only a little less than the downward revised 4 percent shown for last
quarter. On inflation, it's clear that we continue to experience very
rapid price increases. And we continue to anticipate that the
incoming data on the CPI and PPI will show some degree of acceleration
in the remaining months of the quarter. As of now it's our
expectation that nominal GNP this quarter will probably grow at close
to the rate experienced last quarter, which was just a little above 15
percent at an annual rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight, do you want to catch us up
on where we are?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I'd like to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, wait a minute. I looked at Mr.
Axilrod and said Mr. Sternlight. You apparently have a call into Mr.
Axilrod, so why don't you catch us up and then I'll have Mr. Axilrod
catch us up.

MR. STERNLIGHT. My call to Steve, Mr. Chairman, was about
the fact that the funds market situation has changed since our morning
call today. But Steve might want to give more background on this.
The general situation is that we are looking at a need--to meet our
path objective--for substantially more reserves in this statement
week. We've been going through the week finding the funds rate below
the 15 percent lower bound, and on Friday and again yesterday we took
action to drain reserves, which did not really cause the funds market
to firm up very much at all. This morning we were looking at a very
large need to add more reserves. Funds had inched up to 15-1/8
percent. We were prepared to provide some modest amount of reserves,
meeting a part of the need by passing through some of our customer
repurchase agreements. But between the time our call concluded and we
were set to go into the market to do that, the money market eased
again. Funds were back at 15 percent and I thought I would defer that
modest action to add some reserves to the market. So, that was what I
wanted to convey to Steve at that point. We're sitting now with funds
at 15 percent and apparently a large need to add reserves this week of
something like $1.6 billion to $1.8 billion on a weekly average basis.
The banks have large cumulative reserve deficiencies and they just are
not acting on that basis at this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think that's just a setting for
the general situation. Why don't you proceed, Mr. Axilrod?

MR. AXILROD. Well, Mr. Chairman, the monetary aggregates
have shown diverse trends since the last Committee meeting. The
narrow monetary aggregates, M1-A and M1-B, viewed after abstracting



2/24/81

from shifts to NOW accounts, of course, have been much [lower] than we
had anticipated. But making the best estimate we can of the
distribution of [those shifts], they appear to be from out of demand
deposits and out of other deposits. It looks as if both M1 measures--
really it's best to consider them both together--are doing the same
thing; they are running substantially below the path that the
Committee set. As you recall, that path called for a rate of growth
in the M1 measures of roughly 5-1/2 percent. So far as we can tell,
from December to March--with a projection for March that indicates a
distinct rise in the rate of growth, so if March turns out to be
weaker than the 6 percent or so we're projecting we'd be even further
below the path--we'd have growth of M1-A at about a 2-1/2 percent rate
and growth of M1-B at a 3 percent rate. From December to date,
they're both showing no growth. So, this growth we're showing from
December to March really is a projection of growth in the last half of
February and the month of March.

On the other hand, while the narrow aggregates are weak
relative to the path the Committee set, the broader aggregates are
generally strong. At the time of the Committee meeting, the Committee
set a path for growth in M2 at around 8 percent at an annual rate from
December to March. In January and February the growth in M2 is very
close to 8 percent and we're projecting a March rate of growth, given
the strength we've observed particularly in money market funds so far
in February, of close to 10 percent. So, if March turned out to be 10
percent or even lower--any number down to 8-1/2 percent or so--we'd be
somewhat over the December-to-March path on M2. Our actual projection
for December to March is 8-3/4 percent as against that 8 percent path.
To date the growth is right at about 8 percent. Meanwhile, although
the Committee didn't officially set a path over the December-to-March
period for M3, it probably should be observed that growth in M3 has
been quite strong. In January, M3 grew at about a 13 percent annual
rate. And given the data we have thus far in December--

MR. PARTEE. February.

MR. AXILROD. I mean February, sorry--growth is at around a
10-1/2 percent annual rate. So in a sense M3 is growing well above
its long-run path. Meanwhile, on an average basis, bank credit in
January was quite strong, but the fragmentary data we have for the
large banks suggest a substantial slowing in that growth in February,
probably an extension of the slowing that might have been developing
over the course of January. That's the report on the aggregates, Mr.
Chairman.

I don't know whether Mr. Sternlight wants to report further
on interest rate developments but, given the weakness in the narrow
aggregates in particular, there has been a drop in required reserves
relative to the original path. In consequence, the implied borrowing
has dropped from about the $1.3 billion that was used in constructing
the path originally to something on the order of $770 million in the
current and next statement weeks, and that has been accompanied by a
sharp drop in money market rates, and indeed in the funds rate to
below 15 percent recently. Given our projection of the aggregates, it
would appear that borrowing after the next two weeks would rise back
up to somewhere between $900 million and $1 billion. So even if this
$770 million worked out--and it hasn't been working out this week--the
money market would be wrenched by a turnaround in the level of



2/24/81

borrowing back up to the $900 million to $1 billion range. And, of
course, it would be even higher if it turns out that we're
underprojecting the aggregates, as is possible, given the GNP outlook
that Jim just mentioned.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether you want to add a
word, Peter, at this point.

MR. STERNLIGHT. No. I think Steve covered it. As he said,
the short rates have come down because we've been aiming for the
nonborrowed [reserve path] such that borrowing was on a declining
track. So funds have come down from the 17 percent area to a shade
under 15 percent; in fact the funds rate average is 14-7/8 percent so
far this week. It is interesting that as you go out longer in the
maturity spectrum rates have actually moved up since the time of the
meeting a couple of weeks ago with continuing concern in the market
about longer-term prospects in the economy, budget policy, and so on.
So it's very much a swinging around of the yield curve with those
short rates coming down and the long rates going up modestly.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I think it would helpful to the
Committee, in pointing to the oddity of this M1 behavior, to note that
at the time the path was set at the last meeting we expected--and the
Committee adopted a target of--growth QI-over-QIV of around 2-3/4
percent in M1-B, abstracting from all those shifts. Given the pattern
we have thus far in the month and expecting March growth of 6-3/4
percent, abstracting from shifts, we would end up with a rate of
growth quarter-over-quarter of 0.5 percent, effectively zero.
Meanwhile, it looks as if nominal GNP is a bit higher. So we're
staring at a velocity here of M1-B of 14 or 15 percent at an annual
rate. Granted that the staff in its brilliance expected a downward
demand shift, we didn't expect anything like this. This would be a
very unusual result should it stand up, suggesting that something
might give here, either the M1 or maybe nominal GNP. It's not clear.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is another possibility, not
exclusive of the possibilities that you cited: That the kind of
institutional wrench of NOW accounts has somehow affected behavior. I
don't know [why] that should be but it's a peculiar coincidence.

MR. AXILROD. Well, I was talking to Jim in the hall, and my
memory is that in early '79--I'm not sure of the timing--when ATS
accounts were introduced, we got more of an effect on demand deposits
than we thought a priori we would get. Our rationale at that point
was that this made people begin to think about their whole cash
management process and that they might have switched not only into ATS
accounts but decided that they had surplus cash in general and put
money in money market funds at the time. That's similar to what is
going on now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have an uneasy feeling from time-to-time
that we may just be getting some pure misreporting from banks, where
ATS accounts are not classified in the right [categories] with this
limitation of three transfers a month. Banks really don't know what
to do. I suspect we do get some misreporting. Actually, I suspect we
get a lot of it; whether it's mutually offsetting, I don't know. But
there are a lot of elements of uncertainty.

-3-



2/24/81

Well, the general purpose of the meeting today, of course, is
that we are having a consultation because we reached the 15 percent
[lower limit on the funds rate band] that we cited [in the directive].
The question is what to do about it. My own feeling is that moving
very mechanically on uncertain M1 numbers, in the light of the other
aggregates being high and considering that there has been a
substantial easing in the money market, is probably not appropriate
pending some further evaluation of this. We actually set a little
higher target at the Federal Open Market Committee [meeting] this time
than we had in December, if you recall. We didn't accept the low path
that took us back to the equivalent of the December decision, if
that's a correct way to state it, Mr. Sternlight. In any event, we
have a conflict between the two parts of the directive and the
question is what to do about it. We can just operate on the 15
percent limit, I think, without doing anything. Alternatively, and I
think probably more appropriately, we can make a different judgment.
These judgments have an arbitrary element anyway. We are keying off
the $1.3 billion borrowing assumption we made at the last meeting and
the changes have been mechanical from there. I would propose raising
the borrowing assumption from where we now are--not from the $1.3
billion but from the $770 million. We think it's likely to go up
anyway when we get through this period. Raising that to somewhat over
$1 billion and letting the money market go where it goes with that
assumption seems to me not inappropriate at this time. So, that's
what I would propose. Let me hear what other reactions are.

MS. TEETERS. Are you implying that we would let it reach the
15 percent?

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I would support
your position. We have a conflict between the financial data and the
economic data at the moment and my hunch is that it will be resolved
in a softening in the economy. Not only do we see the [low growth in
the] M1 measures, but we see a flattening in business loans and steady
weakness in commodity prices. So, I think we've got to hold on until
we find which way this ball is going to bounce, and I would support
your position.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know which way the ball is going
to bounce. But I'm a little suspicious even if there were some
slowing in the economy, which isn't very visible now but which I don't
discount, that we may get a big bounce up in these M1 figures anyway
because that velocity figure looks awfully peculiar.

MR. ROOS. This is Larry Roos.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Mrs. Teeters], I'll get to you in a
minute.

MR. ROOS. I must disagree with you. First of all, if you
observe what has happened to the monetary base, there is every reason
to believe that there would be this flat movement of the aggregates.
To me our biggest problem is to avoid like the plague a replay of what
happened last year when we had a significant undershoot early in the
year. [My reason is that] I think people are looking to us to achieve
a steadiness that was not characteristic of last year. If we adjust
our borrowing assumption upward, that has the same effect of perhaps
leading to an undershoot in the long pull. I just think that we



2/24/81

should reduce the lower limit of the fed funds range and provide
whatever reserves are necessary to avoid a downward movement like the
one that occurred last year in such a damaging way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters has a question.

MS. TEETERS. I just want to clarify what your proposal is,
Mr. Chairman. If we moved to a borrowing level of $1 billion, does
that mean that we're then going to let the interest rate fluctuate
below as well as above the 15 percent floor?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My assumption is that we'd move the
borrowing [down to] probably a little above $1 billion, but then let
interest rates develop as they would. And if, after a suitable
interval of time, [the funds rate] appeared to be moving lower and was
inconsistent, we'd have another consultation.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but moving to the $1 billion plus--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It does not mean protecting the 15 percent
floor per se during this interval, but we may have another
consultation.

MS. TEETERS. Right. But moving from where we are to $1
billion plus in borrowing implies some tightening in the market at the
present time. And it would lower the nonborrowed reserve path. Is
that correct?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it would lower the nonborrowed
reserve path, yes. But I don't know what the market effect would be.

MS. TEETERS. Yes.

MR. AXILROD. The market would be somewhat tighter than it
would otherwise be, but I'm not so sure it would be much easier or
tighter than in fact it is now; borrowing has been running about $1.1
billion. That's literally where we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's uncertain; it doesn't imply
necessarily an increase. We just don't know. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Paul, I too would like to temporize for a while,
and I think that's what we're talking about. It seems to me most
likely that both of the pieces of the scissors that we're looking at
are going to come together by the nominal GNP moderating and by the
money numbers going up. I think both will happen. But now we're
talking about such a very large velocity number that there is lots of
room for both to move toward each other and still not be out of line.
You may remember that late last year we had a couple of similar
conference calls in which we told the Manager that he didn't have to
observe the upper limit of the funds range exactly, but that he should
let the market tend to [set] the rate and it could be a little above
that limit. I think a similar [response] may be quite appropriate
now; not changing the lower limit from 15 percent but letting the
Manager let the market determine the rate. And if it turns out to be
somewhat lower than 15 percent, he should not resist it. I do think
that would likely result in quite a bit lower rate unless we move the
nonborrowed reserve path down some--on the order of $100 million or so



2/24/81

from where it otherwise would have been--which as I understand it is
what you're proposing. I think that would be a good move at this
time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, this is Tony Solomon. I agree
with the substance of your analysis of the situation and the bottom
line of your recommendation. But since it's not clear that even an
increase in the borrowing assumption and a lowering of the nonborrowed
reserve path will necessarily keep us where we want to be while we
wait out this peculiar situation, another possibility would be to
modify the last meeting's directive to say that in view of the
stronger growth in the broader aggregates and the fact that the
narrower aggregates are somewhat distorted by the NOW account picture,
we would permit some undershooting for a period of time. And then we
could consult again. As I remember the discussion at our last FOMC
meeting, even though it never got into the directive as such, there
was some feeling in the group that it would be appropriate to permit
some undershooting in view of the overshooting in the second half of
last year. But I'd go along with your more informal approach, if the
Committee doesn't want to modify the directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if we have a formal approach, I
would--

MR. MAYO. Bob Mayo. I would support you, Paul. Chuck has
given my reasoning for the sort of floating idea that you have stated
in a little different way. I wouldn't formalize [the approach] at
this point. We'll just keep our ears open until we get some figures
that we're a little more comfortable with. This is a real puzzle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just interject. If you want to
formalize it, I had some wording that I was fooling around with here,
which follows pretty much what Mr. Solomon said. It would say
something like: "In light of the relatively strong growth of M2 and
M3 and the substantial easing recently in money market conditions, as
well as uncertainties about the behavior of M1, the Committee agreed
to accept some shortfall in the growth of M1-A and M1-B from the
specified rates in the domestic policy directive as consistent with
developments in the aggregates generally and the objectives for the
year."

MR. MAYO. Sounds pretty good.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll discuss formal or informal later.
Let's get the substantive views.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, this is Willis. I have two or three
things. One is that we have one method now of addressing our base
drift problem with these developments and we really didn't address
that in our previous discussion. Second is that loan demand is not
off as much at the small banks, I think, as it is at the large banks
with the shift into commercial paper, given the lagging prime rate.
And third, a technical way of achieving the same purpose--although I
think it would be far more difficult to explain--would be to drop the
band but at the same time raise the discount rate. That would do
almost the same thing, although it's more difficult to explain, that
we'd accomplish with raising the borrowing assumption above the $1
billion base--



2/24/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that fooling around with
the discount rate would be very confusing, Willis. I thought of that
but--

MR. WINN. I think that's right, Paul, but it's another way
to do it.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, this is Jerry Corrigan. I would
very much support the approach that you have suggested, and I would be
disposed also to go in the direction that you and Tony both suggested
of coupling that with accepting a shortfall for the time being.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. I tentatively would support your
proposal, if I understand it. So, I would like to ask a few
questions. One is: When you speak of adjusting the borrowing
[assumption] to $1 billion plus, is that an adjustment from the
current [assumption] of what I believe to be about $950 million?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only $770 million now--or will be on
the current projection. We're in one of these arbitrary averaging
periods that we use, and because we inadvertently ran a little high
earlier in the period, this $770 million is in that sense artificially
low. So, the current assumption is that on the same mechanics the
borrowings would go up anyway based upon current projections of the
money supply in the next reserve averaging period two weeks away. And
they would be around $950 million. But right at the moment they're
below that. The current expectation is that if we didn't do anything,
we'd be back at $950 million in borrowing anyway two weeks from now.

MR. GUFFEY. I'm going to have to ask another question then.
The downward adjustment to the nonborrowed path to accommodate your
suggestion is about $250 million. Is that right?

MR. AXILROD. It would be about $150 million a couple of
weeks from now and in the current two-week period it would be close to
$350 million because we would in effect be leaving borrowings--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $300 million anyway.

MR. AXILROD. --at the $1.1 billion level, as they were in
the first two weeks following the Committee meeting, instead of having
them drop to around the $770 million, which would require it to
average out at $950 million, if you know what I mean.

MR. GUFFEY. Yes I do and I would approve that. The second
question that I had, Mr. Chairman, is for a bit clearer statement as
to what we would do with the lower bound, which is 15 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my proposal is that we wouldn't do
anything with it, but we would recognize that market rates might be
above or below it. If they were significantly below, we might want to
have another consultation in a couple of weeks or a week or whatever.



2/24/81

MR. GUFFEY. Significantly means something in the 14-1/2
percent or below range?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know that we would consult
if it were 14-1/2 percent, just having consulted today; but if it got
down toward 14 percent, I certainly think we'd have another one, just
consistent with the basic directive.

MR. GUFFEY. I would support you on that basis.

MR. KOCH. Mr. Chairman, this is Don Koch for Bill Ford who
has asked me to convey the fact that since M2 and M3 are quite strong
at this time, he would very much go along with your recommendation.
Steve, can you tell me what has happened to the excess reserve account
during the time that borrowings have gone from [our assumption of]
$1.3 billion to [the current level of] $770 million?

MR. AXILROD. Excess reserves have been running a little
lower than in the previous three or four months. In the first week of
this period, they dropped to--

MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't hear the question in New York.

MR. AXILROD. The question, Peter, is: What has happened to
excess reserves since the Committee meeting?

MR. KOCH. What is happening to the excess reserves during
this period as far as your expectations?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they tended to come down; of course,
they had been running very high in December and January. These recent
levels have been a bit more in the $200 to $400 million area. How
this week is going to work out, I don't know, because right now the
banks seem to have a big cumulative reserve deficiency that they are
in no mood to cover.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who is next?

MR. PARTEE. Maybe that's everybody.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I haven't talked yet, Mr. Chairman. This
is Gramley. I support your approach. I think it's important to
recognize that either we're looking at very, very artificial
statistics or we're looking at a very, very substantial drop in the
money demand function. And in either of those cases, that means not
reacting in ways that could generate problems for the future, I think,
[in terms of] letting interest rates go down a lot further than they
already have. So, I would say: Yes, let's go your direction. Let's
meet fairly promptly again, however, if in fact this approach leads to
further declines in interest rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I might add to that. If we got a further
very distinct softening in M1 instead of the reverse, I think we ought
to meet again, too. We've got to keep this under close review. Who
else has not talked here? Governor Rice?

MR. RICE. I accept your proposal, Mr. Chairman, for the
reasons that have already been outlined.



2/24/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz?

MR. SCHULTZ. I have nothing to add.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to guess what we will do
when the money supply strengthens. And not knowing that makes it
difficult for me to decide. My sympathies lie with what Larry Roos
said, but I suspect that we might be inclined to drag our feet a
little too much on the up side. If that tended to be correct, then
what you suggested might be the best position with which to temporize.

MS. TEETERS. I haven't known where it was and wasn't aware
that we were dragging our feet on the up side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters, you haven't expressed a
view. You asked a question but didn't express an opinion.

MS. TEETERS. I can go along with your approach. We simply
can't make the things reconcile at this point. So, let's let the
market give us some indications as to what it wants to do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I agree fully with you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I don't know whether we have any
comment from San Francisco or Philadelphia where the presidents aren't
available. Well, there seems to be a general agreement with maybe a
little restiveness. Let me report to you an arithmetic calculation
that was made yesterday that disturbed me, which may bear upon this a
bit. If you literally took our targets for this year and we hit them
exactly every quarter, the average level for the year would be
significantly higher than last year, even though the target is lower.
That's a result I don't like much.

MR. ROOS(?). Would you repeat that, please?

MR. SCHULTZ. No. Forget it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we were on target every quarter on the
average, the average level of the money supply for this year would be
higher than it was last year.

MR. SCHULTZ. The midpoint of the target?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, the midpoint of the target.

MR. PARTEE. That's the oddity of last year's--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The reason you get that result is, in
effect, the base drift problem. We ended up last year very high, and
that's where the new target takes off from. So if one were looking at
the year-to-year change, the target is too high unless we have a
shortfall sometime during the year.

MS. TEETERS. Well, we've already got it.



2/24/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've already got it for six weeks,
but the data are inadequate. The question remains as to whether or
not we want to incorporate this in a formal finding, which would be
reported when we publish [the policy record]. I think we can do it
either way. One can argue that the more straightforward way is just
to report it. It's not really a new directive; it's an instruction to
the Desk as to how to conduct [operations] when we have the aggregates
going in somewhat different directions and in the light of the 15
percent limit. I think we can well justify the written modification.

MS. TEETERS. What did we do when we reached the top?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, when we have reached the top, I
think we've done it different ways at different times. When we
actually relaxed the limit, we did a formal relaxation.

MR. PARTEE. This is Chuck Partee. Paul, I didn't disagree
with the first part of your language. I didn't like the reference to
the uncertainty with regard to M1 in it. I certainly agree that there
is great uncertainty as to the distribution between M1-A and M1-B.
But I don't really think that M1-B could be much stronger than we have
it because of the way the statistics are being handled. I think we
could refer to the strength of M2 and M3 and to the easing in money
market conditions. But I wouldn't refer to a feeling that M1-A and
M1-B looked at together are not reliable. I can see how it affects
the distribution, but I don't see how M1-B could be a great deal
higher than we already have it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, M1-B would be higher if the
percentage coming out of [savings] were higher.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, but we already have 75 to 80 percent, you
see.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we already have the percentage coming
out of savings at 75 to 80 percent. The other possibility is that
we're not getting all the ATS accounts reported.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't know if I agree on the ATS. I
think they already have been set up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You were looking into that out in
Minneapolis, weren't you, Jerry?

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, I don't have anything much further to
report. We have some people up here looking at it, and all I can say
at this point is that the raw numbers look funny.

MR. PARTEE. I think there is probably, shall I say, some
avoidance of reserves going on there. But I think it's going on by
continuing to classify as ATS accounts what are really NOW accounts.

MR. CORRIGAN. I think that's right.

MR. PARTEE. And that doesn't affect the aggregates. It
affects the reserves, but it doesn't affect the aggregates.



2/24/81

MR. CORRIGAN. It depends on where that savings part is in
reserves, too. At least it's bothering me in terms of M1-B. Again, I
don't have any way of knowing this, but I just wonder if some of this
flow into money market funds in the last six weeks or so may not be
more of a shift of consumer-type accounts out of banks into the money
market funds.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Of course, that's reflected in the
strength of M2.

MR. CORRIGAN. True, but I'm thinking in terms of Chuck's
point that he can't find any other reason to think that M1-B--

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's a different kind of reason though,
Jerry. What you're saying is that the change in interest rate
relationships has shifted demands for various kinds of financial
assets. That's different from saying that we're uncertain about the
quality of the M1-B numbers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what's the general sentiment about
whether to make a formal modification of the directive?

MR. ROOS. Paul, this is Larry Roos. I urge you to take some
formal action because I feel strongly opposed to what everybody is
agreeing to today. If you look at the monetary base for the past four
months and if you look at total reserves over five months, they have
been flat. We have these aggregates [unintelligible] have dropped
from about a 14 percent growth rate over many months to zero recently.
All of this adds up to the potential for a very serious undershoot,
and I have to dissent from this action. I think it's a total mistake.

MS. TEETERS. I would much prefer to keep it on an informal
basis at this point. We haven't really changed the lower [limit of
the funds range]. We're doing something very similar to what was done
in December when we reached the top [of the range]. I'd just keep it
on an informal basis at this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We did take a formal vote in December;
that was the most recent time. Well, we have some mixed opinions.
Let me just check quickly. Governor Gramley, do want to be formal or
informal?

MR. GRAMLEY. I have no strong opinion; I can go either way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey?

MR. GUFFEY. I'm not quite sure. I might say, if I
understand what we're doing, that I think I would prefer a formal vote
in the sense that there has been a policy judgment to change the
nonborrowed path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that we are changing
the nonborrowed path from a mechanical application of what we decided
last time. Put another way, one could say it's being shifted in the
light of M2, which is in the directive, and in the light of the 15
percent, which is in the directive too. That's why we can do it
either way. But you're basically a formal fellow?

-11-



2/24/81

MR. GUFFEY. Yes, I think so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris?

MR. MORRIS. I'm formal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee?

MR. PARTEE. I don't care an awful lot, except for that one
objection I have to your statement.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice?

MR. RICE. I don't feel strongly either, but I lean toward
informal because I don't believe we're taking any significant policy
action here today and we may want to take some significant policy
action in a few days.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos wants it formal. Governor
Schultz?

MR. SCHULTZ. I lean to formal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Peter Sternlight, here; he was called away.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did I interpret his previous comment as
wanting it formal?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think so, although given that he's not
here to cast a formal vote, he might just as soon not have it be
formal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters is informal. Mr. Winn?

MR. WINN. Immaterial to me, Paul.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a lot of immateriality, but
among those who expressed an opinion we have a majority--I don't know
whether it's a true majority--who would like it formal. So, maybe we
ought to do it formally. I do think there is uncertainty about the
behavior of M1, but I don't think whether or not that is mentioned in
the [directive] language is anything like a make or break point.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, one way of handling Governor
Partee's point is to talk about uncertainty in interpreting the M1s.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's all right, to put it in those terms.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What's this? Uncertainties about the
interpretation of the behavior? Is that the wording?

MR. PARTEE. You are saying "interpretation" now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, "uncertainties about the
interpretation of the behavior of..." If we're going to take a formal
vote, let me try to read some scribbles I have in front of me. "In

-12-



2/24/81

light of the relatively strong growth of M2 and M3 and the substantial
easing recently in money market conditions, as well as uncertainties
about the interpretation of the behavior of M1, the Committee agreed
to accept some shortfall in growth of M1-A and M1-B from the specified
rates in the domestic policy directive as consistent with developments
in the aggregates generally and the objectives for the year." That
latter part is meant to convey that we're not just forgetting about
these aggregates and we're not going to let them go down so far that
it jeopardizes the objectives for the year. Understood? I take it
it's understood. We will vote.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Solomon
Governor Gramley
President Guffey
President Morris
Governor Partee
Governor Rice
President Roos
Governor Schultz
Governor Teeters
President Winn

Yes
Absent; had to step away
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. I suspect we may well be
consulting again shortly.

END OF SESSION

-13-


