









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

March 31, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,

D. C., on Tuesday, March 31, 1981 at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman

Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin

Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford, and Winn, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Petersen, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir,
Mullineaux, Prell, Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel,
Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of International

Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Smith 1/, Assistant Director, Division of International

Finance, Board of Governors

1/ Entered the meeting prior to the action to amend the Authorization for
Foreign Currency Operations and left following the action to reaffirm
the agreement to "warehouse" foreign currencies.



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A low; it was a high in the numerical
sense, a low in reality. That was what--three or four weeks ago now,
I suppose?

MS. GREENE. Just before the Bundesbank's move, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Since then, it has come off that very low
valley. The market has continued erratic, but I don't think there's
any great judgment that there was much to be done about it. The
tendency was not cumulative in one direction or another. At the same
time, we've entered into some discussions with the Treasury as to what
their views might be on intervention. They're going to start out, as
all new [Administrations] do anyway, by not being very--let me put it
the other way around--by being quite cautious on whether intervention
is useful or not. It remains to be seen. I don't think there's any
big question here that a variety of influences have suggested that
intervention under the current circumstances is not serving a terribly
useful purpose. And there hasn't been any intervention except for
yesterday, for what--three weeks or so?

MS. GREENE. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The markets have been quite erratic on a
day-to-day basis, but have shown no particular trend movement in one
direction or another after coming off the valley or the peak,
whichever way one puts it. I myself don't see any particular need for
any systematic intervention, in the near future in any event. We'll
see what happens in the market, but it has been rather trendless and
featureless as I see it, though not featureless in the sense that
there is quite a lot of short-term volatility. But that's the nature
of the beast at the moment.

MS. TEETERS. But you would still expect [the Desk] to
intervene on disorderly markets?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is a disorderly market? That is
always the question.

MS. TEETERS. I realize that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, this is not a--

MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As with any new Administration, in terms
of their own views, they are going to have to test their way in
specific circumstances. We had a circumstance yesterday which was
obviously of a highly exceptional character. But just forgetting
about that aspect--though that's an important aspect--I myself do not
see intervention as serving any particular purpose at the moment. And
we haven't done any, so we haven't got a test of it. By some
measures, I guess the market has been disorderly. By measures that we
would have considered appropriate ten years ago, certainly, it has
been disorderly. I think there's a question whether it is disorderly
in the present context of things. That there is some inherent
volatility here is, unfortunately, a fact of life. I'm not sure how
it will settle down most easily, frankly--with an official presence or
without.



3/31/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't have, possibly, a full
historical understanding of the policy [that was in effect] before I
was at the Treasury. During the time I was there, it was understood
that the Desk had flexibility [to intervene] in relatively modest
amounts to counter disorderly markets, using its own judgment, and
keeping both the Treasury and, of course, the Chairman informed. And
it was understood that on larger interventions there would be
authorization. I don't know whether we're moving in a direction now
where, even on modest efforts to counter disorderly markets, there has
to be specific authorization from both the Treasury and the Chairman,
even in regard just to the use of Federal Reserve resources as
distinct from the joint use of Federal Reserve and Treasury resources.
I don't know what the situation was prior to my joining the Treasury.
Was it that clean-cut that there had to be specific authorization?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we've gone through every possible
variant and permutation and combination of this through the years.
Sometimes there has been [no intervention] and [that policy] was
maintained for a considerable period of time. Sometimes there has
been intervention with rather specific authorization each time and
sometimes there has been a more flexible view. We will try to work
this out a little over the next month or two in terms of consistency
with the Treasury's views. There is no definitive answer to that
question at the moment, so far as they're concerned. But as a
practical matter, I don't see any urgent requirements at the moment.
Now, that can always change on a day-by-day basis, and that is what
will give us the grist for practical judgments in working this out.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Have there been periods of time,
Paul, when there has been modest intervention to counter disorderly
markets just using Federal Reserve resources?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, yes.

MR. TRUMAN. Generally in the past--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I said "yes" hastily; I'm sure there have
been.

MR. TRUMAN. Yes. Generally in the past, until after the
early 1970s, the Treasury didn't have substantial balances of its own.
So, most of the intervention was for the Federal Reserve account
exclusively, both in terms of building up very tiny balances and in
terms of all drawings on the swap lines.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think one can find every combination in
past history in terms of what has been done. But it has been
exceptional to have the Treasury participate to the extent it has
participated in the last four years or so. Nevertheless, the question
has been a repeated one going back to the earliest days of floating
[rates], when I participated from the other side [at the Treasury].
Should intervention be joint, separate, or should the Treasury do it
in the first instance or should we do it in the first instance?

MR. BALLES. You started all this!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles raised this question of a
study. Let me suggest a procedure, if it's satisfactory. I'm not



3/31/81

sure whether you all are aware that some of these things were touched
upon in a System study, the results of which were sent out a few
months ago. Why don't you just say a word or two about that, Mr.
Truman? Describe the nature of that study and its limitations for
this purpose.

MR. TRUMAN. Well, the study was actually done in connection
with the special System objectives for the calendar year 1979. [The
intent] was to encourage economists within the System to look again at
the floating exchange rate regime and how it had been functioning.
Although there was some talk of encouraging staffs at the various
Banks and the Board to identify a broad range of issues, there wasn't
an attempt, as is often true in such a case, to arrive at a single
conclusion. The result was that a large numbers of papers--I think
numbering in the 40s--were prepared by various people, and they were
summarized in the paper that was circulated to you earlier this year.
One important section of that paper, in this context, had to do with
the question of exchange rate determination. I would argue from an
economic point of view that one has to resolve that issue in one's
mind before one resolves questions about the effectiveness of
intervention. I think it's fair to say, based on the paper--and in
fact the concluding section says this--that the jury is still out in
the sense that it is not entirely clear in purely economic terms what
the effectiveness of intervention would be. You will find, though,
among economists within the System, that both views are supported.
And there are lengthy articulations of what assumptions they make
about the substitutability of assets denominated in different
currencies. The paper was put together by Jeff Shafer and Joanna Gray
and Mike Keran and was in a form a little different than often is
done; it was issued subsequently as a discussion paper by the Board
staff. But it might be instructive. In fact, one of the reasons why
we put together the paper was that it did present a reasonable review
or survey on these topics without trying to come to a detailed
conclusion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is extremely difficult to identify any
peculiar results from intervention per se economically. Intervention
serves a number of purposes, some of which are inherently
immeasurable, such as cooperating with a foreign central bank and
maintaining some spirit of harmony in markets, and some of which more
directly affect markets, such as a psychological objective as to the
intentions of the government in combination with or apart from other
elements of an economic program. Against that background, what I
would suggest is that you take a look at that work, which has already
been done. And we can consider next time, having looked at that and
refreshed our minds about what has been done, whether we can identify
more precisely what additional work, if any, might be desirable. If
that's acceptable, we'll have a little discussion of it at the next
meeting in that context. It may be that there are things to be looked
at and we should have a go at it again; or we may conclude that there
isn't much more to be done. But those studies are not fresh in my
mind, to say the least. In fact, I would say I have not read them and
some of the rest of you may be in that same position.

We have to ratify the transactions, if we're finished with
this topic. Do we have a motion?

MR. PARTEE. So move.



3/31/81

MR. BOEHNE. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Do you have any
recommendations, Ms. Greene?

MS. GREENE. [Recommendation--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that concluding comment? I am
afraid my attention wandered.

MS. GREENE. It was that we do not yet know whether the
Riksbank will request us to renew the increase [in their swap line
that was enacted last year]. In the event that they do, we probably
will hear about it before the next FOMC meeting and we would like to
be able at that time to recommend by wire that the renewal be
approved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can take an action, if we want
to. We can't wait until our next meeting, which comes [after] the
expiration of the [increase in the] line. I don't know that this is a
big issue; but I can just as easily wait and see whether they request
a renewal.

MS. GREENE. We thought they might wish to talk about it at
the time they repay. That is the reason we brought it up at this
time.

MS. TEETERS. When are they scheduled to repay?

MS. GREENE. The 23rd of April.

MR. WALLICH. If we renew, does this mean that the implicit
takeout from some further Euro-borrowing is pushed farther away in
time?

MS. GREENE. I fully expect that they will repay the drawing.
The question is, if there's an increase in the arrangement, whether
that should also be renewed. The reason for bringing it up now,
although they are two separate items, is that when we're talking to
them about the repayment, we expect that they will ask for an initial
reaction as to whether or not they could renew the increase in the
line as well.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would think we could defer action on
this, but if there's any expression of opinion that would be helpful
in guiding conversations with the Riksbank, we might have such an
expression of opinion at this time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Mr. Chairman, everything
considered, I think it would be appropriate for us to agree to
[extending] the increase if they request it. They are a responsible
central bank and I think it would be a little strange--we'd have to
have a good reason and I can't think of what reason we would offer--to
refuse such a modest increase.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The total amount of the line is what now?

-5-



3/31/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. $300 million; the temporary increase
is $200 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's $300 million, so it goes up to $500
million. As I remember, when that line was increased last year there
were some pretty clear understandings that it would be used--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. As bridge money.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --as bridge money to a financing, which in
effect is what they did, or perhaps for other contingencies of that
sort. But the obvious [purpose] was as a bridge financing to a market
financing or to an IMF drawing, which was in the picture recurrently
with respect to Sweden. Is that still in the picture, or do they feel
so confident now that they're not thinking of IMF drawings?

MS. GREENE. I think that's something, if we are cooperative
with them, that we could remind them about, if the situation so
required.

MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, before the actions in January,
there were some suggestions--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it strikes me that there are a
number of reasons why, in fact, we should not make a decision right
now. We can have some discussion and see what the attitude is toward
these things. Assuming the attitude is favorable--and my inclination
would be like Mr. Solomon's that we have the probability of a renewal
[request] here--we don't have to take the formal action. We have to
see the way they will present it. And we can take the action at the
next meeting if it seems appropriate then, assuming they do request
it. Any objection to that?

SPEAKER(?). No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If not, of course, we will conduct
ourselves accordingly. Since we're on the subject of the foreign
issues, we might as well jump to the amendments to the authorization
for foreign currency operations and the renewal of the directives,
which are standard material. The only [proposed] change involves what
is essentially a cleaning up of the language in the authorization for
foreign currency operations. Do you want to describe that, Mr.
Truman?

MR. TRUMAN. Well, part of the changes are just a cleaning
up. The one issue that the Committee might want to discuss is the
question you have asked the staff to address of whether we should now
incorporate the informal limits on System [foreign currency] balances
into the formal instruments. We looked at the question and we
suggested a way in which that could be done, but we also suggested
that, on balance, we didn't think it was a good idea. Therefore, we
recommended that any formal limit with respect to the System's overall
open position be the limit that now exists. And in that connection,
we suggested as a technical adjustment that the two numbers that now

-6-



3/31/81

appear in the authorization--one number is a footnote and one number
is in the text, with the one [in the footnote] being eight times the
size of the other--be combined to one number in the text and that the
footnote be dropped. Assuming the Committee accepts the proposition
that the informal limits be retained, we suggested that we might be
able to simplify the presentation of those informal limits so that
there's one overall number with three subnumbers rather than the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a bit lost. What specifically, are
you proposing? It's on what page of what memorandum?

MR. TRUMAN. The memorandum from the Secretary is dated March
24th. The first recommendation, on the first page, is that the formal
limit on the overall open position be encompassed in the limit [noted
in the text]. The second recommendation, on page 2, is that the
number be moved from the footnote to the text. Those are the
substantive recommendations.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We now have an $8 billion limit on our
open position.

MR. PARTEE. In a footnote.

MR. TRUMAN. But it's in a footnote, and the number in the
text is $1 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your recommendation is to move the $8
billion from the footnote to the text?

MR. TRUMAN. That's earth-shaking, I know!

MR. GUFFEY. And change the $8 billion to $5 billion.

MR. AXILROD. We also suggest the possibility of changing the
$8 billion to $5 billion.

MR. GUFFEY. Right. That's in the text.

MR. AXILROD. It would give the Committee more flexibility in
decisionmaking.

MR. PARTEE. What is the open position now?

MR. TRUMAN. It's $3.2 billion as I remember.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make sure I am clear on this.
The substantive proposal is nothing more than moving an $8 billion
limit, which is now in a footnote, to the text.

MR. TRUMAN. Right. But the substantive proposal with
respect to your charge to the staff was not to incorporate the
informal limits into the formal documents. That may require a
positive decision, too, or a negative decision.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the total position, which is in
the document in the footnote, is $8 billion. That in some sense
governs the total open position, and we would put that up in the text.

-7-



3/31/81

The informal limits on the individual currencies we would not put in
the directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you rewrote them slightly, didn't you?

MR. TRUMAN. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where do the informal limits appear?

MR. TRUMAN. They don't appear anywhere; that's the issue
that we addressed. They appear in the notes or the records of the
Desk [and the Secretariat], which I think is the proper way to do it,
after having listened to the informed discussion of the Committee.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, how were they appearing in the notes
that is different from the way they now appear?

MR. TRUMAN. That is listed on page 3 of the memorandum. We
would suggest that the informal limit, as the Desk has it, be set at
$4-1/4 billion, with sublimits of up to $2-3/4 billion in marks, $1
billion in yen, and $1/2 billion in all other currencies. That would
just mean that subsequently, if the Committee in its discussion said
that it wanted to raise those informal limits, any time it raised one
of the three components that would automatically raise the total. It
would save some time; it's a somewhat simplified procedure.

MR. WALLICH. Items 1-A and 1-B are the alternatives; we can
do B while also doing A.

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, they are part of the basic recommendation.

MR. WALLICH. But 1-C would be a different procedure?

MR. TRUMAN. It is an alternative, which we do not recommend.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, I guess I understand this. Let
me repeat it. We have two proposals, basically. One is to move the
$8 billion from a footnote to the formal text. Is this in the
directive?

MR. TRUMAN. The authorization.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Authorization. The other is not to put an
individual currency limit in the formal authorization. We are now
confirming an informal understanding, stated a somewhat different way,
that says the total limit on the balances is $4-1/4 billion, the same
as the present limitation, of which the limits are $2750 million in
marks, $1 billion in yen, and $500 million in all other currencies.
That is the same as we have now, expressed a little more felicitously.

MR. TRUMAN. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What gets published: the $8 billion?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion is the only thing that is
published.



3/31/81

MR. TRUMAN. That is the number that is now published. Both
the $1 billion in the text and the $8 billion in the footnote are now
published. So, nothing is changed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it is now, the authorization is
for $1 billion and then there is a footnote that says, in effect,
except the Committee decided on $8 billion. So the $8 billion is
moved up to replace the $1 billion. Let's just focus on that one for
a moment. Is that acceptable?

MS. TEETERS. Is the $8 billion regardless of signs?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

MS. TEETERS. And the $4-1/4 billion is a plus.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $8 billion would mean that if we were
long $4 billion in one currency and short $4 billion in another, the
net is not zero but $8 billion. It covers our overall exposure. Is
that acceptable?

MR. GUFFEY. There is another part of the recommendation, and
that is that rather than put $8 billion in the text, we would put $5
billion; it retains the language that's now in the text with respect
to the Committee's authorization.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put any number in there we want to.
We got to $8 billion during the '78 operation, I guess.

MR. TRUMAN. It was raised, I think, by $2 or $3 billion in
December of 1978 and that limit has been there ever since. We never
got there, but we came close.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, to go at it another way, if I understand
the recommendation, it would be to go to $8 billion in the text and
delete the language that would permit the Committee to increase it.

MR. TRUMAN. No.

MR. AXILROD. We didn't assume the Committee needed
permission.

MR. TRUMAN. The reason for the proposal that that language
be deleted is that when this document was last thoroughly overhauled,
there was an express authorization with respect to the old Swiss franc
debt. And the express authorization said to treat that debt, which
was part of the open position, outside of the $1 billion limit. That
was the reason for the language that we now suggest be deleted. It's
not that we're trying to reduce your flexibility.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure how that language got in
there, but it seems clear that the Committee can always change this to
put in whatever number it wants to put in, either larger or smaller.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Mr. Chairman, it's a good suggestion.
It's strictly procedural. [But] I think it would be a mistake to
change the number; the markets might read something into that if we
were to change the number. I see no reason at this point,



3/31/81

particularly with all the discussion in the markets about a policy
shift in the Treasury in regard to intervention, for us to feed that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can make the substantive
decision, but I think we have to have a reason for making it. If we
want to reduce it, we can reduce it. But if there is a strong feeling
about not suggesting a policy change here, or explaining what we are
doing, the straightforward thing is just to do the $8 billion.

MR. PARTEE. But certainly we need to have some reason. I
don't know why we have $8 billion, but I don't know why we would
change it to $5 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we had $8 billion because
that was the guess of what might have been necessary at the time of
the '78 operation.

MR. PARTEE. I think it was a building up of several things.

MR. TRUMAN. Well, in December of '78, [our open position]
went up to $5-1/2 billion at the end of year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had increased swap lines at that point
and so forth.

MR. TRUMAN. I think it had previously been $5 billion and it
was raised by enough so that, during that environment, the Committee
wouldn't have to adjust it every three weeks.

MR. PARTEE. So it is whatever is needed to keep from
impeding any operations we'd like to undertake. It's a great limit.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The more meaningful limits are the
informal limits.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $8 billion acceptable?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will have $8
billion. Now, this other issue, if I understand it correctly, is the
way it is recorded in the notes. Again, there's no substantive
difference. It would be recorded in the notes slightly differently,
in a simpler way, which is what gave rise to the discussion. There is
a straightforward limitation on how much in total we can have and how
much of that total can be in marks, how much in yen, how much in
everything else. And it's exactly where we are now in substance.

MR. CORRIGAN. Is it exactly where we are now? I thought
that under the way we operate now, if we changed one component, we
didn't necessarily change the total. Whereas this contemplates that
if you went to--

MR. TRUMAN. Well, in effect, yes, we've been doing it that
way. That was the source of the confusion during the discussion in
December, though, and that's why we suggested that we change it this
way. The only thing that has been changed recently has been the mark
total. But since we had an overall limit, every time $1/2 billion or

-10-



3/31/81

$1 billion was added to the mark total we had to push everything else
up, especially since we were holding, and still are holding, about
$250 million worth of all the other currencies.

MR. CORRIGAN. But the presumption here would be that there's
an automatic dollar-for-dollar lifting in the total.

MR. WALLICH. Well, these currencies aren't substitutes
necessarily. So, if there's a reason for raising one, that's no
reason to reduce another if that were to be the consequence of having
a ceiling.

MR. AXILROD. But it's conceivable, if the Committee wished,
that it could reduce the yen limit and raise the [mark or the other
currencies limit]. It's not impossible to substitute among those
things.

MR. TRUMAN. Right, but it would be separately--

MR. CORRIGAN. But then the understanding would be, barring
an express decision that way--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much do we have now?

MR. TRUMAN. As Gretchen said, in marks we have $2566
million, or almost $2.6 billion. We have $399 million of yen, and
$260 million of everything else.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, if we approve this, it implies a
leeway of approximately $200 million in marks, $600 million in yen,
and $240 million in everything else.

MR. SCHULTZ. I thought we had more Swiss francs than that.

MR. TRUMAN. No, it's $257 million or something like that of
Swiss francs and the rest of it is--

MR. SCHULTZ. Where did I get the idea that we had more than
that because we have a Carter bond?

MR. TRUMAN. We, the United States, do; we, the System, do
not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's the Treasury.

MR. SCHULTZ. Oh, I see; we've already sent it over. We
bought it for them. The total position we have in Swiss francs is a
little over $1 billion, is that right?

MR. TRUMAN. The United States has $1.3 billion. It's $1.4
billion, using the historical rates, of which we have $250 million.

MR. SCHULTZ. Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The substance of what we're saying here is
that these numbers are not changed from what we now have, but there
isn't much room for increasing mark balances and there isn't much room

-11-



3/31/81

for increasing other balances. There is a fair amount of room for
increasing yen balances, but we have no intention of doing so.

MR. BLACK. But we're going to say that a lot better than we
were saying it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says it more straightforwardly. That's
right. But there isn't a lot of room here, actually, in these current
informal limits for increasing [our holdings of] anything.

MR. TRUMAN. Actually, my figures are absent the $74.4
million we sold yesterday. My figures don't include that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we have a little more room for
increasing marks, having sold some yesterday. Is that acceptable?

MR. PARTEE. Sounds fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there anything else? [Next] we have
paragraph 3 and paragraph 5. This is an attempt to have more
straightforward wording again, isn't it?

MR. TRUMAN. Right, in paragraph 3. Paragraph 5 deals with
the fact that we now have a broader range of things that we invest in.
Paragraph 6 reflects the fact that we no longer send out a daily call
to the members of the Subcommittee. To reduce paperwork some time ago
we combined that with the 2:30 call that goes to all members of the
Committee along with the Manager's regular reports.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think any of these changes is
substantive. One purpose of the change in paragraph 5, at least in
part, is that we now have authority to invest in foreign government
securities and, in effect, we are limiting that and making clear that
these [investments] are to be in liquid form. Are these all
acceptable?

MS. TEETERS. Wasn't there some question as to whether we
were going to put the informal limits directly in the directive?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume that we made the decision
not to, in accepting the other alternative and these language changes.
Hearing no dissent, I guess we need a motion. This is the formal
[authorization], isn't it?

SPEAKER(?). Yes. So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will adopt those.
One other issue in this area is warehousing. Mr. Truman, are you
going to comment on warehousing?

MR. TRUMAN. We have had this agreement, the current one,
formally since January 1977. The limit on warehousing foreign
currencies for the Treasury and the Exchange Stabilization Fund is now
$5 billion. The total that is now in use under that arrangement is a
little over $4 billion. The Treasury would just as soon renew the
authority. They may well be using some of those balances over the

-12-



3/31/81

course of the next year to repay some of the Carter notes that come
due over the period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are recommending no change here?

MR. TRUMAN. No change.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This [issue] comes up every year as to
whether we want to continue it. There's no change [proposed]. It is
being used to the extent of over $4 billion against the $5 billion
authorization. Do we have a motion on this one?

SPEAKER(?). You have a motion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without dissent, we will approve the
renewal of the warehousing [agreement]. Mr. Altmann tells me we have
to approve one other thing here.

MR. ALTMANN. We need approval of the foreign currency
directive and the procedural instructions with respect to foreign
currency operations in which no changes have been proposed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are the basic authority for the
foreign currency operations. There are no changes. They are just
reviewed every year and accepted or not accepted. Obviously, changes
can be proposed, but there are no changes being proposed by the staff.
This is the basic [directive] for foreign currency operations and the
accompanying procedural [instructions]. They have been in effect [in
their present form] for three or four years.

MR. WALLICH. It is noteworthy that any change in
intervention policy can be accommodated within this document, no
matter what we do.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's very appropriate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will renew the
foreign currency directive and the procedural instructions. That
concludes all the foreign-related matters. We did ratify the
transactions, did we not? I think we are finished with the foreign
side. We will go now to Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Comments? Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Peter, going back to your comments on the path
for nonborrowed reserves: Did I understand you to say that you
considered the reduction in the path that was agreed to roughly at the
time of that telephone conference call to be a temporary reduction and
that in the most recent 4-week period you are back to the previous
path?

MR. STERNLIGHT. That is correct, yes.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I hadn't understood that that was going to
happen. I can see how that would be an interpretation, but this is

-13-



3/31/81

the first I have heard of that--that it was a temporary reduction and
then the path was restored.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that's quite right.

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's why I asked the question. Peter
seems to think so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We set the path.

MR. STERNLIGHT. That's my understanding of what was done.

MR. AXILROD. That is exactly what was done after the
February 24th call. The borrowing level in the last 2 weeks of the
first 4 weeks of the 8-week interval--I don't know what it was in the
3rd week, but it was very low in the 4th week--would have been zero.
It was understood after that call that half the adjustment would be
made to keep it at around $1 billion. And in the next 4-week period,
we reverted to the original path, which itself implied borrowing of
around $1 or $1.1 billion at that time. I thought that was made clear
at the time.

MR. PARTEE. It just shows how tricky this whole thing is; I
hadn't understood it. I think we have to be very clear in terms of
what the understandings are. Nothing happened adversely as a result
of it, but I thought we had made a downward adjustment in the path
that [would not be changed] until the Committee reconsidered the
matter.

MR. AXILROD. Well, if we had made the same adjustment
downward in the path that we made in that two weeks, it would have
implied borrowing rising to a considerable amount.

MR. PARTEE. Well, this has explained something to me. In
fact, I just asked yesterday: Why is the market acting the way it is?
Well, it's acting that way because we have reverted to the [original]
path. I had never understood that. I might have expected the rapid
growth in money of the last month or so to have brought some tightness
in the market and it hasn't brought very much. Now I know why.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, because in effect the Committee is still
under its path that it adopted--

MR. PARTEE. At the last meeting?

MR. AXILROD. --at the last meeting.

MR. PARTEE. But not as amended in the telephone conference.

MR. AXILROD. Our interpretation of that amendment was that
it applied to the first 4-week interval. The second 4-week interval
was leading to borrowing that seemed likely to bring the federal funds
rate back up to the 15 percent lower limit, so that no further
adjustments were necessary one way or the other to bring to the
Committee's attention.

MR. CORRIGAN. What did borrowings average in that second
four weeks?

-14-



3/31/81

MR. AXILROD. They were a little under $900 million, I think.

MR. STERNLIGHT. About $900 million. This week they are
running higher, and the average may move up some this week. My
recollection of that would be that there was flexibility, [based on]
the Committee's decision, to have made some further adjustment if it
had proved necessary to keep--

MR. PARTEE. On the down side. Yes, I agree with that.

MR. STERNLIGHT. -- the funds rate from tending to slide off
below 15 percent; but as it was shading up, it didn't [prove
necessary].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am a bit confused at this point. Maybe
the way to state it is this: That I didn't realize you were back on
the original nonborrowed reserve path. Well, that's right. My
understanding is the same as yours, but I suppose you could say that
this may be the source of the confusion. With total reserves running
low, you might have raised that path and you didn't.

MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Total reserves have been
running well below.

MR. PARTEE. That's an additional or separate conceptual
adjustment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [An adjustment] was not made which might
in other circumstances have been made. Maybe that's it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though we didn't explicitly
discuss a return to path in the second 4-week period, it was
formulated the way Peter suggested, and Steve also, that the
flexibility was for as long as necessary and that when it was no
longer necessary in terms of the fed funds rate, then it just
automatically made--

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, but I'm quite sure
that it was pointed out to the Committee at the time that one of the
reasons for making the adjustment to keep borrowing at $1 billion was
that looking ahead to the next 4-week interval, it was apparent at the
time of the February 24 call that, unless something weird happened,
borrowing--given an adherence to the nonborrowed path--would move up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That was certainly a factor.

MR. PARTEE. But it didn't move up much. Is that right?

MR. AXILROD. Well, it moved up. I don't know what the
average is going to end up being; it will be something like $900
million or maybe a little higher.

MR. STERNLIGHT. We were looking at about $900 million last
Friday as the average borrowing in the second 4-week period.

MR. WALLICH. Essentially, we seem to have targeted on the
funds rate.

-15-



3/31/81

MR. AXILROD. I'd say we have targeted on the nonborrowed
path; we had to in the last four weeks. We adjusted the nonborrowed
path for the first four weeks downward in order to keep borrowing in
line with how it appeared to be evolving. That's how I would put it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me be clear about the funds rate.
This is my interpretation, obviously. We made a decision on the 24th
or whenever it was which, in my judgment, overrode the funds rate. We
said: This is the way we are going to set the borrowing path. Now,
there may be some fogginess, and I can't put myself back there. Once
having set the borrowing path there, the federal funds rate came out
where it came out regardless of where the limits were on the federal
funds rate. The path was reset. The only question is: reset from
what to what? It was reset, based upon some judgment of what the
aggregates in total were doing combined, I'm sure, with some feeling
in the mind of Committee members--and each one probably had a slightly
different feeling--as to the implications for interest rates. But,
once having made that decision, the federal funds rate was no longer
relevant. We had our consultation when it moved below 15 percent.
The result of the consultation was to set a certain nonborrowed
reserve path, and the federal funds rate then fell out regardless of
the 15 to 20 percent limit. And, in fact, it ran below 15 percent
almost all that time. That was of no concern to me because in my mind
the Committee had made a judgment that it would be overridden.

MR. WALLICH. What I meant to say is that we targeted on
borrowed reserves, which is very similar to targeting on the funds
rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We always target on borrowed reserves.

MR. WALLICH. Well, that's why we always target on the funds
rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's true. I don't agree
with that at all.

MR. AXILROD. The reason borrowing dropped below the $1
billion we thought it would be at the time of the February 24th
[telephone] meeting and [the assumption of] $1 billion we set for the
next two weeks was that in the next four weeks required reserves
turned out to be weaker than was thought at that time. So, borrowing
dropped and the funds rate dropped. If required reserves had been
what we expected at the time of the conference call, borrowing would
have stayed at about $1 billion. In the event, borrowing has come
back up in the last couple of weeks.

MR. WALLICH. We start by [making a borrowing assumption] in
this way; subsequently [the actual level of borrowing and thus] the
funds rate [are] free to move. To make the place for that--

MR. AXILROD. I'm trying to say we're adhering to the
nonborrowed path and borrowing is fluctuating.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I'd like to address this question to Peter or to
Steve. As one whose brain is not as facile as many of yours, when I

-16-



3/31/81

sense this confusion among so many of you, would there be an easier or
simpler way of conducting this to be more effective and less complex?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Maybe I didn't report on it clearly enough.
I don't see a simpler way of accomplishing the Committee's objectives.

MR. ROOS. A total reserves operation wouldn't help?

MR. PARTEE. No, because still the question would be whether
we were reducing it temporarily or reducing it for the whole period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The confusion here arises, in my mind
anyway, [in that] I had kind of forgotten what the implicit path was
for the next 4-week period. We certainly lowered the nonborrowed
reserve path for whatever period of time was left in the then current
period being used for operational purposes. That's clear. It was
done against the background of a high M2 figure and the relatively low
M1 figure at the time, and whatever judgments various members of the
Committee had in their minds as to what was going on in the money
markets. I did not remember that the new path was exactly the same as
the old path. That may be true. In any event, we forewent what could
have been a possible increase in that path when [borrowing was]
running low. I think that was implicit in the decision. And I
repeat: Once having made that decision, it was my conclusion or my
interpretation of that decision that the federal funds rate limit was
no longer binding. It's never binding in the way we formally set
forth the directive, but we had an inconsistency, we had a
consultation, and we reset the reserve path. Whatever happened to the
federal funds from then on happened to the federal funds rate in the
light of that path, barring any further consultation, which we did not
have.

MR. BOEHNE. Maybe we ought to have more confusion, because I
think things turned out pretty well over the last six weeks! It seems
to me that we did follow the spirit of the new procedure without being
mechanical. There was some judgment involved, and interest rates
dropped; there was an adjustment to demand factors, but we avoided a
free fall in interest rates, it seems to me. This is about the way I
think we would have wanted things to come out, if we could have
[planned it].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't disagree with that. We made the
judgment in the reserve path. I think what is different and what will
appear a little different to the market when this decision is
published is that previously when we ran into the federal funds
constraint, we said something about the federal funds constraint per
se. This time we didn't say it openly; we said it implicitly, in my
judgment. And the implicit judgment was reflected in the fact that
for at least two weeks or maybe three weeks--I don't remember exactly
-- the rate was clearly below the 15 percent limit.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, one week it was 13-1/2 percent on
average. Another week it was just a hair below [15 percent].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just a little below. So, one week it was
way down and in only one other week was it below.

-17-



3/31/81

MR. ROOS. You mentioned the events of the period, draining
reserves because of the--

MR. STERNLIGHT. Just before that February 24 telephone
discussion, President Roos, when the funds rate was flirting with the
lower bound--it was tending to drop down to 15 percent or lower--there
was one day when our projection suggested that maybe we should be
draining a little, but because the funds rate was dropping below 15
percent we drained a fairly sizable amount, more than we would have
done just on the reserve numbers alone. I think that was a Friday;
the following Monday, when the projection showed no need to drain,
funds ran below 15 percent and we did drain that day. I'd say there
were those two occasions when we were guided by the funds rate.

MR. ROOS. That was a time when we were concerned about
reserves growing too slowly, right?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, reserves had been growing slowly but,
also, the Committee had not held its telephone consultation. After
that, as the Chairman said, the funds rate did not constrain us and it
dropped down a bit.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. At this point, there is no floor to
the fed funds rate. And it seems to me that in the future, if we
continue with this operation, every time there's a telephone
consultation and a decision is made to change the nonborrowed reserve
path--ignoring the floor or ceiling as the case may be--then for the
rest of the intermeeting period we are operating without a floor or
without a ceiling.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could arrive at a different decision.
I think that was the decision we arrived at [in this case].

MR. PARTEE. We could do both, I think: reset our path and
reset a floor or a ceiling. We just didn't want to reduce that floor,
that's all.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I was a little confused
immediately after the meeting until I talked with Paul a couple days
later because during the consultation Paul had said--and everybody
went along--that he wouldn't be particularly disturbed if the funds
rate went as low as, say, even 14 percent and then there might or
might not be a need for another consultation. And yet we were
required to add reserves when it was down to about 13-1/2 or 13-7/8
percent. So, I was thinking that maybe we had a kind of rough floor
set around 14 percent. But then I realized, after talking to him,
that the way he was interpreting this was that we basically didn't
have a floor.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me say that if I had thought the funds
rate was declining way down and was going to stay down, obviously, we
could have had another consultation. But I didn't feel that was
necessary in the--

MR. PARTEE. You thought it was very temporary.

MR. SCHULTZ. It's also important to clarify that there was
nothing mechanical here. Just because the funds rate dropped below 15

-18-



3/31/81

percent didn't mean that automatically the Desk was going to drain
reserves. They look at the projections, both the Board and New York
projections, and they look at the funds rate as an indication of what
the conditions are in the market. And if the rate falls below 15
percent, then the market is saying that things are easier than the
projections would seem to suggest. So, it's important that maybe
there was the sense that 15 percent was regarded as an absolute floor
by the Desk and the minute it went below that, then an automatic
response would be triggered. That is not the case. That's not the
way the fed funds rate is being used at this point in time. It is a
consultation point; it is not a mechanical thing on which we target.

MR. WALLICH. We also now use the term "taken over a period
of time," which indicates that there is that flexibility you speak of.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I was obviously one who was thoroughly
confused in this second four-week period. Is it not true, despite all
of this, none of which I disagree with, that had we not adjusted the
nonborrowed path back to where it was the probabilities are that the
funds rate would have been down over that three-week period, anyway--
just as a behavioral thing.

MR. STERNLIGHT. You're talking about the second four weeks?

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes. Had we not readjusted the path back--

MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't readjust it back because we had
never really adjusted that second four-week part of it.

MR. AXILROD. I'm not sure what would have happened if the
Committee hadn't met on February 24th and said it was all right to
lower the nonborrowed path for the last two weeks of the first four-
week period.

MR. CORRIGAN. Okay.

MR. AXILROD. The funds rate would have dropped to, say, 2 or
3 percent in that two-week period.

MR. CORRIGAN. That I have no problem with.

MR. AXILROD. And then looking at the projections of deposits
and required reserves, our numbers would have suggested that adhering
to the nonborrowed path going into the next four-week period would
have brought the funds rate back up to 13 or 14 percent at that time,
because borrowing at the time of that February 24th meeting was
projected at $937 million precisely. So, if the adjustment hadn't
been made and we had just followed the nonborrowed path constructed
for the first four weeks [in the] second four weeks, funds would have
dropped to around 2 percent and then moved back up to on the order of
14 percent. What the Committee's action effectively did was to stop
that drop down to around 2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the Committee's action did two
things. I'd just forgotten all the details here. It did what you
just said and it forestalled what might have been a judgmental

-19-



3/31/81

increase in nonborrowed reserves to take account of the shortfall in
total reserves.

MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. Well, I was assuming that all through
that period normal procedures would have meant raising nonborrowed
reserves even further. And, of course, I would just assume that that
was forestalled by the Committee's action.

MR. CORRIGAN. Let me ask my question differently. For that
2-week period at the end of the first four weeks, I understand
perfectly what was done and why it was done. I, too, have been under
the assumption, obviously erroneous, that the path that you
established for the last two weeks of the first 4-week period was the
same one you were going to stay on for the second four weeks as a
whole. My question is: Had that been done, would we still have seen
in that roughly 3-week period the funds rate below the original 15
percent floor?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it might have been to a lesser
degree. I can't say for sure exactly where it would have been.

MR. PARTEE. We would have had $200 million more borrowing, I
guess, throughout that second four weeks than we in fact had.

MR. STERNLIGHT. About $160 million [more] of borrowing.

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm sorry. I'm not misunderstanding your
question, Jerry, [but] I can't put the question in that framework.
The way my mind works on this, there's something I'm missing on that.
That path in the last two weeks was simply to keep borrowing at $1.1
billion for a two-week period.

MR. CORRIGAN. I thought it was a new path for six weeks.

MR. AXILROD. Oh, no. I'm sorry, there must have been
something lacking in our communication with the Committee at that
time, then. No, that was not--

MR. CORRIGAN. That's all my question is. I thought it was
for six weeks. And my question is: Had it been for six weeks as a
whole, would we have had more borrowing and presumably a somewhat
higher funds rate? And Governor Partee's and Peter's answer are the
same.

MR. AXILROD. The question would have arisen as we looked at
it, going into the next four-week period. Holding the path that we
had originally constructed after the Committee meeting, if it looked
as if borrowing was going to have to be very low again, then the
policy decision for the Committee would have arisen.

MR. CORRIGAN. I think we're saying the same thing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, I just want to go on record to say that I
didn't understand either, and that may not be unusual. I understood
the same thing that Jerry Corrigan just explained. When we dropped
the nonborrowed path, I thought it was for the remaining weeks in the

-20-



3/31/81

period before the next FOMC meeting, which would have been five or six
weeks.

MR. AXILROD. It would have been six at that time.

MR. GUFFEY. Further, there was a misunderstanding on my part
that when we took the action that the federal funds lower bound was no
longer a constraint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

MR. GUFFEY. I have no recollection of any discussion, either
inferred or otherwise, indicating that to be true other than, I
believe, Mr. Chairman, you stated--and I may have asked on the
telephone what you meant by reaching the lower end--that the federal
funds rate would be something below 15 percent. I asked what area you
were speaking of and you would not be pinned down, as I recall. But
it was also fairly clear to me at that time, apparently erroneously,
that as we moved into the remaining weeks of the period the 15 percent
would still be a constraint or a consultation would have taken place.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is an interpretation that ought
to be cleared up because my interpretation, as I stated it, was that
the directive literally says that we will consult if these things are
inconsistent. We consulted. And my assumption was that the decision
was made and we recognized that we were flirting with 15 percent and
it might go below. I think that much was explicit. And, therefore,
the new reserve path was controlling. Now, that does not say as an
exercise of judgment that if the rate had really gone down, we would
not have had another consultation. We would have.

MR. MORRIS. I think I'm right, Steve, in saying that the
Committee actually got a lower nonborrowed path in the second 4-week
period because, in the absence of the [telephone] meeting, you would
have been required to raise the nonborrowed path.

MR. AXILROD. Oh, absolutely. Sure, we would have been
required to raise it the first four weeks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably the source of the
confusion: What you would have done in the absence of that
[consultation]. I had forgotten, but technically it seems to be the
case that the path was set just where it would have been set
tentatively four weeks earlier. But the issue just ordinarily arises
as a matter of discretion. If total reserves are running [off]
enough, we raise it. We didn't do that.

MR. AXILROD. We didn't do that in either the first four or
the second four weeks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope this has clarified things a bit.

MR. AXILROD. I hope it's clear. I tried to explain in the
Bluebook that the sharp drop in nonborrowed reserves in February, when
total reserves also declined about the same amount, reflected the
adjustment made in lowering the path below where it had originally
been set. And the rise then in March kind of offsets that, because we

-21-



3/31/81

lowered it and kept the March levels. So, we get a bigger increase in
March. The two months together are about right, so to speak.

MR. PARTEE. Well, that's just what you said yesterday when I
asked precisely the same question, but we didn't focus on it this way.
So I was still not communicating at that time.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to ratify the transactions.

SPEAKER(?). So move.

SPEAKER(?). Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we shall ratify them.
If we could take a moment, just in logical order, we have the
authorization for domestic open market operations to review. This,
again, is a routine item for the [annual organization] meeting. There
is no change proposed. It's the basic authorization for domestic
operations.

SPEAKER(?). Move it.

SPEAKER(?). Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion? Without objection, we
shall approve it. Maybe we should just slip in this lending issue,
too, while you have the table, Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't have anything to add to the short
memo that went around on that. We believe that the lending operation
to avert delivery failures remains a useful item in the good
functioning of the government securities market and, in that sense, is
reasonably necessary to its smooth operation and, thus, an aid to the
conduct of open market operations. And it's a modest money maker for
us. It much more than covers its cost of operation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This one seems to be a little less routine
than the others. We do have to justify this in terms of promoting the
ends of open market operations, I guess, and that is a matter of
judgment. Mr. Sternlight has so indicated. I'm not sure that this is
a business that we should be in, as a matter of routine; it really
should have that justification. But we have the authorization and
we've done this for how many years now?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh, 6 or 8 years.

MR. MORRIS. Well, if we're going to continue to have $50 to
$60 billion deficits, it's going to be an essential tool.

MR. PARTEE. There would be a greater problem if we didn't
have a deficit. We wouldn't have so many securities available to
deliver them.

MR. WALLICH. And eventually own them all!

-22-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think the markets should use
this as too much of a crutch. There is an effort--we charge a penalty
rate on this stuff compared to what the market charges, don't we?

MR. STERNLIGHT. That's right, yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is at least one indication of [our
objective of] discouraging it and not using it excessively. Do we
have a motion on this one?

MR. CORRIGAN. Peter, on the first page of your memorandum,
there is a reference to the volume of trading and that it may have put
strains on your automatic clearing mechanism in government securities.
Are you talking about our system or are you talking about the Street
systems there?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I was not referring to the System's
open market operations but to the volume of traffic through the
System's clearing mechanism.

MR. CORRIGAN. No. The clearing mechanism through the Fed?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. The dealers, then, have never set up any kind
of interface of their own with our system to move a lot of stuff out
of ours.

MR. STERNLIGHT. No, but in a--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I need a second.

SPEAKER(?). Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve this.
I think that is all the authorizations and directives and so forth
that have to be approved. So, we can go to the substance of our
discussion. Mr. Kichline.

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

[Coffee break]

[MR. AXILROD. Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will just make one preliminary comment
myself: As we focus on these numbers, let us recognize that we are
not [skillful] enough to hit any of them. And we are engaged in an
exercise [of assessing] which way the risks go in substantial part,
following a period when velocity has been way off from expectations or
interest rates have been way off from expectations, however you want
to state it. In fact, they have both been off from expectations. I
suspect that when we sat here the last time we were all somewhat
[expecting], in setting the reserve path, that interest rates were
going to go up with any of the reserve paths. Instead, they came down
by quite a few percentage points, which cast a quite different light
on things as the period progressed. There is nothing we can do to



3/31/81

eliminate those uncertainties. I just think we ought to be aware of
them. Who would like to comment? Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a comment and
ask Steve some questions. These figures on adjusted M-1B, of course,
are going to be the great guessing game of 1981. There has been a lot
of solid analytical work done at the Boston Bank and by the Board
staff on what happened in earlier periods when NOWs were introduced
and so forth. We have some survey data already. We intend to do some
more surveys. Yet I, for one, Steve, end up with a feeling of a
little skepticism about how much we solidly know. I'm told by my
staff, whom I have had looking into this, that if we took at face
value the survey data that came in from the banks and the S&Ls for
January and February and assumed that about the same results prevailed
in March that prevailed in February, we'd end up with something like a
weighted average for banks and S&Ls together of 82 percent of the
source of NOWs being demand deposits and the balance being non-
transaction accounts. That is in a bit of contrast with the best
judgment of the Board staff. It came out in the Greenbook, for
example, that in January 80 percent of the NOWs came out of demand,
and the figure for February and March was 75 percent. Using the
figure that we came up with of an 82 percent weighted average as a
rough estimate for the first three months of the year--and I don't say
that I have complete certainty on that either--rather than the [Board
staff] figures I just cited, we would come up with a 5.2 percent
annual rate of gain, seasonally adjusted, for M-1B from December to
March, versus your figure of 3.2 percent. In other words, it would be
a full 2 percentage point difference and the level of M-1B would be $2
billion higher.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's from January to March or December
to March?

MR. BALLES. December to March. And we would, in fact, be
fairly close to the midpoint [of our target]. It's just a word of
caution that, from my standpoint at least, I would feel a little safer
if this Committee for its own deliberations had in mind a range of
possible outcomes rather than a pinpoint figure, because at least at
this point in time, I don't feel we have enough information to have a
solid figure that's measurable to the extent we do for a lot of
economic statistics and so forth. Having expressed my misgivings, I
am turning to you, Steve, to see if you can reassure me or tell me
that things are better.

MR. AXILROD. Since I don't know the method of calculation
used by your staff, I certainly can't do much reassuring. The
percentages we took were based on the surveys from banks. We asked
what percent came from demand deposits and what came from other
accounts. We got similar percentages out of the Michigan survey of
consumer attitudes. For the S&Ls we took the percentages that the
Home Loan Bank people told us came out of their own accounts versus
what came from other institutions. The amount that came from other
institutions we divided up in the same way as on the banks' reports
and we rounded a little. We came to 80 percent for the first month
and then 75 percent for the next two months. I'm not sure of the
exact number, but I think it probably came out at something like 76 or
77 percent. Probably the best thing to do is for us simply to send to
the Committee a note on the exact calculation method we used, and then

-24-



3/31/81

it would be verifiable against how other people might like to view
exactly the same data.

MR. BALLES. Maybe I could pinpoint this a bit more. Is my
understanding correct--I got this from somewhere--that you
judgmentally shaded down somewhat the survey data that came in from
the institutions, at least for January if not February, in terms of
the percent they reported as coming from demand deposits?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm not certain of that, President
Balles. I know that we tried to make allowance for the fact that the
sample we used was wrong--well, not wrong, but it had more large banks
relative to small banks than there are in the nation as a whole. So,
therefore, we tried to weight it so that we gave more weight to small
banks [in the survey], in line with their role in the nation as a
whole. We didn't simply average it, so to speak, which would have
resulted in a higher number because the sample had fewer small banks
relative to large banks than is true nationally. Now, that could be a
difference. I don't know whether, in fact, it is.

MR. BALLES. The only other comment I wanted to make on this,
Mr. Chairman, is that some of these fine and really well-designed
analytical studies that were done, say, with respect to the New
England experience, lead to a conclusion that probably about two-
thirds of the source of NOWs was demand deposits and the rest was from
savings and so forth. We have a feeling that that might not be
applicable to the United States as a whole in 1981. We see that a
very large number of respondents to the surveys, contrary to what I
understand was the case in New England, are permitting minimum
balances to be held in various forms of savings instruments, such as
passbook accounts, money market certificates, the 30-month small
savers certificate, etc. At least in the West, the largest banks and
the largest S&Ls, in fact, are permitting those so-called minimum
balance requirements for NOWs to be held in savings instruments, which
I understand contrasts somewhat, Frank, with what had been the
experience in New England. If that practice should prevail as we
continue to keep this under observation during the rest of the year,
it might lead to a greater proportion of NOWs coming out of demand
deposits and less out of savings. So, there is the possibility that
the present methodology could be understating the adjusted growth in
M-1B. But I think that needs some more study.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think your comments are very well
taken in the vein that there is uncertainty here, which I doubt we can
resolve completely, but we've got to keep looking at it. I think we
just have to recognize that there is a band of uncertainty. And in
that connection, we assumed in the target for the actual figures, the
equivalent target, that this would pretty quickly go down to two-
thirds, didn't we?

MR. AXILROD. Well, but we changed that assumption.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have? We haven't published a new one.
The question is when we should indicate that there is a new target
equivalent for the actual figures, if we change that assumption.

-25-



3/31/81

MR. AXILROD. We have postponed that two-thirds because the
latest data coming in suggest that [proportion from demand deposits]
remains very high, and we have stayed with the same [assumption].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But at some point we will have to change
that other target, won't we?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right. But we haven't. For sure
we would do it around midyear. But whether we would want to do it
before then--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I might want to do it before then if
I thought it became big enough so that it was really significant.
It's the other side of saying that this adjusted figure may understate
what actually has been going on.

MR. BALLES. I can only speculate that the extraordinary
increase in velocity of M-1B, as reported based on the adjusted
figures, could not have been so big if the adjusted figures should
have been adjusted higher. We get those sorts of interactions going
on. So I, for one, just have to express some skepticism. All I'm
doing is trying to find out how solidly we know what the adjusted
results are. And, if anything, I have a hunch--and that's all it is--
that perhaps we should be addressing--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The answer, of course, is not very
solidly, which is a matter of curiosity. It may affect how people
think, if people were suspicious of this estimate we made of 75 to 80
percent, depending upon what month. If you had to guess, is it the
general feeling that that percentage sounds too low, which is what you
are suggesting, John?

MR. BALLES. Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we did a more comprehensive survey of
institutions up in the Ninth District. While it wasn't a big survey,
it was done very carefully; we did in-depth interviews with the
accounting officers and all the rest. We are finding the same thing
Mr. Balles was suggesting, including that for large numbers of these
accounts the kicker is in what they call a "hostage" account, a
savings account. And, therefore, there is no minimum balance to speak
of at all in the NOW account itself. I'll send that to you, Steve.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will never resolve this because, even
if we did it very accurately for this early period, which we can't, we
just don't know how it affects the behavior from then on. And no
banker can tell us because he doesn't know either.

MR. MORRIS. I assume the purpose of this scheme is to reduce
reserve requirements.

MR. FORD. Sure. They want to keep the money in the bank but
in the form of an account that has the lower reserve requirements.
That's why some of them, I'm told, are continuing the ATS approach,
which one would have thought would have been outmoded.

-26-



3/31/81

MR. BLACK. Well, a lot of them are not even offering NOWs
but are sticking with ATS accounts because that stays in for that very
reason.

MR. FORD. So, from the [market] I think what you are hearing
here is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The ATS account ought to work the other
way. I would think the inclination would then be just to call the
savings account an ATS account, which means it's all--or a large
portion of it--coming out of savings accounts. It's very difficult.
Well, Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. I wanted to ask one question, in the same vein as
John's about how some of the technical work was done, on this issue
that has been raised by some of the money market gurus about the
seasonal adjustment: As I understand it, for the first quarter of the
year it would not have made a lot of difference in the adjustments you
made for December through March, but looking ahead to the next quarter
of the year, there might be some problems with the big seasonal
adjustment. I would like to hear, Steve, how you factored that into
your projections and whether we are facing the possibility of any big
surprises just due to the fact that we haven't yet been able to
develop an appropriate seasonal adjustment.

MR. AXILROD. We will be putting out the revised seasonals in
May. They are delayed this year because last year was so exceptional
that we didn't feel we could run an ordinary X-11 and we were trying
to do some modeling to abstract from the credit control program, which
is a one-time event. But as a temporary ad hoc measure, we were
thinking that what we should do is to take 80 percent or 75 percent,
whatever the number is, of the other checkable deposit increase above
trend in 1981 and put it back into demand deposits when we seasonally
adjust. So we would not be adding it in unadjusted; and that's what
the market is focusing on. I asked the fellows back in January, right
after the first week was so big, to keep track of a series on that to
see what difference it made. And as you suggest, it doesn't make a
substantial amount of difference in January, February, and March. The
growth rate in January, as we do it now, was 2.9 percent; if we had
thrown the demand deposits back in, it would have been 2.0 percent.
This would be partially but not entirely offset in February; where we
have now a -2.3 percent, it would have been zero. And then in March,
it doesn't happen to make any difference. You are quite right that
when the seasonal factors get large in April, May, and June, it makes
more of a difference. On our current estimates of the distribution of
OCDs between savings and demand, it would lower the growth rate for
April, and I'm going to round, by 2-1/2 percentage points. The growth
rate adjusted "properly" would be lowered by about 2-1/2 percentage
points. In May it would be raised by 3-1/2 percentage points and for
June it would be lowered by 2-1/2 percentage points. So, they're not
quite offsetting, but that would be the relationship. We have
presented the targets as we're [making these calculations] now. If we
had presented them in these other terms, instead of 6 percent, let's
say, for April, May, and June, we would have presented under
alternative B something like 3-1/2, 9-1/2, and 3-1/2 percent. April
would have been low, May high, and June low. But we are presenting
them on something like a straight 6 percent if you take alternative B.
And as long as we measure against the target in a way consistent with

-27-



3/31/81

how the target is set, I don't think we have troubles. We don't
intend to measure it in an inconsistent way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me what you are saying, if I
understand you correctly, is that one can pick any one of these
alternatives and seasonally adjust it the other way, which seems more
sensible to me, and the growth would be bigger.

MR. AXILROD. The growth would be--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Bigger or smaller?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth would be somewhat smaller, the
way it works out on these figures. The growth, by the way, from
January to June evens out entirely.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It would be smaller in April, bigger in
May, and smaller in June.

MR. AXILROD. The numbers I gave add up to 16-1/2 percent the
other way and to a little under 18 percent the way we are doing it
currently.

MR. MORRIS. Well, it's still smaller than the average noise
factor in it.

MR. AXILROD. Well, that's right. Also, we think the
seasonal is going to change in any [event]. And that isn't done yet.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it bothers me a little, because it
just seems conceptually that we should seasonally adjust these things.

MR. AXILROD. Oh, that's right. Given the size of the
shifts, we should. But this is very ad hoc. We don't know because we
don't know how the OCD series is going to behave once [the shifts
have] happened. This is just putting back into demand deposits what
was shifted out. But once it is shifted out, combined with some
savings deposits, it bears interest. Given that interest payments are
made, we don't know that the seasonal behavior is going to be the
same.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I know you don't know. But as a first
approximation I would think it would be more like the demand deposit
seasonal than no seasonal at all.

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think [that's true of] the shift. But
otherwise I doubt it. When interest rates fall, I don't know what is
going to happen to these accounts. Their behavior is going to be very
different, I'm convinced, than demand deposits. We might be able to
get the cyclical movement out, but it's going to be something of a
problem. But we intend in May to get this all corrected. As of the
moment, we are operating in this way. And I don't think the Committee
is being misled as long as we set the target and measure against it in
a consistent way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

-28-



3/31/81

MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Balles talked about a range of possible
outcomes. It's rather important to think along those lines because,
at this point, it's easy to parade the horribles. In spite of my
great respect for Mr. Kichline, I think his forecast is not likely to
come to pass. If you look at what he has for budget deficits--$85
billion [in 1981 and $94 billion] in 1982--and then look where he ends
up with his GNP forecast, which is for very sluggish growth, I think
the proper assumption is that we have very high interest rates during
that period. From my discussions with bankers around the country, I
just don't think the real world is going to operate that way. I get
the feeling that they're pretty concerned about the financial
condition of a lot of corporations out there, and I just don't think a
lot of companies can stand that kind of environment for that length of
time. I don't know what it's going to be like, but I doubt that it's
going to be like that forecast. Take two possibilities. One is that
this M2 growth is more meaningful and that we get tax cuts this
summer, which are going to be very expansionary. We [could] get an
enormous surge in money growth in the last half of the year and very
high interest rates, and then get socked like the devil in 1982. Or
take the other way around that we are going to have a much weaker
economy short term than now appears likely, so [money] growth is going
to be much slower. Add to the whole problem what the House Banking
Committee said--I was struck by this--which was that they could accept
the upper end of the target ranges for monetary growth for 1981
provided that budget and other fiscal policies offset the high
unemployment effects that the monetary policy is expected to produce.
That seems to me to be a scenario for absolute disaster. If they are
going to continue to look to us to hold the line, I don't think we
have a choice. We've said what our path is going to be and, if we
were to attempt to ease, it's pretty clear that everybody would think
we had let the inflationary cat out of the bag. And it seems to me
that interest rates would be even higher under those circumstances.
So, I don't think we have a choice; we have to stay on our general
path here. But the scenarios of what could possibly happen can be
pretty wild. So, it's rather crucial at this point to try to retain
what flexibility we can and to have some range of options because this
is a pretty tough period we are heading into.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure where that leaves us.
Mr. Black.

MR. SCHULTZ. Scared!

MR. BLACK. I can't answer that question, Mr. Chairman. I
had something in mind I wanted to ask and get an answer on. Bill Ford
made the main point I had, but I would add that what really concerns
us is the bulge that we ordinarily get in M-1B in April on an
unadjusted basis. If the NOW account portion is not somehow
seasonally adjusted, that bulge is going to be overstated and the
psychological effects on the market concern us. We were going to
suggest that we try some kind of ad hoc adjustment on that, Steve,
along the lines that you were playing with, just to avoid that adverse
effect. We played with it by applying the demand deposit seasonal
adjustment to that portion of the NOW accounts that we thought came
out of demand deposits and the savings deposits seasonal adjustment to
the other portion. We estimated that in April, which was the month
that concerned us, it would probably be overstated by about 3-1/2
percentage points, and that seemed to be a very bad time for that

-29-



3/31/81

figure to be appearing because we seem to be making some progress
toward our ultimate objective. We were hoping we could do something
about that, although--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we seasonally adjusted it, it would be
3-1/2 percent higher than if we didn't.

MR. BLACK. No. If we don't seasonally adjust the NOW
portion, the seasonal will pull [it up]. April has a very high
seasonal adjustment factor and if we don't apply that to the NOW
account portion, then we estimated--this may not be exactly right--

MR. PARTEE. It's a build-up for the tax payment, I guess.

MR. BLACK. --that it would be overstated by about 3-1/2
percent above what it really was in fact, as nearly as we could
estimate at all. I'm well aware that we don't have all the
information we need for any kind of rigorous seasonal adjustment, but
that one month really concerns us. It doesn't make that much
difference in what The Wall Street Journal is covering, I don't think.
But it could at that particular juncture.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I feel that we're really trapped or
tripped up by our own procedures. We built in the expectation that
we've lowered the ranges and yet we make no allowance for base drift
in our targets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say, if I may insert a comment
relevant to base drift, that I look at these targets somewhat
differently. We look at these cones, which always gives us an
impossible problem at the beginning of the year; because the cone is
so narrow at the beginning of the year, we're always outside it. If
we were to attach this cone to where we, in fact, ended up last year--
and we concede that we ended up high last year--and took the targets
from the fourth quarter and showed where we wanted to end up this
year, I think one can argue that we are now about in the middle of the
range where we should be. I am sorry that I don't have the picture
with me but we're about in the middle of that channel.

MR. PARTEE. A longer range, sort of starting off in the
beginning of '80.

MR. MORRIS. That's for M-1B, right?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. We're clearly high on M2 and M3; I'm
just talking about M-1B. In other words, stated another way, we ended
up the year high, so having a low quarter brings us back to where we
should be.

MR. WINN. That's right. That would be my point: We're in
the upper end of the old range even though we're below the range for
the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or stated another way, we didn't change
the target's slope much. If you just extended that target for last
year, we'd be at about the middle of it now.

-30-



3/31/81

MR. WINN. Well, that again is where we've tripped up. If we
start to adjust the aggregates for the transaction part of money
market funds, that is clearly one thing. It's not the total money
market funds, but we see the transfers going through on our check
clearing operations, so they are being used. Second, we have RPs and
Eurodollars and one can argue how much of that belongs in the picture.
And if we adjust the aggregates on a real M-1B or transaction type
basis, it results in a much higher figure than we're reporting. So,
not only have we got our targets out of focus but the bullets [with
which] we're trying to hit the targets all seem off to me. We really
have two major sources of confusion for which I'm afraid we're going
to get beaten over the head no matter what evolves. Add onto that a
look at the economic analysis: We have inventory certainly tight or
under control; we have consumers who certainly have behaved far
stronger than anybody thought they would, but they're continuing to do
that; we've projected construction expenditures in office buildings,
apartment houses, and hotels that really are starting to jump in a
very big way; and we have the stimulus from the deficit that's
certainly a pretty big one. And we ought to recall that we've been
projecting declines since 1979. Now, one of these times we may get
that, but we're not sure we're going to get that. So we're higher in
the range than we think we are. We're much higher if we adjust the
aggregates. And we may have a stronger economic picture than we think
we are facing. All of these factors give me pause as we start to set
our objectives for the next three months.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me start with a word
on the price outlook. I sense for the first time at least a few
straws in the wind that are consistent with some backing off on
inflationary expectations. I don't think there's much hard evidence
one can point to, but I do get a little flavor of that. It's also
true that we could get lucky in terms of the consumer price index
toward the end of this year. Now, if the staff's estimates about
mortgage rates [are right]--that they're just going to stay high--they
presumably won't be adding. And I think the outlook for food prices,
assuming we continue to get some moisture in the Midwest, is a good
deal better than it was even a few months ago.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get some rain in the last few
days?

MR. CORRIGAN. Yes, some rain is starting to come. And the
energy price outlook, I think, is also distinctly better. So, maybe
there's a little ground for optimism there. On the economy, I look
for a flattening out in the second quarter, but I think the potential
for strong upward pressures later in the year is very real. And in
line with one of Mr. Schultz's two scenarios, I think the potential
for strong financial pressures in the second half of the year and
strong pressures on money growth is very real. I noticed in Mr.
Kichline's forecast, for example, that he has the Treasury borrowing
almost $50 billion, $49.2 billion, in the fourth quarter, which is
considerably greater than even the $35 billion we had this [quarter].
So, I sense that whatever problems we may have now with controlling
money and interest rates are only going to get worse as the year goes
along, partly because the risks are that the economy is going to be
stronger rather than weaker in the second half of the year. And I

-31-



3/31/81

couple that with my sense that M-1B is giving us the wrong signals.
On this money market fund thing, for example, we did a little
exercise. It doesn't mean anything, but just as an example: If you
took the growth in money market funds over December to March and just
added in one-tenth of the growth to M-1B, that raises the growth of M-
1B for the quarter to 6.2 percent. And that, again, doesn't say
anything about this other matter that Mr. Balles was pointing to
earlier.

MR. FORD. How would you rationalize doing that?

MR. CORRIGAN. No rationalization. It's just a guess, just a
number. You just take one-tenth of the growth in the money market
funds phased in at the rate at which they actually grew and add that
into M-1B.

MR. PARTEE. But you should have taken two-tenths of the
decline in savings accounts and added that in, too. You didn't do
that.

MR. CORRIGAN. Why should I do that?

MR. PARTEE. Because savings accounts are transactions
balances also.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, but they're in M2. I don't think it
makes--

MR. PARTEE. So are money market funds.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, we can dispute that, but I think this
understatement of M-1B is very real.

MR. PARTEE. I don't know.

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, whether or not it is, I think it is. It
just adds further weight to the argument that M-1B is giving us some
false signals here. When I put it together, in terms of policy, I
would not be allergic to giving a little more weight to M2 in line
with one of the points that Steve made. Also, the whole [situation],
at least in my mind, argues in the direction of doing the best we can
now to keep well within the targets because later on I think it's only
going to get harder.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Looking at the situation that we have, the
economy is much stronger than we had expected. Once again, we've had
a recession predicted that so far hasn't materialized. As a result,
the degree of slack in the economy and the pressure on prices and
wages are less from excess capacity. The conclusion one is driven to
is that our past policies, which we thought were quite restraining,
were much less restraining. As for why that should have been, I share
the views that have been expressed around the table. M-1B is probably
misleading. People are probably treating their money market mutual
funds and other sources of liquidity as at least a factor that allows
them to use their checking accounts more actively. At the level of
holders of very large liquid assets, bear in mind that the Treasury

-32-



3/31/81

has issued an enormous amount of bills, including cash management
bills, which at least go into L if they don't go into the lower
aggregates. While these would be absorbed again as the Treasury
avoids borrowing and people use this liquidity to pay their taxes,
nevertheless, there is probably some additional liquidity, and some
residual liquidity will remain. So, if we were to look at these
broader aggregates, including all short-term assets, we'd probably see
a higher degree of expansion. Now, M2 is probably a more relevant
guide than M-1B. I don't want to bore you again with my views about
interest rates in real terms after tax and why they haven't been very
restraining.

As far as the outlook is concerned, I think there is a sense
of unrealism about the Greenbook. It would be nice if things worked
out that way with slow, stable growth. We have to bear in mind that
[the level of economic activity] is really a little higher already
than we thought it would be as a result of the strong first quarter.
But the realism of the outlook is undermined by the fact that we use
M-1B at 4-1/2 or 4-3/4 percent. I think the chances are that we will
be pushed at least to 6 percent, the upper limit. We have had base
drift raising the whole level of the aggregates over time. So, I find
it hard to believe that we'll get quite the same pressures in terms of
restraint that are seen in the [staff's] outlook. I do see that we're
going to get strong budgetary pressures. My impression is that the
risks are very much on the up side and much less on the down side.
That would encourage me now to want to accumulate such reserves of
restraint as we can. We're lucky in a way to have undershot the
[targets], at least with respect to the narrower aggregates. And I'd
husband this reserve. We'll probably be pushed off that point later
in the year. There's no reason to volunteer [to go] in that direction
now. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I would like to remind you that those deficit
numbers are not independent of the forecast. Our projected deficit
for next year is considerably above the Administration's, primarily
because of a much, much weaker forecast--a 0.5 percent rate of real
growth rather than 5 percent, and higher unemployment rates and
interest rates. I think we added back in about $18 billion for
interest payments based on our interest rate forecast rather than the
Administration's, and we're losing about $25 billion in deficit per
point of unemployment, if you compare the 6 percent with 5 percent.
So, if Henry's scenario that the risks are on the up side comes true,
the size of the deficit will be considerably below what is being
projected at the present time. As I understand this forecast, the
staff had a great deal of difficulty getting any of the GNP numbers to
work out because of the paucity of money. It is a very tight
forecast. And the interest rates that would have come out of just a
mechanical running of the model are considerably higher than what are
being shown here. So, in contrast to what Henry says, I would think
that the risks are on the other side. The consumer is running out of
steam; the automobile [sales] probably won't last. [Businesses] can
slow down investment. I don't feel strongly enough about it to say
that [the risk on] the forecast is on the down side, because I think
we have some real demand pressures which are being suppressed, namely
in housing at the present time, which with any sort of readjustment
would rise.

-33-



3/31/81

This forecast is one of the gloomiest I've ever seen. And it
certainly is gloomier than any forecast that is in the public [arena]
now, mainly because of the underlying assumptions about interest
rates. I don't particularly want [policy] to let up. On the other
hand, I don't want to screw it down any harder at this point. It
seems to me that the best way to do this is approximately alternative
B because what Fred says about other corporations [is true of the
thrifts]. We're going to have impacts on the thrifts. If we keep
interest rates up there, we'll get a lot of emergency reaction in
trying to rescue them. A very good study was done here at the Board
on the number of corporations that have had their ratings in the bond
market downgraded. It's not only surprising, it's fairly widespread.
There are going to be a lot of corporations in trouble, and I don't
see making it any worse for them. I would also point out that we have
M2 misspecified relative to where we've set the M1 measures. We have
decided to keep the M2 target where it was last year, even though the
staff's best estimate was that it would be higher. So we're trying to
get M2 into a slot that's inconsistent with M1. And if we just look
at the fact that we're over [our target] on M2, I think that is going
to lead us to actions to depress its growth and depress the M1s [more]
than ever. And we've got the money market mutual funds. We have an
interest-sensitive, very interest-sensitive, [component] in the M1
measures, and if interest rates begin to drop, we're going to be
sitting here worrying about the fact that M2 is going down, not that
it's going up--and for [a reason] that's not connected with our
targets. In terms of the alternatives, I come out for "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I have the same sense of disquiet that's
being voiced around the table, because somehow everything doesn't seem
to hang together. We really can't explain why the economy has been as
strong as it has been over the fall and winter. And not being able to
explain why it has been so strong, we don't have a very firm grasp on
what it's going to do in the period immediately to come. I think we
have to be pretty flexible and await developments. I have a sense of
trepidation that Fred's expectation is going to work out: That the
rest of the year will be stronger than we are now anticipating and
that there will be a tendency toward very rapid money growth. I hate
to talk about these neat little adjustments of what ought and what
ought not to be counted, but just in plain old M-1B terms, as velocity
turns around, I think we're going to have very fast growth to contend
with. And the tax cut will [create] some stimulus to the economy and,
therefore, a difficult situation for us to contend with as the year
goes on from the standpoint of our target ranges.

Now, I don't think interest rates are so low, as Henry does.
Looking at the Bluebook [appendix], you find that the long-term
government bond yield is 13 percent, the long-term corporate bond
yield is 14 percent, and the long-term mortgage rate is 15-1/2
percent. It seems to me that those must all be positive real interest
rates by some margin, but they are not, except in the case of
mortgages, having that much effect on behavior. That troubles me
because I think they will come to have an effect on behavior. And
when attitudes shift, then we could find a rather sharp
[deterioration] in the [economy]. So, I wouldn't urge deliberately
going about raising interest rates, but I think we ought to stick with
the course we've set. I didn't mean to offend Jerry on his money

-34-



3/31/81

market fund calculation, but the fact of the matter is that the
turnover of savings accounts is greater than the turnover of money
funds. So, if you add some portion of money funds in, you ought to
add some portion of the decline in savings accounts into the
calculation. You'll never reach an end on this because of the great
difficulty of dealing with these problems.

I come out, Mr. Chairman, somehow right where Nancy did. I
think we just ought to follow alternative B, which is somewhat of a
middle course, and have plenty of room to adjust as we go along in the
spring. I like "B" because it doesn't use up our room too rapidly.
Our previous experience, you'll recall, is always that things go along
pretty well until we get to a double-digit month--and one will be
coming before very long--and then perhaps we'll have to cope with a
very low one. I think ["B"] is the way to go. I am troubled by the
seasonal adjustment problem. If the April number has something like a
3-1/2 percent overstatement, it's not going to be good psychologically
because it will probably give us a pretty high April number and will
look bad as it develops. I don't know what to do about it, but we
ought to think about that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the other side of that coin is that
if we don't get a high April figure, we really have a much lower
number than we think we have when we're publishing it.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we might get a very high April figure.
How would you handle 15 percent for April?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, at 15 percent it's not so bad. We'd
know it's high.

MS. TEETERS. But remember last April we had an estimate at
this time of the year for a very large growth in April because of the
enlarged refund. And, in fact, it came in at -14 percent, as I
remember.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, there's tremendous volatility in that
month.

MS. TEETERS. April is just a terrible month.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have listened to all these
concerns, which seem to be pointed in one direction. But it seems to
me that the scenario could be quite different in that the second
quarter could turn out to be much weaker than the staff is projecting,
and I'm inclined to think that that will be the case. Not that it
will be a second quarter such as we had last year, where we had a
[GNP] drop at a 10 percent annual rate, but that it will be a
sufficient drop to put us in the situation of having to decide whether
we are going to follow a monetarist course and let interest rates drop
substantially or whether we're going to decide that we will do things
differently this year--maintain a relatively high level of rates in
the face of a weak economy and perhaps produce a much poorer third
quarter than we have projected as well. It seems to me that this is
just as logical a scenario as the ones that have been written so far.
The fact is that at the moment we just don't know to which of these to

-35-



3/31/81

attach the higher probability. So, therefore, the staff comes out
with zero, which I think is a commendable position if you have to come
out with a number. But I'm really concerned about facing exactly the
same problem we did last spring.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's much easier to disagree with the
staff forecast than to come up with one of your own.

MR. PARTEE. It's the statistical--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does this lead you to any particular
conclusion among these alternatives?

MR. MORRIS. I think "B" is the one that I would support.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I agree that there's a
lot of uncertainty as to how much the second quarter will weaken and
how much increased strength in the real economy there will be in the
second half of the year, I feel that there's a greater presumption of
strength in the monetary aggregates. Now, I'm not talking about
April, but we're not likely to see the same velocity of circulation,
and there are increases in defense spending and tax cuts of some kind
coming long. Therefore, it seems to me that to position ourselves as
flexibly as possible, we ought to aim for a return to the bottom end
of the range by June rather than to the midpoint. However, even
though that's alternative B, I think a $1.3 billion borrowing
assumption would be just as compatible with that as a $1.5 billion
assumption. I'd go on to suggest that to the extent opportunities
arise for a discretionary adjustment of the nonborrowed reserve path
during the intermeeting period that we bear in mind the overshooting
of M2. If that continues to overshoot in a significant way, that
should be factored in. Our analysis is that alternative B, even with
a $1.3 billion assumption, probably means a rise in the fed funds rate
of maybe a point or so from present levels. That's a very rough
guess, but we might have something close to the 15 to 17 percent
range. If you take the midpoint, it would be a marginal increase, but
I don't think it would be that significant that it would cause a lot
of reaction. And that's the best position we can be in; I think it
would be a great mistake to go either to "A" or to "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Yes, sir. I would opt for alternative C and I
would base that on the following rationale: I assume that our primary
objective is to achieve a start on reducing the rate of inflation we
have had and that there is an effect on inflation of reducing the
growth of, let's say, M-1B. We had M-1B growth last year at about a
7.3 percent rate. A reasonable reduction, if we're able to achieve
it, would be from that 7.3 percent to 6 percent growth, let's say, for
the period from February through the end of the year. If we set the
paths for growth as reflected in "C," I think we can achieve that 6
percent annual growth. I think we can do it without having an
impossibly low rate of output. We project, assuming 6 percent M-1B
growth for the year, real GNP of something in the area of 0 to 1
percent. That's obviously slow growth, but it's not negative growth.
I don't think that we can achieve a fast growth of output and still

-36-



3/31/81

have the necessary degree of monetary restraint to achieve a reduction
in inflation. Now, that 6 percent I'm referring to is on an
unadjusted basis. We assume--and maybe some would argue-- that NOW
account flows have almost ceased and that in the period ahead we can
use an unadjusted aggregate and not be in trouble inasmuch as we
believe that the big NOW account change has already occurred. So, to
make a long story short, I think the best way of achieving our targets
and the best way of bringing down M-1B growth as necessary to have a
salutary effect on reducing inflation is "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, what is the latest on NOW account
growth in the last couple of weeks? I forget. Has it come down
further or not?

MR. AXILROD. Let me get the figure. Here it is. For the
week of the 18th, it's only about $500 million and we're projecting
$600 million for the week of the 25th. Our pattern had been that big
increases occurred in the first couple of weeks and then they slowed
down in the last couple of weeks of the month. In the early part of
this month, increases had been about $2 billion. I would assume from
here on out--or early next month--that the increases might be more in
the $1 to $1-1/2 billion range and then come down again. We are at a
higher rate of growth than we expected.

MR. PARTEE. You are talking about several billion a month.

MR. MORRIS. Actually, Larry, the New England NOW account
experience would indicate that we are not going to have a complete
adjustment to NOW accounts for two years. The idea that the country
is going to adapt to this in a few months just does not jive with the
New England experience. Now, maybe the rest of the country moves a
lot faster than we do in New England, but I doubt it.

MR. SCHULTZ. The fact that we have much higher interest
rates now indicates that the adjustment would take place more rapidly.
We are seeing shorter lag times in everything.

MR. MORRIS. Well, it may be more rapidly, but to argue that
the adjustment is largely over I think is just wrong.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see. It would certainly
ease our problems if it were over fairly soon. I'm a bit confused by
what you said, [Larry]. I just want to clarify it. I'm a little
surprised that you came out for "C." It's against that background
that I ask this. My confusion is what numbers you are using. The
numbers in the table, as I understand it, are adjusted M1 figures.
So, when you talk about 7.3 percent last year, you are talking about
the unadjusted figure.

MR. ROOS. Yes, I'm talking about the unadjusted figures:
4-1/2 percent March to June M-1B on page 7 under alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but that 4-1/2 percent is adjusted.
On an unadjusted basis, that means what: 6-1/2 percent or something?

MR. AXILROD. Last year?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, right now.

-37-



3/31/81

MR. AXILROD. 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a 1-1/2 point difference now?

MR. AXILROD. That's our estimate. That's from March to
June. From February to June it's 2 percentage points different.

MR. ROOS. In other words, that would give us a 6 percent
unadjusted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if you talk about 6 percent through
the year unadjusted, this estimate may be wrong in the amount of
shifting. You may be assuming less shifting but, as we have [now]
estimated, it's at the bottom of the range for the unadjusted figure.

MR. ROOS. I think that's 6 percent from the first quarter of
1981 through the period ahead.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent from the first quarter through
the last quarter, unadjusted?

MR. ROOS. That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would give you slightly less than 6
percent for the year then, which is at the bottom of the target that
has been set. I just wanted to make sure that's what you were saying.

MR. ROOS. That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You want to come in at the bottom of the
target range for the year. I just wanted to clarify that. That
means, in terms of the adjusted target, that you would be happy to
come in at 3-1/2 percent or so.

MR. ROOS. Yes, but we have some differences with the degree
of adjustment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that I understand may be a problem.
But it's in that neighborhood, right? Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. This futility that we all encounter in trying to
forecast the economic outlook is perfectly understandable. That
reinforces my basic belief that we ought never to lose sight of
something that I think we all agree on: That we have to get these
aggregates down over the long run. If we work in that direction, then
we have an automatic stabilizer in place. And that is something we
sometimes forget, I think. If the economy does turn out to be
stronger, as it may, then that would tend to exert some kind of
braking action; and if it turns out to be weaker, which I think you
made a good case for, Frank, then we have an automatic stabilizer on
the down side. So, in choosing our short-run targets, we always ought
to bear in mind the risk involved. We have had three years in which
we haven't been able to reduce the rate of growth in the aggregates as
much as we wanted. We came in a little above target last time, so
that leads me to suggest that we ought to resolve the risk by choosing
a little lower rate than we otherwise might. And I think around 6
percent on an unadjusted basis, as Larry suggested, would be about
right between February and June.

-38-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The unadjusted basis?

MR. BLACK. Right. Unadjusted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, you're on "C" basically; I just want
to be [sure].

MR. BLACK. A little above "C" or between "B" and "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Six percent on an unadjusted basis, from
what Steve just told me, is equivalent to "C."

MR. PARTEE. March to June is shown on the next page here;
it's 6 percent.

MR. BLACK. Yes, I'm talking about February to June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you're below "C" then, if you're
talking about February [to June].

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's 7-1/2 percent on "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I just want to clarify where you are.

MR. BLACK. Let me get my [Bluebook].

MR. FORD. It's on page 8.

MR. BLACK. Page 7 is what I'm talking about.

MR. PARTEE. Well, you're talking adjusted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're adjusted.

MR. FORD. They're adjusted. The unadjusted is on page 8.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Keep these two pages in mind.

MR. FORD. Do you know what they did? What's causing the
confusion, I think, is that the staff switched what they put in
parentheses and what they don't--

MR. AXILROD. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you look at the last line on page 8, as
I understand it--. It doesn't seem right. Well, we don't look at
March to June [on a quarterly average basis].

MR. BLACK. You want to look at February to June or March to
June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. February to June or
March to June, whichever one you prefer to look at.

MR. BLACK. Yes, I thought I was in between "B" and "C"
[with] the 6 percent on the unadjusted. The unadjusted is at the top,
isn't it, and the adjusted is at the bottom? I meant 6 percent on an
unadjusted basis.



3/31/81

MR. BALLES. Vice versa, Bob.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait a minute. We are saying on an
unadjusted basis, February to June produces an adjusted figure
considerably below "C." We better all try to get this straight in our
minds. I think the confusion is because of the parentheses. The real
figures are in parentheses; the adjusted figures are not. So, if you
were saying 6 percent on the unadjusted figure, you're at only 4
percent on the adjusted figure, which is below "C."

MR. BLACK. Well, I did not mean to be below "C." I'm
confused on this. It's devilishly confusing anyway. I thought what I
was choosing was something between "B" and "C" on M-1B on chart 1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's okay. Those are the adjusted
figures.

MR. BLACK. Okay. Well, somewhere in between there, erring a
little toward "C" is really what I had in mind.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. BLACK. I [understand] this well periodically and then I
get myself confused. It's tricky business.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easy to get confused. I think we had
better be sure what we have decided before we go on. Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I don't think I can add to the confusion, and
certainly I won't try! I think a good plan, when you don't know what
to do or what is going to happen, is to take the middle ground, and it
seems to me that "B" captures that about as well as anything. So, I
would be for "B." I would like to pick up on a point that Nancy made,
however. The M2 target that we have is quite unrealistic in the sense
that it's not consistent, at least in the staff's judgment, with the
M-1B target. So, I don't think I would be maneuvering M-1B around a
good bit to hit an unrealistic M2 target, which is another way of
saying that I don't think M2 is much of a refuge just because we are
having trouble knowing what is happening to M-1B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I recognize, like Governor Wallich,
that the economy has turned out to be stronger and has remained
stronger for a longer period than one would have expected.
Nevertheless, it's hard to see where the sources of continued strength
will be. It's hard to see that the saving rate will fall much further
than where it is at the present time and, of course, the outlook for
growth in income does not leave much room for consumers to continue to
spend heavily out of income. So, I wouldn't see strength continuing
to come from the consumer sector. Again, it's hard to see that there
will be any strong surge in investment spending. So, in contrast to
some of the views that have been expressed around the table, it seems
to me that the staff forecast is certainly as good as any I have seen
and probably better than most. For lack of a better forecast, I would
base my expectations on the staff forecast.

-40-



3/31/81

In the circumstances, I think we need to preserve our
flexibility and, as has already been expressed, it probably would best
be preserved by alternative B. I believe that in the circumstances we
should give somewhat more weight to M2. Alternative B would do that
to a degree. Certainly it allows for a gradual return of M-1B to a
lower range in time. Hopefully, over the period of the year, we will
get back closer to the top of the target range. I think the risk of
alternative C is that we may force higher interest rates over time--
interest rates higher than are likely to be sustained. And we may
then find ourselves facing a rather sharp fall-off from the peak rates
that might be reached. So, I think alternative B is the one that
assures us the most flexibility, the most ability to maintain
stability, and at the same time maintains a posture of significant
restraint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
staff forecast for the economy, I don't know that there's very much to
disagree with if you can't come up with a better forecast. But since
I'm not a professional economist, I guess I can take the liberty of
suggesting that the forecast in the past has consistently undershot
the actual performance. And queuing off of that history, I would
believe that we may be looking forward in the period ahead to somewhat
stronger growth than is evidenced by the staff forecast in the
Greenbook. Having said that and then looking at what is described as
the downward shift in demand for money that has been very great in the
period just passed--and the sub-talk that we'll return to some more
normal level in the period ahead--it suggests that we are going to
have very strong money growth as we move to the second quarter and
perhaps into the third quarter. If that's correct, it seems to me
that we ought to take what we can get now, and that would suggest at
least "B" and perhaps "C." And since I can't decide between the two,
I would take something in between. The borrowing level that has been
described in the Bluebook as being consistent with alternative B, and
I believe that's $1-1/2 billion, seems a bit high to me. Let me make
the point that there has been some discussion about whether or not M2
should be taken into consideration for the period ahead. I'd like to
see it taken into consideration in a sense that it is running very
high. And at the time the staff sets the paths for the period ahead
and the borrowing level consistent with those paths, M2 should be
either explicitly in the directive or, because of the discussion
around this table, implicitly be taken into consideration and not
lowered. Thus, that suggests a bit firmer policy, or closer to "C"
than to "B." I would just come out someplace between "B" and "C,"
which is about 6 percent from February to June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What was that last comment? It's the last
sentence I need.

MR. GUFFEY. It's 6 percent if you are looking from February
to June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.

MR. GUFFEY. M-1B goes to 6 percent and M2 to 12 percent; or
if you are looking at March to June, it's about 5-1/2 and 10-1/2
percent.

-41-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, in terms of these alternatives, I
too would favor "B" for many of the same reasons that have already
been cited. But I do have one question. Perhaps I am the only one
around the table who doesn't understand this, but I wonder if you
would repeat what you believe to be the significance of the federal
funds range associated with "B." We've had an extensive discussion--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, Mr. Axilrod would have to address
that. I will give you a general answer: The federal funds range that
we cite in the directive is the trigger for consultation, and then
what it means depends upon the nature of the consultation.

MR. BALLES. My further question, Mr. Chairman, would be with
respect to the telephone conference call on February 24, when I
happened to be out of town and wasn't able to participate. It was
decided, as I remember from reading the memos, that there would be no
change in the official funds rate range at that time. But was that
also meant to imply that the Desk was free in some sense to come in
with an actual federal funds rate lower than the officially specified
range? If that is the case, is that also what is suggested with
respect to this future period? That's what I'm trying to get some
clarification on.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm just taking it literally. I'm
not talking about what numbers we put in there. The purpose of the
funds range is that if an inconsistency develops, as it says, we will
have a consultation. What happens during that consultation is an open
question. It depends upon what the results of the consultation are.

MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme point of view perhaps,
I would want to know why it wouldn't make more sense to have a federal
funds rate range centered pretty much around where we are now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, my comment is entirely independent
of where this federal funds range is set, which is something nobody
has addressed yet. You may want to address yourself to that question.

MR. AXILROD. I probably should say something. There are any
number of ways one could set this range. One is to project what
interest rate level the staff thinks is consistent with these
aggregate targets and set a range of plus or minus 2 to 3 percentage
points around that. That would again be different than taking the
current range, because we don't think the current range is
particularly consistent except for "A." We have done that in the past
under previous kinds of operating procedures. I have felt reluctant
in general to make the range substantially different, even though our
staff forecast might be substantially different in a sense, from where
the Committee had been. So, what these ranges really represent is
some skewing of the present Committee range; they are skewed to allow
for where we think the funds rate will be, but there is more room on
top because our projection is that, if anything, rates will go higher
than where it appears the rate will start off and not that they will
go lower. So, they're in some sense judgmental in that respect,
trying to distend the existing range to make allowance for how we
think the funds rate comes out of the analysis.

-42-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will tell you what my personal attitude
toward setting those ranges is. I look at what the staff has to say,
but I don't think that's the controlling thing. It's where do we want
to have a consultation if it went either down or up, which may or may
not be consistent with where the staff estimates that the market might
bring it. Those estimates are not very good. They may be the best
estimates that can be made, but I look at the range and say, as a
first approximation: What level of interest rates might disturb us
enough to want a consultation?

MR. GUFFEY. That would suggest we could narrow it to 2
percentage points.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd be having a consultation all
the time, I suppose.

MR. BALLES. Well, to take an extreme view, which I'm not
necessarily proposing here: Since the recent fed funds rate has been
around 14 percent, if we want to allow some room both on the up side
and the down side for the Desk to operate without the necessity of a
consultation, we might specify a range of something like 11 to 17
percent to go along with "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Quite possibly.

MR. BALLES. If there's some flaw in that argument, I wish
somebody would point it out to me; there may be a flaw.

MR. AXILROD. Well, it depends. There's no flaw in the logic
of the argument, clearly. But the staff expectation of "B"--what we
presented--is a borrowing level of $1-1/2 billion. If the Committee
chose that borrowing level, I believe that the funds rate probably
would be above 15 percent and maybe closer to 16 percent, although
these relationships are loose. In that case, the range around that
wouldn't be 11 to 17 percent; it would be quite a different range if
that was where you wanted to start and you wanted to allow variation
around that. If you wanted to start at 14 percent as you were
suggesting and allow variation around that, then I don't think the
borrowing level we specified for alternative B is consistent with that
approach.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think we have two choices. One is
to take what we think it probably would be--let's say 15 to 17
percent--and then have a symmetrical range with enough room on either
side. Or we can deliberately put it off center from that 15 to 17
percent--let's say, John Balles' 11 to 17 percent--because we want to
trigger a consultation at 17 percent. I think we are better off
continuing to have a 5-point range that is symmetrical [around] the
most likely area it will be within because the Chairman can always
call a consultation anyway.

MR. MORRIS. My concern, given my view of the second quarter,
is whether, using John's range, we would want to allow the funds rate
to go down as low as 11 percent before consulting. That's why I would
prefer a higher lower limit than a lot of you.

-43-



3/31/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If 15 to 17 percent is the best guess
of the staff [at the Board] and in New York, then we can talk about
something like 14 to 19 or 13 to 19 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we haven't set the borrowing level
yet. Let's finish the go-around and we'll get back to this subject.
It's obviously a variable we have to set. Who hasn't been heard from?
Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I share many of the concerns
that have been expressed with respect to the forecast. I think the
economy is and probably will be a little stronger than is projected.
Possibly I'm influenced by the people I've talked to down in our part
of the country where things tend to be a little stronger. Also, I
have a concern, obviously, about inflation in that there doesn't
appear to be very much progress in that regard. For the reasons that
have already been discussed with respect to the uncertainty about M-1B
and also for the arguments that Steve presented on M2, my inclination
would be to put a little more emphasis on M2 at least for the time
being. I favor maintaining a fairly firm stance in the policy area
and I do have some sympathy for alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.

MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, as many others have today, I come
out on the gloomy side of the forecast on the real economy. The
principal reason for that is that it's just inescapable in our
District to come to any other conclusion. I know that the plight of
the automobile industry has been widely acknowledged, but I think it's
important that the impact of that industry and the state it is in be
seen in terms of what it does to us in the Seventh District. For
example, there are all kinds of numbers on just what the employment
base is, but I will cite just a couple of observations about that.
Even little American Motors, which I think had less than 2 percent of
the market last year, is the largest single employer in the state of
Wisconsin. While hundreds of thousands of jobs have gone down on the
production side, their board just recently announced that they have
terminated 60,000 salaried employees, and a cut into the staffing side
is quite a change. The second point is that the plight of Chrysler, I
think, has tended to overshadow somewhat some of the problems
throughout the rest of the industry. Of all of the automobiles sold
in the country last year--just the domestic models--Ford only had two
models in the top ten, and one of those was the Pinto which is no
longer made. One has to go all the way down to about the 21st rank
before we find the car that used to be the number two and number one
best seller in the country: the large size Ford. The most difficult
aspect, however, is the future. The industry has always been a
cyclical one and it has always been optimistic. But it is extremely
pessimistic. I think that relates primarily to two things. One is
the difference in wage [costs] as they perceive them between the
imports and the domestic models. While those figures again are all
over the board, they could be greatly understated if we take into
account such factors as absenteeism and other benefits for the
American worker. And the second is the growing conviction among the
domestic automakers--and we hear this more all the time--that the
large car must come back in order for them to survive. They are
convinced that, given the choice between a high-priced small car and a
high-priced larger car, the consumer is going to take that large car.

-44-



3/31/81

I'm not saying they're right; I'm merely reporting how they feel about
it. But if they are wrong, that will have a very serious impact down
the road.

Despite that, there are some bright spots in our area,
particularly in steel and capital goods. But on balance, and despite
the suggestion--and certainly our directors feel very strongly about
this--that we should be easing economic policy, strong inflationary
pressures still persist. That's particularly true in agriculture,
where we probably have been lucky so far as price increases are
concerned, as others have commented here. We possibly will see
continued upward pressures on prices toward the end of the year. And
beyond that, any arguments toward easing tend to focus more on the
cost of money. In fact, I think many of us feel the reason why
automobiles, for example, are not selling is because of the prices
rather the cost of money borrowed to acquire them. So, on balance, I
would concur with alternative B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. According to my little checklist, Mr.
Ford, you talked but you didn't express any conclusion about where we
should go.

MR. FORD. Well, after listening to all the discussion, I
frankly am confused by the indicators we're getting on the real
economy. I've never been a great believer in trying to fine-tune the
economy from one month or one quarter to the next, anyway. I come out
between "B" and "C," where a number of other people have, with John
Balles' reservation, however, that we ought to allow the lower end of
the funds rate range to be at least somewhat lower than what the rate
is today as we're sitting here. I'd be inclined to go for a "B-"
solution with a little more stringency in the control of the
aggregates growth and a little more attention to M2. Although Nancy's
argument about the unreliability of M2 also concerns me, I feel more
nervous about the problems with M-1B than I do about the problems with
M2. And looking at the growth rates that the staff has for M2 in
these various [alternatives], I'd lean toward trying to come down on
M2 a little harder than "B" with an in-between policy prescription
somewhat like a number of others have expressed, except with the fed
funds range having a lower low end that will allow some flexibility in
the next few days so that if the futures market for the T-bills, for
example, is right, we don't have to be on the phone with each other
next week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you were not very
specific. I gather you are on the lower side of things.

MR. WALLICH. I was for "C," and I would like to see the
funds range a little higher than it is there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A little higher?

MR. WALLICH. Higher.

MR. PARTEE. He always goes that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite sure how to interpret you,
Mr. Winn, but I thought you were in the same direction. Is that
correct?

-45-



3/31/81

MR. WINN. Oh, no, "B" to "C," or something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I'm kind of a "B-," but I could go with "B" if
we put a little more explicit weight on M2, even if just in terms of
looking at the path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. I was arguing against "A" and "C." So, I'm for
"B" and I tend to agree with Tony that we ought to start out with
borrowing around $1.3 billion. And I would go with a federal funds
range of 12 to 18 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a lunch for Mr. Mayo and I
don't think we're going to complete this [discussion] before lunch
without forcing things a little faster than I think is appropriate,
considering the uncertainties here. It's clear that nobody has been
for "A." There are a lot of "Bs," quite a few "Cs," and some in
between "B" and "C." We really have had very little discussion of the
funds rate until very recently. I am comfortable myself on this. I
don't think I would be quite comfortable flat out aiming for "C." I
wouldn't be very comfortable going much above "B," depending upon how
things happen here. It's a question of how we posture ourselves on
borrowing and the funds rate and how we react to the inevitable
uncertainties that arise. I may feel differently about the borrowing
and the funds rate or whatever, depending upon what happens in the
next couple of weeks. If it remains very quiescent for the next
couple of weeks, we have quite a lot of room for growth. If we
suddenly get a jump in April, we're on the other side of the fence,
and I think we will need a little discussion of how to proceed under
various hypotheses--or at least two hypotheses. One is if money
supply comes in weak in the short run and the other is if it comes in
strong in the short run. When is lunch scheduled--at 1:00 or 1:15
p.m.?

MR. ALTMANN. Guests are arriving in your office at 1:15 p.m.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, if it's 1:15, I think we can proceed
a little further. I'm a little worried about how the directive is
written in the light of the various options before us. In general
terms, I take it that people are prepared to react fairly strongly, by
which I mean they are prepared to see the borrowing level go up and a
discretionary adjustment in the path or whatever, if [monetary growth]
began running significantly above "B." Nobody has been for above "B,"
so I assume that that is the implication of that approach. I assume
that if we really got below "C," let's say--and there isn't a very big
margin between these--in the way the numbers came in, that nobody
would resist a decline in interest rates in that possible scenario.
Where has the borrowing been just recently? It's under $1 billion,
isn't it?

MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's coming in a little higher.
It's averaging about $1-1/2 billion because one large bank borrowed
substantially this past Friday and that is tending to raise this
week's level. The implicit level that we're shooting for in this week

-46-



3/31/81

is about [$1.150] billion, but it seems to be running higher than
that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's that high, [$1.150] billion? I guess
I would at least raise the question why we should start out any higher
than where we are, given that the money supply isn't moving in any
particular direction. It's contrary to a "B to C" view of things
until we get some evidence that it is moving in one direction or
another. I just don't feel confident enough about any of these
forecasts to suggest a strong view that we should move off the
existing level. But the implication is--you know, literally it can
happen in a week--that if a great big figure comes in as it sometimes
does, assuming that it either happens in a week or over the course of
two or three weeks, we would be prepared to move the path pretty
quickly if we felt it was getting above the "B" path.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March fairly strong, Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know. I don't know how to
interpret it. The latest estimate is 8 percent or 8-1/2 percent.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, 8-1/2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you just look at March in isolation,
that's a reasonably big figure. If you look at it against the
previous two months, it doesn't seem very big, and the most recent
figures are slack. And if I take the revisions as my leading
indicator--that has been the most reliable indication--they're not
very clear but they're certainly not being revised upward as they do
when this gets a lot of momentum. If anything, the latest revisions
have come in a little weak, haven't they, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. Last week we revised down the [most
recent] weeks in March.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't March M2 still running
around 19 percent?

MR. STERNLIGHT. It's 16-1/2.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, M2 is around 17.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M2 is certainly high; there is no question
that M2 is high. The prevailing view--and I should say that not
everybody mentioned it--among those who did mention it, with at least
one exception, was to give some weight to M2. And I think that that's
implicit. I should, though, make it explicit in what I'm saying, that
we would give some weight to M2 in adjusting the reserve path. Again,
I'm not quite sure what number to put down in the actual directive.
But if I read the Committee right, the members are certainly more
disturbed about exceeding "B" than falling somewhat short of "B."

MR. PARTEE. So long as it isn't short of "C," I think I
would agree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably a fair summary.
What bothers me is how to word this. I'm not sure there's any massive
difference of opinion. I do think all these federal funds ranges seem
too high. All these ranges as stated, given the uncertainties that

-47-



3/31/81

exist, may be quite appropriate in terms of the best estimate the
staff can make. But I would get worried if the funds rate shot up to
20 percent here, quite frankly, without reconsidering just where we
were. I would not get particularly worried if it went down to where
it was before, conceivably, depending upon how business [conditions]
unfold in the next few weeks. The lowest was 13-1/2 percent on a
weekly average basis. I can imagine circumstances in which that would
not be at all disturbing and may be desirable. The numbers I had
scratched down here before I heard any conversation were 12 to 17
percent, but I had no particular brief for that exactly.

MS. TEETERS. Why don't we make it 12 to 18 percent, as Fred
and I [suggested].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is symmetrical around where we are,
sort of.

MR. PARTEE. Where are we--around 15 percent or plus a
little?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this week, I guess it would be a
little plus.

MR. PARTEE. Probably 18 percent, given--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The most recent figure is 14-1/2 percent
or something?

MR. STERNLIGHT. This week it's averaging 15.07 percent so
far.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it will probably ease for the rest
of this week, given all the borrowing that has already taken place.
That still doesn't tell me how to write the directive, which makes me
a little hesitant. But I suppose we could put in a number somewhat
below "B" if that captures the center of gravity, with whatever funds
rate range--

MS. TEETERS. We've used language in the past that gave a
number and then said we wouldn't be disturbed if it fell slightly
short of it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we could use that kind of language.
Maybe that captures it. We could say "B" or lower, depending upon--

MR. PARTEE and MS. TEETERS. Somewhat lower.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What is the language we've used before?
It was "somewhat lower depending upon"--

MR. AXILROD. I think "or somewhat lower."

MR. ALTMANN. "Somewhat less."

MR. AXILROD. Well, we had language about interest rates--
that you were not forcing them down.

-48-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Did we actually put that in the
directive or was that--

MR. AXILROD. There was such language. I'd have to look it
up, but there was such language.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, maybe that is the kind of language
we need here. Can you provide that language to us, Mr. Secretary?

MR. ALTMANN. Possibly.

MS. TEETERS. What have the borrowings averaged in the last
four weeks?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Last four weeks?

MR. AXILROD. Well, in the last three weeks, which is easy to
[calculate], they were almost $800 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but what do we actually put in the
[path]?

MR. AXILROD. But before that, they were in a range of $1.1
to $1.7 billion in that one exceptional week.

MS. TEETERS. So $1.3 billion would be an increase in the
borrowing level over where we've been most recently?

MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. In some sense, for this four-week
period that is ending, we are aiming at an average level of borrowing
somewhere on the order of $900 million. We're aiming this week at
$1.2 billion because in the earlier weeks borrowing had dropped well
below that $900 million. So, it's coming up this week.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just point out the consequences,
not just the arithmetic consequences, of this decision in terms of its
implications. If we went with "B" and if the forecast is [right]--and
I think most people agree with it in terms of tendencies toward a weak
economy in the short run and weaker than average in some sense for the
year--a 6 percent growth in M-1B in the second quarter maintained
through the rest of the year would leave us within our target, but
barely, with the prospect of a pretty good interest rate fluctuation
if this next quarter is really soft. "B" potentially forces [the
funds rate] up against a natural tendency. "C" continued through the
rest of the year, I guess, brings us--

MR. AXILROD. To the bottom end of the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The bottom end for the year as a whole?

MR. AXILROD. That's right. And "B" to the middle.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might be more than the middle, wouldn't
it? It's three-fourths [of the year at] 6 percent and one-fourth at
whatever it was.

MR. AXILROD. [Unintelligible].

-49-



3/31/81

MR. PRELL. "B" would be in the middle by September and then
you'd have to decelerate slightly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So we'd be above [the middle], yes. Well,
these are monthly growth rates rather than quarterly. What is the
equivalent quarterly growth rate here for "B"? It appears someplace,
doesn't it?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the equivalent quarterly growth rate is
5.7 percent for M-1B over the 6 [months].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, so it's a little less. But we'd
still be above the middle of the range, I think. It would not be
running at the top of the range, but just slightly below it after a
small first quarter. It's right at the middle of the range in
September. Continuing at 6 percent must put us above [the middle],
but not as close to the top as I thought.

MR. AXILROD. Well, yes, quarter-over-quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All that suggests, I think, that we should
be more conscious of exceeding it than falling somewhat low. What
language do we have that was actually in the directive?

MR. ALTMANN. It was in December [1980].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that language was: "...some
shortfall in growth would be acceptable in the near term if that
developed in the context of reduced pressures in the money market."

MR. SCHULTZ. That sounds pretty good because, as I recall
Steve's figures, the staff is looking for velocity to slow down some
in the second quarter so you were anticipating that we would have to
have the higher borrowing, weren't you? What were you looking at in
terms of--

MR. AXILROD. In terms of the level of borrowing?

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, for "B." You were talking about $1.5
billion, weren't you?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. We had a rather high level of borrowing
because we were assuming considerably higher interest rates than I
think the Chairman or the specifications are either explicitly or
implicitly assuming. So there would be a difference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not particularly assuming a
level of interest rates. All I said is that I might want to consider
[an adjustment] at some point if they got high enough. I'm suggesting
that this is what the relationships look like and if we want to hit
"B," we'd better go out and increase the borrowing right away. But
I'm saying: Let's wait and see and get some evidence that that
projection is in fact being borne out before we move. It may well be
correct or maybe we will have to go even further, but let's wait and
see.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think we'd have to be as specific as
that language that you just read, Paul. I don't know why we don't

-50-



3/31/81

just say "growth in M-1B from March to June at an annual rate of 6
percent or somewhat less."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that may be, because I'm not sure
we're talking about reduced pressures. It might be that we'd accept
somewhat less if [the funds rate] just stayed where it was.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I think so too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try to see what we're talking
about. You said 6 percent is the figure you were thinking of for
March to June.

MR. PARTEE. I was thinking March to June. After all,
tomorrow is April 1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

MR. PARTEE. And it seems to me, even though we don't quite
know March, we ought to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we ought to use March to June,
too.

MR. AXILROD. Governor Partee, I would mention that we really
only know half of March.

MR. PARTEE. I know. But people think we know it.

MR. SCHULTZ. People think we know a lot!

SPEAKER(?). As you can tell from the previous discussion, we
have great faith in the forecast!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can say 6 percent or somewhat
less or I suppose we can say 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I don't
know where you want to put the funds rate range. As I say, I would
want to look at it even if the funds rate were at 17 percent if the
economy were also quite weak at the same time. It wouldn't bother me
at 17 percent if the economy were quite strong. But that's something
we don't know until we sit down and look at it.

MR. PARTEE. Speaking for those who like a wide funds rate
range, I could accept 12 to 18 percent. I think we ought to have a
6-point range rather than go back down to a narrower range.

MR. BOEHNE. I think 12 to 18 percent makes sense.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would prefer 13 to 19 percent. It
seems to me a little more symmetrically placed around--

MR. PARTEE. Well, if you think it's 15 percent now, 12 to 18
is even-handed. But if Paul is sensitive to high rates, as he seems
to be, we're going to have a telephone conference call if the rate
gets up there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have the feeling that at some point
we would want to consult.

-51-



3/31/81

MS. TEETERS. I can support the 12 to 18 percent. Are you
implying that we'd stay at about the $1.1 billion in borrowing and
then let it--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wanted to get to that next. I was
implying that until we get further information we'd stay roughly where
we are, whether that's $1.1 billion or slightly over $1.1 billion.
But consistent with this whole attitude is that if the money supply
came in strong, we would be prepared to move pretty quickly, which
might mean a discretionary move as the natural result of holding the
nonborrowed path steady. And we'd be quicker to move in that
direction if it came in strong than if it fell short.

MR. PARTEE. That is to adjust the nonborrowed path?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A more even pattern of borrowing
yielding the same total as this week would probably give us a lower
fed funds rate than the 15+ percent we're seeing, right? Therefore,
if we're talking about keeping the present fed funds rate, which is
around 15 percent, then--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't particularly care myself about the
present level of the federal funds rate.

SPEAKER(?). Well, I think this is going too far.
VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, we would certainly have to

start off with it there. Then I think we probably are talking about
something closer to $1.3 billion than $1.1 billion.

MR. WALLICH. As to the lower level of 12 percent [for the
funds rate], if we get there, it would have to be below that on
several days before we say that over a period of time it has been
below that. And then we would have done about three-fourths of the
drop that we had in 1980.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have no vested interest in 12
percent. If you want to make it 13--

MR. WALLICH. No, I want to make it substantially higher.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think making it 13 is going to capture
[Henry's vote].

MR. CORRIGAN. I would prefer to state the March-to-June
growth rate at 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less. I could go either 12
to 18 or 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and borrowings starting
out in a range of $1.2 to $1.3 billion. But I still have a question
in my mind. Suppose we did either one of these things and M2
continued to grow at, say, 15 percent. If M-1B was around 5-1/2 or 6
percent but M2 was 15 percent, what would we do then?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think we can deal with every
possible contingency, but I--

MR. CORRIGAN. No, I [realize that].

-52-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to take the specifications you
suggested, if M-1B came in around 5-1/2 to 6 percent and M2 was very
high, we would lean on the tighter side. We might make an adjustment.

MS. TEETERS. But we'd do it with a consultation?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that would require a
consultation if the funds rate were in the range and so forth.

MS. TEETERS. Suppose it's all money market mutual funds?

MR. CORRIGAN. Well, there's a little more to it than--

MR. PARTEE. [Unintelligible] market rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm sure if it did, it will be all.

MR. PARTEE. [The money market mutual funds] are very
sensitive to market rates. If market rates go above what the funds
pay, the money that is in the funds will move back into the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is a question of whether we give some
weight to M2. But we don't have to word the directive that way; it
already does. The directive always gives weight to M2 as I recall.

MR. CORRIGAN. I'm reacting a little, Tony, to that memo that
you distributed, which effectively points out that we don't make any
adjustment in the paths for the nonreservable components of M2
regardless of what they do.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though I distributed the memo,
on balance I would prefer that greater attention to M2 be done on a
judgmental basis rather than a mechanistic one.

MR. CORRIGAN. I agree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I'm not talking about a formula. The
directive just specifies a target for both, which implies that we take
account of M2. I don't think we have to change the directive for that
purpose.

SPEAKER(?). Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think we have to have some knowledge
among ourselves about what weight we give to it; I'm suggesting that
be on a judgmental basis. If we want to give it weight, that doesn't
in itself require a consultation. The substantive question is whether
we want to give it weight.

MS. TEETERS. Well, it all depends, in Jerry's scenario, on
what is making M2 go up relative to M-1B.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, without getting in a long
digression, do you have any feel as to whether Mr. Fauntroy's bill on
money market mutual funds has any chance of passing in the near
future? That could have some bearing on the growth of M2.

-53-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no particular sense that any bill
on money market funds is going to be passed in the near enough future
to affect anything before our next meeting.

MR. SCHULTZ. Furthermore, both bills have been referred to
the Commerce Committee, which is a very unfriendly referral.

MR. BALLES. Oh, really?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There conceivably could be legislation,
but I don't think it's going to take place in a way that affects
anything before May 23rd, or whenever our next meeting is scheduled.

MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Chairman, if we just go with 5-1/2 percent
or somewhat less, doesn't that really give us the kind of flexibility
that we need to take care of most of these [contingencies]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. I just want an understanding of how
we adjust as we go along. The basic [M-1B reference] is 5-1/2 percent
or less, but I think it is appropriate to give some weight to M2.
That's what most people are saying.

MS. TEETERS. How did we get to 5-1/2 percent? I thought we
were at 6 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to resolve that.

MS. TEETERS. All of a sudden we've dropped 1/2 percentage
point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are trying to find the center of
gravity here.

MR. PARTEE. And it's falling.

MS. TEETERS. Yes. It was 6 percent or somewhat less and now
it's 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me?

MR. ALTMANN. Peter Sternlight has a comment.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, you referred to giving some
weight to M2 judgmentally. In the recent period, there was an
opportunity to do that because the M1s were running weak and we could
modify the extent to which we would change the path because of that.
But that [situation] wouldn't necessarily arise in the future. You
might not have the opportunity to give weight to a strong M2 if, for
example, the M1s were running right about on path. Even if M2 were
running very strong, I wouldn't see that same kind of opportunity to
give discretionary weight to that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't understand. You would just reduce
the nonborrowed reserve path.

MR. STERNLIGHT. But we might be right about on path.

-54-



3/31/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You might be on the M-1B path, but you
would not be giving weight to M2. I don't understand how it differs.

MR. STERNLIGHT. If M-1B were on target, we might be just
about on path. If that were the case--

MR. FORD. Paul, the way I hear the sense of the Committee is
this: Whatever we want to argue about on M-1B, either 5-1/2 or 6
percent, even if we're hitting M-1B at 5-1/2 or 6 percent, the farther
off M2 goes, the more we want to adjust. I think that is what you're
trying to say.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is what I am saying, yes. Well, we
have to go to lunch. We'll see whether we can resolve this in a hurry
or not. We have a proposal for 5-1/2 percent or lower.

MR. PARTEE. Somewhat lower.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll just put down 13 to 18 percent at
this point on the federal funds rate.

MS. TEETERS. If we have [only] 5-1/2 percent, we can take
that "somewhat lower" off.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me finish.

MR. FORD. You may get a chance.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm suggesting the level of borrowings
about where they are, the implication being fairly rapid adjustment of
the borrowing level if we exceed [the money supply growth
specification]. There would be an adjustment if we fell short, too,
but it would be a little more sluggish. That's what the "or lower"
reflects.

MR. BALLES. Where are we now on the borrowings?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About $1.1 billion or slightly above, I
think.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, we're aiming at that, but it is running
stronger. We're aiming at $1.16 billion. That's the point [target].

SPEAKER(?). [Unintelligible] decimal point.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's $1.2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. $1.150 billion. And there's a degree of
consensus that we're giving weight to M2 if it gets wildly off the
assumption here, which is about 10 percent.

MR. FORD. Are we leaving out M-1A altogether?

MR. PARTEE. Yes, it's about 10 percent if you--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [the "C alternative] is only 10-1/4
percent [for M2], so we're at about 10-3/4 percent for M2 or someplace

-55-



3/31/81

in there. If M2 were in the 11 percent area, it isn't going to get
any weight. It's consistent if it's--

MS. TEETERS. What was your fed funds range in the directive?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent. And the M-1B number in
the directive is 5-1/2 percent or lower.

MR. BOEHNE. "Lower" or "somewhat lower"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Either one you would prefer. "Or somewhat
lower" probably better captures it.

MR. PARTEE. "Or lower" is infinite.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A consistent number for M2 is 10-1/2
percent, I guess, just looking here.

MR. ALTMANN. You need a time period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the March-to-June period. Well, let
me have a show of hands as to how many prefer this formulation? I
think the obvious alternative is just changing M-1B to 5-1/2 to 6
percent and leaving everything else the same.

MR. PARTEE. You want voting members only, don't you?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess so. We're on the 5-1/2 percent
alternative at this point.

MR. PARTEE. 13 to 18 percent for the funds range and $1.150
billion on borrowings.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 13 to 18 percent on the funds rate and
$1.150 borrowings with more of a hair trigger on raising it if it
comes in higher than lower.

MR. BOEHNE. Is this prefer or accept?

MR. PARTEE. Is anyone unable to accept it?

MR. FORD. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Let's get it over with; somehow I'm able to
accept it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's accept it.

MR. BOEHNE. Accept? I can accept it.

MR. RICE. I would prefer 6 percent or somewhat less, but I
could accept that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm still bothered by something. I
want to be sure that everybody understands something, which is this:
My gut instinct is that if we set the borrowings low at $1.150
billion, we're going to see a drop in the fed funds rate in the next
week or two. I realize that we'd be able to adjust it. But do we

-56-



3/31/81

want to see at this point a market signal that we are easing monetary
policy?

MR. PARTEE. The funds rate is not a signal.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, may I add on to that? I don't
know what the funds rate will be with that borrowing. We had
borrowing of $1.145 billion in the week of [February] 18th and the
funds rate was 15.81 percent. The preceding week borrowing was $1.1
billion and the funds rate was 16.51 percent. And in the more recent
week of March 4th, we had a borrowing level of $1.3 billion and the
funds rate was 15-3/4 percent. All this [suggests] that we can't be
very certain where we're going to come out on this. But I would
assume it's somewhere above 15 percent, which would be above the
existing--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You mean with that $1.15 billion?

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Holding it for a while?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. I think from this day it would be above
15 percent, but I can't be absolutely certain.

MR. STERNLIGHT. There's a range of uncertainty on these.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's vote on this.

MS. TEETERS. Did you take a vote on the 5-1/2 to 6?

MR. RICE. Six percent or somewhat less.

MS. TEETERS. Or 6 percent and somewhat less.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can explore preferences on that.
How many people prefer 6 percent? Everything is the same except we
would put a 6 percent number in there.

MS. TEETERS. I would prefer 6.

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

SPEAKER(?). I would prefer 6.

SPEAKER(?). I would prefer it too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One, two, three, four, five.

MS. TEETERS. Try 5-1/2 to 6.

MR. PARTEE. No, we have to have a number for targeting
purposes.

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're in an area where the [difference] is
extremely narrow. How many people prefer the 5-1/2 percent?

-57-



3/31/81

SPEAKER(?). Or less?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Before I ask how many would accept it, how
many prefer the 5-1/2?

MR. WALLICH. Without accepting it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You've got to sneak--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I prefer the 5-1/2 to 6.

SPEAKER(?). You feel it has to be a single number?

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, it doesn't really have--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We already have "or lower" and it makes
almost no difference here.

MR. PARTEE. [The path would be drawn on] 5-3/4 percent if we
said 5-1/2 to 6 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, put me down for 5-1/2.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we're virtually equally divided as
to preferences here. Let's go with the 5-1/2.

MR. PARTEE. I have a feeling it's the Chairman's preference.

MS. TEETERS. Well, if you're going to do that, it should be
5-1/2 percent or somewhat more. At least take off the somewhat less.

MR. SCHULTZ. It's only somewhat less, Nancy.

MS. TEETERS. Yes, and you'd let it come out as a minus 3.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think there is a--

MS. TEETERS. How far are we off the target for the first
quarter? That was a 4-3/4 percent rate of growth or 3 percent or
something. And we're coming in at what, minus 2 percent?

MR. SCHULTZ. I voted with you, Nancy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's have a vote at 5-1/2.

MR. ALTMANN. Or somewhat less, too?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, or somewhat lower.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Boehne Yes
President Boykin Yes
President Corrigan Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes

-58-



Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich
President Winn

Ten for, one against.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay.
finished before lunch. If we make
always finish before lunch!

Thank you. Without much delay we
the lunch late enough, we can

END OF MEETING

3/31/81 -59-

Yes
No
Yes




