









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

October 5-6, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in

Washington, D. C., starting on Monday, October 5, 1981, at 4:30 p.m. and

continuing on Tuesday, October 6, 1981, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker,
Mr. Solomon,
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Chairman
Vice Chairman

Messrs. Balles, Ford, Timlen, and Winn, Alternate Members of

the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Morris and Roos, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director

Mr. Altmann, Secretary

Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary

Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel 1/

Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel

Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel 1/

Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, R. Davis, Ettin, Keir, Mullineaux, Prell,
Scheld, Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.



10/5-6/81

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Siegman, Associate Director, Division of Inter-

national Finance, Board of Governors

Mr. Lindsey 2/, Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mr. Simpson, Chief, Banking Section, Division of Research

And Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Deck 1/, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,

Board of Governors

Mr. Monhollon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Keran, Koch, and
Parthemos, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve

Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City,
San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond, respectively

Messrs. Fieleke and Syron 1/, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston

Mr. Duprey, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis

1/ Attended Tuesday session only.
2/ Attended Monday session only.

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 5-6, 1981

October 5, 1981--Afternoon Session

MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any comments or questions? Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Just one question: To what extent did the Libyan
pull-out [of funds] from this country affect the rate movement?

MR. CROSS. The impact on the rate movement?

MR. WINN. Yes. If I understand, there was a big withdrawal
of Libyan funds from this country.

MR. CROSS. There was a large withdrawal--well, not a
withdrawal, but a--

MR. WINN. Transfer.

MR. CROSS. There was a run-off of securities--Treasury bills
and notes that the Libyans held here--of a fairly substantial amount.
But I don't think and have not heard that it was an important factor
in the exchange rate situation. But as Treasury bills and notes
matured, the Libyans have drawn down their holdings.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Do you find that the closeness of contact and
quality of information with European central banks and with the market
in general is being maintained at present?

MR. CROSS. Well, we're certainly doing everything we can to
maintain it. It's always a little easier if we're more involved in
the operations, I think. But we're trying to do what we can, of
course, to keep in close contact and to get all the information we
can. There had been some talk by one or two of the lower level people
in some of the European central banks that if the United States isn't
going to be in the game, so to speak, perhaps we should not
participate to the extent we have in the exchange of information. At
this point, it has not been anything other than a statement by one or
two officials, and I don't see any reason at this point that they
would not continue [to exchange information].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one thing informally and
I'll ask for your comment, if you have any, tomorrow morning so you
can think about it a little. We have had an informal inquiry from one
central bank not in the swap network to be placed in the swap network.
It is a small country

MR. CORRIGAN.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We turned down



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They have been given no particular
encouragement, but I told them I would raise it for a general
reaction, not for a decision. I told them I thought there was a
certain reluctance to extend these arrangements, partly because of the
inquiries that would trigger from still others. I think it's fair to
say, Mr. Truman, that the

They are on their own, so to speak. [Participation in the swap
network] would be of some assistance to them in their reserve
management and, I would suspect--although this weighing is mine and
not theirs--even more assistance in terms of their prestige

and as a member of the in good standing.
Weren't those about all the considerations they raised, Ted? They've
raised this from time to time in the past. I will not ask for your
comment this minute, but apart from Mr. Corrigan's let you
reflect on it for a very brief period [and ask] tomorrow for any
comments you want to make.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'll make a bet that it took
longer to ask for it than you just outlined it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Their numbers are smaller, they are
an Article IV country or whatever it is, and they are in the EMS.
Article VIII is what we're looking for, isn't it? Article IV is those
other guys. So, it depends upon one's attitudes toward this kind of
thing. Domestic open market operations, Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much did the bond market go up today?

MR. STERNLIGHT. By the end of the day 1/2 to 3/4 of a point.
It had been up more than that earlier, but [the gain] got trimmed
back.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was this a rally that hasn't been
accompanied by any lightening of spirits?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think attitudes are still mostly cautious.
They're not really seeing extensive investor buying [though] there has
been some. Until they see more of that, it has more of the
characteristics of a technical rebound with short covering and not a
lifting of spirits.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any further comment?

MR. WINN. I'd just raise a question about the margin and the
valuation [for System repurchase agreements]. What is the margin
requirement?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there's a whole scale of valuations
when we value securities for repurchase agreements. And it's a
sliding scale; it depends on the maturity of the issues. For example,
with Treasury bills over one month [in maturity] we went from 10 to 25



10/5-6/81

basis points. That is where we would value the securities against the
current quoted market. In very rough terms it was about a doubling of
the margins.

MR. CORRIGAN. Is that commonplace in the market now, Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of lenders have been raising their
margins, and I'd say our margins are in line with those of the more
conservative lenders. I wouldn't say everybody is up there. Some
lenders still rely primarily on whom they're lending to rather than
looking to the margin itself for protection.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. I just wanted to get Peter's thoughts, if he has
any, on what happened to M-1B shift adjusted in the last two weeks, in
that it suddenly fell out of bed and gave us an unexpected, at least
to me, 4 percent decline. Earlier in [September] it looked as if it
would be coming in close to 2 or 3 percent.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. Well, I don't know. Steve might
have a comment on it. I have given up trying to explain short-term
variations in the money supply.

MR. MORRIS. A shift in the demand for money.

MR. PARTEE. Of course!

MR. GRAMLEY(?). We're possibly moving along--

MR. BALLES. Well, maybe I should ask Steve.

MR. AXILROD. We don't have any very obvious explanation.
There is nothing special that we can see. Just as a word of caution,
I would hold my breath a little until October 7th. We're not
projecting a large increase in that week; we're projecting something
on the order of $2 or $3 billion, but it's not impossible that it
could come in quite a bit larger and could begin to make up for that
decline. So far as the economics of it go, it could indicate some
weakening in real GNP, which is quite consistent with the nonfinancial
data that are coming in. But again, that's somewhat speculative.

MR. SCHULTZ. Mr. Kaufman is projecting a large increase [for
the week of] October 7th.

MR. STERNLIGHT. A lot of market people expect it because
it's one of those weeks in which we have the Social Security payments
on Friday in the first week of the month. Often in the past that has
been accompanied by large increases.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We don't know what [last] week's figures
are much less the figures for the 7th. These preliminary figures have
gotten very [unreliable]. One of the strange things is that currency
is so weak. Does anybody know why currency is so weak?

MR. MORRIS. Maybe the drug business is slowing down. We're
about to publish an article that indicates that a large part of the



10/5-6/81

net increase in currency is not related to any normal economic
activity, but is--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. M1 has really been lower, drug adjusted!

MR. MORRIS. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions? If not,
we shall adjourn. But first we have to ratify the transactions.

SPEAKER(?). So move.

MS. TEETERS. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we'll ratify the
transactions and adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.

[Meeting recessed.]



10/5-6/81 -5-

October 6, 1981--Morning Session

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, gentlemen--lady and gentlemen--we
can resume and spend just a few minutes on any reactions or comments
or feelings you have about swaps, with particular reference to

not necessarily confined to that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, let me make a point. The
argument that and, therefore, should
have a swap line, has some weaknesses in it because
becoming a member.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their answer to that is is not
becoming a member but also--. Are they an Article VIII country?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, they are.

MR. TRUMAN. No, they are not an Article VIII country; they
are not part of the consultation in the EMS and they're not part of
the VIII group. So that's their distinctive--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But they are Article VIII?

MR. TRUMAN. They're not Article VIII.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're not Article VIII?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They're not Article VIII? I thought
Article VIII meant simply that a currency is convertible.

MR. TRUMAN. That's right. And is not a
convertible currency in that sense.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I see. You mean there are certain
types of formal exchange--

MR. TRUMAN. Well, they haven't given up the right to have
[exchange controls].

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh, I see, even though in practice
there are no exchange controls on at the moment. Still, I don't think
that ought to be the main reason for giving a swap line to
Have they presented a reason other than prestige why they should have
a swap line--a substantive reason?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the argument is that we turned them
down ten years ago or thereabouts apparently on the basis that they
were members of the sterling area and that they ought to look to
London for assistance. They are no longer members of the sterling
area so that reason is no longer valid for turning them down. They do
have independent reserve management, and it would be of at least
modest help to them in reserve management to know they have this
backstop.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if we went ahead with
came in again, would this change your attitude about giving

one to



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Clearly, a major problem with this is the
precedent we create for others. It's not ; we also get
asked by countries.

MR. TRUMAN. Some of which are [now] Article VIII countries,
like whom we turned down in '67 solely on
that ground. There are also who might
think that they were on the right side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Turned them down solely on what ground?

MR. TRUMAN. Primarily on the Article VIII grounds of 1967;
but subsequently they've become part of our [unintelligible] article.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, they've become a member.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My [view] would be that unless
there's a substantive reason, we open up more problems by agreeing to
it. I think we ought to be in a posture that unless it's one of the
countries that we deal with [and is] important to the [effective
functioning of the international] monetary system, the extension of a
swap line ought to have a substantive reason behind it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments?

MR. PARTEE. I agree with Tony. I think it opens up a can of
worms. I don't know how we could turn down the
countries that are bigger trading partners and bigger countries and
everything else-- --if we let in

MR. WALLICH. I would think we could perhaps [say no] on the
basis that this is not the right time. I don't want to preclude this
for all eternity.

MR. PARTEE. They could get a closer tie with sterling and
then have--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They could take it up in 1990.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That is possibly the correct--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't detect any enthusiasm. They
have already been told that a major problem is the precedential
character of it. Well, we can proceed to the staff reports on the
economic situation.

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just pause here and get
reactions on the business scene as such. You made the comment that
you don't see any precipitous drop likely. That's one question that I
suppose arises. Comments on that or other points about the business
scene are in order at this point. Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think the economy does have a downward tilt to
it. I doubt that we're in for a precipitous drop but I do think that
financial conditions have worsened. The small business situation--the

-6-



10/5-6/81

stretch-out of accounts payable--has put considerable strain on these
companies and I'm hearing more and more cries of complaint from them.

MR. SCHULTZ. From whom? Where are you getting that? I keep
trying to get a feel for this--I've talked to bankers all over the
country--and it's hard. In general, when I talk to big bankers, they
say things don't look so bad; they look pretty good. Even the ones
that have special divisions that lend to small businesses say they
have checked and the people they have loaned to are under a lot of
pressure but none seems about to break. Then when I talk to the
little bankers, they say the cataclysm has arrived.

MR. BOEHNE. I'm getting this not from the biggest banks in
our District but from, say, the $1-1/2 billion size ones who tend to
specialize in lending to small and medium size businesses. Their
cries of concern are getting louder. I'm also hearing this directly
from the small and medium size businesses. I've talked to a number of
them; I had a luncheon last week with people from small and medium
size firms in manufacturing, services, and consulting type businesses,
and they're talking about accounts receivable that are going out 120
days and higher. The worst offender appears to be the federal
government, which is very slow in paying its bills. The kind of
comment I heard at the luncheon was: "I'm just hanging by the tips of
my fingers over the edge of the cliff; I can see the edge of the
cliff." We had a go-around and almost to a person they mentioned this
cash flow problem as being very, very serious. It was in various
degrees depending on who was talking. But the tone of "Am I going to
survive or not?" was clearly there. That was a real question.

MR. SCHULTZ. Just to be specific about your District, I had
lunch with who has a very good program for
small business lending. He said the small businesses are all under
pressure but he didn't see any that are going [under]. That's the
problem that I have. The [small businesses] all are saying that
they're in really difficult condition but if you ask the banker who
has lent to them, he says he thinks they're going to make it okay.

MR. BOEHNE. I've tried to keep in touch with this and my
reading is that the seriousness of the slippage in financial
conditions is significantly greater now than it was a couple of months
ago.

MR. PARTEE. Would this affect their inventory attitude,
though?

MR. BOEHNE. Some of them mentioned that even if the [demand]
were there, they wouldn't be stocked up to take care of it because
they can't handle the inventory.

MR. PARTEE. The reason I asked is that Jim had the
conclusion that inventories weren't a sensitive sector. But it does
seem to me that if a firm's cash flow is poor and if the costs of
carry are very high, it could liquidate inventory. We have different
circumstances than in the past for judging these stock/sales ratios
and so forth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anyone else?

-7-



10/5-6/81

MR. MORRIS. I can confirm Ed's finding. I've talked to a
number of small and medium size bankers who have reported that just
recently, in the last few weeks, for the first time this year they're
looking at some loans that are turning sour. It's a very recent
development. Bankers not only in Massachusetts but in New Hampshire
and Maine have said the same thing. But they've mostly been the small
and medium size banks, not the big ones.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't know how much this adds or
how much light it throws on it. I had a meeting with about a dozen
business leaders in New York City and, even though they tend to be
larger size businesses, many of them have companies or product lines
that have been very adversely affected by current conditions. The
curious thing I noticed was that even the ones who said they were in
great difficulty in regard to those particular product lines all said
that there were other product lines that displayed some strength, as
proof of the fact that they didn't feel they were near any cliff.
These are not huge companies; they are what I guess we call medium
size companies; some have sales as small as $200 or $300 million. But
to a man all of them--even the ones who said that were [hurting]--said
they hoped the Fed would continue its tight monetary policy. They
said they thought it would eventually work. As I say, it probably
doesn't throw any light on this, but it's the only contact [of this
kind that] I've had.

MR. WALLICH. We have some data on bankruptcies and failures
which throw some light, don't they, on the degree of strain? My
impression is that they are up significantly, about 40 percent, but
that this is also influenced by the new bankruptcy law. Certainly
[that affects] the bankruptcies; less so perhaps the failures. Do you
have any more data? Is 40 percent unique historically?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your people had some data yesterday, Jim,
relating to failures--I forget whether the term used was failures or
not--per 10,000 firms. It wasn't all that much, was it?

MR. KICHLINE. Right, it was failures--Dunn and Bradstreet's
failure index, which tries to adjust for the size of business
population. That was up substantially; I don't have in mind the
percent. It's still below the peak in that series, which occurred in
1960-61.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was high, but it didn't look so high
historically.

MR. KICHLINE. There are other indicators, such as adverse
dividend actions or ratings changes. They are looking more adverse
now compared with a year ago, but they're all well below what happened
in 1974-75, which obviously was extraordinary. Nevertheless, they
have been creeping up in recent months, and one gets a sense that the
corporate sector is experiencing some deterioration. But it's not
dramatic at this point.

MR. SCHULTZ. The bankruptcy rate is up 41.5 percent over
last year. But one has to remember that the new bankruptcy law has
this new Chapter 13, which is very attractive for these smaller

-8-



10/5-6/81

businesses who can go into that and keep running under their
management. It's a different kind of animal than they've ever had to
work with before.

MR. PARTEE. Of course, that was in effect last year, too.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, only in the latter part of last year.

MR. PARTEE. No, it [became effective] in late '79.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's right; it was late '79.

MS. TEETERS. I think I read someplace that 30 states have
overridden it.

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, that's right.

MR. GRAMLEY. One wants to remember also that historically
numbers of failures have not been procyclical; they were
countercyclical for many, many years. The reason was that when
business activity speeded up, the rate of business formation
accelerated and there were so many new firms coming out that there
tended to be more failures. But when there is a prolonged period in
which the rate of net business formation is low and there's a very
sharp acceleration in failures, I think it is an indication of growing
difficulty. The other thing that ought to be said is that one knows
just from raw logic about interest rates that small businesses will
have difficulty when they are paying 20 percent for credit and are
looking at a rate of increase of basic industrial and service prices
of between 8 and 9 percent. You can talk all you want about how the
interest cost is less taking taxes into account; but as a firm gets
closer and closer to the edge, the less relevant this tax calculation
becomes and the more the firm is going to be staring at the need to
pay 20 percent for credit. So, just abstracting, the problem has to
grow and grow and grow as time goes on. It's not surprising that Ed
is finding more and more signs of this.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And now you can sell your tax credit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. We had a group of people from about 20 medium and
large size businesses in last week and the reaction we had was very
similar to what Fred reported. In some specific fields and areas
there are relatively serious problems, but by and large we got the
feeling that there is an underpinning of strength. And there was
unanimous sentiment--as has been the case in the past--that if the Fed
were to do a flip-flop and become really expansive, it wouldn't solve
their problems. In other words, their message to me was: For
heaven's sakes hang in there. And we didn't sense any danger of a
precipitous decline. Of course this is a diversified Midwestern area.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. We're getting the same picture. In terms of
specifics, the optimistic points I found are the high-tech companies
in the Southeast, such as and
so on, which I visited in the last few weeks. They are all super



10/5-6/81

optimistic about the way things are going. Their earnings are growing
in the 20 to 30 percent range or higher. The technical service
industries of that type are doing very well. The weaknesses that we
find are in the areas that one would expect. We're seeing more and
more classified loans to developers. We also have in our section of
the country--in Atlanta, for example--a very high office vacancy rate
that is beginning to approach the problems we had in the mid-1970s in
terms of percent of vacant floor space and things like that. So,
we're finding significant signs of weakness both in commercial and
residential construction and in the lending institutions other than
banks, i.e. the thrifts. I find these days that just about every S&L
executive carries around in his pocket a schedule of weeks to go or
months to go in terms of how long the S&L's equity will last based on
its current earnings. There's a lot of worry in that industry. The
tourist industry in southeast Florida is way off. The state had its
slowest [tourist] season in the last ten years in the southern part of
Florida and that also affected related industries. The lumber
industry, which is big in our area, is also in dire straits because of
the housing situation; the carpet industry in Georgia, where we have
the capital of the world's carpet business, is beginning to come under
some stress. Putting all of this together, my feeling is that overall
we have a mixed picture. The economy is moving sideways. Some of the
industries are prospering and the ones we would expect to be hurt are
being hurt.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that among the bankers I have
talked with there's a growing sense of concern about small and medium
size businesses. Several of the bankers have commented that there are
bankruptcies that are in [train]--that at this point, nothing can be
done to defer them and they're just plain going to happen. Despite
that, just to echo Tony's comments, I haven't talked to anybody I
would regard as a responsible individual who would suggest that we
ought to change what we're doing. [They think] the course is
certainly the right one.

I just want to comment a bit on bankruptcies. Though that is
a statistic that is available and is followed, there are also a lot of
people who are just quietly going out of business at this point, and
that is not a statistic that we can follow very easily. And there are
a lot of people who feel that some of these small and medium size
companies are simply getting what they can out of the business before
they actually have to go into bankruptcy. So, this is having an
adverse impact on that group.

Let me ask Jim Kichline something on what he said about
construction. My impression is that major construction is holding up
pretty well in terms of orders and that kind of thing. Is that right?

MR. KICHLINE. You mean nonresidential?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, big construction.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, the orders in the last couple of months
have bounced up. On average they had been about flat from last winter
through much of the summer. But in the last couple of months we've
had two really big increases; it's a very volatile series. I'd say
the longer-term trend is rather flat in real terms.

-10-



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me a little surprising not to
see some weakness there, in the orders anyway. I understand there's a
lot in the pipeline. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. I'll say a couple of things. One is that many of
the small businesses are holding on and as such they're delaying or
[canceling] any orders for new equipment and delaying expansion, so
we're going to get some secondary effect from this curtailment. Many
of them have worked out financing arrangements at under prime so they
get a little relief on that score, and the banks have been cooperating
with them on that to hold them together. They complain about the
large companies not paying their bills more than [about] one another;
they say the large [companies are] carrying themselves through the
impact on some of the smaller companies. And this is a source of
complaint. Strangely enough, none of them that I've heard really
[favors] a change in Fed policy. They realize it's tough, but they
want us to hang with it still. Another point is that if we look at
large capital investments and that sort of thing, it's interesting to
see the changes that are taking place in the debt/equity ratios. It
used to be that a firm financed a building [entirely with] debt and no
equity and now the ratio is up to about 50/50, which is an interesting
turnaround in terms of the financing arrangements in our area. My
concern is largely that the crunch is going to come with some of the
financial institutions, not with some of the business firms, and that
the unexpected fallout or the repercussions may send shock waves
through the system. They talk about months until the end of the line.

MR. PARTEE. You're talking about thrifts?

MR. WINN. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Not banks.

MR. WINN. No, there are a few banks.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a large other subject, but one
can get a bit concerned about what one sees going on in the banking
system: companies being held alive by not very good lending and loans
to foreign countries being rescheduled with loans on top of loans.

MR. WINN. That's right. That is the thing I think is the
real [unintelligible] side of it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. We also see evidence that soft spots are
spreading, and it's not necessarily limited to small business. In the
Pacific Northwest, of course, there has been a long period now where
all kinds of small lumber mills have either closed their doors
permanently or have gone on indefinite furlough, but things are
spreading now even to the commercial side in the aerospace business.
Employment is down noticeably from where it had been at its peak
earlier in the year. Big aluminum companies are cutting back. These
are suppliers for housing, automobiles, and so forth. Even some of
the bigger companies are reporting capital spending cutbacks.
Agricultural prices--and agriculture is one of the big industries in
California--have been dropping partly due to a slippage in overseas
demand because of the strength of the dollar. We get fairly

-11-



10/5-6/81

widespread reports from our directors about further slowdowns in
retail sales. This pretty much confirms the prospect that we've been
looking at for some time now of a soggy economy. I'm not sure it adds
up to a cumulative serious downward spiral, but it's enough to give
some cause for concern.

MS. TEETERS. John, I noticed that 3 or 4 small banks in
Oregon are on the troubled bank list. Is Oregon particularly hard hit
at this point?

MR. BALLES. It really is. I think with one exception all of
our so-called problem banks are in the state of Oregon. And that's a
direct feedback from the very high unemployment rates, the closings of
these lumber mills, and so forth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. I don't think there's any doubt that in the
last month or two or so the signs of the long awaited credit quality
problems have begun to emerge in ways that bankers and other people
can see them. Frankly, I run into that point of view from virtually
all the bankers that I have had an opportunity to talk to. Indeed,
one prominent banker told me not too long ago that any banker who says
he's not seeing that either isn't looking or is lying. Be that as it
may, the one somewhat qualitative thing that I would add is that, in a
number of cases where people are willing to talk about these problems,
they tend to tell me that these were semi-marginal to marginal credits
to begin with. Maybe they shouldn't have extended to begin with; and
if they were having trouble at 10 or 12 percent, certainly they're
going to have trouble at 18 or 20 percent. I run into that kind of
attitude with some regularity, the point being that it's not just the
question of, say, housing or wood products or farmers, it's also a
question of the well-run business versus the not-so-well-run business
almost regardless of the nature of the business. But I don't think
there's any question that the problem is increasing.

Two other quick comments: One I find very curious, and that
is that throughout all of this I begin to sense a little backing away,
if I can put it that way, in terms of people's outlook for inflation
over the next months, which I can't attribute to anything except that
some of the euphoria of those really good consumer price index numbers
earlier in the year has worn off and people are now starting to get
back to reality. Those wage rates are there and those medical prices
are there, and the view is that, indeed, the next step on the road is
going to be a damn tough one. I perceive that now that we've gotten
to the point where businesses are starting to look hard at the
question of "Where do we go from here?" They are coming back to
reality, as it were, in terms of what still lies ahead with regard to
their own pricing decisions in an environment in which they obviously
all are looking for every opportunity they can find to pass through
costs to try to regenerate cash flow and profit margins. And I think
that is a curious thing to find at this point--the reevaluation of how
far we can really expect to go in the near term on inflation, given
all the forces that they see pushing on them in terms of their own
wage and price decisions.

On the economy, I would certainly agree that it's moving
downward. I don't see at the moment any evidence of a pervasive or

-12-



10/5-6/81

precipitous decline, but I would align myself with Willis Winn in
suggesting that the potential for that is clearly there. The biggest
single vulnerability in my judgment would be not so much that
something will happen to the thrift industry--I think that's all been
discounted--but that some other sizable financial shock may be looming
out there and none of us seems to know quite where it is or where its
ugly head might pop up. I think that risk is there. And if that kind
of thing were to happen, that might well change my view as to whether
or not there is some potential on the down side beyond what one would
find just by looking at the numbers in front of us today.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You touched upon the wage picture. I must
say I get a little discouraged sometimes when I look at wage
attitudes. The gentleman on my left is very optimistic on this score.
We had some big bankers in here a month or so ago who are all planning
to increase clerical salaries in a range of 11 to 15 percent next year
and who I understand believe this is typical of industry generally. I
suspect it is. How that is consistent with getting inflation down, if
this generalizes very far, I don't know. Not many people have
commented on that. If there are any additional comments to lend
insight as to how business or labor are reacting in this situation in
terms of prospective wage settlements, that's an interesting variable.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, you said I was optimistic; I am
optimistic. I'm optimistic because of just what Jerry Corrigan said.
I have never felt that there was any way to get inflation down without
putting pressure on business and labor. Put pressure on business and
they have to find a way to cut those costs because they don't have
[available] the path of least resistance of raising prices. And if
you put pressure on business, labor begins to get the point that if
they get too much in wages they won't have a business to work for. I
think that really is beginning to happen now and that's why I'm more
optimistic. Every business I know of out there is doing everything it
can to cut costs. When the Teamsters open the master contract because
they see some of their truckers going under, when the UAW talks about
job security instead of wage increases, and when Pan Am workers are
willing to take 10 percent cuts because the airlines are in trouble, I
think those are signs that we're at the point where something can
really start to happen. So, that's why I tend to be optimistic on the
subject.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question that there are some
scattered signs. I won't prejudice [the discussion]. The question is
how widespread they are.

MR. PARTEE. Scattered here and there.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I tend to feel the way Fred feels.
At that same lunch of business leaders I raised this question: What
kind of wage increases do you expect to pay next year? And much to my
surprise a lot of them who had factories that were in very depressed
conditions said they had already quietly begun to renegotiate and were
coming in with very low settlements. For those who had factories that
were doing much better, it was a different story. But there was a
rather selective approach; they were implying that if it was kept
quiet, they were getting trade union cooperation in the area.

-13-



10/5-6/81

MR. CORRIGAN. In terms of my own remarks, I didn't want to
leave [the impression] that all of it was on the wrong side of things.
In one sense I was trying to suggest that it was on the right side of
things because people were aggressively thinking about what to do.
And that in itself says something, because heretofore I think the
decision was almost automatic when the corporate business plan came
up. They just filled in the numbers and didn't even think about it.
So, I was trying to suggest that it's not all bad.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, [unintelligible] the typical big
businessman up until recently--he may be changing his mind--was ready
to give a 10, 11, 12 percent wage increase like falling off a log. He
thought that was a normal thing to do. That may be changing, but I--

MR. WINN. Some of our large national companies have quietly
renegotiated the COLA contracts out of their labor agreements. I
think that's a very positive step.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It sounds to me--

MR. WALLICH. Well, it has to be seen in the light of the
fact that there's a big tax cut in 1982. Nobody seems to take that as
a reason for having a lower wage increase. There would be more of a
real income increase than one would otherwise expect.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You're right; nobody relates a wage
increase to the fact that taxes are coming down.

MR. PARTEE. It comes from different parts.

MR. CORRIGAN. In most years that would get us in a lot of
trouble.

MR. WINN. Does anybody have a feel for what federal
government policy is going to be on this score?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the federal wage increase is set at
4.8 percent or something like that. Oh, you mean in the private
[unintelligible]. I meant in the government itself. They broke the
comparability link, so it moves in that direction. Of course, I think
the attitudes on the controllers' strike have had some bearing on this
climate in general, accidentally or otherwise. Mr. Boykin. We have
the good news coming up!

MR. BOYKIN. I'm a little embarrassed; I was trying to hold
off for a while. It's obvious from our comments in the Redbook that
the Eleventh District economy continues to be a bit of an outlier. We
haven't really seen any major change in economic activity down our way
in recent months. It's still pretty strong. The drilling boom for
oil and gas just seems to keep right on going. We don't see any signs
of weakening there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have so many holes in Texas that after
a while, it's going to--!

MS. TEETERS. You're talking about Texas [unintelligible]?

MR. BOYKIN. No, it's the [unintelligible].

-14-



10/5-6/81

MS. TEETERS. It's far and wide; it's headquartered out of
Houston is what it is.

MR. BOYKIN. Yes.

MR. SCHULTZ. There have been more oil wells drilled in the
continental United States than in the rest of the world put together.

MR. BOYKIN. The unfortunate thing is that they don't always
[succeed]. I know of one plot that was a dry hole.

Nonresidential construction continues very strong. And there
are a number of local government construction projects under way.
Just as an example, in Dallas at the end of last year we had a little
over 41 million square feet of office space. We are projecting an
additional 29 million in the next four years. Most of that is under
construction or firmly announced, so we'll be up to 70 million square
feet. Houston, of course, is now as strong as Dallas or even
stronger. It's going on in San Antonio [and] even out in Midland,
Texas, in the western part of Texas; a lot [is related to] oil
activity. On the [unintelligible] they're putting up a 40-story
building; I just hope it will stand up when a sand storm comes. As
for manufacturing strength, it's just concentrated in those industries
supplying the energy and nonresidential construction sectors. On the
financial side, I've not heard what Ed has heard. I will say, as
opposed to questions of immediate concern, that I do sense that people
are beginning to wonder a bit about what the next few months are going
to hold down our way. But, as far as any specifics, we don't have
any. I was talking to one small businessman in the franchising
business and he said they've slowed down a bit because they're trying
to franchise nationwide and it's a little slow in other parts of the
country but in Texas they're still opening new stores.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You need a McDonald's by every 70-story
office building!

MR. SCHULTZ. You mean an oil well by every 70-story
building!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. I'd just like to follow Bob to say that one half
of our District--the western part comprised of two or three states
plus Oklahoma--would fall in the category that he has just described,
and it's largely related to energy and energy development. They
continue to put down holes, successfully finding gas and oil in
Wyoming, Colorado, and in Oklahoma. There is a commercial building
boom in Denver, as Bob has described in Dallas and Houston, whereas
the rest of our District--and I'm speaking largely of Kansas City and
the Omaha area--does not share in that particular activity. On the
other hand, in the agricultural sector we've enjoyed one of the best
crop seasons that the District as a whole has experienced in many
years. The cattle and hog industries, although marginally profitable,
appear to have a somewhat brighter outlook. However, the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think the cattle is marginally
profitable?

-15-



10/5-6/81

MR. GUFFEY. Yes, marginally profitable at the moment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. I had a bunch of cattlemen in
here on Friday and they weren't very happy.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, some of them say they're losing from $30
to $100 a head, but they continue to lose that every year and remain
in business and drive Cadillacs. It's a rather strange operation.
But the fact of the matter is that the outlook for the profitability
of the red meat industry [in] the high plains area is much brighter
than it was, say, a year ago. By the same token there just does not
appear to be any evidence of additional upward pressure on food prices
stemming from the cattle/hog meat prices that may result from the
[somewhat brighter outlook].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What do you see going on in land prices--I
was asking those fellows on Friday about that--and in house prices
too? These cattlemen who were very upset conceded that land prices
weren't going down and might still be going up a little because of all
the outsiders coming in and buying land.

MR. GUFFEY. The latest information we have is that farm
prices have gone up but only marginally. They have been essentially
flat recently, with some increases in prices but not nearly to the
extent that they rose over the last 3 or 4 years. The rise has slowed
considerably. And residential prices are flat or actually decreasing,
at least in the eastern part of the District. In the western part of
the District, they can't build houses fast enough to accommodate the
growth, particularly in the Denver area. So, prices have not subsided
there.

MR. PARTEE. They're still building houses in Denver, Roger?

MR. GUFFEY. Yes. As a matter of fact, within the last 30
days there was an announcement of one of the largest developments in
the Denver area--the project is over $1 billion--to be undertaken.
It's well financed, no question about it being--

MS. TEETERS. You have some boom towns, don't you? Up in the
Wyoming and Montana areas, don't you have some towns that are starting
from scratch and--

MR. GUFFEY. Perhaps not from scratch, but some of the areas
are [unintelligible]. In the coal or other energy-related industries,
both oil and gas, we have some camp cities where people are housed
essentially in temporary housing simply because they are in boom
communities. That's particularly true in Wyoming and on parts of the
western slope of Colorado. One thing that I would like to mention is
that I have met with the homebuilders in our District and probably the
rest of the presidents at least and perhaps the Board members will
have an opportunity to meet with homebuilders also. I hear two
curious comments. One is that they're about to go out of business and
they need some relief. By the same token, and almost in the same
breath, they say that they believe Federal Reserve policy to be the
correct policy and thus they feel uneasy about even coming to talk
with us. They recognize that the relief they need is legislative
relief rather than an easing of interest rates through monetary
policy. It seems to me a rather curious turn. I understand that

-16-



10/5-6/81

today is the day they're going to present keys to everybody. I met
with them last week and their message is for the Federal Reserve to
hold tight but that they need relief.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's the [view] nationwide. It's everywhere.
It's really remarkable. I have been meeting a lot with homebuilders;
I went up to Boston to talk to the board of directors of the National
Association of Homebuilders. Would you believe that their board of
directors is 1800 people? That was exactly the [sentiment]: I'm
dying, what are you doing to me? But you have to hang in there and
get rid of inflation.

MR. GUFFEY. As a matter of fact, I know that you were up
there. Our homebuilders spoke of your speech to the board of
directors.

MR. BOEHNE. They talk about the federal deficit. I've met
with some of them and they talk about how the deficit ought to be
shrunk. They realize that's not the Fed's problem but they just want
us to listen. I found the same thing, actually. They were remarkably
understanding; there was a commitment to what the Fed is doing [along]
with these same cries that something has to be done. But when you
talk to them they tend to push the blame off on Congress or wherever
and not so much on the Fed. In their more emotional moments, they--

MR. CORRIGAN. You have to understand, though, that when they
talk to Congress, they turn the whole thing around.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Don't kid yourself. I think without
question there's a lot of support now. There's a lot of concern about
the budget deficit and a lot of understanding among business leaders
and association leaders in many areas. But there's a lot of anger
growing out there. It tends to be: The Federal Reserve controls
interest rates and the Federal Reserve ought to do something about
them. It's not exactly below the surface. And when it will erupt
like Mt. Vesuvius, I don't know.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the reaction in the Congress
since they came back is exaggerated in terms of business opinion for
the reasons that have been talked about. The Congress is frustrated
and is receiving an enormous amount of criticism, much of it having to
do with the budget deficit. And when members of Congress talk to you
and other members of the Board here in Washington I think they are
reflecting not a focused criticism of the Fed but a general criticism
of conditions by their constituents. I'm not saying that the Fed is
exempt, not by any means, but I wouldn't interpret the Congressional
complaints regarding how their constituents feel about the Fed and
conditions as being focused on us. That is the way it comes out of
Congressional mouths. I have talked to a few Congressmen up in the
New York area and we got into this shading--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you have to make a
distinction. A lot of [the criticism] has been focused on the budget
deficit, fortunately, which is where it should be. On the other hand,
for both political and real reasons, I'm very skeptical of how much
progress is going to be made on the spending side. The Democrats
don't have much incentive; they're fairly happy. The Republicans are
worried; they feel they've cut spending. It's going to be very hard

-17-



10/5-6/81

to make the next cuts. There will be some but how much relative to
the size of the problem is very questionable. I think you've talked
to fairly sophisticated people; I'm talking about the people who are a
little less sophisticated perhaps. And they're just getting angry.

MS. TEETERS. It's compounded by the fact that the original
rounds of cuts are just being felt. Most of them just started the
middle of last week so that the reactions, particularly by state and
local governments and recipients of transfer payments, are just now
being felt.

MR. BOEHNE. I had 8 or 9 people in for lunch a couple weeks
ago and I asked them how many of their Congressmen who voted for the
tax and budget cuts last time would vote for them this time. I found
about eight Congressmen represented and the group thought that two
would not support another round of budget cuts. It wasn't a very big
margin at the beginning, so two out of eight represents--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. I want to make just one additional comment about
the agricultural sector because it's a change from what I have
reported at previous meetings. I have commented in the past that
rates have had a negative impact, but within the last few weeks there
has been a growing wave of pessimism. I'm really now talking about
the grain side as opposed to the meat side. Production figures keep
going up and, therefore, prices keep coming down. And net cash income
for the farmers in our area is being reduced rather continually. It
now looks as if income for this year will be lower than in any year
since 1977. And that's unadjusted for inflation. If you adjust for
inflation, you have to go back a long, long way to have a year that is
going to be like this year. About 40 percent of the farms are debt
free and are not impacted by [high interest rates]; 60 percent have
some debt and, therefore, this is a very significant problem for them.
Here again, the lenders are beginning to get very uneasy about their
agricultural credits. They're worried about debt coverage ratios, the
leverage, etc. So, the farm industry in our area is getting very
concerned.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we've exhausted this subject. We
can turn to Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see
Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The subtleties of Mr. Axilrod's analysis
may not be fully grasped by the Chairman in all respects, but we can
perhaps clarify [them in] the discussion. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Steve, would you repeat the part near the end of
your statement where you spoke of an increased demand for M-1B having
some effect on the necessity of trying to get M-1B up to the lower end
of the range? I was lost.

MR. AXILROD. I was just thinking that in the last 3 months
of the year it's possible that there may be some rebound from this
very low growth that we have had in M-1B. The rebound in itself could
tend to increase M2 because I was assuming that it wouldn't

-18-



10/5-6/81

necessarily mean that people were taking deposits out of other
components of M2 and putting them in M-1B but simply were putting more
money in M-1B in general that they would have put other places because
they realized their cash was low relative to what they normally would
expect it to be in relation to income.

MR. ROOS. In terms of positioning ourselves, Mr. Chairman,
it seems to me that we have to think of our vulnerability from a
public opinion point of view if the economy remains soft, as it
probably will, to the end of the year. If we visibly fail to bring
M-1B into its range, won't people who are exaggerating the effect of
so-called tight policy by the Fed have something to hang us with when
they actually see that M-1B has come in below [its range]? I don't
know whether that's a greater danger than the possibility of some
misinterpretation of [the growth that] would be necessary to bring it
into the range. It seems to me, if we are thinking of public opinion
--and maybe we shouldn't be--that the question is whether the heat of
coming in below the range and being accused of precipitating a
recession is greater or less than the possible misinterpretation of a
degree of temporary expansiveness to bring M-1B into the range. Those
are two fundamental issues [that bear on] public response. But maybe
we shouldn't be concerned about that aspect of our policy.

MR. PARTEE. Steve, didn't you say 12 percent growth from
September to December does not get us back to the range? That is,
December is back to the track, but people will still be able to read
the fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter growth even then, as I read the
Bluebook, as 3 percent rather than 3-1/2 percent.

MR. AXILROD. That's right, given the patterns of the months
within the quarter. If it so happened that October was a very strong
month instead of November and December, you might hit [the lower limit
of the range]. We were assuming October will be--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This arithmetic gets rather drastically
changed by the estimates of the money supply for the past two weeks,
of which one week is still doubtful. And the first week in October
may also be doubtful; we don't know very much about it. Let me ask
one purely statistical question, Mr. Axilrod, so we know what we are
talking about here. It may be covered in the Bluebook. Even in
alternative C, let's say, which is 9-1/2 percent for M2, we are above
the range. That half percent is your estimate of a somewhat
extraordinary impact of all savers certificates or something?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the best we could come up with is that
the range of impact would probably be on the order of 1/4 to 3/4 of a
percentage point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is some assumption that [money]
comes into all savers out of what would otherwise be in M2. Where is
that from and what evidence would you have for it when it happens?

MR. AXILROD. We have virtually no evidence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You haven't any evidence; you wouldn't
have the evidence now because you don't know the statistics. But
where would you find that evidence?

-19-



10/5-6/81

MR. AXILROD. Well, we are going to ask questions in the
Michigan survey of an admittedly small sample. We are going to ask
those who have all savers certificates, what was the immediate source
of those funds. That would be the only direct evidence we would have;
otherwise it would be a matter of analyzing the data that we have
available.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably, you would look where:
for individual holdings of Treasury securities or something?

MR. AXILROD. We would want to look for unusual behavior of
time and savings deposits and money market funds. If they began to
behave unexpectedly relative to what--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but they are all in M2, let's say.

MR. AXILROD. Oh, yes. But if we could account for
everything that happens to all savers certificates from that, that
doesn't leave much residual for [funds coming from] elsewhere.
Essentially in this assumption we have assumed that in the fourth
quarter only about $3 to $5 billion comes out of non-M2 assets other
than retail RPs, and we have assumed that two-thirds of the retail
RPs--$10 billion out of $15 billion of RPs--goes into all savers
certificates. The reason that I am uncertain between the 1/4 and the
3/4 of a percentage point is that we have to make a further assumption
regarding how much of those retail RPs would have come out of M2 to
begin with or how much would have come out of non-M2 type assets. We
have essentially assumed very little, really, coming out of non-M2
assets. It's practically negligible if you eliminate the retail RPs
and they were in M2 in any event.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Will you assume those are in M2? And you
say apart from that you are only estimating $5 billion or so.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, $3 to $5 billion. About a 1/4--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That only makes 1/4.

MR. AXILROD. That only makes 1/4 added to this.

MS. TEETERS. Is that an addition to this 9-1/2 percent
[growth for the year] in alternative C or is that [included]?

MR. AXILROD. No, [M2 growth for the year] would be 9-1/4
percent, abstracting from that.

MR. RICE. Steve, did I hear you say that if we tried to
increase M-1B so that it moves back toward the lower end of the target
range from where it is now, given the demand for M-1B, that would in
effect be inflationary because we would be giving people more money
presumably than they want to hold? Is that correct?

MR. AXILROD. Well, what I said was there's a degree to which
it would be; we think it would entail a sharp drop in short-term
interest rates over the next 2 or 3 months.

MR. RICE. Any increase in M-1B?

-20-



10/5-6/81

MR. AXILROD. No, [raising its growth] to that 12 percent,
which would be needed to get it back [into the range]. And if you
happen to think that there's a sizable pent-up demand for goods and
services, as some of us on the staff think--some may not--then we
could have a very sharp rebound in spending and a sharp rebound in
interest rates later in order to keep money under control. And if
that large money growth sets off a sharp rebound in spending, I think
the progress made in curbing inflationary expectations would be lost.
That's one analysis that one could make. If you think the economy is
extremely weak in any event and no one is going to do much when short
rates go very low, then you might not come to that conclusion. That's
what I was saying at the end of my statement.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, does it make sense to continue
doing the adjustment for the shifts into NOW accounts?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think it made a lot of sense earlier,
obviously. It has been making a degree of less sense, but I think we
need to have a shift adjusted series to evaluate the year properly.
Therefore, it has been our thought that we might as well continue at
least until year-end, just because that is what we have done for the
last several months, and at that point change over. We would have to
keep presenting a shift adjusted series even if we didn't shift adjust
each month. If we said the shift adjustment was now in effect zero,
we would still need a shift adjusted series for the year. So it just
seems simpler to continue on to year-end; the differences are small
now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you have currently any direct evidence
of what the basis for this shift adjustment is?

MR. AXILROD. Very little. We are getting less frequent data
on the shifts and we have not changed our assumption. One piece of
evidence is that we do have data that new NOW accounts are still being
opened at a sizable pace. But we can't tell what is happening to the
deposits in the NOW accounts that were opened earlier this year. That
money could be going out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But you have evidence that new NOW
accounts are still being opened and that some significant proportion
is coming from outside of demand deposits?

MR. AXILROD. Well, we have stuck with our past assumptions;
we only get survey data on that about every three months now instead
of every month, so I'm not exactly up to date on it.

MR. CORRIGAN. Steve, I have a technical question on a
different subject. I can't quite understand the recent relationship
between the reserve numbers and the money numbers. One of your tables
shows, for example, that you estimate that total required reserves in
September grew by 17.9 percent. I know we have all these shifts going
on in terms of reserves phasing up and down and across and all the
rest, but when I look at the components across the board, it's very
hard for me to see where one can find anything that would account for
that much of an increase in required reserves.

MR. AXILROD. Well, in September, in terms of amounts--this
is under a lagged accounting regime--we have a $592 million dollar

-21-



10/5-6/81

increase in required reserves, which is the 17.9 percent at an annual
rate that you referred to. Of that amount, $319 million is in savings
and time deposits, which is mainly large CDs in that period. [Most
of] the rest of it is in transactions deposits, which include OCDs,
demand deposits, U.S. government deposits, net interbank deposits, and
telephone transfers. And the remaining $4 million--I had to do this
accounting--was in nonmember commercial banks and others and can be
accounted for, with the large bulk of the increase coming from items
that are not in M-1B. If you pretend that the accounting was
contemporaneous--

MR. CORRIGAN. Oh, that's right; you're picking up that big
August jump.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. It would be a quite smaller
increase.

MR. PARTEE. But in September M-1B went up not at all.

MR. AXILROD. That's right; it's only the last two weeks of
August and the first two weeks of September that get into this. If
you pretend that it's contemporaneous, then the transactions deposits
part is in September and instead of being [an increase of] $269
million it's only $49 million. Don't forget that currency was quite
negative. So, if the rate of growth in total reserves in September on
a contemporaneous basis, so to speak, is 7 percent, [growth in] total
required reserves is 7 percent. Total reserve [growth] on a lagged
basis is much higher.

MR. CORRIGAN. Those large CDs are still at what--3 percent?

MR. AXILROD. They're phasing down to where they're 5/8ths of
whatever they were originally, which was, I keep forgetting--maybe 6
percent.

MR. PARTEE. I think it was 6.

MR. AXILROD. 5/8ths of 6.

MR. CORRIGAN. Oh, that's right.

MR. AXILROD. They're down now. Starting in September they
are 5/8ths of 6 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is it 5/8ths of 6 or 5/8ths of the
difference between 3 and 6?.

MR. AXILROD. It's 5/8ths of the difference between 3 and 6--
that's where we are--slipping to zero.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You may be interested--this sounds like a
little more reliable report--that Mr. Sadat clearly was hit, but they
say no vital organs were hit and he's being operated on and said to be
not critical.

The observation was just made--it's a peculiarity and I don't
know if anybody has a logical explanation--that the weakness in M1

-22-



10/5-6/81

partly reflects an extraordinary weakness in currency in terms of
general trends. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I want to compliment Mr. Axilrod on his
statement this morning. I've heard him and his predecessors make many
statements over the years, but I don't think I've heard a more weighty
or meaty set of comments given to this Committee. I particularly
liked his comments about the need to look at what is going on in the
real economy to make some ultimate judgment.

MR. PARTEE. We do tend to forget that.

MR. GRAMLEY. That's particularly apropos when these monetary
aggregates are so slippery and so difficult to interpret. I think we
have ended up with an economy that has had more restraint on it during
the course of this year than we had expected earlier. And, frankly,
we have had more restraint than I personally would have wanted in the
sense that I think our objectives over the long run are not likely to
be maximized by permitting the economy to slip into a couple quarters
of negative growth like this. If we could somehow fine-tune--and I'm
not suggesting we try--and keep the economy growing at zero or a
slightly positive rate, I think we would be better off. The pressures
to do something to turn it around are going to intensify if we
continue to have negative growth. The structural damage that is being
created is also growing, and I strongly agree with Ed Boehne that we
have a real problem there.

[Steve's] comments about M2--as to why M2 can be a very
slippery guide--I thought were particularly interesting. When we
watch M2 and try to limit it, we induce innovations that in turn tend
to make M2 continue to grow. As a consequence, interest rates go up
and that weakens the economy. So, if we slow the growth of M-1B even
more--. I look back at the past couple of months and I wish I had
listened to my colleague, Governor Partee, about why we need to pay
more attention to M-1B in a period like this. I think one of the
things we need to do in our decisions today is to make sure we don't
do what in effect we have done in the past couple of months, which is
literally to ignore M-1B. We have given almost entire weight to M2,
the way the period worked out. That wasn't what we intended, but
that's the way it happened. I don't think we can adopt a policy today
that is designed to make M-1B get back up in the target range by the
fourth quarter or by December. That would just induce a collapse of
interest rates. We would have the economy growing like gangbusters in
the first half of next year and then we would be in real trouble. But
what we do have to do, I think, is to make sure we pay more attention
to M-1B than we have in the recent past.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just pick up on one point you made.
I have no doubt about the enormous weight of Mr. Axilrod's
presentation. But the point about M2 I must confess went right over
my head.

MR. GRAMLEY. Maybe we ought to have him repeat it. It was a
good point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He can repeat it, but he's going to have
to repeat it in different words so far as I am concerned.

-23-



10/5-6/81

MR. AXILROD. All I had in mind, Mr. Chairman, was that M2 is
increasingly becoming like that because it has money market funds,
money market certificates, and small savers certificates in it. If
the System is holding back on reserves, let's say, in a period of
strong money demand, interest rates go up. If the return on these
instruments that are in money deposits doesn't go up, then you'll get
restraint on money relatively easily, in effect, because people will
shift out of deposits into something else.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You'll get restraint on M2 relatively
easily.

MR. AXILROD. If the money definition covers only things that
have market interest rates on them, then as we hold back on reserves
in the face of [strong] money demand, market rates tend to go up. The
banks and other financial institutions raise their offering rates on
these deposits so that the gap between the market rates and the
deposit rates, in effect, doesn't change very much. People still
demand those things because that gap hasn't changed. We have to hold
back on reserves even further; that forces rates up more.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I understand all that; M2 doesn't decline
the way it used to when we would run into deposit ceilings.

MR. AXILROD. Well, no, I didn't mean that. What I meant was
that interest rates move more rapidly than they used to.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And interest rates may move more rapidly
as a result of that. I don't understand that it follows that M2 is in
some sense artificially swelled by this and gives you a--

MR. AXILROD. No, I didn't say that. I said the
nontransactions component will rise relative to M-1B in this present
environment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I agree with. It rises relative to
M-1B. But I don't understand that it follows that M2 is in some sense
artificially--

MR. AXILROD. No, no.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Artificially isn't the word. I don't
understand that the expansion in M-1B is giving a false signal as to
the credit growth in the economy or the monetary growth in the
economy.

MR. AXILROD. No, my only point was that given this behavior
of the assets in M2, if there was increasing need in the context to
constrain M2, it would follow that M-1B would be weaker than one might
have "expected." I also think short rates might have been somewhat
higher than the staff was predicting all along. They probably are a
bit higher. And my only evidence that this was real restraint is that
the short rates in real terms were quite high. They are not only
nominally high short rates; they are also high, in quotes, "real"
short rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess I don't see the conclusion from
what has happened that in some sense we were tighter than we intended

-24-



10/5-6/81

to be. Also, if I may just make a point here, I don't think it is
accurate to say we haven't been following M-1B. The borrowings have
gone way down, particularly with the sinking spell at the end of
September. M-1B obviously isn't as high as we intended, but I think
that is why borrowings have gone down. We didn't make some
discretionary adjustments we could have made. But, certainly, the
fact that pressures on reserve positions have eased as much as they
have is because we were looking at M-1B.

MR. AXILROD. No, what I was saying is that to the degree the
Committee gives more weight to an aggregate that has market rates as
offering rates, you get a prompter response in interest rates, I
think, than you would if you give weight to something that doesn't
have such rates. And in the limit--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [don't] know if it's prompter; you
certainly get a larger one.

MR. AXILROD. That's right. And, in the limit, if you had an
aggregate that only had market rates in it, I would see almost no way
to control it except through control of the economy itself. If you
conceive of something where rates kept going up, finally you'd get GNP
so weak that the transactions demand for that aggregate or the savings
demand--. But, obviously, we are not at that stage.

MR. ROOS. What is the rationale that if short-term interest
rates decline that might result in stimulus to the economy beginning
next year? And what were the negative consequences of that? I don't
know whether it was Lyle or someone else who said that.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I can tell you what I would regard as the
negative consequences, and that is that I agree with Governor Schultz
that we have the potential for a big breakthrough on union wages next
year. Union wages have gotten way, way out of line with non-union
wages. You close that gap in one or two ways: Either non-union wages
catch up or union wage growth slows down. We need a very sluggish
economy in 1982 to make reasonably certain that that gap is going to
be closed by a slowdown in union wages. But I don't want an economy
that's sluggish by having it nosedive and then come roaring back
again.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have all kinds of problems. You
mentioned one kind of perceptual problem, Larry. I guess Lyle and
others are worried about both perceptual and real problems in other
connections more related to interest rates. Let me tell you just from
a public relations standpoint that there is great restiveness and
anger, as I said before, growing out there. That would be relieved,
obviously, by some decline in interest rates. But in some way the
worst thing that could happen to us is to have a great sense of relief
for a month or two or three that interest rates are coming down--I'm
now talking public reaction and not policy--and then have them racing
up again. I think the public patience for climbing up the hill very
rapidly again may be extremely limited.

MS. TEETERS. Public patience for staying on top of the hill
won't last.

-25-



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Hence, public patience is getting limited
in all directions. It's a question of--

MR. PARTEE. A technical point on M2 that I would make, Paul,
is that we have to remember that we are factoring in new elements of
market-related rates as time goes on. That can give a first
difference in M2 that we are coming to a steady state.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, to the extent funds come in from
outside M2.

MR. PARTEE. They tend to because we have more [components of
M2] that are at a market rate, and the staff didn't take that into
account when they gave us their ranges at the beginning of the year.
And, by the way, the Committee didn't take those ranges; we reduced
the ranges, as Nancy often points out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a simple common sense analysis that I
have used on many occasions. There are some institutional changes
that have depressed M1 and increased M2. It must be the case since
there is a discrepancy between them. We didn't have to operate on
both of them, I suppose, but certainly the discrepancy is bigger than
expected. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to say
that I agree with a lot of what Governor Gramley said the first time.
I'm not sure about his second statement.

MR. GRAMLEY. Why not all?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What he said the second time he said
the first time, too.

MR. RICE. No, not quite. I think the staff forecast is
about right. I agree with their view that there's no solid evidence
at present that the economy is in the process of a sharp downturn,
despite the softening tendencies that we see. But it seems to me
there is a danger that the weakening that we see in progress will gain
momentum and could possibly become cumulative. That is just a
possibility. I don't see it, but it's possible. And much of what
I've heard this morning increases my anxiety that there may be more
financial strain out there than we recognize at the moment. One
possible result of that is that a downturn could gather momentum. In
the circumstances, I think our policy should seek to avoid encouraging
any process of a cumulative downturn. It would not do that, I
believe, if we accepted a much lower rate of growth in M-1B than was
targeted. On the other hand, I think policy should avoid any attempt
to achieve a precipitous easing of money and credit at this time.
What we should do is to aim at maintaining current conditions while
gradually trying to nudge M-1B back in the direction of the lower end
of its target. It may well require some slight reduction in interest
rates to maintain current conditions, but I think that would be
desirable at the present time. This suggests to me that alternative B
would make the most sense in the current situation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just suggest that we can break
pretty soon for coffee but that anybody who wants to make some general
comments of the sort that have been made do so. I think that is

-26-



10/5-6/81

useful. Let's dispose of that before asking everybody to make a
[specific policy] comment. If the spirit doesn't move anyone, we'll
go and have some coffee and come back and get more specific.

MR. WALLICH. Well, it seems to me we're seeing again what is
the nature of a stable money supply target. It leads to very wide
swings in interest rates. That in turn leads to possibly wide swings
and very quick swings in the economy, with a ceiling placed over
expansion and a floor probably placed under any contraction, but
unfortunately with a great deal of damage being done to the machinery
while these gyrations proceed. So, I'm concerned about a move to get
back on track with M-1B. I think we're better off considering that as
progress against inflation and money in the bank and not trying to
undo it. I think we're in danger of repeating 1980. And back in 1980
I said that we were in danger of repeating 1971-79. We didn't do
that; we did much worse. [I'd] preclude any risk on this score here.
I do have to say, contrary to the implication of what I've said so
far, that if I understand Steve correctly about M2, it sounds as
though he is saying it's perversely interest elastic. That is, the
higher interest rates go, the faster it grows. For that there is a
precedent in the British experiment with sterling M3. They made that
their number one target and it kept growing very fast. The
implication seems to be that it attracted funds from outside the
monetary aggregates, out of non-monetary assets, and so it grew faster
the higher interest rates went and, therefore, substantially misled
them. Evidently the aggregate they should have looked at was more
nearly M1.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure I heard Steve saying
that.

MR. AXILROD. No, I was saying--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought I might have heard him say that
the first time around; the second time around, I don't think so.

MR. AXILROD. No, I was saying that there would be a tendency
for that to occur because the depository institutions would raise the
rates pari passu with market rates. And to the extent to which the
Committee was determined to hit M2--and it probably could--that meant
that rates would have to move up even faster, at the limit to the
point where income was so affected that there wasn't enough savings to
put in M2.

MR. WALLICH. Well, that's exactly what happened in England.
Income was affected so much by high rates that M2, which after all is
largely a function of income, slowed down as they achieved their
sterling M3 [objective]. They got it under control but precisely by
the route you described.

MR. PARTEE. Which was a big recession.

MR. WALLICH. It was a big recession. Now, on the other
hand, I see M-1B--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure that's saying anything but
that that's the way monetary policy works whatever M you use.

-27-



10/5-6/81

MR. WALLICH. No, it worked excessively. In other words, had
they been guided by M1, they probably would not have been as tight as
they were in pursuit of an ever rising sterling M3.

MR. PARTEE. I think that's right.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I have the same doubts about M-1B.
However, I think it is underspecified, whether you call that a very
strong demand shift, high velocity growth, or whether you say that
some part of money market mutual funds or other [liquid assets] ought
to be included as transactions balances. In any event, it seems to me
that it is potentially misleading to take it at face value and,
therefore, some undershooting of M-1B as now specified doesn't seem to
me to be as important as it would otherwise. That gets one back, of
course, to looking at the real economy and looking at interest rates.
Now, as I see the real economy, I recognize that we've had a very poor
growth performance. But we've not had that bad a performance in
unemployment; 7.5 percent is bad but it isn't as bad as one might have
thought we would get from this degree of restraint; presumably,
productivity is the main cause. So, I think we have to resign
ourselves to low and occasionally negative growth for a while.
Interest rates presumably will come down somewhat. I think if the
public perceived that as an easing action, we would throw off
altogether the wrong signal; we would get people saying that we've
stopped fighting inflation and are starting to fight recession. And,
I think the businessmen and bankers who say "We're hurting, but hang
on" are precisely conscious of that. Then we would get another round
and face the same problems at higher rates of inflation and,
therefore, higher rates of interest. It's better to sit it out this
time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I want to take off from a comment that
Mr. Roos made on the subject of credibility. That's an issue that all
of us have wondered about and thought about, particularly in view of
the fact that there is a lot of pressure on this institution. We've
had a lot of bills introduced in the Congress to restructure the
Federal Reserve or to do away with it or, perhaps the one that makes
the most sense, to impeach all members of the Open Market Committee!
At any rate, it strikes me that our credibility is not at issue when
it comes to whether we hit the bottom of the target on M-1B or not.
Our credibility is really at issue in the more basic question of
whether we are going to do the job that I think we were in essence
created to do. It seems to me that the basic function of a central
bank is to avoid deflation on one hand and inflation on the other.
And I'm not terribly sure how successful we can be fine-tuning in
between. My feeling is that maybe we shouldn't call this the moment
of truth because it's going to be a lot longer than that. It's going
to be a period of truth. I don't fear all of these bills that are in
the Congress to change the Federal Reserve if we do our basic job of
finally getting inflation under control. If we don't do that job,
then what the heck is our reason for being? How do we justify our
existence under those circumstances? It seems to me our basic raison
d'etre would be gone. So, I think that's where the credibility issue
is: whether we are in fact going to do the job that we were created
to do. We've been criticized in the past, and I think a lot of that
criticism is proper. But now we're at the point where we have to

-28-



10/5-6/81

carry through and get the job done. I'm certainly not attempting to
say that we ought to crush the economy but we just can't lose sight of
the basic fact that what we're trying to do is to keep that steady
pressure on--we have some luck here in food and fuel prices--and if we
keep the pressure on, we can get some movement in the wage-price
structure and begin to get this spiral going in the other direction.

So, I for one think alternative C is the one that makes the
difference. I agree that M-1B has problems and that M2 has problems,
so it seems to me sensible to look at both of them and in some way to
incorporate both of them in the directive. I would get terribly
worried about going much faster than [alternative C] on M-1B because
what happens, then, when we get to January? Not only do we run the
risk of stimulating these latent demands--. Mr. Roos asked what
difference interest rates make. Well, it strikes me that we've been
keeping the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy under a great
deal of pressure. And if interest rates do go down, that has a
stimulative effect on those sectors of the economy. And then what do
we do when we get to January if we're not going to pick targets that
are lower than what we have here? If we're going to go to 6 percent
or even faster [M-1B growth at this point], what happens then? Do we
then tighten the screws and get the up and down effect again? So,
anything that's faster than "C" would worry me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I'll just make a general
comment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Pardon me? We're just making general
comments.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I understand. The conventional
Wall Street view that you can't get inflation down without a
significant recession is still heard in the financial community, but
they all admit that if it's a typical short, sharp recession--six to
nine months of downswing--it probably won't do much for inflationary
expectations. People in the financial community and in the business
community would expect that when the economy recovers the inflation
level would then be back again at somewhere near the earlier level. I
feel very strongly--I think many of us do, and I think Lyle and Henry
were both saying this although in slightly different sounding ways--
that we really need a sustained period of zero or very low real growth
to change inflationary expectations. And, politically, in terms of
the tolerance for our monetary policy, it also is somewhat better than
the roller coaster. In addition, this time, given our present
techniques, if we have a roller coaster in the real economy, we're
likely to see the Henry Kaufman thesis prove true: That if we have a
sustained upswing next year, interest rates will go to levels even
higher than they did in the earlier peak.

From all that, I conclude that we should try to follow a
policy that focuses on what interest rate levels [we need] over the
next few months and what path we should take to give us an economy
that is neither in significant recession--or not even in technical
recession if possible--and yet avoids the kinds of conditions that
will lay a basis for an explosion later on. There is an enormous
amount of pent-up demand. I find [staggering] the amount of bond

-29-



10/5-6/81

issues that corporate executives passing through my office talk about
being ready to start placing if interest rates come down just 2 or 3
points. Now, obviously, some of that will recede when interest rates
do come down, if they do, 2 or 3 points in the long end of the market;
some of them will want to wait for another 1- or 2-point drop. Even
so, there will be an enormous volume of activity in the bond market
and activity in the economy if we have too big a decline, if we repeat
the 1980 pattern. So, given the confusion in the aggregates--given
the fact that we're undershooting one and overshooting the other and
all these changes that have been talked about--it seems to me that we
ought to be a little more sensitive to the implications of interest
rate movements in terms of their impact on the real economy in order
to achieve, hopefully, the zero or slightly positive real growth that
we've been talking about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I would mention the fact that the
fiscal outlook has changed rather substantially since our last
meeting, and that's going to have an expectational effect that will
probably put us to a much greater degree at the friction point here in
terms of our struggle. I don't think we should ignore that aspect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I just have a quick comment. I agree with
Tony that what we have to do is run our strategy for the long pull
because it's going to take the long pull to get inflation down. I
think it would be a very serious indictment of the Federal Reserve if
it encourages a recession of size in this environment. I read the
history of the Federal Reserve as indicating it was set up to provide
an elastic currency, not that it was set up to stop inflation and pay
no attention to the economy, Fred. Indeed, I think that's the thrust
of the whole first 50 years of the System and its origins. What we
have to do is to avoid seeming to add to a strong recessionary thrust,
because I think we will lose the ball game if we do that. Now, I
believe that serious protracted shortfalls from the lower end of our
targets will give us exactly that image. I would not be so worried if
M-1B in the next three months goes up 7 or 8 percent. That would be
all right; we'll be below the target, but that's all right. What I'm
worried about is that we'll have another 5-point shortfall from what
we expect in the fourth quarter as we did in the third. And I think
we have to guard greatly against that problem.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If nobody else is thrusting their hand
upward or whatever, we'll go have a coffee break.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [In response to your question about Mr.
Sadat,] he's either dead or alive, and that's all we know.

MS. TEETERS. Has there been a market reaction?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The dollar was up some, but not all that
much. The gold price is up pretty far. Our intervention policy isn't
associated with it.

-30-



10/5-6/81

Well, I think we can proceed with somewhat more precise
comments at this point. I don't know right now if I have anything in
particular to add. I don't have much faith in any of these
projections, I must say, as to the statistical relationships between
borrowings and the money supply or interest rates or whatever. I
think we have to assume that those relationships are highly unstable,
to say the least. And the probability distribution around these
estimates, if they are perfect as a measure of the central tendency,
is enormously wide. I don't think anybody really has the faintest
idea what the money supply is going to do on its own in the next month
or three months. And I think we have to take that into account in
making our decisions. The volatility of interest rates is a problem.
The economy is soft; in some sense in the very short run there may be
some risk of it getting softer rather than stronger. But there is a
major risk, which a number of people have alluded to, of a yo-yo
performance of the economy. That isn't going to be very helpful in
terms of our longer-range objectives if it gets up a head of steam
again in a time perspective of 6 months or so. Having said that much,
let's proceed. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. Building on the remarks that a number of people
have made, including what you just said, I would come down on
alternative B. Our feeling in Atlanta, in looking at behavior of the
aggregates, is that the alleged undershoot on M-1B is probably
overrated as a worry. We feel that some adjustment should be made for
the money market funds. Even if we put it at a tiny fraction of the
money market funds, we would say that M-1B has been somewhat stronger
than it appears in the adjusted figures. So I'm not too concerned
about the undershoot, although the direction of the shift would be
toward getting us back into the range. Looking at the alternatives
that the staff has prepared, the one that looks most reasonable to me
is something like "B" with a side constraint of some sort on M2 so
that we stay around the upper end of M2 while we are at it. The fed
funds range, if we are going to continue with the process, is sort of
centered on where the fed funds rate has been in the last day or two,
so that doesn't look bad to me either. So, I'd pretty much go with
the targets of alternative B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Well, Mr. Chairman, before we get into my
specific comments on the alternatives, I'd again like to raise the
question I brought up last month, which has to do with the relative
weighting of M2 and M1. Yesterday I was asking Peter and Steve
whether they had any particular insight about what looks to be a
sudden very sharp collapse in M-1B. Steve made a very germane comment
--I think we've often noticed this before--that these monetary
aggregates may be telling us something about spreading weakness in the
economy. One never knows that until well after the event. In any
case, I would again like to refer to the way we used to give about
equal weight in a judgmental sense to both M1 and M2. It seems to me
that over the past several months, with the way the proviso clause has
worked, there has been a risk of what I would view as overemphasis on
M2, and I would hope to get back to a more equal weighing of those two
[aggregates]. If we don't, we may have a real problem--at least in a
public relations sense and possibly in an economic sense--of letting
M1 go down too far.

-31-



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just inject that there is an
official report here that Mr. Sadat is dead.

Did you complete your comments?

MR. BALLES. At the moment, yes sir.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would associate my views
clearly with Governor Schultz. I think alternative C is where we
should be. He did a very fine job expressing the reasons, so I won't
be repetitious by going through them again. But I'm strongly for "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems clear, at
least to me, from the discussion around the table that the
informational value of M-1B particularly--and maybe M2 or all the
aggregates--is suspect. As a result, I think we have to refer to what
I believe Governor Gramley first cited, and that is the state of the
economy. The fact that we are at zero or thereabouts in real growth
seems to be exactly the objective we set out to achieve. The risk may
be for a further downturn in the economy; I think it's a risk that we
must take. To back away from it now would be a great mistake for the
Federal Reserve. Having said that, my prescription would be for
something similar to the current money market conditions and, in my
view at least, alternative C comes closest to setting forth what we
[recently] have been experiencing. Alternative C would be my choice,
with the fed funds range that is shown there of 13 to 18 percent. On
the other hand, I would prefer to have a borrowing level someplace in
the $850 to $900 million range, at least initially, to insure that if
weakness in the aggregates does show up very quickly in October, we
won't precipitously push the funds rate down and, thus, other interest
rates down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. I would come out for alternative B; I think we
have been too tight. If we go for "C," we might see the funds rate go
back up to the top of the range, and I don't want to see the funds
rate go up. I would like to see it in the 14 to 15 percent range. I
think most of you who have been opting for the tighter alternatives
also had the higher growth rates. I'm not sure that you have
readjusted your perception of how slowly the economy is actually
growing to the degree of tightness that has been prevailing over this
year. So, I would opt for "B" with an average funds rate of about 14
percent, and I'm not worried about the $200 to $300 million in
borrowing. I think that's about right because they will pay back as
they have the opportunity. If we go with "B," we will get some easing
in the long-term rates, which is what we need very badly at this
point, particularly in the mortgage area and in bond rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the economy is
already in a recession and that the fourth quarter is likely to be
weaker than the staff has projected, which is not a very good climate

-32-



10/5-6/81

for inducing rapid growth in M-1B. But I like the objectives of
alternative B, and if we could come out with a result that showed us
with a small shortfall in M-1B, a slight overrun in M2 and M3, and
with bank credit in the range--and if I'm right about the recession
bank credit should be well within the range--it seems to me that that
package should be defensible to Congress and the public.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have more than a slight overrun in M3.

MR. MORRIS. What I mean is that if the economy is weaker
than the staff projection, then we will have a run-off of big CDs,
which should bend the M3 line down. I would, however, change the
Federal funds range to 12 to 17 percent. It seems to me that before
we go below 12 percent on the funds rate, we ought to have a
conference call to discuss the state of the economy. I would agree
with Lyle: I would be very reluctant to see us repeat the mistakes of
the spring of 1980 and in our monetarist zeal allow interest rates to
get to levels that produce the big reactions. That's why I pick 12
percent as the floor.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I would go with "C." I observe that
there is no alternative this time that would allow for a tightening
from where we are now. It's not offered on the menu and I wouldn't
know how to go about producing it.

MR. PARTEE. Just reduce all those numbers for the
aggregates.

MR. WALLICH. But 6 percent on M-1B is a slight reduction
from the 7 percent we were aiming at last time--though, of course, not
achieving--and it seems to me fairly safe from being misconstrued. On
the funds rate, I would note that a survey of 38 market people
projects the funds rate by the end of 1981 at 15-1/2 percent, up
slightly from where it was when the survey was taken. So, the market
doesn't seem to be expecting a large decline, and the 13 to 18 percent
range of alternative C, therefore, seems to me quite reasonable. I'm
also reassured that these paths are likely to produce reasonable
looking--in fact very tight looking--paths for nonborrowed reserves
and total reserves. In retrospect, this 20 percent growth of
nonborrowed reserves for the last three months looks peculiar, even
though there were reasons why it had to be so in constructing the
path. But a nonborrowed path of 4 percent and a total reserves path
of 3 percent look extremely moderate. I think that's a plus for this
alternative. My inclination for borrowed reserves would be on the
high side of the $900 million to $1.2 billion range. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I'm worried about the economy going down
deeper than what the staff has forecast before it comes back again. I
don't disagree with the overall forecast, which goes to 1982, but I
think we are looking at a prospective weakness that may be of larger
dimensions than the staff has put down on paper yet. In adopting a
directive this time, I think we've got to give more weight to holding
up the growth of M-1B and focusing less on M2 than we have in the

-33-



10/5-6/81

past. I would do that by going back to a formulation in which we
incorporate both M-1B and M2 into the initial stipulation rather than
having a proviso clause for M2. We ought to avoid a 1980 kind of drop
in interest rates, but I don't think any drop in interest rates is
going to be damaging to us. Some drop in interest rates in the
context of a weakening economy and very slow growth in M-1B is
essential if we are going to maintain a public posture that it isn't
very heavy handed inflexibility on the part of the monetary
authorities that is causing all this damage. So, if we could get to
an agreement on directive wording which places some additional weight
on M2 [rather than have M2 in a proviso clause], then I could buy
something like halfway between "B" and "C." I think Frank has made a
good point: That lower limit on the funds rate in "B" of 11 percent
is quite low. I could go with something like a 12 to 17 percent
range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I feel most comfortable between "B" and "C" and
balancing the need to get some more growth in M1 while avoiding a
bulge. Also, I'd like to align myself with those who would drop the
proviso clause for M2 and put it in the Committee's initial
stipulation. I think we have to give M1 and M2 equal weight and I
would underscore that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Given where we are now, and supporting Governor
Schultz's comments about the possibility of making significant gains
[on the wage/price front] next year, if I had to come down on one of
the alternatives, I would come down on "C." But if there is a growing
feeling that we could have something midway between "B" and "C," I
would opt for that. I sense that there is enough noise and confusion
in M2 that I would put greater emphasis on M-1B and would suggest that
when we set the target for that aggregate we really try to achieve it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I've made my general comments. I feel
that the economy is going to be weaker in the fourth quarter than the
projection. I think we are going to have trouble keeping M-1B even at
the level of alternative C. I don't see that alternative as being
very restrictive, frankly. So, I would come down on alternative C,
with initial borrowing at $800 million, an M2 proviso, and a fed funds
range of 12 to 17 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would preface my remarks by
saying that I still consider myself to be as hawkish in my desires to
give top priority to dealing with the problem of inflation as one
could be. On the other hand, as I recall when we set our annual
target ranges this year, they represented a gradual reduction from the
previous year and they were intended as an anti-inflationary program.
By opting for alternative B, which I would prefer, I don't think I
would in any way be relinquishing my underlying concern about
inflation. On the other hand, if we are too restrictive--if we go for
"C" or more of an undershoot of our targets than that--we are really
digging our own grave because I think there is a relationship between

-34-



10/5-6/81

the rate of M-1B growth and real output; and if real output continues
to [weaken] significantly, we are going to have in our economy and in
our body politic a reaction for strong stimulus next year to get
ourselves out of a recessionary situation. And that poses a real
threat to our long-term efforts to cope with inflation. So,
alternative B is a reasonable middle ground. We will be getting up
toward the lower end of our target, which was an anti-inflationary
target. We cannot be accused of tolerating a continuing and
persistent undershoot, which in many people's minds would be a factor
in causing a further softening of the economy. I think "B" is the
best solution, remembering that it is an anti-inflationary and not an
expansionist alternative.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I am not as disturbed as some
members of the Committee are by the so-called shortfall in M-1B, even
though I would concede in the ideal order of things that M-1B is
probably what we should be looking at. When I look at that aggregate
this year, shifts into money market funds, mutual funds, and even the
possibility that all savers money might come out of there leave me
quite comfortable with the general pattern of its behavior,
particularly in the context of the broader aggregates, and in the
context of what it would take to get it back near the bottom of the
range for this year.

Somebody mentioned earlier that we should be conducting
policy with an eye on the long haul and I certainly agree with that.
I very much agree that we must avoid another of the very sharp swings
in interest rates. And the point that Governor Schultz made about the
trajectory for 1982 is rather critically important in that context.
In the current setting, obviously, there is a great deal of attention
and sensitivity focused on this Committee. [There is] a particular
element of sensitivity out there to any major signs of some give on
the part of the Fed. That sensitivity is particularly important among
the group of people who really are important in determining what
happens over the next couple of years: the business leaders who set
prices; the union leaders who negotiate wages; and the institutional
money managers who have to make decisions whether to buy some long-
term paper or not to buy some long-term paper.

Given all of that, when I look at alternative B and see that
the staff says, for what it's worth, that "B" would involve monthly
growth rates of M-1B shift adjusted of 7-1/2, 10-1/2, and 11-3/4
percent out through December, I am very, very troubled by that. I
think that pattern of monthly behavior, even in the context of the
shortfall that we have seen earlier in the year, would run a real risk
of compromising what has been achieved to date in this effort to get
inflation down. And in the context of that trajectory question, it
might well leave us in the worst of all worlds. In that light, I
think that we clearly should be taking a very, very go slow attitude.
That is reinforced, in my judgment, by the recent behavior of the
reserve aggregates. And on a less technical note, it's also
reinforced by a thought that the law of averages is running against us
in some sense. One of these months interest rates and everything else
notwithstanding, the money supply is going to jump for whatever
reasons. And, in terms of the economy itself I draw some consolation
from the fact that there are very sizable latent demands out there

-35-



10/5-6/81

that will resurface as interest rates come down and will have a
tendency to surface in any event in the environment of the tax cuts
that are now on board and will be coming on line next year.

In the light of all that, I come out rather squarely on
alternative C, with some disposition toward initial borrowings of
around $1 billion or so. As usual, the big question is what do we do
if we are not on that track as the period unfolds. There is one other
comment I would like to make, too. We've all been talking about this
credit problem and financial shakiness or whatever it is out there,
and obviously we should be talking about it. When I think about that,
the worst of all situations there for me would be for us to find
ourselves getting blindsided by some development that we have totally
missed in our intelligence gathering and other activities. That, too,
could compromise our ability to hang in there. I also would suggest
that there are things that we can do, at least in our intelligence
gathering activities, to try to minimize the likelihood of getting
totally surprised. And I for one would like to see some efforts made
in the direction of redoubling that intelligence apparatus to try to
sensitize ourselves fully to what may be out there.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles, I guess we're back to you.

MR. BALLES. I didn't express myself on the alternatives
earlier, Mr. Chairman. But I do want to allude to what I thought was
very interesting work that the Board's staff has done on the likely
downward shift that is taking place in money demand. Our staff was
taking a look at that and pretty much concurs. What that says in
practice, to me at least, is that observed M-1B may in fact be about
where we are in terms of the effects of money. That takes some of the
sting out of the apparent undershoot in shift adjusted M-1B. But
having said that, I would hate to see us fall further behind in the
transactions component. In view of my hunch that there has in fact
been a significant downward shift in money demand, I would be in favor
of alternative C to get us up to the lower end of the range for shift
adjusted M-1B by year-end. Again I would urge that in following those
paths we ought to give equal weighting, as I mentioned earlier, to
both M1 and M2.

MR. ROOS. May I add one [comment]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. ROOS. I think it's important that we think ahead to the
end of the year into February when we're going to have to set our
targets for next year. If we opt for "C" and M-1B really comes in as
projected in "C," we'd have average money growth of M-1B for this year
of about 1.9 percent. Then what are we going to do in February when
we have to set next year's targets? Are we going to indicate at that
time that we've all of a sudden become very expansive and set the
ranges up to where they would be 1 percent below this year's announced
targets, or are we going to reduce them further from the 1.9 percent
average growth this year? In other words, if we don't bite the bullet
now--if we don't get [M-1B] up there in the range--we're going to face
that same concern of public perception of an expansive policy next
February. And it will be even more dramatic when we set annual rates
if we set them from a very low growth rate for this year.

-36-



10/5-6/81

MR. SCHULTZ. Larry, that's not the problem, though. If we
did "B," M-1B would be running at a 12 percent annual rate in
December. Then we'd go into the new year and let's say we set [the
midpoint of the target for M-1B growth] at 4 or 5 or 6 percent or
whatever we want to do for next year. That's a lot of leeway; then
we'd really have to turn that screw. That's the problem we run into:
If [M-1B growth] is going up like that and all of a sudden we have
these lower targets, then we really have to shut down on the economy.
And it seems to me that's what we want to avoid. We want the
continuity of running along from here rather than getting into the
kind of box that you're thinking about.

MR. ROOS. Well, I think there's a middle course between the
expansionists--I won't use the expression you did--a difference
between going high and going low. I do see a problem next year. If
our growth has been very slow this year, we're going to have to raise
it next year, aren't we? Even though it would only be in the last
month, we'd have to explain if we took a more expansive approach that
it was merely to get us to or near the lower end of our anti-
inflationary targets for the year 1981. I may be off base. Am I?

MR. SCHULTZ. I just want to avoid this yo-yo.

MR. ROOS. We got ourselves into the problem by permitting
ourselves to undershoot to the extent that we did, I would guess.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, on that point, Larry, I think one
has to average through. We can face the question when we get to
February as to what we say. One thing would be to base it on the
fourth quarter of 1980 and look at the two years combined if we're way
short. That would also tend to take care of your problem, Fred. I
agree with Jerry that we're going to have volatility in the money
supply. I just wish we would have some volatility on the up side
because it has been quite a while--April I think was the last month
when there was a really strong [M-1B] number--and we're about due.
I'm a little concerned that we may not get it because if we are in
fact moving into a somewhat faster decline in business--I avoid the
word "recession"--it seems unlikely that we're going to have strong
money growth. So, we may in fact be facing this over the next several
months. As I said before, I think we have to fall short on the year.
We just can't ask for a 12 percent increase in M-1B from September to
December, and even that won't quite get us there. The public wouldn't
understand. It's just too radical. I could accept "B." I could
shade M-1B in "B" to 8 percent, which I think would be a reasonable
objective. I don't think the monthly pattern the staff has in those
numbers means anything. We could have an 11 percent growth rate for
December or we could have 3 percent or 18 percent. We don't have any
idea what the month of December is going to bring. But I think the
central thrust of our policy ought to be to begin to return to the
bottom of the M-1B range, and 8 percent seems to me suitably fast to
plan for. I'd consider ourselves very lucky if we get that high of a
number in those last three months.

I would also agree with several who have suggested that maybe
the federal funds rate range ought to be 12 to 17 percent. That's not
because I don't think rates are going to come in low. Let me point
out to you that the staff projection for the rate of inflation next
year is 7.1 percent. Now, assume they're wrong. A lot of people

-37-



10/5-6/81

think they're too low. Assume it's 8 percent. Still, these rates are
too high for that rate of inflation. And in a recession environment
we can't have much of a real rate and expect to get the stimulus to
the economy that will bring it back. So, we might have a temporary
problem with borrowers coming into the market because rates are lower
than they have been. But I don't think it will last if, in fact, the
rate of inflation does tend to wind down, as most forecasters now are
anticipating. So, we really have to get from where we are to a level
of rates, it seems to me, of about 8 to 10 percent. It's a question
of how we manage that reduction in the rate level over a period of
time if we want to have a reasonably bland economy. And I would, of
course, change the emphasis, as suggested, away from too much emphasis
on M2. I think the way that Lyle suggested is a good way of doing it.
That $200 million for borrowings is at the end of the period, I
believe. Steve has left the room, but I think the idea is that
borrowings might work out to be $200 or $300 million by the end of the
period. I think the [initial level] ought to be about $800 million or
something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, I get a little nervous about the
42-day gap before our [next] meeting with any of these specifications.
I don't know how to assess the Sadat situation. I don't know whether
we're faced with the problem of increasing retardation in business
activity or whether this is temporary and the economy will bounce
back. I'd hate to see us with any of these limits with a negative
rate of growth of M-1B in October. That's not viable in terms of the
political side. On the other hand, I don't want a precipitous rate
decline. I'd rather put some sort of limit on the M-1B growth and a
narrower funds range and in 20 days consult again as to what the
implications some of these rather dramatic events are going to have
for us. To set up wide specifications for a 42-day period I think is
a mistake at this juncture. I'd prefer something between "B" and "C"
in terms of the aggregates and I'd like to consult at the 13 percent
level [on the funds rate]. But I'd sure hate to see that [rate] go up
over 16 percent at this time until we have a better feeling as to
which way to turn. By the end of the period we may have to make
changes on both of these.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, following up on what I said
earlier, and I think a lot of other people had the same kinds of
objectives: If one makes the assumption in this most uncertain of
uncertain worlds that a gradual interest rate decline of a couple of
points over the quarter provides the best chance of maintaining an
economy that avoids recession and yet avoids an upsurge for the next
quarter or so, then I would prefer the objectives of alternative B.
But I don't think we will achieve the objectives of alternative B if
the economy is as weak as I think it is. We have a curious situation.
If the economy is as weak as I think it is, we're not likely to get
even the growth that is outlined in alternative C. And, I don't want
to see too big a drop in interest rates. I don't know quite how to
reconcile this. It seems to me that we have to start off with
something that is not a precipitous change in borrowing. So, we have
to start off with something like $800 million. It's perfectly all
right to have a target [for M-1B growth] between "B" and "C", say, 7

-38-



10/5-6/81

to 7-1/2 percent. I don't think it's too meaningful. It's more
meaningful if we relax the constraint of M2. I wasn't quite sure how
Lyle wanted to formulate the relaxation of the M2 constraint. How did
you want to formulate that?

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd take it out of the proviso and put it up on
a collateral basis with M-1B.

MS. TEETERS. Does that include a target?

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. Oh, yes. We'd specify reserve aggregate
behavior consistent with growth of M-1B and M2 at such and such
percentages, respectively, taking into account NOWs and all savers.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay. But I have a problem there
because I think M2 is likely to be stronger than the 10 percent
indicated here for alternative C. I think it's still likely to be
about 11 percent.

MR. PARTEE. That's "B."

MR. SCHULTZ. If you did that, would you also put in this
language about the all savers?

MS. TEETERS. Yes.

MR. PARTEE and VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. Your worry that we may have a weaker economy is
a real one, Tony, and I share it. And we don't want a precipitous
decline of interest rates. What would happen is that it would trigger
a consultation.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right.

MR. GRAMLEY. We would have to ask ourselves at that point if
the incoming news was sufficiently weak that we ought to lean in the
direction of slightly lower interest rates or not. So, we'd revise
our targets.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That's why I would recommend a fairly
tough [floor]--in other words, a 13 to 18 percent range--in order to
have a consultation. Even 13 percent represents a drop of about 2-1/2
points and I think we ought to have a consultation at that point to
avoid just following it blindly all through the quarter if it looks as
if it's going to press way below 13 percent. In summary, where I
stand is a 7 to 7-1/2 percent target in M-1B, relaxing the M2
constraint language somewhat--although I'm not sure that we should put
in a numerical target if there's another way of doing it--a 13 to 18
percent fed funds rate range, and an initial borrowing level of $800
million. I don't think we're going to end up anywhere near these
numbers if the economy is as weak as most of us, including the staff,
think it is.

MR. PARTEE. Well, M2 could still be pretty strong, but M-1B
could fall well short.

-39-



10/5-6/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's right. The reason I'm so
confused is that we've pumped in nonborrowed reserves at the rate of
20 percent but we have had an increase of only 1.8 percent in M-1B.
And I'm thoroughly confused. I know what I want in the way of
objectives; I don't see how to have these paths lead us there.

MR. PARTEE. Lags kill you every time!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Monhollon.

MR. MONHOLLON. I'm encouraged by some of the price
statistics and the prospect that union settlements next year may be
smaller than they have been.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you encouraged by? Tell me.

MR. MONHOLLON. Oh, by some lower rates of growth in the
consumer price indexes. And I certainly wouldn't want to do anything
that would worsen inflationary expectations. But, as has been
discussed around the table, I think there's some danger that the
liquidity bind that a number of businesses are in could produce a wave
of bankruptcies that might result in a sharp slump. My concern on
this score is reinforced by the extremely sharp and sustained
reduction we've experienced in shift adjusted M-1B this year. As for
M2, the possibility that it will come in over target doesn't disturb
me as much as it does some. As has been discussed, there is a great
deal of noise in the nontransactions component of M2 and it's
difficult to interpret what it means. In addition, it's difficult to
control the nontransactions component of M2. Given the changing
composition of this component, I wonder if we can be sure whether it's
positively or negatively correlated to the funds rate. In some way
the work that we're doing suggests that it may be positively related
and that efforts to hold down [M2] may produce the principal result of
keeping M-1B well below the lower limits of its range. And that would
be unfortunate. So, I would concur with the idea that the M2 proviso
be dropped from the directive. I think there are some distinct risks
in failing to get M-1B growth up fairly close to the lower end of our
target range.

The issue of credibility has been discussed. I don't know on
what credibility hinges exactly, but I think there's some risk to our
credibility in failing to hit the 3-1/2 percent [lower end of the]
target range that we announced in July. There's a risk, too, of
contributing unnecessarily to what appears to be a developing
recession. And there's a risk, as was discussed earlier, that a very
low rate of growth for M-1B in 1981 will complicate our targeting for
1982. So, this leads me to suggest that we try to get as much growth
in M-1B as we can by the end of the year without unduly upsetting the
markets.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's impossible, if I may say.

MR. MONHOLLON. We certainly wouldn't want to encourage
people to think that we've thrown in the towel on the inflation fight.
How much we can do, I don't know. But maybe "B" is about the best we
can do, starting off with a borrowed reserve target of around $750
million and pushing it down as we find necessary to accelerate the
growth of M-1B.

-40-



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice, you expressed yourself earlier,
I believe, and so did Mr. Guffey.

MR. RICE. On M-1B I would go along with raising the lower
end of the federal funds range up to 12 or even 13 percent and I would
like to see borrowing fall no lower than, say, $500 to $600 million.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You don't have a very clean-cut
alternative.

MR. PARTEE. Not that that makes a difference.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm sorry, I didn't catch all these.

MR. RICE. Well, I said I'm for alternative B. I said that
earlier.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

MR. RICE. But in light of the discussion I would go along
with raising the lower end of the federal funds range under
alternative B from 11 to perhaps as high as 13 percent. And I would
not want to see the borrowing fall below $500 million or maybe even
$600 million.

MR. PARTEE. You mean no matter how weak M-1B is? You'd put
a floor on borrowing?

MR. RICE. On borrowing I would be inclined to want to do
that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, I think we've been through the list.
I just want to take care of another matter for about three minutes, if
you will just excuse me, and we will come back to this.

MR. WINN. Maybe we should resolve never to meet on October
the 6th.

MR. PARTEE. It is a bad day, isn't it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a matter of whether we should
intervene in this market. [The dollar] went up a bit, a percent or
more, on President Sadat's death. Since then it has come back. I
don't see any urgent need at the moment but we will be in contact with
the Bundesbank and make sure that they know we're willing to be
helpful if we can be of any help. But at the moment we're doing
nothing.

MR. WALLICH. It was up to 2.29--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I may have to talk to the Bundesbank, so
if I get interrupted again, that's what it is.

There may be some thread to all of this, for all of the
confusion. The problem is that none of us can rely very well on any
of these statistical projections. Certainly this is a time when we
may have to stay closely in touch because we don't know what is going
to happen. Things will look quite different than they look today. We

-41-



10/5-6/81

had a 7 percent increase in M1 in August, and September looked as if
it would be up until we got some [new] figures, one of which hasn't
even been confirmed yet. And, if we had the pattern that Mr. Corrigan
is suggesting that was in the paper, I think it would look awful. If
we had growth, but because it was a big bulge suddenly in October
which we didn't have to react to, it would look quite different. I
think [the money growth numbers] are just plain unpredictable.

So far as the threat of recession is concerned--it depends
upon how you define recession--that's not the forecast that has been
given to us, which people did not take great exception to, but I share
the feeling that there's a danger in balancing the risks in the very
short term. There could well be a risk that things will get
significantly worse rather than better in terms of that forecast. I'd
just repeat that in a sense I think those are the risks we have to
take. We have a very restrictive policy; I think those risks were
there all along. That doesn't mean we should go out of our way to
aggravate it or create a provocation, but I don't think we should be
surprised if those risks arise, given the configuration of economic
policy generally and the kind of problem that we have. Indeed, it
would probably be a miracle if we get through this without a
recession--something that goes in the books at least as a mild
recession--because everybody loves to have recessions and they're very
quick about calling things recessions. There is an automaticity in
all of our policies in that as this pronounced sluggishness remains,
interest rates should tend to go down as short-term rates have been
tending to do for a couple of months. And, presumably they would
continue to do so under those circumstances. The big problem, and
maybe the only question there, is that an enormous amount of Treasury
financing has to be done. We've had a glorious period of short-term
rates going down 2 or 3 percentage points and long-term rates going
up, which is not very helpful in some sense, and there's nothing we
can control just by pumping out money. It may have the opposite
effects, but we have the hard reality of all that Treasury financing
out there.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Aren't they projecting $50 billion
for the next quarter?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we're projecting $37 billion, I
think; it's only about $3 billion a week or something of that kind!
Well, I'm including the off-budget finance to the Treasury, but I'm
not including the other. But it's an enormous amount of financing.

MR. STERNLIGHT. You're talking about the financing need in
the fourth quarter?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the Treasury looks for something in
the mid-$30 billion area; $35 billion or so is what the market
expects.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Or it just could get higher. In any
event, frankly, getting M-1B in the range is very much a two-edged
proposition so far as I'm concerned. It has the moderate merit of
looking great when we're testifying, but it doesn't look great even
when one is testifying if M2 and all the other aggregates are above

-42-



10/5-6/81

the range. I'd rather have [M-1B] below the range if the others are
above, quite frankly, just in the pure presentational sense. But a
great big increase [in M-1B] is not going to look good to what I will
call the market or to people wondering what we're doing and whether
we're easing aggressively in the face of sour business news. Also,
just in terms of the performance for the year as a whole, while it's
very hard to evaluate the quantitative magnitude, there are reasons to
believe that M-1B should be lower than we thought when we set the
targets, particularly in light of the effects money market funds,
which have only doubled or more this year, have on that particular
aggregate. I also recognize that it may have the other kind of effect
on the other aggregate. But the interpretation that is going to be
put on this and its real effect depend upon whether we have to push or
whether we accept it, and that's what we've been struggling with here.
I think there is--if I detect it correctly--some fair reluctance to
push M-1B growth too high. It's a matter of judgment what too high
means. On the other hand, there's quite a willingness to accept a
high number if it can come without pushing too hard. I don't know
whether that's possible or not. That's about where I am anyway, and I
suspect that sums up the feeling that a lot of people have. If we
take this backwards, what is your infamous borrowing number at the
moment--$875 or $884 million or thereabouts?

MR. AXILROD. $880 million is the present implied level.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that has come down a lot, of course.
As a matter of instinct, although it is alleged to be inconsistent
with alternative C in being too low, it doesn't seem to be
inconsistent with interest rates where they are and moving lower if M-
1B continues weak, which is the normal repercussion we would have to
that. So, starting out around that level may tempt us to be slightly
lower than where we are and it seems to capture the midpoint of what
is proposed anyway. The same thought is reflected in all these
feelings; [namely], that we should have a consultation if the federal
funds rate gets around 12 percent. I don't have any problem with
that. In some sense, those are the two most operational decisions we
will make here. We'll see what happens with that approach.

MR. PARTEE. A beginning [borrowing] level of what?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Around $800 million.

MR. PARTEE. And a funds rate [lower limit] of 12 or 13?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I've not specified that at the
moment. One or the other.

MS. TEETERS. Does that give the staff enough information to
construct the reserve path?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not going to stop there, but I'm just
saying that the operational [decision] that's important would be how
we handle the concern. Just in terms of these various alternatives, I
myself think the weight of the argument is on something like "C" in
terms of its presentational and other effects. That doesn't mean that
if we got a burst--if October turned out to be the long awaited month
of some bulge in M-1B--we would react. It would imply to me that we
wouldn't react to that at all fast or at all, if it's just in October.

-43-



10/5-6/81

If we ended up above the "C" specifications as a result of a bulge in
October, it's not going to make anybody terribly unhappy. On the
other hand, I don't really want a specification that forces us to ease
and push so hard that it conflicts with what I think was the tone of
what people said--in effect, that they don't want to push that hard
simply to get within a range. And I would attach some importance to
M2. Now, whether that's put in the form of a proviso or of equal
weighing, which some people have suggested, isn't a crucial issue to
me. I think that's what it amounts to anyway.

MS. TEETERS. I would prefer the equal weighing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose that would leave me at something
like "C," with borrowing of $800 million; and if you want to make it
equal weighing of the two aggregates, that doesn't bother me. I don't
know, but 13 to 17 percent is fine with me as a benchmark to trigger a
consultation, which is what [the bottom of the "C"] range is. I do
not have a strong feeling that if money were really weak we would stop
at 13 percent. That's not my gut feeling at the moment. But if
that's an appropriate place for consultation, it's perfectly
satisfactory to me.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, could we have an understanding of
consulting but at the same time not narrow the fed funds range in the
directive to a 4-point spread? That's going to be interpreted as our
moving back toward concentrating on controlling interest rates rather
than what we've really said we're doing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's a pretty subtle point, but we
have sometimes had 4-point ranges and sometimes 5-point ranges.

MR. ROOS. It's been 5 or 6 most of the time.

MR. CORRIGAN(?). [13] to 18 percent?

MR. PARTEE. [I prefer] 12 to 17 percent. Do you really want
a target of as low as 10 percent on M2 and 6 percent on M-1B?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. [We could] continue last quarter's
intermeeting target of 7 percent. I don't think it's very important,
frankly, this time; it's not as important as the other decisions.

MR. PARTEE. We could say "7 percent or somewhat more," or
something like that.

MR. BOEHNE. I'd have some preference for that. If we said 7
percent last time and say 6 percent this time, I think we're saying
the wrong thing.

MR. PARTEE. After having missed 7 percent so clearly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think one can argue just that.
It's what we said before and that [will be announced soon]. It's not
going to surprise anybody if we say 7 percent again. I'd be a little
concerned about the "or somewhat more" if that implied that 7 percent
was the minimum to which we were going to push at all cost.

MR. WALLICH. It's a very high number anyway.

-44-



10/5-6/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, I was thinking of accepting a higher
number. That's why I asked.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I said, we just cannot predict. If the
higher number came about without our pushing it that hard, that's one
thing. We'd accept it and say: That's fine, we were low on the
target; there's no great strain here and we don't have to tighten up
promptly because it's above 7 percent or whatever.

MR. GRAMLEY. Does a 10 percent number for M2 mean that we
take out of the actual number whatever we're attributing to all savers
in there and the 10 percent means an underlying growth of less than
that? We'll get, I think, very [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How much impact, just on a quarterly
basis, say, are we talking about here?

MR. AXILROD. Well, if you took our lower estimate of 1/4 of
a point for the year, it would be 1 percentage point on a quarterly
basis.

MR. GRAMLEY. Quarterly average, Steve, or for 3 months?

MR. AXILROD. No, that's 3 months.

MR. BOEHNE. How about "10 percent or somewhat more" for M2
to convey the idea of a less constraining influence of M2 on M1
growth.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think it's a good idea to put
the numerical target for M2 in the directive. I think we ought to
relax the constraint very slightly by saying "at or slightly above,"
which gives us some leeway.

MR. PARTEE. At or somewhat above the range for the year?
That's 9 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right, "at or somewhat above the
range." So, I'd say we're talking about up to 10 percent. I don't
think we're going to hit the 6 percent [lower end of the range], so
even though 10 percent is low if we were figuring on reaching 6
percent, I doubt we're going to hit the 6 percent with the economy as
weak as it is.

MR. GRAMLEY. But if we stick that in the proviso clause,
then in effect what happens is that the weakness in M-1B has a very,
very small influence on what happens at the Desk. I think we have to
give more weight to what is going on in M-1B. The danger that you
worry about we handle with the consultative process by specifying the
federal funds rate more tightly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must say that I see little difference
between numbers and the proviso. They're both there in the directive.

MS. TEETERS. Well, does it make a difference in the way the
Desk operates as to whether it's in a proviso?

-45-



10/5-6/81

MR. AXILROD. The difference would be only if it reflected a
different understanding of what the Committee preferred. That's what
it would depend on. It wouldn't be a matter of wording but what the
Committee actually prefers.

MR. PARTEE. Well, as I said last time, technically a proviso
is much more limiting than giving equal weight. A proviso means you
give total weight when the proviso is in effect. Now, that may not be
the understanding that everybody has. But reading the English, that's
what one would conclude it means.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In fact in this last period, M2 would have
been significantly--I guess that's the right word--above the proviso
except for the information we got a week ago. It suddenly revised
downward in September 10 days ago.

MR. PARTEE. But we had decided last time, you remember, that
even though it was a proviso, we were going to regard it as not a
proviso.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not accept that language, but in fact
it was running higher than the top end of the range and we did not
cease providing more nonborrowed reserves for that reason
[unintelligible].

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Why didn't it act as more of a
constraint in August when M2 was growing at 12.1 percent? Why didn't
it result in a change in the nonborrowed reserve path?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was sort of in the range that was
expected for August at the time of the meeting.

MR. AXILROD. The Committee accepted a high M2 in--

MR. STERNLIGHT. The path for M2 was something like 14
percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I'll be back in just a second.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Based on the last quarter, you're
saying that it was running at what, about 9.4 percent? Was that the
highest it reached in August?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, over the fourth quarter. It probably was
a little less than that; but if we put retail RPs back in, it would be
more like that.

MR. PARTEE. But we don't have any idea how many all savers
certificates have been sold, or where they're coming from. We're
buying a "pig in a poke" if we constrain ourselves with M2.

MR. GRAMLEY. I think the argument was reasonably solid a
month ago--what Governor Partee put forth--but I just didn't go with
it. But the argument seems to me overwhelmingly strong now when the
M2 number is being affected by something that we simply cannot
measure. We will have no idea for some months, if then, what the all
savers certificate has done to that number.

-46-



10/5-6/81

MR. BOEHNE. Whatever weight we put on M2 at the last
meeting, we have to put less on it now, I would think, because of the
all savers distortion. And we have less information to guide us on an
all savers adjustment than we did with the NOW account adjustment for
M1. We really have nothing to go on for all savers. What we could do
is publish an adjusted M2.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Steve, adjust it.

SPEAKER(?). You want to publish an adjusted M2?

MR. AXILROD. No, please.

MR. PARTEE. Take out half the all savers.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Is there another nonquantitative way,
or non-numerical way, of formulating M2 other than with the phrase "at
or slightly above" that I suggested earlier? Lyle, can you reach your
objective without putting in a numerical target?

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if we don't put in anything for M2, then
no one knows definitely how to interpret any words we might use. If
we use words and M2 growth goes up to 15 percent, what do we do given
those words? If it goes to 10 percent, what do we do? We have to be
able to specify what specific action will follow upon a particular
pattern of growth of M1, otherwise M2 will be totally ignored. If we
totally ignore M2, then what will happen is that M-1B will become the
only target of policy. And then we have the possibility of having a
tremendous decline in interest rates. So, it seems to me that the
reasonable way out of this is to put M1 and M2 on a collateral basis
in the directive and specify something about the uncertainty with
which the M2 number is going to be [viewed].

MR. PARTEE. We can say "about" or "around," and fuzz the
actual numbers.

MR. CORRIGAN. There is another option, which I don't think
much of, but we could do it. And that is to start out the way that
Chuck and Lyle are saying but to put in the directive that to the
extent M2 departs significantly because of all savers certificates or
for whatever reasons we would have a consultation. So, it would be
couched in terms of triggering a consultation rather than triggering a
shift in the reserve path.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, if we narrow the fed funds range
somewhat, that's in effect what happens.

MR. CORRIGAN. Not if it's all because of all savers
certificates.

MR. AXILROD. We tried to allow for that with the suggested
wording in the directive that says: "It is recognized that the
behavior of M2 must be evaluated in the light of effects of recent
regulatory and legislative changes, particularly the public's response
to the availability of the all savers certificate."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever way it goes in there, there ought
to be some sentence to that effect. We have to evaluate that.

-47-



10/5-6/81

MS. TEETERS. Steve, do you have enough of a gap between M1
and M2? For the year it looks as if the differential is going to run
about 7 percent and none of these for the fourth quarter is coming
anywhere near that much of a difference.

MR. AXILROD. Well, we do think there will be some rebound in
M-1B relative to M2, which will narrow the gap that has developed thus
far this year. We could well be wrong on that, but that's our view at
the moment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just go back. I still don't see
particularly that it makes any difference how this is worded, frankly.
What we did last time was that we didn't react very fast to M2 being
high, and the Committee understood it would be high in August. What
we did was pretty directly to follow the reserve path for nonborrowed
reserves, which left total reserves short. We would have had--if we
were just operating on M-1B--a greater case for making a so-called
discretionary judgment to push up nonborrowed reserves even faster.
They were going up at a rate of 20 percent a year. For several months
we did not take that discretionary action, partly with an eye toward
the proviso; but since we thought it was strictly above the annual
target until 10 days ago, the fact that it was slightly above the
annual target didn't stop us from continuing on the full nonborrowed
reserve path. This business of a shortfall, if it holds up in
September, brings us almost exactly to the top of the annual target.

MR. PARTEE. But, as was pointed out, it doesn't include
retail RPs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right, and we were aware of that,
so--

MR. PARTEE. A lot of those are going to go into all savers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But the recorded M2 figure undoubtedly
understates the functional M2 figure because it just doesn't happen to
have retail RPs defined in it and they should be in it. So, we're
really running above. And that will be reflected when we talk about
the change to the all savers; part of that looks like an artificial
jump that's real. It's just catching up to the recorded shortfall on
M2 already.

MS. TEETERS. Which means we should take a higher number for
the M2 specifications at this time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It depends upon whether you're worried
about M2 running high enough. The fact is that it's running high in a
real sense.

MR. PARTEE. Well, if there has been a shortfall, Paul, we
already have had it; and therefore if it comes in high, we shouldn't
respond to it. My point is this: Let's say we had $6 billion in
retail RPs and we accepted them; now we shouldn't react if the $6
billion in retail RPs goes into all savers.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I certainly don't think we should react in
that week in which they go in. One can still be worried about M2
being a little high.

-48-



10/5-6/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In addition to saying "at or slightly
above," could we leave that proviso and then go on to say that the
Committee would tolerate an overrun in M2 due to the movement of funds
from RPs into all savers certificates?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think I would say it that way.
What we really should be tolerating is the movement into all savers
certificates from funds that aren't and shouldn't be in M2.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, that's right. That's a more
concrete way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need some sentence to that effect in
there, whichever way we do it. We have to say we will evaluate M2 in
the light of this. I see nothing the matter with the language that
[the staff] wrote here. But some language to that effect, whatever it
is precisely, should be there; people ought to notice that we may get
an artificial bulge in M2 that we are in a sense discounting. I have
no problem with that, whether we put in the numbers for M2 and M1
directly or put it in the form of a proviso indicating a range around
the annual equivalent or slightly above, if that's what you're
suggesting.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I'm just uneasy about coming up with
some numerical target that we're not going to hit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We won't have any difficulty making a
numerical target, presumably, for M2.

MS. TEETERS. You're afraid of going over the target for M2?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are much more likely to be close to
this number for M2 than we are for M1, just in terms of the randomness
of the numbers. We can argue about it; I frankly don't think it makes
a lot of difference. We can say: "In the short run the Committee
seeks behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1B
from September to December at an annual rate of 7 percent after
allowance for the impact of the flows into NOW accounts and growth in
M2 around"--I don't know what are we saying.

MS. TEETERS. Why don't we take the 11 percent from
alternative B and at least allow some leeway.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd rather put in a lower number and say
"or slightly higher."

MR. PARTEE. Sure, why not say "10 percent or somewhat more"?
And then we have a proviso later about taking account of all savers
certificates. That seems all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Even 10 percent or somewhat more bothers
me a bit. If we are going to say "somewhat more," we can always use a
lower number.

MR. PARTEE. Oh, come on, Paul, you know it's going to be a
big number.

-49-



10/5-6/81

MS. TEETERS. You are going to get the relationship between
the two growth rates so far off--!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does the 10 percent include the all savers
or not? Is that where your--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It isn't clear. This language simply
says that it has to be evaluated. That's why I said "tolerate."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say "10 percent or slightly more,
recognizing that the behavior of M2 will be affected by the recent
regulatory and legislative changes."

MR. BOEHNE. That sounds reasonable.

MR. PARTEE. October will probably be a good-sized month, and
then growth may fall off. But October will be a good-sized month--
maybe 13, 14, 15 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Recognizing particularly that in October.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, and that [unintelligible] forecast of
interest rates.

MR. GRAMLEY. What would go with that, then: an $800 million
initial borrowing level and a fed funds range of what?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. 13 to 18 percent.

MR. RICE. 13 to 17 percent.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the Chairman said at one time either 12
or 13 percent at the bottom.

MR. SCHULTZ. I have some sensitivity to what Mr. Roos said
about narrowing that range.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I do too.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think we really ought to retain a 5-point
range anyway, and I would have no problems with 12 to 17 percent.

MR. FORD(?). Even that seems to me to be restrictive because
funds are trading at 14 percent today; they were down in the 13
percent range yesterday. We don't want to have to call each other up
tomorrow with 12 percent.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, I think we would want to if it got down
that fast. How precipitous the decline occurs is of some importance,
don't you think?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have had trading at 14 percent as the
low but the 14 percent range may be a little artificial today. We
have too many reserves out. You are selling today, I take it?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Right. We are absorbing the excess.

-50-



10/5-6/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We had excess reserves, Bill, because
of the move to same-day settlement.

MR. FORD. Yes, but we have had a number of days in the last
two weeks when it has been down around 13 percent, haven't we?

MR. STERNLIGHT. 14 percent.

MR. FORD. All I'm saying is: Let's not lock ourselves in so
tightly. Let's go in with something like the alternative B range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It wouldn't lock us very tightly anyway.
MS. TEETERS. What do you expect the borrowings to do, Steve?

If we start at $880 million, do you expect them to drop off?

MR. AXILROD. Well, the degree of error around this is vast.
We've assumed that that level of borrowing implies a funds rate of
something like 14-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent. I don't know if Peter thinks
it is exactly in that range. We probably are going to get M-1B growth
on the order of 6, 7, or 8 percent; so if that's right, I wouldn't
assume any further drop in borrowing and the funds rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Steve, you may be right. I hope you are
right in this sense. But what we are probably running into here is
this: If the low money figure for publication this week is confirmed
and next week is low, this $800 million that we started with will
probably be lowered pretty promptly. If we get a bulge in the first
week of October, it won't be. But if the first week in October is
another low number--meaning it might be positive but only $1 billion
or so--we'll probably get the borrowings down further.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, in constructing this path we have allowed
for an increase on the order of $2-1/2 billion in the first week of
October.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what the number is. But
let's say it's distinctly below $2-1/2 billion; we will probably
gradually be lowering the borrowing right off. If it's $4 or $5
billion, we wouldn't be.

MR. SCHULTZ. I'd be very nervous about not consulting if the
funds rate got down to 12 percent in such a short period of time.
That could be misinterpreted by the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do what we want to do there.
We can put in 12 to 17 percent; there's nothing to stop us from
consulting before that if we don't like what is happening.

MR. PARTEE. Depending on the behavior of the pattern.

MS. TEETERS. We could also put in a range for the fourth
quarter instead of coming down on [a specific growth rate].

MR. PARTEE. For the aggregates?

MS. TEETERS. For the aggregates, yes.

-51-



10/5-6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That bothers me a little just because if
we put in a range it sounds as if we are really in trouble on either
side of that range.

MS. TEETERS. I just thought that's about where we are.

MR. PARTEE. But the staff has to construct a path, you see.
We choose the number and then they construct the path.

MS. TEETERS. They can take it out of the center of the
range, which apparently is where we're coming down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we put in even a 3-point range, the
probability, at least early in the period, is that it would not occur.
And as a result, [I would like to suggest that] we set the initial
borrowing at something near the $880 million we have been
experiencing--say, $850 to $900 million--rather than going to $800
million and risking a drop to 14 percent very quickly and having to
take some action on the discount rate.

MR. AXILROD. I should just give the figures. In the last
three complete statement weeks the funds rate averaged 16.09, 15.33,
and 15 percent. That 15 percent was for the week ending September 30,
the quarterly statement date. For this week to date, I don't have the
figure, but it must be over 15 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We had borrowings over a billion dollars
with the first figure, right?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, because we had high funds rates.

MR. AXILROD. We had a high funds rate early in the week so
the average level of the funds rate hasn't really gotten below 15 to
15-1/2 percent, if you take out the exception week.

MR. GUFFEY. An exception week being what?

MR. AXILROD. September 30th, which might have some funny--

MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing was higher than the $900
million or so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no problem with $850 million.

MR. WALLICH. If we do all this, we may get to a position
very similar to last year where it looks as though we cut the funds
rates in half; other rates won't have moved quite that much, but it
will look like a very big drop.

MR. PARTEE. So what?

MR. WALLICH. Cutting interest rates in half is just showing
that we are giving up on inflation and are starting to fight
recession; that's very much what it seems to me we are tempted to do.

MR. FORD. We're not cutting them in half, Henry. The funds
rate never averaged over what, 20 percent?

-52-



10/5-6/81

MR. WALLICH. It was 21 percent, I think.

MR. RICE. The estimate in the Bluebook is that $200 to $300
million of borrowing is consistent with a 14 percent funds rate.
That's not cutting interest rates in half.

MR. WALLICH. We are letting it go to 12 percent before we
consult, which indicates that we are willing to let it go very far.

MR. RICE. But if we keep borrowing up at $800 million, we
are not going to have to worry about a 12 or 13 percent funds rate.

MR. WALLICH. It moves pretty fast.

MR. PARTEE. But maybe the 20 percent was way too high. We
shouldn't have let it go to 20 percent. If we're going to control
interest rates rather than aggregates, maybe we shouldn't have let it
go to 20 percent.

MR. WALLICH. No, I'm concerned with the picture that we
present if interest rates drop sharply. You can say all you like
about the fact that we are below target on the money supply, but the
public will perceive this as easing and 90 percent of the commentators
will say that the Fed has eased very substantially.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think the one comment that
everybody agreed on here is that we didn't want a precipitous decline
in interest rates. I don't see why we can't have a consultation at 13
percent. It's quite a move down from the current 15 or 15-1/4 percent
level.

MR. PARTEE. I would rather post it at 12 to 17 percent and
just agree [on when to consult]. I don't like the idea of narrowing
this range to 4 points. We really are not supposed to be paying that
much attention to it, although I know we are.

MR. ROOS. Some of us are.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Would you have a consultation at 13
percent even though the range is 12 to 17?

MR. PARTEE. Because it would be approaching it--moving down
to 12 percent--and before it got there we would have a consultation.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. All right, that's a reasonable
compromise.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we have to decide that with
any precision. If it reached 13 percent in mid-November and
everything is weak, nobody is going to be disturbed about it. If it
reached 13 percent two weeks from now, people would be disturbed. You
have to assume a certain amount of competence, some minimum level, in
the Chairman.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's the weak part of the whole thing!

-53-



10/5-6/81

MR. BALLES. Paul, I understood a while ago that you were
leaning toward putting a numerical target in for M2, with cautionary
language following it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not leaning either way.

MR. BALLES. If that were done, followed by the cautionary
language that evaluation of M2 would have to be made in light of all
savers, etc., one way the directive could handle it would be at the
end of the last paragraph that calls for consultation when the funds
rate is persistently outside a range to add a phrase "or if M2 growth
is substantially higher than currently projected." So, consultation
would be triggered [either] by the departure of the funds range
persistently from whatever range we end up specifying or by M2 growing
faster than the numerical target, if one is put in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am suggesting is one version; let
me just run this one up the flag pole and see who salutes: "In the
short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates
consistent with growth of M-1B from September to December at an annual
rate of 7 percent after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW
accounts and 10 percent or slightly higher for M2, recognizing that
behavior of M2 will be affected by recent regulatory and legislative
changes, particularly the public's response to the availability of the
all savers certificate." I will modify my proposal slightly to say
borrowing at $850 million and a federal funds range of 12 to 17
percent. If the funds rate dropped out of bed here and got around 13
percent promptly, we would probably have a consultation. We won't
necessarily have a consultation if that arises at the end of October
or the beginning of November when we have a lot of weakness in the
aggregates and it's obvious why it is down there.

MR. SCHULTZ. I don't mind that. I prefer a little less than
7 percent on the growth, but I prefer a little less than $850 on the
borrowings, so they balance off.

MR. PARTEE. I would prefer 8 percent on the growth, but I'll
buy 7 percent.

MR. GRAMLEY. That's quite acceptable to me.

MR. BOEHNE. Acceptable to me.

MS. TEETERS. I accept it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, unless somebody has a strong
preference for the proviso type language, we will proceed with this
language. Call the roll, Mr. Altmann.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Boehne Yes
President Boykin Yes
President Corrigan Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
President Keehn Yes
Governor Partee Yes

-54-



10/5-6/81 -55-

Governor Rice
Governor Schultz
Governor Teeters
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Eleven for, one against.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you. We can proceed to lunch.

END OF MEETING




