









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 18, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington,

D. C., on Monday, May 18, 1981 at 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker 1/, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Boykin
Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Balles, Black, Ford and Winn, Alternate Members of
the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey, Morris, and Roos, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis,
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns, Danforth, Ettin, Keir, Prell, Scheld,
Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account

Mr. Pardee, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

1/ Left the meeting following the action to approve the minutes and returned
prior to the action to ratify System open market transactions in Govern-
ment securities, agency obligations,and bankers acceptances.



5/18/81

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Associate Director, Division of International

Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey, Assistant Director, Division of Research

and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,

Board of Governors

Mr. Doyle, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, Fousek, Koch, and Parthemos
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of St. Louis, Cleveland, New York, Atlanta,
and Richmond, respectively

Messrs. Bisignano, Cacy, Fieleke, Sandberg, and Syron,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Kansas City, Boston, New York, and
Boston, respectively

Mr. Lang, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 18, 1981

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The meeting can come to order and we can
approve the minutes.

MR. SCHULTZ. So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, the minutes are
approved. I want to propose a change in the order [of the agenda]
this morning. I'm going to have to leave at about 10:00 a.m. for
about 45 minutes to an hour, unfortunately, so I want to start off
with the business discussion. I've had appointments with the
President on and off and he came up with one this morning and I
decided I'd better grab it while I can get it. You can go back to do
the reports on foreign currency and domestic operations and so forth
at that point. And then I can be back for Mr. Axilrod's presentation,
hopefully. So, why don't we start off with you, Mr. Kichline?

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have a situation continuing where
forecasted downturns by a lot of people haven't materialized. I guess
we ought to focus on how strong we think things are at the moment in
the face of historically high interest rates. Who wants to comment?
Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I'll start briefly. I've been spending a fair
amount of time out in the Third District, and I find an unusual amount
of diversity in terms of what people think about the economy. It's
all the way from the brink of disaster for some manufacturing firms to
strong business for health care, pharmaceuticals, and services. On
average I think the "go slow" is probably right, but my hunch is that
the economy is probably going to be stronger than we think it is,
although there is this diversity.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How strong do we think it is? That's just
it.

MR. BOEHNE. Stronger than we think it is. Also, I find a
fair amount of support for a balanced budget out there rather than tax
cuts. The supply side approach I don't think has reached the
countryside yet. I might just add that there seems to be a lot of
goodwill toward the Fed as an inflation fighter. But despite some
intellectual appreciation for what we're doing, the high and volatile
interest rates are beginning to reach the point where it hurts. And I
think the gut is overpowering the intellect in this area. That's all
I have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask Jim
Kichline to indicate those areas where he thinks the first-quarter GNP
will be revised upward?



5/18/81

MR. KICHLINE. Inventories for one. The implied estimate was
very low for March and the numbers have come in significantly higher.
Business fixed investment we think could be revised up at least $5
billion, as shipments were much stronger than their assumptions. And
in construction outlays, spending put in place was running higher than
their assumptions. Personal consumption expenditures may be a little
higher, given the upward revision in March [retail] sales, as may net
exports, which is a major contributor here in terms of a low guess
prior to the availability of the March data. So, it's pretty much
across the board but, surprisingly, both inventories as well as fixed
investment are very strong.

MR. BLACK. What kind of percentage are you thinking it will
change to?

MR. KICHLINE. We think the first digit should be 8. It's a
question of how much higher. We'd say 8 to 8-1/2 percent or something
like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that's probably right.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, we are hearing much of what Ed
Boehne reflected. We feel that the economy is continuing fairly
strong. We really don't have any specific disagreement with the
Greenbook forecast, but our fear is that the figures on both the
economy and inflation will probably be revised upward. As for the
comments that we're receiving from our directors, bankers, and
businessmen in the District, they are expressing concern over the
plight of the small businessman with these continued high interest
rates. They are expressing possibly some sense of frustration in that
they really don't see any end in sight and they don't seem to have the
feeling that we're making very much progress.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, if one looks at the current data
coming in, one can't see any sign of weakness in the economy. And
with inventories as low as they are, the prospect of any major sharp
decline seems fairly remote. But at the same time, I'd simply caution
that there hasn't been time yet for the data to reflect the impact of
what we've done in the last couple of weeks. We've had a major change
in interest rates and that, I think, is going to show up in the months
ahead. I'm not concerned about the economy running away from us at
the present level of rates, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a little troublesome because we had
higher levels of rates than this in the fourth quarter and we had an 8
to 8-1/2 percent increase in the GNP immediately following.

MR. MORRIS. Yes, but most of that [strength] was early in
the period.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Last month the bond market had over
$5 billion of [new] corporate issues. At the time not only were bond
rates high but it was a very disturbed market. Except for a couple of
trouble spots, there just seems to be enormous pressure for everybody
to go ahead and engage in high levels of economic activity and just
content themselves with Henry Wallich's point that after taxes
interest rates are not that high. That seems to be everything I hear
up here in the financial markets.



5/18/81

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I didn't hear that in Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, and Delaware. They may not be that sophisticated, but they
think these higher rates are hurting and hurting badly, especially the
small and medium sized business firms.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's where it is hurting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. It's obvious that there are very strong
crosscurrents around the country. We see this in the West as well.
The lumber industry, because of the housing industry, is flat on its
back. On the other hand, we see the opposite extreme in office
building construction, for example, which is [experiencing] real boom
conditions in San Francisco, Los Angeles, etc. Agriculture, our
leading source of income in the State of California--I guess it's now
the biggest agricultural state in the country--is doing very well. I
don't hear of any signs of collapse there despite the high cost of
credit to farmers. Aerospace, electronics, and so forth are still
going along very strong. In short, what continues to amaze us is the
resilience of the economy despite high interest rates. I share your
feelings that, looking back over the past couple of years, the often
advertised coming of a recession or slowdown more often than not has
not materialized. And I suspect, if anything, we're underestimating
the strength of the economy. I would look for a better 1982, for
reasons I won't take time to go into at the moment, than forecast by
the Board's staff.

MR. PARTEE. How is housing out there, John?

MR. BALLES. It's about the same as around the country--poor.

MR. PARTEE. I know, but you don't get any feeling of uplift?

MR. BALLES. Not as yet, because all these variable rate
proposals haven't really had a chance--

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. BALLES. --to take effect in terms of restimulating the
industry. But I think when those do get underway, that will have a
beneficial effect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I continue to believe that the
economy is stronger than the so-called consensus forecast, which I
think would encompass Jim's forecast. In terms of the underlying
demands, the suppressed demands, given that in the short run the
capacity to snap back very quickly in housing and other areas is so
great, I can't see much of a significant downside risk. The major
imponderable in all of this is how much financial stress is really
there that we don't see. We focus a lot on the thrift industry
because we know a lot about it. But I suspect that there probably is
a good deal more stress around on balance sheets and other things than
we perhaps really perceive.

-3-



5/18/81

The other point I would make is that, at least in the Ninth
Federal Reserve District, I have a hard time finding anybody who
thinks that a three-year tax cut is a good idea. There's a certain
hesitance for people to talk about that publicly. I'm not sure why.
I guess so much hope is pinned on getting some spending cuts here that
they don't want to compromise that. But certainly in private
discussions I can't find anybody who thinks that a three-year tax cut
is a good idea right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. One of the interesting areas is the steel
industry, which is running currently almost at capacity. How much of
that is inventory building is not quite clear, but think about what
would happen if automobile sales should pick up or--this is hard to
determine--if defense orders start to flow to a greater extent than
they have previously. We'd have a really tight bind with respect to
steel. The second thing is that if you look at retail sales across
the board, and they have been very strong, [our sources] all report
that it is for top-of-the-line merchandise. The bargain stuff isn't
moving very well. This is not a feeling of weakness in my judgment in
terms of what is happening there. One has to watch this comparison
with last year--which is how retailers report sales--because of the
credit crunch and the difference in when Easter falls and other
things. But retailers thought sales would tail off after Easter and
they are continuing quite strong even through last week, which is a
rather strange phenomenon. The third point I'll make is that on
John's point about office building and other kinds of activities we
may have a bit of a booby-trap in this area in that most of those have
been financed on construction loans without take-outs in some
instances. And the question is: With the change in interest rates,
what kind of take-out set-up are we going to have for some of these
things? They went ahead with the buildings thinking that if they
couldn't find financing, they would sell them. We may have more for
sale here suddenly than some people have expected. And this is a
financial booby-trap out there that may or may not snap at us.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. We sense a fairly strong base of economic activity
in our area. There are two dramatically weak segments, home building
and automobile manufacturing, and the latter is a big factor in part
of our District. However, commercial building, as John said, is very
strong, as are chemicals, military equipment, and oil and gas
equipment. Basically, we don't see many signs of weakness except in
those two specific areas I noted.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. In the South we have a mixed picture that reflects
some of the things you've heard from other areas. The tourist
business is great. As for the steel industry in our area,
surprisingly, after years of disaster around Alabama, U.S. Steel is
planning to put up a new plant of all things and employment is rising
in that industry. In our high-tech belt that is developing around
Atlanta and Florida, the high-technology industries are doing great.
The defense-related industries are doing great. In housing and



5/18/81

construction, surprisingly, while activity is not great, on a month-
over-month basis it is up and on a year-over-year basis it is up.
Mortgage loan closings are up; we don't understand why, but apparently
they are. The agricultural sector would be all right were it not for
the fact that everybody else in the country has gotten rain except us
apparently, and there is still some concern about the lingering
effects of the drought we've had.

The big area of worry is in the financial sector where, on
the banking side, our banks are doing not just well, they're doing
fantastically well. Big banks in Atlanta and Florida are up 25, 30,
35 percent year-over-year, quarter-over-quarter, anyway you want to
measure it. But there are areas of stress. I've been going out, as
Ed has, trying to get closer to the individual industries and some of
the particular players to hear how it sounds to them. The thrift
executives are counting [reserves]; they are all down. I've now
talked to about 8 or 10 of them individually because I made the
mistake of making a public speech about their problems a month before
everybody else did, so I've been going around trying to heal the
wounds and listen to them. What I hear is that they're all measuring
their survival literally in terms of how many months of reserves they
have left at the current rate. They all have it counted out that way
and they are in a near panic state, as [the Board] will hear when it
meets with its Advisory Committee later today or whenever.

Consumer finances are starting to worry me in that we see
more and more isolated signs of stress on the consumer balance sheet
tipping upward. One of the biggest industries in our area is Equifax
credit reportings, for example, and they say business is great. There
is more concern than ever about the credit condition of the consumer.
The collection companies are doing great, which is bad news in terms
of financial stress. Another thing that worries me is that we're
starting to get some evidence of creative financing; as a concept, I
think it is very worrisome and something we're going to have to focus
on. A lot of financial balloons have been put up in the air where
people are disintermediating [from] the normal lending agencies and
taking back paper on homes. That is done on the basis of very
questionable credit standards or none at all. And I'm starting to
hear more and more people, as I talk to people about housing finance,
talk about possible problems in the area of creative financing.

Finally, all over the District I'm hearing from small
businessmen, especially dealers of U.S. built autos and various other
small businesses, that they are actually paying 1 or 2 points over the
prime rate. They support us tremendously philosophically, but they
wish we would lower interest rates today because their survival is in
question now. I haven't been able to verify how much of that is true,
but every time I go out to a meeting or sit down at a rotary club talk
or wherever people get me in a corner and I ask them: "Do you believe
in what the Fed is doing?" They say: "Terrific, you're on the right
track; hooray for you and Ronald Reagan." Then if I ask how business
is, they say it's terrible. They say, for example: "It costs me more
to finance a car on the floor of my showroom for one month than I can
ever hope to make in profit, and I'm not selling it within a month."
So, my big worry would be the overall stresses and strains in the
vulnerable areas on the financial side. Overall, I would say the
economy in the South is moving sideways. We have strong areas that
are booming balanced off by these areas of weakness. We don't see a

-5-



5/18/81

big surge coming, but we don't think we're in a depression or a
recession now at all.

MR. SCHULTZ. I told you about going to a cocktail party a
couple of months ago. A fellow who happened to have had a few drinks
came up to me and clapped me on the back and said "I want you to know
that I'm with you all the way, you S.O.B."

SPEAKER(?). That's the exact [sentiment].

MR. FORD. That very much summarizes what I'm hearing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle, let's get the depressing side
of this.

MR. DOYLE. Sorry to add to that, Mr. Chairman. The
automobile industry is still in a very depressed state in our District
and its influence is quite pervasive. Even though production has been
up quite a bit lately, largely associated with the introduction of
some new models, no one I talked with really expects much of a
turnaround in that area at all. There now seem to be increased
concerns spreading somewhat to the rural areas. The banks are highly
liquid, but high interest rates are discouraging borrowers and we tend
to hear more and more from this particular sector recently. The
drought has ended in the Middle West and it has brought with it some
rather interesting revisions in estimates of food price [increases]
for this year, which are expected to be somewhat less than the USDA
projections--say, somewhere around 10 or 11 percent rather than up in
the 11 to 12 percent range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Did you get rid of your dry weather, Mr.
Guffey?

MR. GUFFEY. It largely has abated, yes. Just over the last
week to ten days we've gotten very good rains and very general rains.
There is some good and some bad news to that. Along with the rains
was some very severe weather; and much of the winter wheat, which
would be harvested commencing in early June in the southern part of
the District, was laid flat by the hail and high winds. So, the
question is whether what wheat survived will result in a good crop,
beyond earlier expectations; that which was flattened is a total loss.
The USDA doesn't know what is out there and I don't think the farmers
can tell. Not until the harvest is completed will we know. The fact
of the matter is that the outlook for the agricultural sector probably
is better at the moment than it has been over the past sixty days,
with the exception of the red meat industry, particularly the cattle
industry. There has been a continued liquidation of breeder stock,
keeping meat prices down. As a result of that there is a loss in the
cattle in the feedlot area. That has to end one of these days; and
when it does, we will quite likely see an escalation of meat prices,
which will roll into [consumer] food prices.

On the other hand, the District is heavily engaged in the
energy business and that is going gangbusters. The unemployment rate
ranges someplace from 3-1/2 percent to 8 percent, depending upon
whether you're in Oklahoma, Colorado, or New Mexico. It's a very
mixed picture.



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'd better run in a second. We have
heard from all the presidents; the governors have all been silent.
We'll leave that to you. And you can go over these other [agenda
items].

MR. GUFFEY. Before you leave, Mr. Chairman, I should say
that the green bug problem has been whipped with a red lady bug.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Good. By what?

MR. GUFFEY. Lady bugs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Count on the lady bugs!

MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask a question, Roger. Are the cattle
being slaughtered or are they being put back in the pasture? With the
rains you've had, I would imagine some are going back to pasture.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, I can't answer the question of what may
happen in the future. The rains have only occurred within the last
ten days, so those judgments might be made in the future. But they
certainly haven't been up to now. Conditions have been very dry and
as a result the cattle have been taken off of the range for two
reasons. One was that the prospect for keeping them through the
upcoming summer was not very good. Secondly, those in the feeding
business were losing from $75 to $200 a head on fat cattle. So, they
are just liquidating their breeder stock. Whether or not business
judgments will be made to maintain some of that breeder stock now that
some green grass has come forth, I don't know. It doesn't bode well,
however, for food prices for the period ahead.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We haven't heard from any governors,
I don't think. Emmett.

MR. RICE. I'll start off. Much of what I've heard from the
presidents confirms the feeling I've had about our current situation.
If I had to characterize the current economic situation, I would say
that the economy is slowing from a very high rate of expansion but it
is not by any means weak yet. I say this because it's hard to see any
unqualified indications of weakness. Even in retail sales we see,
adjusting for autos, an increase. And the slowing in industrial
production, while negligible, would actually be an increase if it
weren't for the coal strike. So, most of the indications of weakness
--for example in the payroll employment area--are not unqualified. On
the other hand, there are some fairly good indications of enough
strength still left in the economy. Business fixed investment is
still strong. And, of course, capacity utilization has increased.
So, I would say on balance that there may be some slowing but it's a
slowing from a very rapid rate [of expansion] and the economy is not
at all weak at this point.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Governor Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. I deliberately stayed out of the talking stage
and in the listening mode because it seems to me that it's more
difficult than I can ever remember to know what is happening by
looking at the statistics from here in Washington and by using the
typical technology of forecasting, either models or judgmental

-7-



5/18/81

forecasts. The economy just isn't behaving the way it used to. I
think the staff is basically right, however, that we're looking at an
economy that is quite strong. The areas of weakness that we do see--
and we are seeing some weakness in the housing industry and the auto
industry, which is being reflected in the employment statistics and to
some degree in industrial production--are in credit-sensitive sectors.
To the extent the economy is being restrained at all, it's being
restrained by monetary restraint, by very high interest rates. What
the staff is saying, in effect, is that interest rates will simply
rise however far they have to rise to get nominal growth of GNP down
to the 8 to 9 to 10 percent range or somewhere around there. And I
think the only issue is whether or not the staff's forecast of
interest rates is right. The staff's forecast of interest rates, in
comparison with the major outside forecasters, leaves no doubt that
outside forecasters aren't anywhere close to being correct if the
staff has the basics [right] on where the economy is going. The staff
has interest rates on Treasury bills continuing to move up through the
last three quarters of 1982, hitting a peak of around 17 percent; they
are moving up gently but continue to move up. The mean of other
forecasters has the peak of interest rates in the first quarter of
1981 and coming down to about 11-1/2 percent by the end of 1982.
That's why I think we're seeing a major difference in what forecasters
see for the outlook from now until the end of next year. The economy
is very strong, and I don't think we are likely to make a mistake at
this point of overrestraining it unless we take very drastic action on
top of what has already been done.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Henry.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I find the economy very hard to read, as
do others. Some things don't quite seem to fit together. For
instance, we've had this strong surge in the first quarter, which may
be revised up. But it doesn't seem to have led to a great increase in
capacity utilization; it may have in materials but not in other areas.
And it hasn't led to a reduction in unemployment, as one would figure.
Now, if we are looking at this first quarter, it really means that GNP
from here on out will be about 1 percentage point higher than it would
have been had GNP grown at something like 3 percent or so--spreading
the difference roughly over the rest of the year, or dividing it by 4.
So, the whole picture is somehow tighter. And that I don't quite see
reflected in the capacity utilization or the unemployment figures; but
it must be there. I also am asking myself: Why, in an economy in
which no single thing seems to be outstandingly strong, is there so
little room? Why, when we've got some distinctly weak sectors like
housing and automobiles, has the economy been expanding so rapidly?
Is it because the saving rate is so low that we're now at a much
higher level of consumption than we normally would be so that leaves
less room in the economy for other things and is squeezing things out?
I find all these things difficult to reconcile, but there seems to be
no doubt that the economy is not going down even moderately as much as
thought; it may not go down at all and is overall very strong.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Chuck.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I don't think there's much downside risk
either, except if there should be some unexpected financial difficulty
that would lead to it. And that's always hard, indeed impossible, to
predict or to time. I would agree with Lyle that the governor on the



5/18/81

economy is monetary policy. And with emphasis on the aggregates, what
we're really talking about is how high interest rates will go. But,
of course, as they go higher, if they should go higher, the small
business problem and the problem with housing and with automobiles and
so forth will get greater and greater. Indeed, that's the disturbing
factor about the economy. There doesn't seem to be too much effect in
the soft goods sectors and certainly no effect in the defense area.
There is a strength that could end up in a bad crash, I think, in
nonresidential construction. I agree with Willis that there are a lot
of problems that could develop there because there's an expectation
that prices will go higher and that the properties will appreciate.
If they don't, then there is no basis for the financing being done on
them. So, the concern that I'm beginning to have is that to achieve
the 9 percent nominal GNP that Lyle speaks of, we will have no
activity to speak of in some sectors and hardly reduced activity in
other sectors. The differential impacts are going to be very
difficult to deal with. Henry made a good point a month or so ago, in
a speech that I guess he didn't deliver, which is that there are two
tiers in terms of interest rate effects. Those who don't pay 46
percent tax rates are hurt a lot more than those who do pay 46
percent. That's very consistent with the notion that small business
is complaining, because they [don't] pay 46 percent tax rates. And it
would be very consistent for any firm that is in a loss position to be
badly hurt. It reminds me of the [adage] that the worst thing a bank
can have is money--that the bank should get so that it doesn't have
taxable income. The same thing is getting to be true of debt burden.
The worst thing you could have, if you have any taxable income, is not
to have a debt burden because then you don't have any tax write-off.
So, I agree that we're in a fairly narrow range with very little
chance of a sizable decline in the immediate picture and a good
control over the expansion because monetary policy is well along the
road toward being restraining. But as to the effect that this will
have in the longer run, I'm certainly not prepared to say at this
point.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But isn't it likely from what
everybody is saying around the table that we're going to see monetary
policy not being very effective as a general restrainer until some of
the troubled areas have some dramatic failures? And then we would get
a reaction in the rest of the economy.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, we could get a sharp change in
expectations. The people who are expecting prices such as real estate
values to rise will stop expecting them to rise. And then suddenly
what didn't seem to be such a high interest rate before will seem
extraordinarily high, and that could happen very quickly. But one
just can't predict when it will happen. By the way, though, Tony, I
do think that [our policy] is having a restraining effect on the
economy. It's clear that housing starts are not going to stay at 1.2
million; they're going to drop below it. And that's very restraining.
That's one of the biggest industries in the economy, and it's largely
due to interest rates that housing activity is as low as it is. On
inventories, I agree with Frank. He said inventories are very, very
lean. Why are they lean? It's because interest rates are so high
that everybody pays great attention to keeping inventories down. The
automobile business, which in the last two or three 10-day periods has
been below 6 million in domestic sales, is 4 million off what the
industry has been accustomed to. That's a big cut in output in GNP.



5/18/81

So, interest rates are restraining the economy; and the higher they
go, the more they will restrain.

MR. CORRIGAN. But even in terms of the residential
construction that is still going on, I don't know for sure, but I
would venture a guess that a substantial fraction of the housing
starts we're seeing right now is being creatively financed. Every
place you go you see condominiums, and the sign out front says 10-1/4
percent mortgage money.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's for 2 to 3 years.

MR. CORRIGAN. No, these are term loans. The way they're
being financed is that the builders go to the bank or the S&L and work
a deal for a construction loan. They take out all the first mortgages
on a term basis at 10 percent or something in exchange for $300 or
$400 or $500 thousand in fee income, which the institution takes right
in, charges it as current income, and passes it right down to the
bottom line.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they don't give 10 or 11 percent
on a fixed rate mortgage for 25 years.

MR. CORRIGAN. Absolutely, yes they do.

MR. PARTEE. It's the other way around.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The story that I've been hearing from
people in the Midwest whom I know in the real estate insurance
business is that they have this "teaser" rate. I don't know what they
call it. You come in and get 10 or 11 percent financing for the first
2 to 3 years, during which time the builder compensates the thrift
institution. But thereafter the loan has to be renegotiated.

MR. CORRIGAN. There are some of those, but there is an ample
number of these deals that I've just described where people still can
get a 20-year mortgage at 10 to 11 percent.

MR. WINN(?). They add it onto the price, Tony. They just
jack the price up.

[VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON]. Nancy.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm surprised at the first quarter, and I
don't really understand it. However, I am also getting very worried
about the cumulative effect of this [monetary policy restraint]. If
real GNP revises up even to 8 or 8-1/2 percent, there literally has
been no real growth in the economy for two years. That to me says
that monetary policy has been working quite well in restraining the
economy from any growth. We've never had a period like this in which
we had literally no growth on average for that [length of] time. I
think we have to continue to restrain [the economy]. However, I am
very worried that we will restrain it to the point that we will get
interest rates that are going to be really damaging to all segments of
the economy. Interest rates may be [low] after tax, or in real terms,
but they are still contributing to cost and are creating, I think,
some of the upward pressure on prices. You may be in a 46 percent tax
bracket, but you still have to recoup that 18 or 20 percent interest

-10-



5/18/81

rate in order to pay your taxes on it. This forecast has eight
quarters of 18 percent interest rates. I just don't think the economy
can survive that way. Either it's going [to blow] up on us in the
sense that inflation is going to take off or we're going to have major
failures and we are going to get a major recession from this someplace
down the line. And I urge caution when we come to deciding what we're
going to make the interest rate because I think [the high rates] are
damaging. They can do a lot of damage if we are not careful.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. John Balles.

MR. BALLES. Well, I will just piggyback on Fred's S.O.B.
story with one I find extremely instructive. Two

lumber companies.
One is a great big one and one is a small one. And if there's any
industry in the country, along with autos, that should be screaming
for relief from high interest rates, it seems to me it would certainly
be the lumber industry. Yet both of these guys are foursquare for
solid monetary restraint, enough to get the job done in bringing
inflation down. When their quiz them on how they can
support this kind of restraint in terms of what its doing to their
business, the explanation is along the following lines: They have two
choices, both of which are bad, but one is worse than the other. One
choice is to price people out of housing temporarily through high
interest rates; the other, as they put it, is to price them out of
housing indefinitely and permanently through ongoing double-digit
inflation. So, even looking at their own long-run self interest, they
favor monetary restraint and are not ready to throw me out the window
or out of my job--if they could--because of what we are doing to their
businesses. I find that rather instructive.

MR. PARTEE. They're not facing bankruptcy.

MR. BALLES. No, but the small lumber company is surely
making no money.

MR. PARTEE. That's what I was wondering.

MR. BALLES. It will be a while, but they're not facing
bankruptcy.

MR. BOEHNE. They probably have some independent wealth,
though. I've run into some people like that, too, and they always
have some private means if the [business] goes under.

MR. ROOS. I think it's important to recognize that there is
absolutely no way of reducing these interest rates, even short-term
interest rates, through the old traditional way of pumping money into
the economy. We did an analysis in St. Louis. [It shows that] even
when the weekly figures show an increase in the money supply, it is
meaningless; within a week interest rates rise. So, I don't know how
we can bring these rates down through monetary policy other than by
creating a credible track record where people will really believe that
we are going to bring the rate of money growth down and stick with it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Either that way, Larry, or with an
old fashioned crunch. My guess is that it's more likely to be an old
fashioned crunch. If there aren't any additional comments, we'll move

-11-



5/18/81

on to Scott Pardee's and Peter Sternlight's reports. Does someone
want to make a further comment?

MR. FORD. I'd just like to ask you a question on the point
you just made with regard to an old fashioned crunch. I'd be
interested in knowing, Tony, how serious you think this business is
with the mutual savings banks up there [in your area]. I hear that
one of them already has a negative net worth and that a number of
others are very close to that. What do you see as the scene over the
next three to six months?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I hear, and what my people's
analysis suggests is likely, is that between two and four of them, of
which a couple are very important, are calculating that they will have
a crisis early next year. They are also calculating the number of
months they can take this; and, of course, if interest rates were to
go significantly higher, that [crisis] might be moved up a couple of
months.

MR. FORD. That would mean early winter or late fall of this
year.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think the savings banks are really
quite that close. It's 1982 and 1983 for the savings banks. It's
1981 and 1982 for the savings and loans.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But I'm talking about two to four
coming in early '82.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, that's about what the FDIC feels.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But there are a few others that
would--

MR. PARTEE. By '83, if rates stay up as our forecast has
them, there are going to be quite a few. And they go beyond New York
and Boston.

MR. BOEHNE. Add Philadelphia by 1982-83. We have at least
one and maybe two in Philadelphia. On the timetable for the S&Ls, I
think Chuck's right. Beginning in the fall of this year, stretching
out into '82, you can just string them along a line, a long line.

MR. WINN. But that's with no change in the rate of flows in
and out. If we have any kind of increased disintermediation, that
would precipitate it in a heck of a hurry.

MR. PARTEE. Well, we would, of course, finance them.

MR. BOEHNE. How?

MR. PARTEE. At the window.

MR. WALLICH. And how about the large CDs that might run off?
If this calculation is that easy to make that you can string them on a
line, as Ed says, then others would be doing that, too, and would be
cutting off their support.

-12-



5/18/81

MS. TEETERS. Has there been any indication that their
deposits are being withdrawn in anticipation of failure?

MR. FORD. That's the biggest single worry I have heard from
people in the thrift industry: That they have something on the order
of $50 billion in jumbo CDs that are subject to market confidence.
They are being tiered on the rates right now, similar to what happened
to First Pennsylvania and other banks, as general recognition of a
problem approaches. I would recommend that we track that carefully on
the early warning indicator. I haven't personally verified that
figure, but I'm sure Chuck's staff has good information--I hope you do
--on how much jumbo CD money is subject to quick market judgments.

MR. PARTEE. I don't think we have very good information
because the category is $100,000 and over. And the $100,000 notes are
pretty secure. We don't know how much is in jumbo CDs.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Some of the big investment banks who
are financing some of the mutual savings banks with RP financing are
forcing, quietly, a reduction in volume. First they tried to do it by
simply raising the price on charges. They weren't getting enough
response; the mutual savings banks were paying these higher and higher
spreads. Now they have begun to exercise some "window guidance," you
might call it, cutting back on the line. But they are trying to do it
slowly so as not to trigger [a crisis]--so they wouldn't get the blame
for any kind of financial problem.

MR. SCHULTZ. Most of the commercial paper that thrifts had
out was in the California area, is that right? What has happened to
it? Is there any indication? Does anybody know?

MR. FORD. I know that a number of them have had their
ratings lowered. I don't know about the volume, which is what you
asked about. I remember seeing that a number of them had their
ratings lowered on paper, which should lead to the answer being that
there has been a reduction in the availability, but I don't know that.
I hope somebody on the staff does.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Maybe we'd better get moving along.
There is one point I should mention. I'm told that if anybody has any
questions regarding the Board's examination of the System Open Market
Account, Clyde Farnsworth and Dave Robinson are prepared to answer
questions. Otherwise, we won't bother with that and we'll just accept
the report. Does anybody have any questions on that? If not, we'll
go to Scott.

MR. PARDEE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Any comments?

MR. RICE. Scott, does the Federal Reserve have any
independent authority to operate in foreign exchange markets apart
from the Treasury--or possibly, in parentheses, in violation of
Treasury policy?

MR. PARDEE. We've reviewed this and reviewed this and
reviewed this, and ultimately when it comes down to policy the primary
responsibility rests with the Treasury. We can work on a consultation

-13-



5/18/81

basis and all of that, but if the Treasury objects, then the Federal
Reserve, since I've been in it, has acceded to the Treasury's wishes.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The comment is simply that Congress
has been fairly consistent in its attitude and that there is statutory
language which says that the principal responsibility for
international monetary policy is with the President, operating through
the Secretary of the Treasury. There are no legal constraints on our
operating with our resources but it would create a political problem,
I think, if we were clearly doing it against the wishes of the
Treasury.

MR. RICE. I understand the political problem.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are no legal constraints.

MR. RICE. Legal constraints were what I was asking about.

MS. TEETERS. But you'd be prepared to move as you did the
day Reagan was shot if there's severe disorder in the market, wouldn't
you?

MR. PARDEE. I'm not prepared to move at all until I get an
authorization from Washington.

MR. RICE. Do you mean from the Treasury?

MR. PARTEE. You would let disorderly conditions develop? As
you see it, you just wouldn't move until Washington said yes?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Those are the instructions. Volcker,
Sprinkel and I had a conversation. Scott was there, and [the
Treasury] made it very clear that they want prior consultation before
a dollar is spent. They wouldn't give us any flexibility even on, I
must say, relatively minor routine countering of a disorderly market.
Even though Sprinkel put in his testimony "countering disorderly
markets," which is our responsibility under the amended articles of
the IMF as well as internal policy, in practice I don't think the
policy has changed any from one of no intervention except in an
emergency. We'll just have to wait. Henry was at that meeting also
and he said: "We'll see. [We'll wait] until such time as a foreign
central bank requests the kind of cooperation that requires using our
own resources to some degree or until the dollar itself turns around
so there's a change of view." It's hard to resolve this as an
abstract policy issue. I don't think there will be any change until a
concrete incident or situation comes along that seems to indicate the
other way.

MR. BOEHNE. What about this talk of selling off reserves and
reducing swap lines? Is that serious talk in private and could that
be done if the Treasury so ordered it? Or is that a joint decision to
be made with the Federal Reserve?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. My own view is that they won't insist
on that.

-14-



5/18/81

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that they can block, in effect,
the use of the swaps for intervention, but I don't think they can
compel us to eliminate them.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't think they will try. My own
feeling is, even though

that this is being looked at--and it has
an impact on the exchange markets--that they are unlikely to go to
that extreme. The only way to get rid of the balances without
upsetting markets would be to do an off-market deal with a few central
banks. This would still alarm them and I think there would be
political reactions. The State Department does not think along these
lines at all. I think the State Department would go to the mat with
the Treasury as it became more of a political issue. I don't think
the Treasury is likely to go as far as actually insisting on this.

MR. SCHULTZ. Does the State Department have its economic
team in place yet?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes. Myer Rashish.

MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but he hasn't been confirmed.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes he was.

MR. SCHULTZ. When?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Tom Andrews hasn't been confirmed,
but Myer was confirmed and so was Bob Hormats. That was my
understanding. It was approved by the Committee. Jesse Helms did not
say anything, but continued to object. I assumed, since it was
approved by the Committee about three weeks ago, that there was floor
acceptance. It is normally routine that within 24 hours the whole
Senate--

MR. SCHULTZ. I thought [unintelligible] told me last week
that Rashish had not been confirmed. Did I misunderstand?

MR. WALLICH. I think he was confirmed after 260 questions or
something like that.

MR. PARTEE. The way we would get rid of the foreign
currency, I assume, is on a declining dollar market. That is, it
would seem usual, wouldn't it, if the dollar were dropping to sell
marks to support the dollar? And in the process we would get rid of
balances and just wouldn't rebuild them. That would be a practical
strategy, if we didn't want to--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. After all, that's what the balances
are there for--to cushion if we ever [wanted to]. I'm sure that the
Committee and the Treasury would not want to support the dollar at
these levels; if the dollar started coming down, we probably would
want to do something, but not in any significant amounts. And that's
quite a ways off yet.

MS. TEETERS. But what is there in the outlook that would
bring the dollar down?

-15-



5/18/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, it's awfully high. I would think exports
will fade.

MR. WALLICH. And the current account deficit. We're already
predicting that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Roger.

MR. GUFFEY. Further along [in his report] Scott mentioned
that the French had inquired about the use of the swap line. Is the
Treasury position such as to prohibit us from filling a request for
the French if we otherwise chose to do so?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, it's our normal routine to
touch base with the Treasury before a swap line is drawn on by a
foreign central bank. On the other hand, the Chairman feels, and I
think he is absolutely right, that we don't want to put ourselves in
the position of not having any judgment in these matters and creating
more of a situation where the Treasury is giving us day-to-day
instructions. So, Volcker is planning to tell [unintelligible] that
these swap lines are available. I don't think that we will run into
any resistance from the Administration as a whole. Whether there will
be some initial demurring by the Treasury I don't know, but I'm sure
he also will advise the Secretary of the Treasury. I don't know
whether Ted wants to comment in this area.

MR. TRUMAN. I think that's right. That's the way the
procedures have worked in the past in the long run.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Where there's no large political or
policy [reason] that would cause us to oppose a foreign central bank
drawing on a swap line with us, I think we ought to play it in the
traditional way that we've always played it. And that is that yes,
it's available if the need is there; if a country explains at the time
that it comes in formally [with a request to draw on the swap] and
gives us good convincing reasons, obviously we will go along. That
brings up the Swedish situation. Did you comment on that?

MR. PARDEE. No, I was holding that for my recommendations.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What does that mean?

MR. SCHULTZ. That comes next.

MR. WALLICH. When we have a swap drawing, we usually want to
know where it is going to lead. With the Swedes we knew that there
was a big European loan coming, which might take us out. With the
French, one doesn't know where that's going to lead, and I think one
has to look at the situation at the time it develops. The swaps are
not exclusively for the purpose of intervention anyway. They can be
for the purpose of a balance of payments financing in a broader sense.
I think one can say that with regard to the Swedes, who have a fixed
peg. One can't so easily say that the French have a fixed peg with
the EMS, too. So, again, it becomes more a matter of financing a
deficit than arbitrarily intervening in the market. I think that
makes a pretty good case for the continuance of the swaps.

-16-



5/18/81

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The Mitterand group is unlikely to
permit a devaluation before the elections, which will probably be
around the end of next month. There's an increasing feeling, of
course, among knowledgeable people--and even those who are not too
knowledgeable--that this level of the franc is not sustainable and
that if [a devaluation] doesn't come before the election, it will come
after. And there are implications that this will put a finish to the
European monetary system or that even if it's preserved in its facade,
it won't have very much meaning. If there are no other comments, you
may turn now to your recommendations.

MR. PARDEE. I have no recommendations as far as any action
by the Committee, but I want to inform the Committee that on the 23rd
of May the increase from $300 to $500 million in the swap line of the
Swedish Reichsbank that we put on last year for one year will mature.
The Swedes asked if it could be extended but felt they had no
compelling reasons at this point to justify the extension of that
increase. They did use the line for $200 million and repaid, as
Governor Wallich just mentioned. But in recent months they have had a
rather substantial inflow of funds as a result of policy measures they
took early this year, so it's difficult to argue for a continuation of
this increase in the current environment. It's a hypothetical
situation rather than an actual situation. Discussions with Mr.
Solomon and Mr. Volcker suggested that perhaps we should let the
increase lapse. I informed the Swedish Reichsbank that it would
lapse, as it was proposed that it would last one year. I told them,
should they have further needs down the road, that the availability of
the swap line is there and that if they want to discuss an increase
again, we'd be happy to discuss it when they feel they have a
compelling case. They accepted that, so I am just informing the
Committee rather than making a recommendation that the increase be
extended.

MR. PARTEE. It will drop back to $300 million.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And they were not unhappy about it.
They recognized that in some circles that might be interpreted as a
sign of strength. When I told them it was unlikely we would [extend
it], they didn't seem to mind at all. Bill.

MR. FORD. I just wanted to ask Scott if he could explain
something. I'm interested in this list of a total of $30 billion in
swap lines. I'm just curious to know how you judge, for instance,
that the Swiss should have a $4 billion line, and Italy, which has
more people and I think bigger [unintelligible] should have $3
billion. How do you make a decision as to how big the swap line
should be?

MR. PARDEE. Back in 1967 we had an elegant paper that was
published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin on the criteria for the swap
lines based on financial data, reserve position, balance of payments,
size of country, and so forth. That was when we were in an active
phase of adding countries to the list. We haven't added anybody
since. I think the criteria are more what the problem is that we are
facing at the time and what the financial interest is to the United
States. Our interests are much greater--certainly they were back in
1978 when we had the last increases--with the deutschemark, the Swiss
franc, and the Japanese yen. Those swap lines were increased at that

-17-



5/18/81

time. So, it's more in response to the situations we face. We do
still review them; and the Board staff remember the criteria and bring
them up from time to time when we are reviewing the size of the swap
lines. In the case of the Swedes, it turned out that on these earlier
criteria, if we had continued at $500 million, then there might have
been justification for some of the other Scandinavian countries to
come in and ask for increases. So, we still keep the criteria in
mind, but the size reflects more the pressures at the time we are
dealing with them.

MR. TRUMAN. [We look at the pressures] on both sides. When
the Italian swap line was raised to $2 billion in '74, if I remember
correctly, it was largely to help them out under the circumstances.
In fact, as I remember, they made some drawings. And the Mexicans
have also been a case where they wanted an increase to show, as the
Swedes did last year, solidarity.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. For the currencies that we think we
are going to use when we're in trouble we took action to raise the
swap lines as part of the November 1, 1978 dollar support package. In
the others I guess we've been more or less passive.

MR. TRUMAN. The British and the Italians and the Mexicans
are cases where the shoe has been on the other foot.

MR. FORD. Is this $30 billion total here a historic high?

MR. PARDEE. Well, it would have to be the high; it will go
down from the high by $200 million.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It went to $30 billion on November 1,
[1978]. I gather we have to take action to ratify the transactions
since the meeting on March 31.

MR. PARDEE. Collecting interest on our balances.

MR. PARTEE. Have there been any transactions?

MR. BLACK. It will be interesting to see if we get any
dissents, given the nature of the decision!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Legally we don't need a resolution, I
assume, on any transactions we do for foreign central banks.
Therefore, this particular action is going to be inoperative. If
there's nothing else, we'll turn to Peter.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Comments?

MR. BOEHNE. I have a question. I have the impression,
talking to market types and bankers on the funding side, that there is
still a fair amount of confusion about what the Desk is up to. I want
to inquire--it's probably just schizophrenia--in that we make money on
[high] interest rates [when] we follow reserves and so on. Do you
have the impression in New York that the confusion over the change in
our [operating] procedures is decreasing or increasing? Do you have a
sense of that?

-18-



5/18/81

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think a better understanding of our
procedures has been developing. There was some renewed confusion or
uncertainty when the February policy record was published in early
April because there seemingly was a different significance to the
meaning of the federal funds rate constraint. But with the record
laid down there and some further comments that were made by the
Chairman around that time there has been a better understanding of the
significance of the funds rate limits as well, mainly as checkpoints
rather than tight constraints.

MR. GUFFEY. There's confusion arising [even] within the
Committee.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I have no comment on that!

MR. SCHULTZ. Let me ask you a question. You recall the last
telephone conversation. I expressed some concern about the market
perception along these lines and wondered whether we might not be able
to say things a little better in a way that might help the market.
When we get to the directive today, I think some alternative ways of
talking about the federal funds rate are going to surface because I do
have a sense that some confusion still remains out there. On the
other hand, I also have some concern that it is probably important not
to change the wording very often because just a change of wording has
a tendency to confuse people. So, there are pros and cons on this.
Peter, do you have a sense at this point as to whether there might be
some better way to explain what we are actually about in order to
clear up any confusion they may have? Or is a change of wording going
to add to it?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, as I said, I think there is a better
sense of what we are about that is permeating the markets. It's a
message that [could use] further repetition or elaboration as
opportunities [arise] in testimony or speeches or interviews to convey
just how the procedures work and our approach to the funds rate as a
set of checkpoints. I've heard the question from market people: If
it only has the significance of a checkpoint, why do you have it in
your directives at all? I think that's certainly a legitimate point
for the Committee to want to discuss.

MR. SCHULTZ. Well, that's what I keep hearing: If it's just
a checkpoint, why do you put it in or why don't you just say that more
clearly? They get confused about the way we say it.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the directive does, in effect, say
that [it's a checkpoint] now.

MR. PARTEE. I think we have to have it. Otherwise, how do
we know what the checkpoint is? We could say that that's what it is,
although technically that's what the paragraph says.

MR. SCHULTZ. I know, but it seems to confuse them for some
reason.

MR. BLACK. Peter, you say the [concept of a] checkpoint is
there, but I don't read it quite that strongly.

MR. PARTEE. Why is that?

-19-



5/18/81

MR. SCHULTZ. Maybe I started a conversation that best ought
to be done later on. I withdraw the question.

MR. STERNLIGHT. It seems to me that the change in language--
I think it was at the December meeting--[clarified it]. Up to then I
think the wording called for it more as a real constraint, whereas I
read the current wording as more of a checkpoint. That's because we
are instructed to maintain reserves along a certain path consistent
with the growth path for the aggregates that the Committee voted for
and, if it appears that over a period of time the funds rate is not
going to be consistent with maintaining reserves on that growth path,
then the Manager is to notify the Chairman, and so on.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Whenever we come [to the end of our
comments] in this area, there's coffee available. These transactions
have to be ratified.

MR. WALLICH. I have a question.

MR. PARTEE. I have a question, too.

MR. WALLICH. Peter, knowing only what we've learned from the
incoming data, had we responded very strongly to the upsurge [in the
growth of the aggregates] in April would it have been possible to make
much of a difference in the course of the aggregates? What would have
to have been done to do that?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think we did respond promptly. We
didn't get the rate effect until well along in April. Knowing how the
whole month turned out, if we could have been omniscient at the
beginning of the month, I suppose we could have been even more
vigorous early in the month. I'm inclined to be skeptical as to
whether it would have made a great difference on how the April growth
rate itself would have turned out.

MR. WALLICH. But not being omniscient, just getting the
numbers as they came, I presume we could have acted more immediately.
We could have relied not just on the automatic mechanism that moves
the funds rate; we could have dropped the nonborrowed path and raised
the discount rate and so on.

MS. TEETERS. We did.

MR. STERNLIGHT. We didn't during that first four-week
period, Governor Teeters; we did in the final three weeks. As I
interpreted it--and Steve may want to comment--I thought perhaps there
was not a need to do that in those first four weeks because there was
lighter-than-expected borrowing in the very early part of April. And
because of that we were going to be imposing on the banking system a
demand for even greater borrowing as we got further into April, which
in itself looked as though it was going to be exerting significantly
increased reserve pressure without the need to make these
discretionary, if you will, downward adjustments in the nonborrowed
reserve path. We were looking for borrowing to have to rise up to the
$1.6 or $1.7 billion area, well above that initial $1150 million
level, as we got further along into April.

-20-



5/18/81

MR. CORRIGAN. But the fact is that in the first four weeks
you actually moved the nonborrowed path up.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, those were just technical adjustments
due to the multipliers.

MR. PARTEE. I'd ask the question more historically than
Henry did. We had a 13.9 percent increase in M-1B shift-adjusted in
April. We had evidence fairly early on that the month would be strong
because one of those early weeks came in strong. What would it have
taken to have achieved, say, a 10 percent rate of M-1B growth for the
month of April? Is it within the realm of possibility?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it would have taken [steps] that
would have had to be done in March.

MR. PARTEE. Before we knew that there was an increase.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. That would be my view.

MS. TEETERS. But we were well below our money growth path,
weren't we, for the first three months? And to a certain extent we
expected a rebound in the money supply in April in order to bring the
GNP numbers and the money growth into line.

MR. AXILROD. Right. Governor Partee, worrying about how to
present alternatives and so forth, we did look at the elasticities in
the money market model to see if truly we could get an effect within a
month, because in these alternatives we do have effects even in May
from decisions taken in the last light almost--a little beyond the
middle--of May. And if my memory is right--it may be off a little--it
looked as if a one half percentage point increase in the funds rate
[would be needed to effect the growth of money in a month]. You could
[get the same effect by] working through the borrowing and nonborrowed
path, but it comes down to this: that 1/2 percentage point on the
funds rate seemed to [have an effect of] about 0.3 percent a month on
growth in the money supply.

MR. PARTEE. Right away?

MR. AXILROD. Within the month. So, if you wanted to get [an
effect of] 3 percentage points, multiply that by 10; it's probably not
linear but it might be on the order of 5 percentage points [on the
funds rate]. [So, if the funds rate were 13 percent at the beginning
of a month] and you made it 18 percent pretty promptly during the
month, according to the monthly model it would produce some genuine
effect--on the order of 3 percentage points or so--in the money
supply. That is all we really have to work on. But then you'd really
have to know pretty early in the month what is going to happen.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where you are [on the
agenda]. I understand that you have to ratify the transactions.
Maybe you don't want to, after all of this!

MR. PARTEE. I have one other question Paul, if I might,
before we do that. We did have a large increase in rates in the
month. [The increase in] short rates was historically very large and
long rates [went up] quite a bit. One assumes that there must have

-21-



5/18/81

been losers and well as gainers in that market shift. In fact, the
arithmetic suggests it, so it must be so. In that last comment in
your statement, Peter, you said the big dealers are in no trouble that
you can see.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I said I'm not aware of disastrous
losses. There were certainly losses taken, mainly in early April
because they had some big [positions] at the end of March. But our
impression is that losses were taken by big, well capitalized dealers.
They were unhappy, clearly, but they were not put into a state where
they couldn't function. There were some smaller [problem] situations,
not among the major primary dealers but, as I said, among fringe
operators. I can really think of just one smaller dealer operation
that was put out of business.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, the one that was in the paper.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's almost standard practice for all
the dealers now, unlike a year ago when only half of them did it, to
hedge in the futures market.

MR. PARTEE. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Now, they [can] hedge purposely.

MR. PARTEE. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But they can hedge pretty well under
government securities.

MR. PARTEE. Well, the question I have in my mind is that the
dealers hedge in the futures market and the futures market protects
the dealers, then, against a very sharp rise in rates. Who is on the
other side of those futures transactions and why don't we hear from
them? They must have lost as much as the dealers were able not to
lose.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] dentists.

MR. PARTEE. It may be that it's just very widely
distributed.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There are a lot of dentists in the
area.

MR. PARTEE. You haven't heard of any problems?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, no. The dealers did have some losses
in March. In general, it's true that to some extent they were helped
out by hedging in the futures market. Obviously, there were other
participants on the other side of the futures market who have lost,
but it just seems to be well diversified. We have not heard of
terrible calamitous problems there.

MR. BALLES. I wonder if I can just ask one more technical
question of Peter. Can you bring me up to date [on your procedures]
when you find borrowings departing from assumptions? As I recall, the
last time I heard this discussed you said that in the following period

-22-



5/18/81

you adjust by only half of the undershoot or overshoot, which doesn't
seem to be working out all that well, as far as I can see. Is that
still the practice?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, in the current three-week subperiod,
we went beyond that kind of adjustment and moved the nonborrowed path
more in relation to the overshoot. Initially we appeared to be
running about $550 million above on total reserves, and the initial
downward adjustment in the nonborrowed path was $250 million. Then a
week later, it looked as if we were running over by $375 or $400
million and a further downward adjustment was made in the nonborrowed
path because of that. There was also another adjustment; in the May
6th week we had deliberately accepted some shortfall in nonborrowed
reserves because borrowing had been running higher than expected. It
was kind of the aftermath of that super tight week at the end of
April. So, another $100 million or so downward adjustment was made in
the nonborrowed path for that reason. In total, the downward
adjustment in the nonborrowed reserve path relative to the total
reserve path was $485 million, which in this case was somewhat more
than the amount by which total reserves were running above their path.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have to ratify the transactions.

MR. PARTEE. So move.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, they will be ratified.
When I came back, I thought you had finished your coffee break. I see
the coffee is there. Do you want to hear from Mr. Axilrod so you can
chew over a doughnut and his comments? Maybe we'll do that, if you
don't take too long.

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is that all there is?

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he brought us right to the brink and then
dropped us, didn't he?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't quite prepared for you to stop so
soon, but why don't we have the coffee break.

[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have several alternatives laid out
before us. They take as their low point where we were last time as
converted [for] the remaining part of the period, due to the
unexpectedly high [M-1B] growth rate in April. We are, as you know,
at the midpoint of the range for M-1B adjusted. The only comfort I
feel about M-1B adjusted is that we estimate these shifts about three
different ways and they all [produce] more or less the same [results].
They are probably all wrong, but the different ways of estimating come
out more or less the same. In the last meeting we picked what is the
equivalent of "C" this time, which I believe [involves growth that] is
low in the range. However, if I recall correctly, the actual M2 came
in a little less than we projected the last time, right?

-23-



5/18/81

MR. AXILROD. In April it didn't on average, but the data in
late April and thus far in early May suggest that in May M2 will come
in quite low.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And as you see, bank credit has sneaked
just inside the range and M3 remains above its range. While there is
a lot of week-to-week change, I suppose that is the trend on the
absolutely most recent money supply figures, if there is such a thing
as a trend for about 3 weeks or 4 weeks [of data]. That's where we
stand. Alternative A would leave us theoretically running in the
middle of the range for M-1B adjusted but would leave us above,
although closer to, the ranges in the case of the broader aggregates--
only slightly closer, I guess, in the case of M2. That seems to me to
be the range for our discussion. Who would like to start?

MR. PARTEE. Any of those outcomes is acceptable in terms of
what might happen.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's fair to say the range of
outcomes is likely to be somewhat wider than the ranges presented to
the Committee. So, as usual, we are moving in a direction of bias and
risk averseness or whatever. I agree that any of these results would
not be disturbing in and of themselves. But it's a question of which
way we should lean.

MS. TEETERS. Steve, you show M2 for May at 6.6 percent. Is
it below that now?

MR. AXILROD. We don't have weekly data, except for certain
components. But the weakness in the weekly data on money market funds
and what we have seen in small time and savings deposits have led us
to project M2 for May generally around that rate. So, it reflects the
latest data for those components for which we have weekly data.

MS. TEETERS. The 6.6 percent does?

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Schultz.

MR. SCHULTZ. Let me start out with a very quick story about
the fellow who went to Dublin and asked directions to a castle outside
of town. He said: "Can you tell me how to get there?" And the
fellow he asked said: "Of course I can, but you can't start from
here." I'm afraid I have that same kind of feeling as we go around.
The last time I expressed a lot of vague fears, which I guess have all
come true, that we have gotten higher interest rates and a stronger
economy and everything seems to be going in different directions due
to that. Money seems to affect interest rates, and interest rates
affect money; but neither one seems to have much effect on the
economy. So, I have some real questions about how we should go about
doing this. In addition, I have the same thoughts that were expressed
here a little earlier: That we are putting a lot of pressure on
various parts of the economy and that it's going to be hard to get out
of this without some kind of financial crisis. The one really strong
feeling I have is that monetary policy alone won't do the job for us.
But we don't have much choice. Over the weekend I looked at the
Bluebook and I thought about "B" tending toward "A." But the more I

-24-



5/18/81

listen to the reports that things are pretty strong out there, it
seems fairly clear that we don't have any option but to continue to
restrain this economy. What we've done so far isn't having too much
effect. So, I guess I would now come out somewhere between "B" and
"C," keeping borrowing around $2 billion and perhaps shading that up
if necessary.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, unless the President told you
this morning that he's willing to change his fiscal policy and have a
balanced budget in fiscal 1982 by forgetting about tax cuts and
cutting back on defense increases--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The question answers itself.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Unless you could tell us that, I feel
that we have to go even further this way. I feel we should take
alternative C, but not the initial borrowing assumption of $3 billion.
I'd start off with a $2-1/4 to $2-1/2 billion borrowing assumption. I
think that we have to have a fed funds range going up to 22 percent.
And even that will be skewed; in other words, we are likely to be near
the ceiling fairly quickly unless we are very lucky and we see much
lower growth in May. I recognize, if we do get something on the order
of 5-1/2 or 6 percent [M-1B] growth in May, what this would require in
June and that, therefore, pressure is likely to continue mounting over
that period until the end of June. It seems to me that we are better
off to be very firm and vigorous in our responses early in the game.
I'm influenced not only by the strength of the economy--and there is a
widespread feeling around the country, and certainly in the market,
that with the exception of the troubled sectors the economy is very
strong--but I'm also influenced by the fact that if the President's
program goes through, even with a compromise on the tax cut package,
the fourth quarter is likely to be much stronger, and the third
quarter probably somewhat stronger, than the present quarter. And in
those circumstances we might have major problems [achieving] our
fourth-quarter targets. I feel we are better off trying to nip this
now than trying to be more gentle in our approach; the latter approach
is going to store up a lot of problems toward the end of the year.
That's all I'll say right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may just interrupt, I have a feeling
that this relative buoyancy in the economy against expectations is
importantly affected by the psychology of the Administration's program
itself, the tax reduction.

MR. SCHULTZ. And the way they talk about it.

MR. PARTEE. It's the [tack] of the Administration.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. In the financial markets, privately
people will say that they don't see the difference between a Keynesian
tax cut and a supply sider tax cut; it's going to be the same. We are
calculating internally within the New York Fed that the budget deficit
this year will be above $65 billion and that for fiscal '82, if the
President's program is enacted, it will not be $45 billion or less but
it will be $75 billion. I would say the majority of the big firms in
the financial markets also are forecasting budgetary deficits very

-25-



5/18/81

much higher than the Administration or even than the CBO estimates.
So, that's a factor. I think there would be a remarkable turnaround
in psychology and attitudes if we had a more traditional conservative
approach to the deficit question by the Administration.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think the way they say it is of critical
importance. The President is essentially an upbeat kind of fellow; I
think he wants to talk that way. But the talk has been essentially
that we can get out of this almost without any real pain and without
any real problems. I just don't think that that's the right way to be
talking at this stage of the game because, heaven knows, it's pretty
hard to see how that could be possible. If they would talk in a
little more practical way, I think it would help.

MR. WALLICH. I think they believe this. I have heard this
now for a week from Beryl Sprinkel: Everything will be easy, if the
Fed just keeps the money supply--

MR. BOEHNE. Yes, I was going to add to that. They say we
can get out of this with no problems unless the Fed screws up. If we
have problems, it's the Fed's fault.

MR. WALLICH. That's exactly it.

MR. ROOS. I don't know. In all fairness, an awful lot of us
who have been advocating monetary restraint over the years have said
repeatedly that we can't get over a binge such as the one we have been
on without suffering pain. Whether it's Beryl Sprinkel or Joe Jones
or whoever, those who have advocated restraint have also warned that
there is no easy way out of it. So, I'm not sure that there hasn't
been some recognition of the pain that inevitably will be required to
bring an economy out of the excesses that this economy has been
experiencing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't mean to get off on a discussion
of pain. Governor Partee, what do you have to say?

MR. PARTEE. Well, I agree that we have to be restrictive.
But I would say in response to Tony that what we should do is to set
our money growth course the way we would like to have it. If it
deviates from that, then we'll automatically become more restrictive
in terms of interest rates if we need to be tighter, or less
restrictive if we need to be easier. So, I don't really see moving
all the way down to alternative C in terms of the specifications.
What would we like to have develop in terms of the aggregates? That's
really the question we are being asked. And in my view "A" holds us
right along the mid-section of the M-1B range. It's a little ample on
M2 and M3 and, therefore, there might be a case for alternative B in
order to adjust for having been over on the broader aggregates. As
for the numbers for the aggregates, expansion of 3 percent in M-1B for
April to June is quite reasonable; it's a very modest expansion and
would be a quite acceptable outcome. Now, we don't know what interest
rates might be associated with the 3 percent increase. And if I
understand the meaning of the funds rate range now as the points at
which we're to have a consultation rather than points within which the
Manager operates, I think we might want to raise that range in "B" to
16 to 22 percent. I can certainly imagine the rate going to 22
percent with no trouble at all, and I don't know that it would be

-26-



5/18/81

fruitful to have an exchange [of views] until it gets to about 22
percent. But that's just a test point, or guidepost, or whatever you
said earlier, Peter, rather than a specification to the Manager.

There is one other point that I want to make now. I think we
will be in as much difficulty politically if there is weakness in the
aggregates as if there is strength. We could quickly get quite a
reaction from very weak growth in the monetary aggregates, and that is
not unprecedented. Starting in the spring of both '75 and '76, there
was a surge in the aggregates that was subsequently reversed. The
fact that the last couple of occasions haven't [produced that result]
doesn't mean it won't occur again. April is still an odd month; it
has a lot of tax transactions in it. So it seems to me that we ought
to be in a posture where we can give a little if the numbers come in
weak as well as tighten up a little if the numbers come in strong, and
we ought to do it from a neutral position. So, I could accept the
specifications of alternative A, but I lean rather strongly to "B" as
a conservative posture.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And would you take the associated
borrowing assumption of "B" of $2-1/2 billion?

MR. PARTEE. Well, $2-1/2 billion seems a little strong. I
wanted to ask Steve why he [raised] that. I would say $2 billion is
about where we are now, isn't it?

MR. AXILROD. That's right. We thought with our projections
that to stay with unchanged money market conditions we'd expect an
outcome more like "A" than "B." So, with added restraint from "B," it
looked as if we'd have to have a higher funds rate, on the order of a
percentage point or so higher. It is hard to relate that exactly to
the level of borrowing, but that tends to push up the level of
borrowing by $450 to $500 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are below $2 billion of borrowing right
at the moment.

MR. AXILROD. It was $1.8175 billion on Friday exactly.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But the average of the last three
weeks was about $2 billion.

MR. PARTEE. I would say $2 billion, Tony, and then if M-1B
comes in strong, that would soon develop additional tension and
additional borrowings, as it did in this last episode. I'd favor more
of a neutral start.

MS. TEETERS. That implies a negative rate of growth in M-1B
during June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it depends upon what happens late in
May. The staff is assuming an increase late in May.

MR. AXILROD. It might be helpful to add, Mr. Chairman, that
the May estimate of a little over 6 percent in M-1B growth does assume
an increase from the preliminary data of the 13th to the end of the
month of around $5 billion. If an increase of that magnitude doesn't

-27-



5/18/81

develop, May could turn out to be unchanged or be at a level that has
changed around 1 or 2 percent. It could go almost either way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I feel this May-June period is very
crucial in our efforts to convince the market that we are bound and
determined to hit these targets that we've set. And given the large
bulge we had in the April numbers, I feel we simply can't tolerate any
more than a modest expansion in M-1B. Along with the fiscal stance
that the market perceives, the behavior of the aggregates is going to
be the most important thing determining the business outlook rather
than all those things we hammered through in our go-around earlier
this morning. So, I think we really ought to try very strongly to hit
these March-June targets that we established at our March meeting,
which would incline me to favor alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, this kind of economic environment is
one where most people see strength in the economy and where I would
characterize the economy as indicating a pronounced lack of weakness.
It seems to me that we may continue to see money growth coming in
pretty strong. And in this environment, it seems to me the really
basic question is how rapidly we want to bring M2 and M3 back to
within their target ranges--whether we want to bring them back by the
end of June or whether we are prepared to wait somewhat longer. My
own view is that we should try to get M2 and M3 back within their
target ranges as soon as possible--that is, by the end of June. And
alternative C, of course, is the alternative that will do that.
Alternative C, if we get the results projected, would result in all
three of the aggregates being within their target ranges: M-1B at the
low end, and M2 and M3 at the top. I think that is important to
achieve. If we had an economy that we could be fairly sure was
weakening and if money demand was slackening, we could take a longer
time to try to bring these aggregates back to within their target
ranges. But in the current circumstances, with recent money growth
having been so strong and with every possibility that strong money
demand will continue, I would see less risk in trying to get the
aggregates back [on track]. Of course, to pursue alternative C would
imply, as has been pointed out, substantially higher rates than we
have now and somewhat higher rates than we would anticipate if we
pursued alternative B. That is, we would have these higher rates in
the short run, or at least during the month of June and possibly
longer. However, by the fourth quarter, if I read Appendix II [of the
Bluebook] correctly, alternative C would yield lower short-term
interest rates and alternative B, if pursued, would yield higher
interest rates. So it's a question of whether one wants to take
higher interest rates now or in the fourth quarter. I would opt for
taking them now. And that would lead me to favor alternative C. A
final reason for favoring alternative C right now is that we really
are not too sure what we are working with when we rely exclusively on
M-1B. In these circumstances I think we ought to attach more
importance to M2 and to getting M2 back within the target range, so I
favor alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

-28-



5/18/81

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I line up with Governor Partee on
this one. I think we ought to follow a middle course here. We have
had a major change in policy, as defined by interest rates, in the
past four weeks. We have seen the federal funds rate move up by 300
basis points. There hasn't been enough time for us to see what impact
that is going to have on the economy and monetary growth rates. I
think there's a tendency as we get near the peak of activity always to
feel that we are not accomplishing anything--that the economy somehow
is not sensitive to interest rates. I think back to March, 1980 when
that feeling was clearly dominant in this Committee. We didn't know
at the time that the economy had already been climbing for two months
as we were sitting at the table and as Fred Schultz was about to lead
us into a vigorous credit control program.

MR. SCHULTZ. What a friend!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In defense of Fred Schultz, that's not
wholly apparent to me, [even] with the benefit of hindsight. Had we
not had the credit control program we might not have had the decline.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the evidence is that the decline
had already started.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ex-post people say that. I don't know.

MR. MORRIS. It seems to me that one could make a case here,
at least for the next few weeks, not to set too restrictive a course
in the aggregates until we can assess the effect of what we have
already done. So, "B" looks pretty good to me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. There are a couple of things, Mr. Chairman, that
have led me in the same direction as Mr. Solomon and Governor Rice.
We're beginning to wonder--and it's obviously speculation rather than
proof yet--whether we aren't witnessing some downward shift in the
demand for money, along the same lines as occurred in the 1975-76
episode, because of the institutional changes affecting business
deposits with this surge in money market mutual funds. Some
simulations we have been doing over the past five months show that
M-1B is now well below the level that would have been indicated by
historical demand relationships, and I'm really beginning to wonder
whether there hasn't been a downward shift. I don't know what studies
you have been doing on this, Steve. But if that is going on, and I
suspect it might be, the shift-adjusted range that we have set for
ourselves could actually give us more expansion than we counted on
when we picked out the range at the beginning of the year, even though
we are now, as of April, in the middle of that shift-adjusted range.
And that leads me to lean more toward "C" than "B."

One thing that gives me real pause about coming out there is
what Governor Gramley as well as Steve and the staff remarked on
earlier today: Namely, it seems to indicate that we'd have to keep
interest rates at a very high level for a very long time. We need
some real weakening in the economy in order to hit even the midpoint
of our shift-adjusted M-1B range. But, again, our staff has been
doing some work on the differences between the liquidity preference
model of interest rates and the more traditional loanable funds theory

-29-



5/18/81

of interest rate determination. And the net of that is that, except
for the very short run, interest rates are going to be determined more
by credit market conditions than pure money demand equations [would
suggest]. This leads us to conclude that it's distinctly possible
that we can get a slowdown in money growth this year from last year,
along the lines of the midpoint of our shift-adjusted range, without
keeping interest rates that high that long, and to a point where we
would see somewhat more real economic growth in '81 than the Board
staff [has projected] and almost about the same real economic growth,
close to 3 percent, in 1982. Admittedly, a lot of this is conjectural
and one might even say speculative; but taking both of those reasons
together tilts me toward alternative C.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, when you were out, Governor
Gramley spoke of some frustration in terms of trying to figure out
what the economy is doing. We have more than our share of
frustrations in policy here, too. We just got through revising up the
money supply a little in the first quarter, convincing ourselves that
that made more sense. But now we find that the GNP may be revised up
more, so we're further away than we thought we were.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Wait 'til next year's revision!

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes.

MR. CORRIGAN. We have a little frustration, too, with
respect to this question of how quickly the banking system responds to
what we do. We saw a classic illustration of that in this period
here, apropos to your comment earlier, Governor Partee. We seem to
have a situation where, even when we begin to firm up, what happens
for a couple of weeks is that the banks sit there and wait until
Wednesday and cover their whole position on Wednesday. And the funds
rate doesn't change except on Wednesday and then everybody discounts
the change. And then for a week or two after the banks run down their
excess reserves and end up with deficiencies. Somehow or other, in
ways that are not clear to me, it takes a couple more weeks and we
revise away all those deficiencies with "as-of" adjustments. Then
finally, after all of those processes have run their course, we begin
to see some pressure either in terms of borrowing or the funds rate,
or both. I will also confess to a little continuing sense of
frustration about the construction of and subsequent adjustments to
the reserve paths, which comes up again in this forthcoming period.
The Bluebook indicates that, looking out over the April-June period,
any of the alternatives contemplates a substantial acceleration in
reserve growth while at the same time about the same or less growth in
money. I don't know what all that means except that maybe we don't
know as much as we think we know.

As I suggested earlier, there are some risks here, and I
think we have to be prepared to take some risks. In the current
circumstances I come out somewhere around "C," too, partly because I
think the economy, if anything, is stronger, and partly because I
think money growth is likely to be stronger in the short run than we
expect. And finally, like Governor Rice, if we have to take a bit of
a slowdown or a decline in the economy, which we may have to do, I'd
rather do it now than later, partly because I think it makes more

-30-



5/18/81

sense in the context of hitting the annual targets but partly because
it forestalls an even more serious problem that would occur if we let
[money growth] continue to build up. Given all of that, I come out
somewhere around "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, I see the economy lifted to a higher
level of [activity] and, with a given rate of money growth, we have a
higher level of velocity than one would have expected. Certainly, we
have to [get money growth to] come back [toward our] midpoints. If we
don't do that, I think we will have continuing pressure from high
interest rates for a long time, with the economy being held down by
always bumping [up against] the admittedly very tight-fitting money
supply ceilings. I find that uncomfortable to contemplate for the
future. So, if we could create a little breathing space in the real
sector, letting out some of that steam that built up during the first
quarter, I think we would operate more comfortably with our existing
targets and in the long run we'd probably have less high interest
rates. Conceivably, maintenance of these high interest rates would
give us this [result] anyway through some sort of financial crunch.
But we don't want to provoke that. So, I would lean toward exerting a
good deal of pressure now in order to get [rid of the imbalances in]
the economy and [in] the relationship of the aggregates to the
economy. That suggests that "C" is the appropriate alternative. To
the extent that one can [anticipate] these things, if "C" will allow
the funds rate to come down later even though it may mean a higher
funds rate immediately, that's what I think we should aim at, i.e.
somewhat less pressure in the economy for the longer run.

I would say one other thing. Given the way we were surprised
by events in April, we ought to examine whether we couldn't respond
more flexibly to such developments. I realize that means responding
to the weekly data in a way that the data themselves don't really
justify. Nevertheless, it has happened again and again that we were
overtaken by events and, in the light of hindsight, probably would
have wanted to move faster. I don't recall so many instances in which
we did move fast and then regretted it or didn't move and then found
that that would have been the right thing to do. On balance, I think
our failures have been on the side of actions [that were] too little
and too late.

MR. SCHULTZ. But you want to be asymmetrical about that,
don't you?

MR. WALLICH. On the down side I do have my reservations,
yes. In short, I would lean toward "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm primarily
motivated by a desire to hit the targets that we set earlier, not
because they're magic but because that would tend to avoid the same
kind of thing that happened in June, July, and August of last year.
That is, things got away from us after one month [of] fairly large
[monetary growth]. We say that isn't terribly bad, but when we start
piling one month after the other, we then have a very small chance of
hitting our targets for the year. Therefore, restraint at the moment

-31-



5/18/81

is attractive to me, but I'm not sure that I would go as far as "C."
The staff's estimate of growth in M-1B of 6 percent or a little above
in May under alternative B probably is subject to being off by at
least 100 percent. That is, I think we could get 3 percent or 9
percent in May as easily as 6 percent. Thus, my prescription would be
something between "B" and "C," with a borrowing level initially of
about $2.1 or $2.2 billion and with the rather specific instruction to
the Desk and to the staff that if money growth as it develops in May
is running above 6 percent, the borrowing level should be adjusted
upward promptly to $2-1/2 billion, [the level] I believe the staff
would say at the moment is consistent with "B." So, I am choosing
numbers for growth in the aggregates between "B" and "C," with an
initial borrowing level of $2.1 or $2.2 billion but I would be
prepared to move borrowing up rather rapidly if growth in M-1B starts
coming in above 6 percent in May. A federal funds range of 17 to 22
percent would be acceptable.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think the current economic situation and the
general climate that we're in call for restraint. And we really have
to hit our targets. I'd be prepared to err some on the side of
restraint, but it seems to me that alternative B does that. I find
going all the way to "C" to be too much in that direction. So, I
would come out in the neighborhood of "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. I would opt for "C" for most of the reasons
already stated. There is one further reason, and that is the
possibility that the new seasonal adjustments are a bit unrealistic in
terms of the degree to which they've adjusted the aggregates downward.
I'd like to throw in one other thought, too. If we are interested in
achieving the greatest degree of confidence that could reasonably be
expected in the financial markets, I wonder if in the directive--and
this piggybacks somewhat on some of the things that Fred Schultz has
said--we ought to consider eliminating any reference to our federal
funds rate checkpoints. It seems to me that there could be a lot of
reasons why the Chairman would consult at a critical phase. It is
conceivable that growth of the aggregates, for example, could be a
source of concern that might lead to adjustments. I do know that
there is still a degree of uncertainty in the minds of market
participants as to why we include a reference to checkpoints on the
fed funds rate and not on some of the other [factors] that could
influence our [need to] consult. So, I think some consideration
should be given to clarifying that with a statement, perhaps by the
Chairman, that we consult for a lot of reasons and that under our new
procedures fed funds checkpoints are no more meaningful than other
checkpoints that would lead to consultation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll get to that subject a little later.
Mr. Gramley.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the mood of the
Committee is becoming very clear. This is a Committee that follows a
tough policy. It's only a question of how far we go. I share the
general view that I believe prevails here that we're dealing with a
very strong economy and that our problem this year in terms of the

-32-



5/18/81

monetary aggregates is primarily making sure that we don't overrun the
upper ends [of our ranges] rather than the other way around. But I
want to call the Committee's attention to the fact that we have
essentially one alternative that implies no change in money market
conditions and that's "A." The other two are both tougher. And if my
sense of relationships is correct, the borrowing numbers we're
associating with "B" and "C" are not by any means associated with the
midpoints of the federal funds ranges that we're talking about here.
The present level of borrowing is less than $2 billion. Under "C"
that would go all the way up to $3 billion. And if we go that far, I
think we're going to end up having a telephone consultation by next
Monday, if not earlier. We have done a lot of tightening recently,
and I think we ought to try to keep that degree of tightness and
perhaps go somewhat further. But I wouldn't want us to get into a
situation in which if some temporary weakness in the aggregates does
develop, as Governor Partee suggests it might, we would end up running
interest rates back down again. That would be quite unproductive, if
the Committee's diagnosis of the economic problem is a correct one.
So, I think the better alternative would be to stick with "B" and then
come back a month from now at the next meeting and go further if we
need to.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. I come out pretty much on the consensus of between
"B" and "C," leaning toward "C." I share the concern about the great
risk to credibility and the overriding need to meet the targets and to
start now rather than to wait until later. We've been fortunate that
the seasonal adjustments, if I read the staff work right, had the
effect of making the more recent aggregate numbers look lower. They
are below some of the others, which were adjusted upward, is the way I
read that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes April lower, but May and June
higher.

MR. FORD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. February is higher and April and January
are [lower].

MR. FORD. Depending on how different Fed watchers interpret
that, there may be a little vulnerability about some of the downward
movement from pretty high numbers to quite low ones, even though in
other timeframes they are offset. Overall, I would say we'd have to
go with a reasonably tight policy so as not to pay later, hoping it is
true, as I think Governor Rice said, that we'll get slightly higher
rates now and receive as our reward lower rates later in the year than
we would otherwise have under "B" or "A." However, I'm very concerned
about the fragility of the marketplace. Fred Schultz in his comments
mentioned the words "financial crisis" and it almost sounded casual to
me, Fred. I don't mean to insult you but I don't think that's
something that we should--

MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day!

MR. PARTEE. Casual?

-33-



5/18/81

MR. FORD. You said there might be a financial crisis and I
thought everyone would blanch. I blanched, but nobody else did.
We're obviously not going to put that in the policy record, but I
really do hope that we redouble our efforts to watch very carefully
for possible problems arising in the most vulnerable sectors, the
housing-related sectors, and try every device we can think of to help
the thrifts that is not a bail-out, which would [subvert] monetary
policy. I'm referring to advocating right now federal preemption of
the limits on due-on-sale clauses in 17 states, including some of the
biggest ones, and things like that. That would help them to reliquify
themselves better without an outright bail-out, which would simply
exacerbate our monetary control problems. That's the only thing I
would like to add to this process as we head toward this obvious
consensus of "B" to "C"--that we have to redouble our efforts in the
area of monitoring and doing whatever we can that is not inflationary
to help the [institutions that] bear the brunt of it. I don't know
that there's an answer, Chuck. I know what you're going to say, but
we had better be searching.

MR. PARTEE. Due-on-sale doesn't help them this month or next
month, that's for sure.

MR. FORD. No, but if you do the calculations on the amount
of money they can recycle, that makes a big difference.

MR. PARTEE. It might next year or the year after.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I'm shocked by the consensus that is
emerging. I don't think this economic outlook, which is based on "A,"
is at all encouraging. It means another year or maybe two years of no
growth in the economy. I find the unemployment rates projected, with
no growth, rather unbelievable also. More importantly, it seems to me
that the level of borrowing is now becoming very crucial here. At
just under $2 billion we have already put a great deal of pressure on
the market. We have shot [short-term interest] rates up 3 to 5 full
percentage points, depending on which ones you look at. If we move
borrowing up another $1 billion, the [proposed fed funds upper end of]
22 percent isn't going to hold. It seems to me that we really should
be somewhere between "A" and "B" and perhaps move the borrowing from
the present $1.7 or $1.8 billion to just over $2 billion and let that
be the deciding point here. I'd set the [top of the funds rate] range
at certainly no more than 21 percent, which I find difficult to
accept. We're putting a lot of pressure on the market now. We
haven't had enough time, as Frank said, to assess what that sudden
change in interest rates is going to do. I think it's foolish to run
rates up another 5 percentage points in such a short period of time,
which I'm convinced "C" would do at this point. I can live with "B,"
but I don't like it. I'd much rather have the borrowing halfway
between $2 and $2-1/2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That doesn't sound like such a weak
approach.

MR. PARTEE. No, no.

MR. SCHULTZ. That borrowing [level] is pretty good.

-34-



5/18/81

MR. PARTEE. That's a $400 million adjustment right off.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're above--

MS. TEETERS. Yes, but it's better than the [$2-1/2] billion
that everybody else is talking about.

MR. SCHULTZ. [I don't think] that's right. I was starting
at $2 billion and moving it up from there.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, me too.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I come down pretty clearly for
"C." The arguments for that position have been stated and I will not
take the time to restate them. But just by way of summary: The
strength of the economy worries me; I wonder about the recent rapid
growth in money and that it may not be temporary; also the
expectations issue looms rather large in my thinking. I think it's
important to have a continuously firm policy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Winn.

MR. WINN. Mr. Chairman, there are several things we haven't
really talked about this morning, including the international
situation, the Middle East, and a number of other things that
certainly could alter the outlook very quickly. A second point is
that I'd be very happy if somehow we could get away from the check
writing privileges on these money funds, because I think we are
exposed there with the funds investing in issues that could go sour on
them. We may have more volatility built into this than we are
thinking about. The third is that we talk about targets as if they
were fixed and we forget base-drift and a whole lot of history that
goes into them. I'm not sure that hitting the midpoint of our new
range is what we really ought to be doing. A little miss on the low
side might be more helpful than misses on the high side. I'm
disturbed by the M2 and M3 figures, which tend to go on the high side
in this set-up. On the other hand, I have some sympathy with Lyle's
point of view in that I'd hate to see us run the rates up and then run
them right back down again. That would not be very helpful in terms
of our longer-run objectives. To take a stance at this time, I would
be content to be able to hit somewhere between "B" and "C" rather than
to set a target and then be all over the lot in terms of our
performance. I, too, would be inclined to raise the borrowing
objective to help move in that direction; I'd go to $2.1 billion or
something in that neighborhood as a first move.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Doyle.

MR. DOYLE. Mr. Chairman, it's very difficult for me not to
be influenced by the state of the economy in the Seventh Federal
Reserve District, particularly the credit-sensitive industries, which
are extremely depressed. Every day the feeling seems to be growing
that the risks are greater that some of these industries may not
recover their former strength. Hence, I would favor alternative A but
I could reluctantly support alternative B.

-35-



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess that is everybody, unless somebody
has not been heard from.

MR. PARTEE. We haven't heard from you.

MR. SCHULTZ. We're about to!

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll reveal my forecast on where the
Committee would come out, which by coincidence or otherwise doesn't
make me feel uncomfortable. We have had a 5-1/2 percent [M-1B] target
for the quarter, and the alternative that's consistent with that is
"C." But we had a big increase [in M-1B] in April. My forecast was
that it might not look too good or that people might not want to say
that we should go all the way to "C," which implies about 1 percent
[M-1B growth for April to June] by the time we state it in the
directive. Stated flatly, we're certainly around the "B to C" area;
both the Committee and the non-Committee members, looked at
individually or collectively, are split someplace between "B" and "C"
with a little flavor of between "A" and "B." The question I would
raise is whether we can reconcile that part of it, and I'll get to the
borrowings and the other issues in a minute. If you look at the way
the record has been stated historically, the most consistent way is
that [at this point in the quarter] we'd put in a growth rate for
April to June.

MR. WINN. Is it through June or to June, Paul? I'm worried
about the lack of [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it means through June. We next meet
at the beginning of July, don't we? I wondered, when I looked at it,
whether we could even put in a growth rate through July. I thought
about it after the Bluebook was prepared. But generally we go on the
theory--maybe it's not a good theory--that we set something for the
quarter and then review it at the middle-of-the-quarter meeting. We
can get some of that flavor--I don't know whether this captures some
of the [concerns] or not--with a slight rewriting. The draft
directive says "In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of
reserve aggregates consistent with a substantial deceleration of
growth in M-1B from April to June"--and that's shift-adjusted--"to an
annual rate of ___ percent". This language is all the same so far.
Consistent with this approach, we presumably could put in something
like the "B" number or we could put in [the "B" number and] "or lower,
as may be consistent with the objective for M-1B adopted by the
Committee on March 31" and then repeat that number. If we want to go
that way, I think it says that we are between "B" and "C." And then
we'd put some M2 number in there. We could go that way or we could
just put in a lower number--we can't put in a much lower number--and
say "or lower." To get absolute consistency with what we did last
time, we would [have to] say "C" or lower. Last time the directive
simply said "5-1/2 percent or somewhat less," so theoretically we
could do that. I confess to my own bias of rather liking some feeling
in the directive that we are not going to hit a precise number,
because we are not going to anyway, and giving some flavor of which
way we want the errors to go.

-36-



5/18/81

Well, let me just get a very preliminary reaction to
something like that. Let me say specifically that we are putting in 3
percent but with the period April to June. In any case, we want a
substantial deceleration--I'm just talking about M-1B--to an annual
rate of 3 percent or lower, as may be consistent with the objective of
5-1/2 percent for the quarter that we adopted last time.

MR. GRAMLEY. What is the purpose of putting the rest of the
language in there? If we say 3 percent or lower, what function does
the rest of this language serve?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just ties it back to what we said
before as to what [M-1B growth for] the quarter should be; it's an
element of continuity and it's not really a lower limit. I don't
think we can control M-1B that closely, so its purpose is to give some
idea of what we mean by a little lower, I think.

MR. ROOS. Is there no reference to NOW accounts? That's
because it's shift-adjusted. I get you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, it's shift-adjusted. We are all
talking about the shift-adjusted number--or I am--at this time.

MR. GRAMLEY. To get [a growth rate of] 5-1/2 percent or
somewhat less for March to June, we are going to have less than 1.3
percent for April to June. That bothers me; it seems to me that we
are putting in figures that are really not consistent with one
another.

MR. BLACK. I think that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I disagree with that. But
it's a question of approach. My [point] on this is that we are not
going to hit a precise number anyway, so it's useful to give the
direction in which we would like to go from whatever precise number is
put in. Or we could be completely neutral. If if we put in something
as high as 3 percent as the center of gravity of the Committee, I
would interpret that as not neutral; we'd rather come in lower than
higher. And that's what I'm--

MR. GRAMLEY. But that first "lower"--the phrase "an annual
rate of 3 percent or lower"--connotes that. I wouldn't have judged
that the Committee's view is that [M-1B growth of] 1 percent or less
is what we are really shooting at. And 1.3 percent or less is what
we'd have to get if we are going to get 5-1/2 percent or less from
April to June.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the question. The question
obviously was not asked this way, but let me ask the question.
Suppose we have a happy day and those late May figures come in rather
low and it looks as if, indeed, we may come in lower than 1 percent
for May and June with interest rates not rising and maybe falling
under those circumstances. Would the Committee consider that an
unhappy result or a happy result? I myself would be rather happy.
And, therefore, I would not want to be pushing out money if the growth
rate happened to come in, let's say, at zero in May and June, if
interest rates were already stable or declining.

-37-



5/18/81

MR. GRAMLEY. I don't have any objection to that, but what
that postulates is that we hope to have another downward shift in the
demand function for money. And if we do, that is fine and the money
numbers will look better. Unless we get a very marked turnaround in
the behavior of the economy in the near term, what that would imply is
that the money demand function is not behaving as the staff has
assumed. I don't know why we would want to wish for something like
that. That really doesn't do any good; it just makes the numbers look
better.

MR. PARTEE. There's some advantage to that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not sure I follow your concern. I
would argue that without some wording of this sort--not that the
wording is all that critical--the Committee would begin getting
worried that money growth was coming in too low and would want to
raise it a little. And I'm not sure we want to do that.

MR. BOEHNE. Perhaps what Governor Gramley is getting at is
this: Suppose we aren't so lucky and growth in May and June comes in,
say, at 3 or 4 percent. Then how would that 3 or 4 percent be
interpreted as being consistent with 5-1/2 percent or less?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it wouldn't be. But in that case
it's not consistent with the 3 percent either.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, suppose it's just 3 percent?

MR. PARTEE. Maybe the problem is the [wording] "as may be
consistent." Perhaps we should indicate the direction of the move not
"as may be consistent" but "in order to be more consistent" or
something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can look at this language if you want.

MR. PARTEE. As I read this construction, Paul, I would have
said that the Committee would strongly resist growth above 3 percent
and that it would be more or less indifferent between, say, 3 percent
and zero. That's the way I look at it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I think that is what it is meant to
convey, if we put the number 3 percent in there. There is nothing to
say we have to put 3 percent in there; we can put in a different
number.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way I read it, though, is that we
would also be resistant to [M-1B growth] below 1-1/4 percent or
whatever the number is, as long as it was consistent [with the target
for the quarter].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but then it says the previous target
was 5-1/2 percent or less.

MR. PARTEE. And that's why I said that. Well, any positive
number would be all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would read it the way you did and maybe
even add one of the negative numbers.

-38-



5/18/81

MR. SCHULTZ. Suppose we said "3 percent or lower unless it
becomes inconsistent." What happens if we do that?

MR. BLACK. But wouldn't 3 percent itself be inconsistent?

MR. PARTEE. That moves us toward consistency, but it doesn't
really make it consistent. That's the point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what's consistent? We are talking
about a very small number for two months. That's the problem I always
have with these things. One thing I'm sure of is that in one meeting
out of about twelve we may be within 1 percent of one of these
numbers. There shouldn't be a comma after "percent" anyway. It would
be " percent or lower."

MR. AXILROD. The comma after percent is meant to indicate
that it's only the lower part that is consistent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. If we discuss the central issue
first, maybe this clause will fall into line more easily. If we say 3
percent, we are going squarely for alternative B. It's only if luck
comes along that we are going to accept lower [growth]. The consensus
of the Committee was clearly for between "B" and "C." Some people had
"C," some people had "B," and no more than one or two were between "A"
and "B." I think 3 percent doesn't reflect the Committee consensus.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How we set this up depends upon where the
borrowings go. But I do not read this at all the way you are now
reading it. It says 3 percent or lower and it refers to the
consistency. I read it the way Mr. Partee reads it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It means, though, that the setting of
our reserve path would be based on 3 percent, wouldn't it?

MS. TEETERS. Is that what sets the reserve path? It's
borrowing, isn't it, that sets our reserve path?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, initially.

MR. PARTEE. Yes. If we raise that initial level of
borrowing by anything like what the staff has proposed, that
absolutely swamps the difference in the reserve path between, say, 2
and 3 percent, doesn't it, Steve?

MR. AXILROD. Sure.

MR. PARTEE. You must be talking about a lot more money over
the two months with a $500 million adjustment of the initial borrowing
than you are with the difference between 2 and 3 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Forget about the language at the moment.
My interpretation of this language, as I say, is very much the way
Governor Partee suggested. There's no point in saying that we are not
going to permit something above 3 percent. We don't know. Maybe it
will come in above 3 percent. We may set the borrowings at $3 billion
and it could come in above 3 percent. Forgetting about the language,
is this where we want to be? Will we resist pretty darn hard growth
above 3 percent but be quite relaxed below 3 percent down to zero or I

-39-



5/18/81

would say even below zero, depending upon how things develop in the
market for this 2-month period? Is that what we are trying to say?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I would hope that we are trying to
say that we'd [strongly] resist growth above, say, 2 percent or
something like that, if we want to start somewhere between "B" and
"C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I must confess that I don't know what the
operational meaning of that is for M1-B [growth]. All I have are
forecasts that are right within [a range of plus or minus] 10 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think there's a value in showing
that we are determined and are trying to be very closely consistent
with our previous short-run target. It just adds to our credibility.
And, as various speakers have said, I would rather see the rate
pressure now than later in the year. It's obviously not a matter of
life and death when we are talking about [a difference of] something
like 1 percent, since we don't control it that closely. In terms of
what our target is, it seems to me better to be in a fairly tight
position even if we are a little more relaxed on the initial
[unintelligible] assumption.

MR. CORRIGAN. From my vantage point, if we had 3 percent in
there as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, and in fact ended up there, that
wouldn't bother me too much because I don't see an enormous difference
even between the 6-1/2 percent [of "B"] and the 5-1/2 percent [of "C"]
for March to June. My concern is this: I'm inclined to the view that
whatever we set we are likely to exceed in this immediate situation;
and given the lags in the reaction process both by us and by the
banks, if we start out saying we would live with 3 percent, we could
easily end up with a quarterly growth rate for March to June of not
6-1/2 percent but even more than that. I'm not sure what [directive]
construction allows us to deal with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think any construction
allows us to deal with that. What allows us to deal with that is
where we go on the borrowing assumption right now. I don't see people
being all that gung ho on the borrowing assumption that the staff says
is consistent. I'm not sure it is. The staff estimate may be too
high. I think we ought to get some understanding of what we are
talking about here, but the only difference it makes in the real world
is what number the outsiders read six weeks from now or when it's all
in the past anyway. We can obviously put in 2 percent here. That
goes squarely in between.

MS. TEETERS. What kind of borrowing are we putting in?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will get to that in a minute.

MR. FORD. Paul, in your statement a moment ago you asked us
if what we are trying to say is that we don't care how far down [M-1B
growth] goes. My reaction to that is that we shouldn't have it open-
ended at the bottom. I think "somewhat less" is the right tone. I
wouldn't want to see the aggregates collapse again as they did a year
ago and be at the floor [of the long-term ranges] once again.

-40-



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can write this more straightforwardly
perhaps by just using a sentence that has a number in it and then go
on to say that a shortfall in growth for the two months from the rate
specified above would be acceptable. That's saying the same thing in
two sentences.

MR. GRAMLEY. If we are going to say "or lower," that second
sentence is already implied, it seems to me.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is partly a question of whether
we want to tie it back to the objective for the quarter that we set
earlier. I don't know whether it's a good idea or not. But if we
follow this idea that we set a target for the quarter and we shouldn't
forget about it six weeks later, it's useful to make a reference.

MR. FORD. Stick to your guns.

MR. BALLES. I think it would be less confusing if we
followed what Tony suggested by putting in 2 percent and dropping the
words "or lower."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we can do that here with the
rest of this. We can't say 2 percent, which is higher than the
previous target, and say it's consistent.

MR. PARTEE. We could make it a range. We haven't used a
range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can put in a range. I have thought of
that, too.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or we can say "2 percent or somewhat
lower."

MR. CORRIGAN. What's wrong with a range? I guess the
problem is that it doesn't let us deal with the bottom side.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only fear I have of ranges is that we
can put in a range of 2 to 3 percent and we won't be within it anyway.
And people attribute special importance to a range as a whole. That's
my only objection to a range.

MR. CORRIGAN. For the sake of discussion: If we set a range
of 1-1/2 to 3 percent so as to be generally consistent with the
quarterly objective and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're going to get all excited if it's
less than 1-1/2 percent?

MR. CORRIGAN. I'm not. That's the problem.

MR. PARTEE. It really ought to be zero to 3 percent or
something like that.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, I don't know if it would be
helpful, but part of the reason for wording such as this or the other
wording you suggested is technical. I understand that if the
Committee put a number in there of 2 or 3 percent, we would construct

-41-



5/18/81

the target on 2 or 3 percent or whatever the number is; and at
whatever point the Committee felt they were willing to have a
shortfall, as money was coming in short we simply would lower the
nonborrowed targets commensurately, if that's what the Committee
intends this kind of instruction to mean. Under that assumption we
would really need to know pretty much in a general way what the lower
limit is below which the Committee doesn't want the nonborrowed path
lowered any more. That was why we felt it might be useful to tie it
to the March-to-June target the Committee had already set.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The effort is to get some sense of a range
without saying we have a range that's only one or two percent [wide].
That [kind of range] sounds more rigid than I think we can afford to
be.

MS. TEETERS. What Steve is implying is that the lower limit
would be the 1.3 percent rate of growth.

MR. AXILROD. Or whatever by saying "somewhat less." It's
literally what the Committee set for itself at the previous meeting.
That's what this kind of wording would imply: That it's something
like the lower limit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am inclined to feel that we ought to get
something in there [that gives some definition to the] "or lower."
It's something of an experiment, but I think it may be useful
experimenting to see whether we like referring back to the quarterly
ranges in these interim meetings. We may get in trouble because
sometimes we may not want to refer back to them. But if we don't, we
don't. In this case I think it may be useful [to do so]. This other
language may be better, saying whatever growth rate we want to use--
perhaps an annual rate of 2 or 3 percent--and maybe putting in an "or
lower" and whatever the consistent number is for M2. I don't know.
[We could say]: "A shortfall of growth in M-1B from the 2-month rate
specified above would be acceptable in light of the rapid growth in
April and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for
growth from March to June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or less."
This other way tried to compress it into one sentence; maybe that
isn't wise.

MR. FORD. Are you going to leave out the fed funds range?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I'll get to that. Let's take it one
thing at a time.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Speaking for myself, I feel that
there is some value in referring back; I don't think it's enormous.
Either formulation, as spelled out here or with a separate sentence
talking about accepting a shortfall in the more straightforward way is
okay. I think pretty much everybody would want to have X percent or
lower at a minimum, and I think there's some slight advantage in
referring back to that target for the period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, as nearly as I can see at the
moment, I think we are only left with whether we take this or make it
two sentences. The question is whether to put in 2 or 3 percent to
start with. It doesn't bother me much either way.

-42-



5/18/81

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the way you have separated that and
made it into two statements to my view and Lyle's--he and I were
chatting--eliminates the problem he raised of the 3 percent not really
being consistent. If you say the Committee would also accept a lower
figure, which in a sense would be consistent with the 5-1/2 percent, I
think you have eliminated the problem--assuming that you can get
people to vote for the 3 percent.

MR. PARTEE. "3 percent or lower" is what it says?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, now the way it's written here it
just says 3 percent and then the next sentence goes on to say a
shortfall would be okay.

MR. PARTEE. I see.

MR. BLACK. Which would be consistent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, we could say "3 percent or lower" and
say that a shortfall would be acceptable because of--

MR. BLACK. Yes, that's what I was thinking

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we are close to this two-
sentence version. The question at the moment is the borrowing. Not
everybody mentioned it; a minority mentioned it. Of those who did the
levels suggested ranged from $2 billion to $2-1/4 billion. The latter
was the highest. We had some at $2 billion and some at $2 billion
plus--$2.1 to 2.2 billion. A lot of people didn't say anything. So,
I think it's clear that we start out at least at $2 billion, which is
about $150 million above where we are. The question is how much, if
any, to go above the $2 billion at the start, with the recognition--
particularly if we start around $2 or $2.1 billion--that if [M-1B
growth in] the latter half of May comes in high, we are going to raise
that.

MR. SCHULTZ. Starting out with $2 billion is starting out
$250 million above where we are.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not quite clear where we are at
the moment. I thought we were at least at $1.8 billion.

MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing that we are aiming for--the
borrowing consistent with this week's nonborrowed [path]--would be
about $1860 million. Borrowing for the 3-week subperiod would be
about $2 billion. But if you want to take where borrowings actually
have been this week thus far, it's $1.7 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We know where it has been this week so
far. We only have two numbers. What we were aiming for this week at
this moment on our present track is $1860 million, I take it. And we
have been averaging $2 billion, so $2 billion really isn't all that
much of a change. It's a little higher than where we are aiming right
at the moment, but not higher than where we have been. I don't think
$2 billion implies all that much of a change, so we may want to make
it just a shade higher than that. But a lot of people haven't been
heard from. Whom do we have for something between $2.1 and $ 2.2

-43-



5/18/81

billion--$2.15 billion, I suppose, just to split that--which is about
$300 million higher than this week's figure.

MR. SCHULTZ. Doesn't that have something to do with the fact
that there aren't any excess reserves out there?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. It's swinging up and down.

MR. AXILROD. Well, we tend to adjust to that, so if [the
demands for] excess reserves turn out high, we tend to supply them.

MR. SCHULTZ. But the point is that if we move borrowing up,
we ought to get a fairly quick effect, shouldn't we?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think $2150 million probably would be
consistent with a higher federal funds rate than we have experienced
thus far, [which is] in the 18-1/2 percent range.

MR. GRAMLEY. What would you guess that would be?

MR. AXILROD. I would say between 19 and 20 percent, give or
take some.

MR. PARTEE. Which is right at the very top of the range that
we have specified here.

MR. SCHULTZ. It sounds strong to me. That's why I started
out with $2 billion. But I certainly would be interested in moving it
quickly, depending upon what kind of reactions we see.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just try $2.1 billion and see
whether there's a consensus for that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We're down to voting members?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm asking for a vague consensus
now. How many are happy with $2.1 billion?

MR. PARTEE. Would accept or would make one happy?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wasn't getting that precise. I
was trying to get to some kind of consensus. I take it there's no
overwhelming happiness at $2.1 billion. I don't know which direction
to go from the $2.1 billion.

MR. PARTEE. I could accept it. But try $2 billion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll try it. Does $2 billion make people
unhappy? I have a lot of no hands raised here. Does $2.2 billion
make people happier?

SPEAKER(?). How about $2.1 billion?

MR. PARTEE. I think you hit the right number, but it's
whether it's preferred or acceptable.

SPEAKER(?). $2.1 billion is acceptable.

-44-



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Is $2.1 billion acceptable? We'll remain
very tentatively there at the moment. Let's [discuss] the federal
funds range. First of all, the question has been raised whether we
should have it at all, I guess. Did you hand out these other--

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have a series of reworded sentences. I
have one reworded sentence that assumes we keep it; let me see what
the change is from what we now have. Maybe Mr. Axilrod can explain it
to me.

MR. AXILROD. The essential sentence that you have there says
that if it appears during the period before the next meeting that
fluctuations in the funds rate, taken over a period of time, within a
range of __ to __ percent are likely to be inconsistent, etc., the
Manager will inform the Chairman, who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions. That sounds as if the
federal funds rate is an objective within the [context] of the
instructions. The proposal, in line with some of the [points] raised
by Committee members, essentially has the same beginning but it tries
to make the federal funds rate seem more like a consultation point
that involves a little more flexibility. It says that if it appears
during the period before the next meeting that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths is likely to be associated with a
funds rate range persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent,
then the Manager will inform the Chairman--the same sort of
instructions as before--but then it says "who will then decide whether
consultation with the Committee is necessary."

MR. SCHULTZ. When I was looking at this before, the one
thing I didn't like about it was the use of the word "necessary." Is
that a good word or is "advisable" a better word there? If we say
it's necessary, are we not then implying that again the fed funds
range is part of the--

MR. PARTEE. That's a good point. This construction with
"advisable" would be better.

MR. AXILROD. Well, it reads to me literally as saying that
the Chairman could permit the funds rate to go almost anywhere.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think that's a mistake
anyway. If we are all saying that the purpose of the funds range is
to trigger a consultation, then we should not imply so clearly that
the Chairman can veto a consultation and in effect abolish the FOMC
and run a one-man FOMC.

MR. ROOS. Why wouldn't the same wording apply to the
borrowing assumption and to the aggregates? In other words, isn't
this an implicit prerogative of the Chairman on any of this? He can
call us any time as long as he doesn't call collect!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we ought to discuss whether
we want this at all, which I guess is the question you're raising.
I'm obviously at the hands of the Committee, but I don't find any
difficulties myself, and I see some advantages, in saying if interest
rates move extremely enough the Committee at least wants to review

-45-



5/18/81

what the heck it's doing. I think that's the question. If we really
think that, then I'm inclined to feel that we ought to say it. If we
don't think that and genuinely don't think this is anything to be
worried about, then we [could] leave it out. Now, we could write this
to say that if either the money supply is moving well outside its
range or if the federal funds rate is moving well outside its range,
we would consult. And I think that is true in a sense. The
difference in the implication is that if the money supply is running
outside its range, we know what to do if it doesn't involve conflicts
with these other things. We know what to do in the sense of the
general direction.

MR. SCHULTZ. I think if the money supply is running outside
its range, you will consult [with the Committee]; and if the fed funds
rate is running well outside its range, then you may consult.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'm not so sure we would consult if
it were running outside the range; it depends upon how far. It's
likely to run outside the range in the short run, so we would make all
these adjustments in borrowings and stuff that we talk about.

MR. SCHULTZ. All right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, if it went far enough.... What I
think disturbs people is that we would want to look at [our decision]
again if it implied a very large change in financial conditions that
was not necessarily contemplated at the time of the meeting.

MR. CORRIGAN. If we use some language like this, is it
absolutely essential that the language be right in the directive
itself? Let me explain where I'm coming from. The advantage to a
federal funds rate consultation guideline is that the federal funds
rate, whatever else it is, is the only thing we have in the short run
that is fairly unambiguous. Borrowings and the money supply and
reserves and those things are all over the lot. The funds rate at
least is unambiguous. I certainly agree with the idea of trying to
get the markets and everybody else to recognize the de facto role that
it plays. But I'd like to see something [about the federal funds
rate] preserved, and I wonder whether it can't just be part of the
general discussion and not right in the directive language itself.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It could. It can be anything we want. At
the present time, I am somewhat allergic to making that big a change
in the directive because it will then give more significance to it
than I think it's worth.

MR. WALLICH. Couldn't we perhaps say specifically that the
Manager's operations are not to be constrained by the funds rate but
that if the funds rate moves outside etc., the Committee will consult?
Then it is clear that it is not a constraint.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we can say that. But the
explanation you gave I'd be perfectly happy to put in the general
discussion as background for this.

MR. BLACK. I like this, Mr. Chairman. It's a logical step
in the process of moving where I think we eventually ought to be, if
we can get the aggregates under control, of not having any limits. It

-46-



5/18/81

fits in with the step where we define the limits as a consultation
point and it allows the Desk to move a bit before we have that
consultation rather than delaying it maybe for a couple of days.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it's for more than a couple of days, I
think, under the current directive; we've done that historically.

MR. BLACK. I mean that if you decided to have a
consultation, you might notify us a day or so ahead, and meanwhile the
Desk might go ahead and go outside [the funds range].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think they've been doing that
anyway, but I agree with you.

MR. BLACK. But this makes it clearer to the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. I think this comes pretty close.
We can quibble about the language, but the intent of this is to be
consistent with what we've been saying.

MR. BLACK. I think that's right.

MR. SCHULTZ. I rather like the other alternative we were
talking about, which is that a Committee consultation may be called
for by the Chairman if it appears during the period before the next
meeting that the federal funds rate is likely to be significantly
outside a range of _ to _ percent for an extended period.

SPEAKER(?). I think that's pretty much the same.

MR. SCHULTZ. I thought that was pretty straightforward.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I'll tell you. What I don't like
about that--and we're talking about nuances--is that it has no
connotation that we're following a reserve path. That sentence in and
of itself can be interpreted to mean that we really set this federal
funds range as a range.

MR. PARTEE. Also, it seems to me that there ought to be a
professional judgment on the part of the Manager that it's going to
run well outside the range rather than that the Chairman is making
this decision. If we want it to be a technical question, it seems to
me it ought to be a Manager's question.

MR. ROOS. If any mention of this were totally omitted, where
could the problem conceivably arise in the markets? If we just stop
referring in any way to a federal funds--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there are two questions. Forgetting
about the market, there is just the question of what the Committee
wants to say and whether it wants to have a consultation. If we do,
then I think we ought to put it down. But so far as the markets are
concerned, I think that it will be read as--

SPEAKER(?). As an underlying focus.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. --a further step in the direction toward
ignoring this, and they would expect more instability rather than less

-47-



5/18/81

in some sense. They'd feel we had changed in some more fundamental
way than this discussion seems to imply.

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I like the way it was in the
original here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you mean the way it was last time?

MS. TEETERS. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way it has been?

MS. TEETERS. The way it has been, where the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee. I think that's
what it is we want. I'd rather not have all that stuff about
necessary and persistent and the rest; I'd just leave it alone.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can live with it the way it is. This is
an effort to say what we've said more informally.

MS. TEETERS. I think we can just say it informally and leave
it that way. It has caused a useful consultation for everybody; it
has marked a point at which we make a decision as to whether we're
going to do it or not do it.

MR. SCHULTZ. But, unfortunately, the way we have said it has
led to the feeling on the part of a lot people in the markets that we
still do have a fed funds rate target.

MS. TEETERS. But, Fred, we've violated the range practically
every time, with only one exception.

MR. SCHULTZ. I understand what we've done. It's just that I
think there still is a misperception in the market, which it seems to
me we might be able to clear up with some rewording. I do have some
reluctance about changing it, just on the basis on the fact that every
time we make a change there is some confusion in the market. So,
whether it's worth making the change is a question. My feeling is
that it would be good if we did change it. I would hate to see us
give up some kind of fed funds range because I think the uncertainties
that we're dealing with here and the relationships between the
aggregates and the economy are so difficult that the fed funds rate
tells us something. There can clearly be a situation in which
something is happening out there and we ought to be consulting. But
that's what we're doing. We keep telling people that that's what
we're doing and they don't believe us very well because this range
appears in the directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Altmann reminds me, and I will remind
you, that in what we're going to publish Friday or whenever we publish
it, we have a paragraph in the general discussion that says: "With
respect to the federal funds rate,"--it probably should say the
federal funds rate range--"it was stressed that the Committee
specified an intermeeting range for fluctuations over a period of time
to provide a mechanism for initiating timely consultation between
regularly scheduled meetings whenever it appeared that fluctuations
within the specified range were proving to be inconsistent with the
objectives for the behavior of reserve and monetary aggregates. Thus,

-48-



5/18/81

the limits of the range were indicative of the conditions under which
the Committee would wish to consult to reexamine its short-run
objectives and were not intended as binding constraints on System
operations pending such consultations."

MR. GUFFEY. When will that be published? Is that in the
directive?

MR. ALTMANN. That's in the policy record for the March
meeting, which will come out this Friday.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I take it that there is a general feeling
that we should continue to specify something. Is that correct?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's a majority. One can make an
argument that in the light of all we have said the present language is
increasingly well understood and that we always run some danger of a
renewed misinterpretation by changing it at all. So, we can just
leave it as it was. That's one option. The other option, if I'm
reading it right, is something very close to what was distributed
here, which is not a very drastic change anyway. Which of those two
options commands the greatest support? Let me try the option of not
changing the language at all. Who is for that? Do I conclude from
that that there is positive support for at least a modest change in
the language by the other 15 people sitting here? If that is right,
then we are down to the particular wording. You have one version in
front of you.

MR. GRAMLEY. I have a suggestion, which incorporates
Governor Schultz's thoughts and I think gets around the points that
both you and Governor Partee raised. It reads as follows: "The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next
meeting is likely to be associated with the federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of __ to __ percent."

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But if you say "persistently" then
don't you have to say that the Chairman will call for a consultation?

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, I don't think we ought to deny the
Chairman the opportunity to make a decision on his own.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you can be sure that the Chairman
will [do so], whatever the language says. So this is just a nicety of
whatever language it is.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Oh yes, I know that. I'm not talking
about substance; I'm talking about images.

MR. PARTEE. It says "may," but it certainly implies that
he's going to do it.

MR. SCHULTZ. I prefer "may" because "will" implies that
there is a target there.

-49-



5/18/81

MR. PARTEE. I think that version is considerably better than
this one.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in substance, it seems to me to say
the same thing.

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. Exactly the same, but it leaves in the reserve
path and the monetary aggregates, it lets the Manager for Domestic
Operations make the technical decision, and it says the Chairman "may"
call a consultation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Read it again.

MR. GRAMLEY. "The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during
the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of _ to _ percent."

MR. PARTEE. That certainly puts the reserve issues first;
there's no question about it.

MR. GRAMLEY. And I think it's a clear statement of what
we're trying to accomplish and what is available presently.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Very honestly, I don't detect a
substantive difference, but it's perfectly all right with me.

MR. BLACK. I don't think there's a difference, but I think
it's worded a little better.

MR. GRAMLEY. It's just a matter of wording, really.

MR. GUFFEY(?). Mr. Chairman, for the moment, I'd like to try
to make a case to keep the language as it is presently. The markets
and the public have not seen the March change in the language, which I
think is rather specific and good.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not a change in the directive
language; it's an explanation.

MR. GUFFEY. Yes, it's an explanation. But if we then come
along a month from now and publish a directive, which may mean the
same thing to us but changes maybe 60 words, that will give rise to
the analysts publishing from now until at least the end of the year
all sorts of interpretations. I think that's what we don't want. It
seems to me that consistency would best be served by leaving the
language as it has been published in the directive, with an informal
understanding in the Committee with the Chairman that it is a
consultation point as described in the record.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the argument for not
changing it at all is that it may be more confusing to change it.
We'll see whether your comments changed to more than 4 votes the
number who want not to change it.

-50-



5/18/81

MR. PARTEE. I must say that I think that's incorrect, Roger.
I wasn't at that telephone conference call and I read with some
amusement the paragraph that was just [quoted]. I think it is
stretching things to say that the earlier instruction could be
interpreted in the way it was interpreted in that meeting. And I
think what is now being proposed is consistent with the interpretation
in the telephone conference call. It was a stretched interpretation,
which now needs a different instruction, I think, if we're going to
stay with it and use it. So, I do believe a change is necessary.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Have you convinced anybody, Roger? Do you
have more than 4 votes for not changing it?

MR. GUFFEY. I'm more convinced myself, but it--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think Roger has a point that there
is a danger. We will, of course, publish the policy record from the
earlier meeting and it has this language, which I think exactly
summarizes our feeling about it. Then if we come out with another
directive, there is a danger that some of the Fed watchers may believe
that we mean to change the significance of this paragraph on page 9
[in the March] policy record.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any change we make may be confusing. I
don't disagree with that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. And since the policy record
paragraph on page 9 expresses exactly what we're trying to do, then it
seems to me, even though I guess this may be too unorthodox, that we
could simply refer here to that policy record paragraph.

MR. PARTEE. Always? At every meeting refer to that policy
record interpretation?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Look, we can attempt to handle that
problem. I think there is some danger, which we can't get around,
that with any change in wording somebody will look at it and say: Do
they really mean what they say? We can put in the policy record what
we mean: That what we really have done is to change this language
slightly to make sure it conforms with what we said last time.

SPEAKER(?). Sure.

MR. GUFFEY. But we'd be taking a risk if we do that.

MR. PARTEE. That's the way to do it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But couldn't we simply say, taking
Lyle's language, for example, "as called for in the policy record of
such and such a date" so it makes quite clear that this is simply a
summary version of the larger explanation in the policy record?

MR. GRAMLEY. But this is supposed to be the operating
paragraph of the directive.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's only a formal point as to whether
it's desirable or not to be in the directive.

-51-



5/18/81

MR. PARTEE. Well, you don't mean to put it in the directive.
You mean to have in the policy record entry for today's meeting a
reference to the previous policy record saying that the Committee
adopted this language in furtherance of its determination in the
earlier meeting.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I had meant--

MR. PARTEE. Oh, I see.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I raised the question of whether it
would be appropriate to have a reference in this one-sentence summary
to this larger explanation in the policy record as consistent--

MR. SCHULTZ. I don't like that much, but I think what Chuck
is suggesting is fine.

MR. PARTEE. We could reference it again in the record for
today's meeting.

MR. ALTMANN. An interpretation of the funds rate range?

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. ALTMANN. You mean reiterate it in this--

MR. PARTEE. Then that becomes an explanation for why we
changed this wording, so that people don't think there's something
more that we did, because after all it will come out [later]. They
will know about this wording and then they'll have the explanation of
the wording at the very same time.

MS. TEETERS. But that explanation goes to what's here now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Unless people are ready to change their
minds, I think there are these problems. I'll just return to my
question: Has Roger convinced anybody that there is greater danger in
changing the words at all?

SPEAKER(?). No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's always a danger of some confusion
here. There may be a little but I think we can handle it without
undue risks. I could certainly live with it the other way. It's no
big deal to me. If the issue had never come up in the first place, I
wouldn't change it. But I--

MR. SCHULTZ. This is not my day!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, Roger has my vote.

MR. PARTEE. But he had it before, didn't he?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He didn't? Let's try it again: How many
people would vote for no change [in the directive wording]? We're up
to five; we have one more. That still is a minority.

-52-



5/18/81

MR. WALLICH. On [some] grounds I'd vote that way, though not
because I like what we have now. But I don't like the change to which
we're going, and I suspect we're not going to change it again soon, so
we're losing an opportunity to improve it permanently.

MR. SCHULTZ. What would you do? Would you go further than
what we're suggesting?

MR. WALLICH. I would stress the deviation from the
aggregates and then come in from the funds rate.

MESSRS. PARTEE and SCHULTZ. But that's what Lyle's version
did.

MR. WALLICH. No, I don't think he mentions the deviations
from the paths.

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, he did.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, those are the first words.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's exactly what he did.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a consensus on Mr. Gramley's
reworded version which, if I can read it, says: "The Chairman may
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations..." I don't know what happens if it appears to
the Chairman, but not to the Manager.

SPEAKER(?). Then you better talk to the Manager!

MR. SCHULTZ. I have a feeling the Chairman can talk the
Manager into--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of __to __ percent." Do I have a
consensus on that? I hope I have more than 5 votes anyway. All
right, let's assume that. Now we have to put figures there, it so
happens.

MR. PARTEE. 5 to 50 percent!

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. You still don't have a consensus on 3
percent.

MR. PARTEE. We don't want to have--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will come back [to that]. Actually,
very few people specifically commented on [the funds rate range].
Among the people who specifically commented, we have one mentioning a
ceiling of 20 percent and three a ceiling of 22 percent. My notes
only have that many comments.

MR. PARTEE. I said I would accept 16 to 22--

MR. SCHULTZ. With a "B" specification.

-53-



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right. Well, I think it's probably a
choice between 16 to 21 percent and 16 to 22 percent. I think there
is an implication--these people may be wrong--that the upper end of
this range is much more likely to be binding than the lower end during
this period. And the range isn't absolutely symmetrical [around the
current level]. I'm not sure it's so far from the [expected rate],
depending upon what reserve number we put in there. But I would also
presume that there is a bias; people recognize that it may be a bit
asymmetrical, but they want to consult if it gets above whatever
number we now put in, which seems to me to lie between 21 and 22
percent. How many 22s do we have?

MR. CORRIGAN. This is strictly as a consultation point,
you're saying?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's right. It looks as if that's
the prevailing view. How many would prefer 21 percent? It looks like
we put the upper limit at 22 percent; 16 to 22 percent, I guess.

MR. GRAMLEY. Have we ever had a 6-point range before?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, we have.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, we've backed away from--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. Now we have this reworded
sentence and we have that range tentatively settled at 16 to 22
percent. Let's come back to the borrowing. Is $2.1 billion the
consensus?

SPEAKER(?). Ask for a vote.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many people are willing to put in $2.1
billion immediately? That looks pretty good at a quick look. Now we
come back to the [wording of the] paragraph. What I am suggesting is:
"In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates
consistent with a substantial deceleration of growth in M-1B from
April to June to an annual rate of __ percent..." The question is
whether we put in "or lower" there. The sentence continues with a
comma and then: "after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW
accounts, and with growth in M2 at an annual rate of about __ percent.
A shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate specified above
would be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth in April and the
objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for growth from March
to June at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent or somewhat less." Is that
general language okay? I think that's where we arrived before. We
have to fill in the blanks and decide whether to put in "or lower".
As nearly as I can see, it's a simple choice between 2 or 3 percent.
How many 3 percenters do we have?

SPEAKER(?). If it's "or lower."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. Let me assume it's 3 percent or
lower, if we take the 3 percent.

SPEAKER(?). Okay, I'll go with that rate.

-54-



5/18/81

MR. ALTMANN. Five voting members.

SPEAKER(?). Well, what's the alternative--"somewhat lower"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The alternative, I think, would be 2
percent without the "or lower," but the "lower" appears in the next
sentence.

MR. FORD. We're going to say "lower" not "somewhat lower"?
How far are you going with this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What the next sentence says is that a
shortfall in growth would be acceptable. It refers back to the
earlier [decision on the quarterly growth rate]. The choice is
between "3 percent or lower" in the first sentence, which we just had
an indication of views on, or 2 percent in which case I think we leave
out the "or lower" but the [concept of] lower appears in the next
sentence in the form of a shortfall.

MR. PARTEE. Do you want hands?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, for the 2 percent without the "or
lower."

SPEAKER(?). Just voting members?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether we're getting
close here. Let me just take the voting members and go over it again.
How many--just the voting members now--prefer the 3 percent or lower?

MR. ALTMANN. Five.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Five, okay.

MR. BLACK. There's an exception.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was your hand up or down?

MR. CORRIGAN. I accept this.

SPEAKER(?). Do you prefer it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I asked for preferences at this point.
Now, let me just make sure. Who prefers the 2 percent period? Six.

MR. ALTMANN. Six.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's great. Six and five.

SPEAKER(?). [Not] including you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're down to splitting hairs.

MR. PARTEE. How about 2-1/2 percent?

MR. SCHULTZ. How about "2-1/2 percent or somewhat lower"?

MR. FORD. Or "slightly."

-55-



5/18/81

MR. RICE. Why don't we find out what people can accept.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me try. Who would accept the 3
percent or lower? Ten.

MR. PARTEE. All but Tony.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're within very narrow grounds. I'm
interested in maximizing the happiness at this point. I biased this
thing now. A lot of people will find the 2 percent unacceptable now,
I presume. How many will accept the 2 percent?

MR. SCHULTZ. Accept 2 percent? I'll accept either one.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Eight. I'm afraid I succeeded in biasing
the thing.

SPEAKER(?). No, I was going to vote--

MR. SCHULTZ. I just really can't get awfully excited over
this thing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It looks like 3 percent or lower. And
maybe we should just start the second sentence by saying "The
shortfall...," which refers back to the "lower."

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. SCHULTZ. This is becoming a theology session!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, now we have 3 percent or lower
with this two sentence approach. We have 16 to 22 percent and we have
borrowing at $2.1 billion [without] an allergy toward raising the
borrowing if [money growth] comes in high.

SPEAKER(?). M2?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, M2. Where are we on M2?

MS. TEETERS. 6-1/2 percent.

SPEAKER(?). M2 is 6-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right. For conforming purposes, we've
put in 6-1/2 percent. Because we said "or lower," we can put in 6
percent; that's [about] halfway between "B" and "C" and it's a nice
round number.

MR. BLACK. 6-1/2 percent is [unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, put 6 percent in there.

MR. PARTEE. Six percent looks about right, doesn't it?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It just squares the thing. Okay, so we've
got 3 percent or lower, 6 percent, 16 to 22 percent, and $2.1 billion.

MR. SCHULTZ. And we'll be lucky to hit any of them!

-56-



5/18/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. Is it clear what we're voting on?

MR. WALLICH. No.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, may I call your attention to the
second line of the general paragraphs, which I think is not entirely
consistent with the views of the Committee on what is happening in the
economy. It says: "...suggested that real GNP will probably grow
little in the current quarter." That sounds like an awfully flat
economy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Right.

MR. GRAMLEY. This is a fairly optimistic group. I would
say: "suggested that GNP will grow more slowly in the current
quarter."

MR. SCHULTZ. Yes, or not [unintelligible]. That gives us
more room--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where does this all appear?

MR. GRAMLEY. It's in the second line of the general
paragraphs.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think it's perfectly safe to say that it
will grow more slowly.

MR. PARTEE. Than 8-1/2 percent or something like that.

MR. GRAMLEY. Or even, if you like, "will grow slowly."
"Grow little" sounds as if the economy--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I agree. "Grow more slowly" is
perfectly all right. We'll make that change. Okay, you all know what
you're voting on. Mr. Secretary.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Boehne Yes
President Boykin Yes
President Corrigan Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich Yes
President Winn Yes

MR. SCHULTZ. My word!

MR. PARTEE. I think that's the first unanimous vote--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can go grab a sandwich.

MR. SCHULTZ. That's pretty good.

-57-



5/18/81 -58-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Thank you. Wait a minute, do we have
anything else?

MR. ALTMANN. Only the date of the next meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to confirm the date of the next
meeting. Let me just say that I assume we can confirm that. But it's
a meeting where we have to review the annual targets, so I think it's
quite likely we might want to come in here the afternoon before.

SPEAKER(?). What's the date?

MS. TEETERS. July 7th.

SPEAKER(?). The 7th is Tuesday, but we may start Monday.

END OF MEETING




