









































FOMC Conference Call Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 6, 1981

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Wednesday,

May 6, 1981, at 2:30 p.m., at the call of Chairman Volcker. This was a

telephone conference meeting, and each individual was in Washington, D. C.,

except as otherwise indicated in parentheses in the following list of those

participating.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman

Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Boehne

Mr. Boykin

Mr. Corrigan
Mr. Gramley

Mr. Rice
Mr. Schultz

Mrs. Teeters

(New York)
(Philadelphia)

(Dallas)

Messrs. Balles (San Francisco), Black (Richmond), Ford
(Atlanta), Timlen (New York), and Winn (Philadelphia),

Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Guffey (Kansas City), Morris (Boston), and Roos

(St. Louis), Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary

Mr. Mannion, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Burns (Dallas), Danforth (Minneapolis), Ettin,
Keir, Mullineaux (Philadelphia), Prell, Scheld
(Chicago), Truman, and Zeisel, Associate Economists

Mr. Sternlight (New York), Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Pardee (New York), Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account



5/6/81

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors

Mrs. Deck, Staff Assistant, Open Market Secretariat,
Board of Governors

Mr. Doyle (Chicago), First Vice President, Federal

Reserve Bank of Chicago

Messrs. Balbach (St. Louis), J. Davis (Cleveland),
Eisenmenger (Boston), Fousek (New York), Keran
(San Francisco), Koch (Atlanta), and Parthemos

(Richmond), Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, Boston,

New York, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Richmond,

respectively

Mr. Gambs (Kansas City), Assistant Vice President,

Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

- 2 -



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
May 6, 1981

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [I'm not sure] if you heard me talking to
Mr. Kichline about whether he knew anything new about business
[activity]. He told me "not much," but I think he ought to tell us
what he knows.

MR. KICHLINE. Well, with regard to auto sales for the month
of April, sales on our seasonals were at a 5-3/4 million unit annual
rate, which is about 2 million units below the rate in March. The
only other information we've picked up relates to some very early
information on worker hours in manufacturing for the month of April,
and that seems to have risen a bit. We would infer from that and from
information we know on auto production and some other physical product
data that industrial production probably will be rising 1/4 to 1/2
percent or something like that for the month of April.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether anybody else has any
comments on the business situation at present. Nobody has any strong
sense of conviction out there?

SPEAKER(?). No is right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will turn to Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, we have some very tentative new
numbers on the aggregates. They have the normal tentativeness for a
Wednesday; they will change by tomorrow and perhaps a little more by
Friday. The preliminary data for the week of April 29th had suggested
a decline of $1 billion from the week of the 22nd. The more complete
data, which might be somewhat firm--that's the week we're going to
publish on Friday--now suggest a decline of about $3-1/2 billion from
the week of the 22nd. That would be followed, I hasten to add, by an
increase, if the numbers hold up, of about $3 billion in the week of
May 6th. This looks offsetting, but in a real sense the level of the
series for both the 29th and the 6th is lower than had been built into
the paths. So, the level of the series is lower on average by about
$2 billion in both weeks, April 29th and May 6th. The changes are, as
I mentioned above, about offsetting. This figure would give us a
shift-adjusted April rate of growth--I can't be very precise--probably
on the order of 14 percent or something like that. And that would put
the April level of M-1B almost right smack in the middle of the
Committee's 3-1/2 to 6 percent long-run shift-adjusted range. That,
of course, is somewhat higher than the Committee had been aiming at by
April, but it's still well within the range.

I don't have any new data for M2 yet for April, but the data
we had as of Friday would have had the level of M2 in the month
somewhat above the Committee's long-run growth range, viewed as a
triangle. M3 in April is also somewhat above the range. And bank
credit growth, which is [uncertain] because we don't have good
estimates yet for April, by March had been moving down toward the
range. I don't believe that the growth in April will be very far
from, and probably will be lower than, the 9 percent upper limit of
the Committee's range. So, I think by April it's possible that bank
credit will be at or near the upper end of its range. We have been
running with a reserve path that would imply in the current week



5/6/81

borrowing of around $2 billion. Borrowing started out very high
earlier, before the weekend, and it has been running about $1-1/2
billion since then, as banks have had large excess reserves that
they've been working down. In consequence of this, as you know,
within the week there was some easing; we've had a drop in the funds
rate from the very high levels it had reached earlier. It, too, has
been easing down as banks have adjusted their positions within the
week. But, Mr. Chairman, perhaps Mr. Sternlight would want to comment
on the particular developments in market rates that have followed the
discount rate move.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Mr. Chairman, as the Committee members know,
the markets reacted to the discount rate move with fairly sharp rate
increases. Rates had already been moving up in the wake of the very
tight conclusion to the previous reserve week, the week ending the
29th, and then when the money supply number was published Friday,
there was a further upward rate move. And after the discount rate
action on Monday there were still further increases, leaving the
market in a very demoralized state, I'd say, early yesterday morning.
From that point, things seemed to gel better; sentiment turned around
to some extent. But there has been a lot of worry about whether the
Treasury would get any kind of decent bidding for its three-year
auction. It turned out to be very substantial bidding at the rates
that developed as that auction went on. The [auction average] rate
was a record high, 15.8 percent. But earlier that day the market was
talking about 16 percent or higher. Today the atmosphere continues to
improve. The 10-year auction has been held, with offering rates of
around 14.55 or 14.60 percent, again fairly good. And market rates
have come down from the peaks they hit yesterday morning: The 3-month
rate, which had touched 17 percent, is down to about the 15-1/2
percent area; the CD rate had touched 19 percent for the 3-month issue
and now it's around 18-1/2 percent. As Steve mentioned, we had a high
funds rate at the beginning of this week, which I think was probably
more a function of an extremely tight ending of the April 29th week
than of our own effort to control reserve restraint on the system.
The funds rate had been averaging 20 percent on Thursday and Friday
and then it worked its way down, partly with the help of substantial
borrowing over the weekend. The funds rate today started out around
17-1/2 percent and it's around the 17 or 16-1/2 percent area this
afternoon. That's all I have.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've had rather special circumstances in
the money market affecting the federal funds rate for some weeks,
where the banks either had not borrowed and then came in at the end
[of the maintenance week] or had not borrowed and had run reserve
deficiencies. This week we've had the opposite pattern of borrowing
early in the week in a very tight market and the banks are now being
left with excess reserves. Just for the moment, it's a somewhat
easier money market. Steve described generally where we are on the
aggregates which, to summarize, is on the high side on the broader
aggregates--where we've been all along, or for the last couple of
months anyway. They are not moving particularly strongly at the
moment but they are on the high side. M1 is right in the middle of
the long-run path, if you consider that significant, but above where
we want it to be at this point. We have reduced the nonborrowed
reserve path for other than multiplier reasons in the light of the

-2-



5/6/81

higher-than-desired total reserves, leaving us with something in the
neighborhood of $2 billion of borrowings.

I'm not sure that any great decision has to be taken here.
In terms of the target, I think we have to recognize that at the
moment we're running high, but we meet formally again in a few weeks
and we will reassess that target. I'm not sure that there's any need
to put down another target formally for the next two weeks. We
recognize that we are high; we recognize that in our operations. We
do have a federal funds checkpoint, or whatever, which is 13 to 18
percent. It has generally been fluctuating above that in recent days.
And, today, I think we have to recognize that somehow or another. But
I would suggest that we don't have to take any decisions on money
supply targets per se. We would recognize that we are running high
and describe the situation--I'm just thinking now in terms of what we
might say in the brief paragraphs we write [in the policy record]
about a telephone consultation--and recognize that we've made some
adjustments in the reserve path. And there we are. There is always
the question of the precise reserve path and where we are, if anybody
wants to comment on that. I'm not sure I see anything in these most
recent money supply figures that suggests any big change in that. We
can certainly maintain that kind of borrowing level regardless of the
fact that these last estimates are a shade lower than our previous
estimates.

MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. I have a question. Steve,
what is your best guess on money growth in May?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I may interject before Steve answers:
It's not worth a damn. But he can answer the question.

MR. AXILROD. I was going to say it's very much a guess, but
we see, of course, a diminution from April. If I had to put a range
around our guess, I would say the rate of growth for May is probably
in a range of 6 to 9 percent [for M-1B]. Something on that order of
magnitude would still leave us with a pretty high growth rate in M-1B
for the [second] quarter on average. If we had growth a lot higher
than that, we'd begin to get zero velocities instead of a small
positive coming out of that.

MR. ROOS. Steve, Larry Roos. What do you anticipate total
reserves to be next week at the end of the week?

MR. AXILROD. Next week?

MR. ROOS. I mean this week.

MR. AXILROD. One second, Larry, and I'll tell you. I don't
know whether you really want the total reserve figure for the current
week, but for the three weeks ending May 20th--that's the week just
past, the current week, and next week--it looks as if total reserves
might be around $40,960 million. I can give you the weekly figures.
The path for total reserves is a little over $40,400 million. That
is, for this period of three weeks, actual total reserves appear to be
running about $500 million above what the path for total reserves
would call for. And in each week of that period, it's not too
different from that.



5/6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But below the previous three-week period?

MR. AXILROD. Well, I'm looking at unadjusted figures, but
that would be higher than the preceding four-week period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I didn't write down what you said, but I
thought you just gave a figure that was lower.

MR. AXILROD. No, the path is running lower than the total
reserves demanded. The actual total reserves appear to be running
about $500 million or more above the path for total reserves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They are above the path. But what figure
did you give for the three or four weeks just ending?

MR. AXILROD. Well, for the three weeks ending May 20th, I
gave a figure of $40,960 million. For the preceding four weeks, the
average level of total reserves was $40,027 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, but you gave the projected level of
total reserves for the next three weeks.

MR. AXILROD. The projected level is $40,960 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's for the period just ending, I
thought you said.

MR. AXILROD. No, for the period we're in--the three weeks
ending May 20th.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, May 20th. Okay.

MR. AXILROD. The April growth in total reserves will turn
out to be quite low, with the way the lagged reserve accounting comes
out and the sharp drop in excess reserves at banks, which will hold
down the growth of total reserves. The monetary base in April grew at
around a 6 percent annual rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether I'll need this. Any
other questions?

MR. MORRIS. Paul, this is Frank Morris. I had assumed that
you were going to suggest changing the federal funds range. Is it
your judgment that the Manager can live with the federal funds range
for the next two weeks?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was just fooling with some
language as to what we might report. I'll tell you what I have
written down here. Don't hold me to this word for word, but to
capture the sense of it I would say: We held a consultation on May 6.
The Committee agreed that in the period between now and the next
regularly scheduled meeting on May 18th--that's only two weeks we're
talking about--the reserve paths should continue to be set on the
basis of the money supply path established at the last meeting. It is
recognized that actual money growth may be high for a time relative to
that path, in view of the recent performance of the aggregates. In
the light of this approach, the Committee recognized that short-term
market interest rates might well fluctuate around levels prevailing in



5/6/81

recent days, which by implication says we're not [constrained] by the
18 percent, and the Committee agreed to consult further if the
monetary growth rate does not abate.

MS. TEETERS. In other words, we're leaving the range in
place but piercing the ceiling as necessary. Is that the idea?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This particular version is written on the
assumption that we've had our consultation, related in part to the
federal funds rate range, and we say that we anticipate the rate is
going to be around recent rates, which carries us into the 18 to 20
percent area by implication. But it just does it by implication.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What is the advantage of doing it
that way?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I just think it avoids controversy
about what the new limit is. I don't mean controversy in the
Committee particularly, but just that these people who look at what we
say with great precision would say that we really were aiming at 20
percent or whatever.

MR. GRAMLEY. Mr. Chairman, Lyle Gramley. I think you have a
stronger case for the way you want to do this. We've been trying to
argue that these are not ranges that imply a constraint; they are a
checkpoint. And what we have done, if we go this route, is that we
have demonstrated in effect that this is not a binding range but a
checkpoint. By implication, we have consulted with one another and
have agreed to let the Manager continue to operate in ways that are
based on reserve growth and not on interest rates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have expressed my feelings more
eloquently than I did, Governor Gramley.

MR. MORRIS. Well, the last time we did this, Paul, it caused
a lot of confusion in the street when the record of policy actions
came out. A lot of people were very much confused as to just what the
devil did happen at our telephone meeting, since the range wasn't
changed but at the same time the federal funds rate was 2 percentage
points below the lower end of the range. So, it seems to me there
would be less cause for confusion if we just changed the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I had that in mind with this
proposal, Frank. My own conclusion is that the net result of that
last [episode] was highly constructive. Now, opinions may change on
that, but by doing something a little different I think we may finally
get them to look at it in a little different way. This is only meant
to reinforce that feeling. I was just a little afraid that if we
either use the word "suspend," a slightly awkward word, which is one
thing we can say, or if we say [the upper end] is 20 percent, they
would go back and say: "Well, it really is a constraint." That's why
I tried to avoid it. Something precisely along the lines of Governor
Gramley's reasoning is what I had in mind. But it's a psychological
point in terms of how people read it. My conclusion was that it would
be less confusing doing it this way because I really do think that it
was worth the few days' confusion it caused that other time.

-5-



5/6/81

MR. ROOS. This is St. Louis. I would agree wholeheartedly
with you, Mr. Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, you said in your language, if I
remember correctly, that we expect interest rates to be roughly the
same as in recent days. Is that correct?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "To fluctuate around levels prevailing in
recent weeks" is what I happen to have written down here.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The recent weeks doesn't mean to me--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Recent days" [is actually what] I have.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. "Recent days," right. So, I guess
nobody except us would know that that's 18 to 20 percent. It depends
upon how many days one looks at. If we're talking about the last two
or three days, then you're right. But if we're talking about five or
six days, then that would imply something lower than that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think so. The problem would be
the opposite, if anything. It happens to be lower today. How many
days ago did the federal funds rate hit--

MR. AXILROD. Well, going back, on Tuesday, April 28th, which
was a little more than a week ago, the effective funds rate was 17
percent; the day before that it was 16 percent. Then on the next day
it got to 19 percent, then it was 19, 20, and 18-1/2 percent; and
presumably today it will be 17 percent or so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can say in the last week or so, if that
makes it better.

MR. FORD. Paul, this is Bill Ford in Atlanta. I, too, want
to say, if I'm reading you right, that I think this is a move toward
trying to put across that we are deemphasizing adjustments in the
interest rate or fine-tuning it. That did create some confusion
initially, but the message is getting through to so-called Fed
watchers not to overinterpret every little tick or movement of the fed
funds rate. You might consider tacking on a sentence at the end, in
light of the comments we just had on confusion about which days we
mean, to underline further the fact that we are continuing to stress
keeping the aggregates under control and deemphasizing the importance
of these particular trigger points.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do have a phrase at the end--I think I
read it: "And the Committee agreed to consult further if the monetary
growth rate does not abate." I just wanted to get some reference in
there to monetary growth in terms of the targets. There is nothing
magic in these words or the particular formulation. We could say
"agreed to consult further if necessary to maintain adequate restraint
on the rate of monetary growth" or something like that.

MR. FORD. That would be great. That would make it clearer
that we're moving in that direction and not paying a whole lot of
attention to the particular point level of the fed funds rate.



5/6/81

MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. As long as we're expressing
opinions--and I guess reasonable people can differ--I found the last
experience thoroughly confusing. And most people who watch the Fed
found it thoroughly confusing. I must say that I think the approach
that you suggest, Mr. Chairman, is going to add to confusion. So,
I've got to go along with Frank Morris. I think we'd be better off to
say we're going to have a funds rate ceiling rate of 20 percent or
some explicit number. What you've said may have a great deal of
meaning to us, but I suspect that there are going to be lots of
[different] interpretations in the market. There will be more
confusion. So, I would favor being more explicit.

MR. GUFFEY. Paul?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. GUFFEY. Roger Guffey. I would join Frank Morris and Ed
Boehne. I think we've effectively told the market that the fed funds
rate is only the point at which the Committee will consult. And
anything beyond that, I think the market is discounting. They don't
know when we consult. If, as you have suggested, we have essentially
done away with any point of consulting, I don't have any problem at
this time because we only have ten days before the next meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I don't think I really have, Roger, if
I may just interrupt. This is all filled with subtleties in some
sense; pay your money and take your choice. But this says we
recognize that market interest rates might well fluctuate around
levels prevailing in recent days or in the past week, whatever the
wording is. I think, by implication there, if the rate were widely
different from that, it would be an excuse for consulting. Then it
goes on to say explicitly something about the aggregates. So, I don't
think we've lost any sense of consulting here. I don't know that it
will be necessary in the next two weeks, but I would read this to mean
that if things were drastically different, particularly on the up
side, we would consult.

MR. GUFFEY. Maybe the market was a bit confused after they
saw the record before. And I guess I'm a bit confused as to why we
establish a range if that's true. You've tied this language, as I
understand it, to some projected rate of money growth for the period
ahead.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I am saying is that I think it has
both in there.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, I'd feel more comfortable saying we had a
Committee meeting and reestablished the range at 15 to 20 percent. I
think that is consistent with what Frank Morris and Ed Boehne just
said.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can do that. It's a matter of
preference. My own judgment, in this particular instance, is that it
would be more confusing and not less confusing in one sense. I think
we really have the [better] market [understanding now] after some
confusion. The confusion is not entirely absent now; it's a question
of which way to diminish it. Doing something that sounds quite
consistent with what we did last time, I think, will put us ahead of



5/6/81

the game and not behind it. That has no implications to me for what
we do with the range at the next Committee meeting. We can obviously
discuss that, but I think that's something we can discuss when we're
here face-to-face [at the next meeting].

MR. BOYKIN. This is Boykin. Paul, I would support that
decision versus actually changing the range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to be clear, what I'm a little afraid
of--whatever language I played with for all of three minutes before
coming in here--is that if we change the range, the confusion will
come down to [why] we set a range for such a short period of time.
The market will say: "Well, what the Committee tried to tell us last
time really isn't right. They really have a great concern about [the
funds rate], particularly if they were worried about it for a two-week
period. And they put it right on top of the present market rate; that
must mean that what they tried to tell us last time wasn't true."
That's what I'm worried about.

MS. TEETERS. This is Nancy Teeters. This is much more
specific than the February 24th language. In that we simply agreed to
accept some shortfalls [in the growth of M-1A and M-1B]. In this one
we're mentioning both the monetary aggregates and the interest rate
range, without specifying what it is. So, I think there's less
confusion than there was in the February 24th [directive].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess what we're saying is that there is
no perfectly nonconfusing way of doing this. The question is: In
which direction do we want to go? I just have the gut feeling that
language that establishes a new range for such a short period, against
what we just did, will create the confusion in the opposite direction.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, what if we insert into your
language something that says we recognize that rates are likely to
remain at the levels they have been in recent days and that makes
inoperative the upper end of the range until the next meeting.

MR. BALLES. Paul, this is John Balles. I think Tony Solomon
just made a very good suggestion. Without confusing the market we
could say something about raising the range specifically, sort of
undoing it. I think I would like a more explicit statement than you
read that we are eliminating the upper end of the range until the time
of the next meeting. They would understand the federal funds range--

MR. CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. I must say I come out
at just the opposite way from what John has just said. If you look
back prior to February 24th, for almost two years we've been trying to
convey the message that the funds rate band is a consultation point.
We've also been trying to convey the message that when it has been
hit, consultations have been held and in one way or another,
explicitly or implicitly, and when the forces have dictated, we
effectively have waived it. I think that putting new numbers around
it in the context of the current situation works in exactly the
opposite direction; it reinforces the view that we're playing footsies
with the funds rate. To me the language the Chairman has suggested is
clear enough. It does by implication say that something in the area
of 20 percent is fine. But by implication it also says that something
like 25 percent isn't fine, and if we found the rate moving in that



5/6/81

direction, we'd have another consultation. I think that's what the
market, at least as I read it, is looking for. And that's the message
that we've been giving them, or trying to give them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have no trouble in principle with what
Tony and John are suggesting. The trouble is that it's very hard to
put it in language that does not say: Right now this doesn't make
much difference, but ordinarily we take it very seriously. It's easy
to read that into it. That's the only reason I came up with this
language, not that I have any disagreement in principle. That's what
we're doing; we are suspending [the ceiling]. When we use the word
"suspend," given the confusion that has existed, it sounds as if in
other cases we would have been very apt not to suspend it. That's my
only problem with it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Right. But then what are you going
to do at the next FOMC meeting? Are you assuming that we're going to
come up with a range at the next meeting?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am, but we can obviously discuss it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, if we're going down this road,
it seems to me that an argument can also be made not to come up with a
range at the next meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, one can argue that.

MR. SCHULTZ. This is Fred Schultz. I might want to argue
that. It seems to me that we do need to deemphasize this funds rate
range. It appears to be giving us an awful lot of difficulty. It has
added to the confusion in the market. Events are such that we do have
the opportunity to continue that deemphasis. I think we should go
ahead and take the opportunity, and I would hope that at the next FOMC
meeting we could have a very thorough discussion about exactly what we
want to do with that funds rate range.

MR. RICE. I like the language as it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I do not consider that question at all
prejudiced by this language. That's not the object at all for me
personally.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Paul, I don't have any trouble with
the substance, but I find the wording a little elliptical to my
literal mind. If, in effect, we are making inoperative the upper end
of the range between now and the next FOMC meeting, I'm not sure that
this language carries the implication that at other times we would
want it to be operative. If you're that insistent about not wanting
to project that emphasis on the fed funds rate, it does prejudice--and
maybe rightfully so--the whole question of whether we have a fed funds
range in the future or not, because I don't understand why you would
have that concern now and you wouldn't have that concern twelve days
from now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have the concern because we
consulted. I think it's useful to consult when these things happen.
Well, I don't have any problem with your thought, if you can put in



5/6/81

some language that doesn't say the opposite. And that's my problem.
I started out where you are. I don't know what that language is.

MR. GRAMLEY. Lyle Gramley again. I was sitting here trying
to think of some wording that would be more amenable to the group.
Perhaps we could say something like: "Recognizing that market rates
may stay near the levels of recent days and that the federal funds
rate may be somewhat above the upper end of the range set at the last
FOMC meeting..."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That might do it. I was just thinking of
something similar: "In light of this approach, the Committee
recognized that short-term market interest rates might well fluctuate
around levels prevailing in recent days and that the federal funds
rate might exceed the range specified..." [I hesitate at] the word
"specified;" I guess "specified" is all right.

MR. GRAMLEY. The range "adopted"?

MS. TEETERS. The "upper end of"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...the upper end of the range adopted at
the last meeting." See, it's when we get into words such as "adopted"
or "specified" without saying what the directive does--that this is
the point at which we consult--that gets us into a little difficulty.

MR. AXILROD. "The range indicated"?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "The range indicated for consultation at
the last meeting." Maybe that's a way to do it.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think that language is an
improvement. It's a little less enigmatic.

MR. ROOS. Paul, Larry Roos. I think it's almost impossible
for nineteen of us to draft a statement. You have a general feeling
of support for what you're trying to do and I vote that you just go
ahead in your own words.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is a reasonable comment. We
can try to get some words that mention the range. That last
formulation didn't sound too bad to me off the top of my head. I
don't think it prejudices anybody; it just recognizes that the funds
rate is going to be above what we said was the consultation point
before, which is a factual report.

MR. BOEHNE. I find the language that you just read to be
more acceptable than your original version. If whatever you draft
tends to go in that direction, I wouldn't have any trouble.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the basic issue is whether we want
to do anything more; I guess that is an important issue. I would
propose no substantive new directive. I don't know whether we need to
put anything down here except for that point. I would propose that we
not change the money supply targets. And, apart from what we say in
the language, you understand that we've tightened up on the reserves
and we won't, at the moment, do it appreciably further. We would do
it further just in the normal course of events if the data come in

-10-



5/6/81

adversely. That is the way we intend to operate. If that's
understood, we can conclude.

MR. GUFFEY. Paul, Roger Guffey again. About your statement
that we've tightened up: It would be the first time, as I recall,
that anything would be in the record saying that we actually have
reduced our nonborrowed target and that it was done not by the
Committee in a formal way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think anything I've read said
that.

MR. GUFFEY. I must have misunderstood.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The paragraph I have in front of me here
says: We had a consultation. The Committee agreed that in the brief
period between now and the next regularly scheduled meeting the
reserve path should continue to be set on the basis of the money
supply path established at the last meeting. It doesn't say whether
we lowered it, raised it, or moved it sideways.

MR. GUFFEY. Okay. With the comment that you made--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It was recognized that actual money growth
might be higher. We have, of course, reduced the nonborrowed path.
I'm just saying that it doesn't say in this operative paragraph [that
that was] the conclusion of our discussion.

MR. GUFFEY. So the fact that the nonborrowed path for the
intermeeting period has been lowered will appear no place in the
record, then?

MR. AXILROD. No. Factually, President Guffey, the numbers
we have now suggest that nonborrowed reserves in April declined at
around a 13-1/2 percent annual rate. But that's just a fact. It
wouldn't say in the record what particular mechanical devices got it
there, if it went there.

MS. TEETERS. Are you planning to put in a paragraph on the
consultation of last week?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't planning to. We didn't have any
operative decision. I guess since we weren't planning to then, we
shouldn't plan to now. I don't know what it would say. I'm looking
at a paragraph here that Steve has written just as background. It
talks about constrained availability of reserves and so forth. This
is just something he might put in as background; it doesn't say that
the reserve path was reduced. It says that pressures on reserve
positions were growing and reserves were constrained. I don't know
what precedents we have in the Committee record, but we certainly must
have language of that sort.

MR. AXILROD. This would be consistent with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's nothing in here that says we made
an explicit decision about the nonborrowed reserve path. Any other
comment? In fact, I suppose this paragraph will go out to you for
review in the normal course. Don't these consultations--

-11-



5/6/81

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes. It will only be a paragraph or so
saying where the aggregates are and that banks have come under
increasing pressure and so forth. The operative language was what I
read you. Okay?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if we have something we have
to vote on.

MR. BERNARD. It doesn't seem so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not quite clear to me that we need a
vote.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, in effect, what we've done--no
matter what the language is--is that we've suspended the upper end of
the range. Does that require a vote or not?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What did we do last time? We didn't
change the range. Did we have a vote? What did we vote on?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I thought Murray Altmann said last
time that what we did required that we be recorded.

MR. AXILROD. I think there was a vote, but I can't remember
for certain.

MR. GUFFEY. If you're talking about the last telephone
meeting, I don't believe there was a vote.

SPEAKER(?). Not the last telephone meeting, the last--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. February 24th.

SPEAKER(?). The last time we [went beyond] one end of the
[funds rate] range.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can have a vote. I don't know
what the pros and cons are. The operative sentence here is the
reserve path: that the money supply path established at the last
meeting is unchanged. That's what we would be voting on plus this
other language. If you want to vote on that, I think we can vote.
What you're voting on is that the money supply path is unchanged and
the language indicating that we recognize that short-term interest
rates are going to be around their recent levels and that that
involves a higher rate than was in the checkpoint provided before.

MR. AXILROD. Might involve.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Might involve. Is that clear?

SPEAKER(?). Yes.

-12-



5/6/81

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'll have a vote.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Boehne Yes
President Boykin Yes
Governor Gramley Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Schultz Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
President Winn Yes

It's unanimous.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, thank you.

END OF SESSION

-13-


