









































FOMC Meeting Transcript


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

November 16, 1982

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in

Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, November 16, 1982, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT: Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Solomon, Vice Chairman
Mr. Balles
Mr. Black
Mr. Ford
Mr. Gramley
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Martin 1/
Mr. Partee
Mr. Rice
Mrs. Teeters
Mr. Wallich

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Morris, Roos, and Timlen,2/
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Corrigan, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis,
respectively

Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director
Mr. Altmann, Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele,2/ Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Oltman,2/ Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist

Messrs. Ettin,2/ J. Davis,2/ R. Davis,2/ Keran,2/ Koch,2/
Parthemos,2/ Prell,2/Siegman,2/ Truman, and Zeisel,2/
Associate Economists

1/ Entered the meeting following acceptance of Report of Examination of
System Open Market Account.

2/ Left the meeting prior to discussion and adoption of domestic policy
directive.



11/16/82

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill,1/ Associate Director, Division of International

Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn,1/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey,1/ Assistant Director, Division of Research

and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,

Board of Governors

Messrs. Balbach,1/ Burns,l/ T. Davis,l/ Eisenmenger,l/
Mullineaux,1/ Scheld,1/ and Stern,1/ Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas,
Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,
respectively

Mr. Soss, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York

Ms. Clarkin,l/ Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York



Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 16, 1982

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a number of things to deal with
apart from policy today. I am distressed about what happened after
the last meeting, as you well know, and I am distressed by the actions
that had to be taken for this meeting. We will return to that subject
after we complete the policy discussion. But I think the procedure
[regarding limited attendance during the Committee's discussion of
monetary policy at] this meeting has been outlined to you. Now we
need to deal with the minutes.

MR. PARTEE. So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection, we will approve the
minutes. Next we have the report of examinations, which has been
distributed to you. Do I hear any questions?

MR. PARTEE. It looked like a clean [bill of health].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no questions, we can have a
motion to accept it.

MR. GRAMLEY. So moved.

MS. TEETERS. Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved and seconded and without
objection [it is approved]. We will go to Mr. Cross.

MR. CROSS. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions or discussion?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, as for the recommendation
[regarding the Mexican swap drawings], we don't have any alternative.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could put them in default. Do we
have a motion on the recommendations [for renewal of all the swap
lines for one year and renewal of the drawings by the Bank of Mexico
for three months]?

SPEAKER(?). So moved.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It has been moved. Without objection, we
will approve that. No other commentary? We will go to domestic open
market operations.

MR. ALTMANN. Are you going to ratify the operations?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, we have to ratify the [foreign
currency] operations.

MS. TEETERS. So moved.

MR. RICE. Second.



11/16/82

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I think it's worth making one
comment. Our current account deficit is beginning to mount up; by
almost any estimate it probably will be at least $30 billion next
year, but it might be as high as $50 billion. At what point this will
change market sentiment toward the dollar is unclear; that may require
some other things happening as well. But I would assume that we are
beginning to see a little strengthening in the yen, and the Germans
are beginning to see some strengthening [in the mark] against other
currencies except the dollar. So, there may be a change in this
situation, although I don't expect it imminently.

MR. WALLICH. Well, the nature of this deficit is that it is
the result of a high dollar, and the high dollar is the result of
people wanting to get into the dollar, forcing, as it were, the
financing of the deficit on us for the time being instead of wondering
whether they ought to finance it. That is what I think keeps the
dollar up in the face of this prospect of a huge deficit.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Another way of putting it is that the
capital flows are swamping the equilibrium trade effect of an exchange
rate. There's nothing we can do about that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Probably it will all reverse itself very
suddenly and give us another problem. Mr. Sternlight.

MR. STERNLIGHT. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Questions? Discussion?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, would it be in order to ask Steve a
procedural question somewhere along here? He might not want to do it
at this point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what you have in mind.

MR. BLACK. Well, with our new targeting on M2 and M3, I
think there are some interesting questions about whether these
procedures work the way they did when we were targeting on M1. I
don't know whether you would like that issue raised here or at some
other point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It might as well be raised here.

MR. PARTEE. The steering mechanism?

MR. BLACK. Yes, the steering mechanism. I've been on the
market call and I've been intrigued as I watched this develop. It has
been a very interesting period to be there. We are following the same
sort of reserve targeting procedures from all outward appearances. We
still set a nonborrowed reserve path and we have a borrowed reserves
target; and we've made some adjustments to the borrowed reserves
target. As this period unfolded, I began to ask myself whether this
really makes a lot of sense when we are using M2 and M3 as our
targets. They include a pretty broad confluence of assets. Some are
subject to reserve requirements and some aren't; some have interest
rate ceilings and some don't; and some seem to move in the same
direction as the federal funds rate moves and some seem to move in the
opposite direction. So, I'd like to ask Peter if he really thinks it



11/16/82

makes a lot of sense to use this kind of reserve targeting procedure
while we are using M2 and M3 as our primary targets, or even for that
matter if he really thinks there is any effective way we can control
M2 or M3. The bottom line on this is that I am asking whether the
federal funds rate under current procedures is an effective operating
instrument or whether it tends to become a target in itself.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, there are a lot of parts to your
question, President Black. Just as a technical matter, I think in
using and revising the reserve path there are some [specific]
procedures called for. We had to do some of this adjustment for
different factors even when we were targeting M1. But there are
further adjustments of this kind to allow, as you say, for the fact
that many components of M2 don't generate reserve requirements. Steve
may want to comment on this, but what we have done as we've gone along
is to revise the path as though there were reserve requirements
against M2 in general, in a sense making up for the fact that some
important components of it didn't have reserve requirements. When you
ask if it is effective to control M2 via this means, I would have to
say I have some real doubts as to how good our control mechanism is on
M2. But I think that would be true almost whatever rules we live by
at the Desk. I do think what we're following, though, is an effective
response mechanism to growth in M2 that is either on track or below or
above track. It is something whereby the performance of M2 can
generate a greater or lesser provision of reserves that then impacts
on the money market, on the economy, and so on, and eventually on M2.
I think that this is a sensible procedure.

MR. BLACK. But the ratio between total reserves and M2 or M3
is so low or, to look at the other side, those so-called multipliers
are so high. Therefore, if we miss our target--say we overrun the
target--and we adjust by making the banks borrow that portion by which
we have overrun the target, that's a pretty weak increase in the
borrowed reserve target. Even if we do it on a one-for-one basis and
even if that were the right way, I would wonder whether necessarily
driving up the federal funds rate at a time like this would slow down
a good part of M2. I think we would count on it affecting the M1
portion and probably the part of M2 that is subject to rate ceilings
or reserve requirements. But some of these components are really
money market instruments and they seem to move in the same direction.
This is the kind of thing that has concerned me about it. I felt as
we went through the period that the old apparatus was rather out of
date when we were using this particular kind of target and that maybe
we ought to go directly to [targeting] the federal funds rate, which
probably sounds like heresy to a lot of people who have listened to me
in the past, but--

MR. PARTEE. How would you slow down M2?

MR. BLACK. I don't think we can slow it down except through
affecting M1 and those few assets in M2 that are subject to either
reserve requirements or interest rate ceilings.

MR. WALLICH. Well, one way of putting what you said is that
the funds rate is now an endogenous variable. Is it the result of
trying to restrain M2 with reserves, or is it the other way--that we
move the funds rate and try to restrain M2 and that more or less gives
us the reserve level that is needed?



11/16/82

MR. BLACK. I think that's a good way of putting it. The
whole thing just bothered me and I was hoping for some--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do you want to make any comment, Mr.
Axilrod?

MR. AXILROD. Mr. Chairman, the comments I'd be tempted to
make would be in a fairly broad range. There is a dilemma between the
short run and the long run. It is probably true that because most of
M2 doesn't have any reserve requirements this 2 percent average
reserve requirement on M2 relative to total reserves is giving us a
very weak response in the short run to overruns in M2. That assumes,
if we just go to the 2 percent, that the response is somewhat
proportional and that M1 together with the nontransactions component
would be roughly [as variable as M1]. But as President Black pointed
out, in the short run they clearly won't be; as interest rates go up,
the market will raise rates on the nontransactions components and they
will respond. So, in the short run probably we ought to react, [in
effect,] by moving the reserve requirement on demand deposits. That
is, if M2 is strong, the really practical option is to lower demand
deposits substantially; so we'd have to use a demand deposit ratio in
the multiplier--for the purpose of the [technical] adjustment [to the
nonborrowed reserve path]--rather than the M2 ratio. In that case we
would get a very powerful interest rate response. To reduce demand
deposits sufficiently to offset an expansion in the nontransactions
component would require a very substantial rise in interest rates.
That's just another way of saying in technical jargon that the
interest elasticity of M2 is low relative to the interest elasticity
of M1.

So, to try to control M2 over a very short-run period risks
very substantial interest rate movements. In the end, we would have
to have enough [of an increase in interest rates] to bring income down
and reduce the amount of money available to put into M2. That's the
reason that we started using the 2 percent ratio--to moderate this
particular impact, consistent with the Committee's decision. Also, it
has a certain reality. When you think of the market response, the
control horizon for M2 is [necessarily] somewhat longer than the
control horizon for M1. Whether the Committee would then want to go
directly to the control of the funds rate and make a deliberate
decision about that instead of leaving it implied from a reserve path-
-knowing the control horizon for M2 might be a little longer, but
implied M1 movements would still be substantial--strikes me as an
issue that has more than economics in it. My personal preference, of
course, would be to stay with a reserve path because I think it makes
it a little easier in practice to get the movements of interest rates
that the Committee probably would find tolerable and desirable under
the circumstances.

MR. BLACK. Well, that's very helpful. I did not mean in any
sense to be critical of what was done. I think Peter and Steve did a
fine job in implementing exactly what the Committee had in mind, which
really was a sort of money market directive. I was just getting at
the kind of problems we would have if we continued this for some
period of time. I think Steve and Peter both elucidated those very
well. That was very helpful. Thank you.



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments. I
don't think there's any question that the mechanism creeps when it is
adapted to this purpose. I would not overestimate the precision of
our control technique on M1 either, but there is no doubt that it
looks more strained when we are doing it this way. I was going to
mention later, but I will just mention it now, that we will have a
paper prepared for the Committee looking toward the targets for next
year. It will not be primarily on the control mechanism, although it
may get into that. It seems to me almost certain now that [as a
result of DIDC actions] we shortly will have a full transactions
account with a market rate of interest. We are very close to that now
anyway, and we'll have another account. We may have very close to
transactions accounts without any reserve requirements on them. We
virtually have that now. It raises all kinds of questions both about
the impact this will have on differential growth among the aggregates
and even total growth of the aggregates during some perhaps lengthy
transitional period. And it also has a bearing on the control
mechanism. I don't think we can solve those problems today; I'm sure
we can't. But we can get this paper prepared well before the meeting
at which we have to set targets for next year. We will get it
distributed before the meeting and have a discussion then; I don't
think we will resolve it then but we ought to be in a better position
for resolving it at the following meeting.

MR. BALLES. Paul, I found the [DIDC] announcement in this
morning's paper fascinating. Would it be premature to ask you whether
in your opinion we will end up classifying these new accounts as M1 or
M2?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I've been assuming we will put them in M2
and it probably is premature to say that. It's a very ambiguous
account. Beyond that, I don't know when it will be introduced. But
there is a meeting of the DIDC not very far off--in three weeks or
something like that. I don't know whether the DIDC will approve what
in effect will be a lifting of the interest rate ceiling on NOW
accounts, but I think it will go a long distance toward that. In two
or three months prospectively, I think we will have that. This thing
is so much like a transactions account now. If banks use it as a
sweep account--it's not quite clear that they will--it's on the margin
there. If it were any more liberal than it is, they would certainly
use it as a sweep account and I don't know how one would distinguish
it from a transactions account. I'm not sure we'd stop short of that
margin.

MR. FORD. Excuse me, in that regard, was the newspaper
article accurate that the DIDC has approved in addition to the six
transfers--three checks and three preauthorized--telephone transfers
without limit at least until the next time this is looked at?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That may be reversed, but that's the way
it is now--[unlimited] telephone transfers into one's own checking
account.

MR. FORD. Into one's own checking.

MR. PARTEE. Or a personal visit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a personal visit was always allowed.



11/16/82

MR. FORD. On top of the other six transactions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That decision will [be reviewed]. One of
the people who voted for it immediately wanted to change his mind
after the meeting and he was not allowed to change his vote. So, it
may be reversed in a subsequent meeting. But that bears upon how
transaction-like it is, of course.

MR. FORD. Was it a 3 to 2 vote?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It must have been, because the one vote
would have swung it. Now, we still have a decision to make on that,
frankly. According to our present rules, an account of that sort will
have a reserve requirement. I think that is correct. And if we just
keep the reserve requirement on it, I presume that banks will not
offer that service. I doubt it would be worth it, in terms of paying
the 12 percent reserve requirement.

MR. PARTEE. Paul, I think we are going to have to look at
the control mechanism definitely by the time we choose targets for
monetary policy for next year. We probably will never be able to
steer on M1 again. But M2 or any other aggregate we might choose,
such as bank credit, has to have some concept for translating
undesired behavior in an aggregate to action. And this 2 percent rule
is a minimal response and couldn't be expected to have any effect in
steering the aggregates if that is what we really want to do now. We
might want to take as our aggregate nominal GNP, but even then we need
a control mechanism. That is the vital part to be studied, because
what we have now really doesn't have any tie to aggregate targeting or
aggregate control--not with a 2 percent presumption on running above
or below on the reserve effect of the aggregate.

MR. BLACK. One thing we could do is to make the change in
the borrowing target some multiple of the overrun or underrun.

MR. PARTEE. Sure, we need an [amplification].

MR. BLACK. It doesn't have to be one-for-one; that's rather
arbitrary.

MR. PARTEE. We don't look at M1, but of course we are going
to affect M1 by what we do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, "We don't look at M1" is a little
strong.

MR. PARTEE. I want to put it that way, though. Even if we
never published the figure on M1 or looked at it or anything else, in
trying to steer M2 we could have a process that would have big effects
on actual M1 or the availability of Ml.

MR. BLACK. It would inevitably have to work that way.

MR. ROOS. Would you think it would be helpful in making some
of these very basic decisions, if some input were invited from
whatever Reserve Banks might be interested in getting into the act on
these studies, as far as just expressing themselves? There are some
very fundamental changes in the wind and I would think that anyone



11/16/82

within the System who had intelligent input to offer should be
encouraged. I think we ought to hear the Reserve Bank points of view
as well as those of the [Board] staff.

MR. WALLICH. We at one time had a Committee on the Directive
which got together when there were changes of this kind. Conceivably,
we could revive that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's right. But let's see where
we want to go from the preliminary paper. I think we're going to get
it done by the next meeting. We can't be too cumbersome at this
point, but any Reserve Bank that wants to contribute should be in
touch with Mr. Axilrod. He has already been in touch with some people
at the Reserve Banks.

MR. FORD. Will it include something about your idea, Frank,
of how to control total credit? What would the control mechanism be
under your idea? Would that be in the paper?

MR. AXILROD. We'll look at all the aggregates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first focus is on which aggregates [to
target] and how to interpret the aggregates. And that is partly--I
suppose entirely in some sense--because M1 has problems at the moment
that are looked at as a transitional thing. But it's very easy to get
into a more general discussion, starting with a transitional problem,
particularly when whatever else happens to M1, it looks as if there is
going to be interest paid on it, which is going to change its behavior
soon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We will end up with an adjusted M1A,
which will be called the monetary base.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We need to ratify the transactions, and
Mr. Sternlight made a recommendation to you.

SPEAKER(?). I move approval.

MR. PARTEE. Peter, did you have in mind longer coupons?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we would look at the whole range; we
typically do when we buy bonds.

MR. PARTEE. And you would do it in some volume today?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes. It could be roughly $800 million to $1
billion. That would be a rather normal bite, I think.

MS. TEETERS. Why are you buying? Are you buying for reserve
purposes or inventory?

MR. STERNLIGHT. We have a reserve need running over the next
few weeks. We already bought a large amount of bills at the beginning
of this statement week and it would be a very normal pattern to follow
up with a coupon purchase in the market.



11/16/82

MR. PARTEE. Do you think the market would make anything of
the fact that this sizable and unusual operation is occurring while we
are meeting?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think so, Governor. There have been
several occasions when there were coupon purchases on the Committee's
meeting date.

MR. PARTEE. They are looking apparently for some sign that
we are going to move interest rates down. The only concern would be--

MR. MORRIS. I would think the market would interpret this as
a Federal Reserve concern about the backing up of interest rates.

MR. STERNLIGHT. It might draw some mild--

MR. MORRIS. I think that would be very constructive.

MR. RICE. We might get more leverage if we do it.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it's not really a neutral movement that is
being proposed.

MR. BLACK. It is neutral so far as the money supply is
concerned.

MR. WALLICH. Do you think an amount of that magnitude would
affect the yield structure?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think it would affect it very
significantly. The market might draw some mild encouragement from it,
but I wouldn't think they would make a big deal of it.

MR. WALLICH. I think some people will say: "I hear the
Treasury is issuing these bonds and the Fed buys them."

MR. PARTEE. Are they in the market right now, Peter?

MR. STERNLIGHT. The new issues were delivered yesterday.
It's a real question, with those coming at a current market yield and
some of the other recently offered issues because of their high
coupons having more attractive yields, whether we should buy them on a
yield basis. We are apt to buy very few of the new one that just came
into the market.

MR. GRAMLEY. How long has it been since you've made coupon
purchases?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Oh gosh, several months.

MR. PARTEE. And of this size that must really--

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think it was early last summer. The size
would be a normal size; we did $800 million about 3 or 4 months ago.

MR. WALLICH. I am a little skeptical of this. What would
happen if you postponed this?



11/16/82

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we have a reserve need to meet for
next week and, given its persistence, it ought to be met in sizable
measure through outright purchases. So, if we don't buy coupons, we'd
probably want to do another sizable purchase of Treasury bills. It
would be somewhat of a surprise to the market for us to do that
because they have come to expect that after doing some sizable bill
buying for a while we would intermix that on occasion with coupon
purchases. I think they would take it as a deliberate shunning of the
coupon market if we didn't get in there. I don't think it absolutely
has to be today; it seems like the most logical day to me from the
standpoint of our reserve needs. If we did it tomorrow, then people
could read that even more in the context of the Committee meeting than
if it is being done on the day of the meeting.

MR. WALLICH. I think you should do a mixed bag of short-
medium- and long-term issues.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Governor, when we buy coupons it is
just that. It's not all long-term bonds. We buy the whole range of
coupon issues. To intermix bills and coupons I think would be a
terribly cumbersome, totally novel, excursion in the market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't think this is the most vital
issue of the day. If there is a lot of discomfort about doing it
today, it will be done presumably on Thursday or Friday.

MR. GRAMLEY. I have no problems.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that makes people feel more
comfortable, we can do that.

MR. MARTIN. I have no problem going ahead today. I'd rather
see us go ahead today than tomorrow given all this mumble-jumble
misinterpretation we've been referring to.

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

MR. WALLICH. If we're going to do it this week, it would be
better to do it today.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Do we have a motion?

MR. MARTIN. I move.

MS. TEETERS. You have a motion that has been seconded.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I wasn't sure what that motion was.

MR. RICE. The motion was to accept the recommendation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we also have to ratify the
transactions and I didn't ask anyone for--

MR. PARTEE. The motion I think is to add a billion dollars
to the [intermeeting] limit.

MR. MARTIN. Raising it by $1 billion [to $4 billion].



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any objections?

MR. WALLICH. I think I'll vote against it if it's pure
coupon purchases. If it's just to add a billion dollars [to the
intermeeting limit], I can't be against that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think we really want a vote
appearing in the record that we voted on a particular operation and
had an objection. If you want to persist in your objection, I think
we ought to defer the whole thing.

MR. WALLICH. No, I'll withdraw my objection.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The action has nothing to do with coupons;
it's just to increase the limit.

SEVERAL. That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We also need a motion to ratify the
transactions.

SPEAKER(?). So moved.

SPEAKER(?). Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Approved.] Mr. Kichline.

MR. KICHLINE. [Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. BLACK. That's finished goods. Jim?

MR. KICHLINE. That's right--total finished goods.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we just go on to Mr. Truman and
get the complete picture.

MR. TRUMAN. [Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I won't describe the picture
domestically and internationally but open it to discussion.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, looking back over the last six
months, it's a little unnerving to witness the failure of prosperity,
which was supposed to be right around the corner, to emerge. Laying
aside political figures, as I recall, Jim, there have been respected
people in the forecasting fraternity who were predicting that an
upturn would begin as early as last May or last June. One month after
another after another right down to the current one, as we know, that
has failed to happen. Looking back, can you put your finger on any
particular factor that has produced this outcome? I'm thinking that
despite the tax cut for business last year and despite the October '81
and July '82 cuts in personal income taxes and all these wonderful
things that were supposed to get us off onto a new road here,
[recovery] keeps eluding us. Looking back, I wonder why.

MR. KICHLINE. I think there are a number of factors. It's
not really comforting to know that we have had a lot of company, but
you are quite correct that the general expectation for the second half

-10-



11/16/82

of the year has not been met. In part, from our side, I think we
perhaps underestimated the interest rate impact on a variety of
sectors, and in business fixed investment it was not just the interest
rate impact but more broadly an erosion of confidence in that sector.
That's the one area that we have written down substantially and it
accounts for the major drop in activity late in this year. The export
side is one that has been weakening as well in recent months, given
the deterioration in international conditions. So, both of those
sectors are now heading down with a vengeance. I would say there are
obvious impacts on income and consumer spending flows from that. If
you look around at what went wrong, it is a bit weaker virtually every
place. I don't know any place in our forecast where we tended to
revise [our estimates] up. Some revisions have been large on the down
side and others small; but they all have tended to run in a negative
direction. I think it's a whole host of factors. I would say also
that the tax cut was a little weaker than we anticipated earlier, but
it was so small that it pales by comparison with the other things
going on and it just doesn't matter in the aggregate.

MR. PARTEE. We didn't have a rise in personal savings,
particularly, as a result of the tax cut, which suggests that income
growth was so much poorer that it used up the benefits of the tax cut.

MR. KICHLINE. That's right. The monthly savings rate
numbers are a little hazardous to look at, but September now is down
to the 6-1/2 percent range. The temporary blip has been all but
erased and a lot of income has been destroyed in effect or lost from
the fact that these other sectors were deteriorating.

MR. BOEHNE. I think we can trace most of [the economy's
weakness], John, to very high interest rates. That stares us right in
the face. We have extraordinarily high interest rates. If you look
back at other recoveries, real rates have been a good bit less. I've
noticed in my District, for example, that the drop in rates over the
most recent months and its impact on the stock market has had a
positive effect; there is less pessimism and some increase in hope. I
think that will be quickly erased if rates reverse themselves to any
significant degree. I believe the recovery eludes us because rates
are too high, and we won't get a recovery until we have lower rates.

MR. BALLES. I happen to agree with that, Ed. I didn't want
to put words in Jim's mouth. I think that's the way it came out,
though. The key factor, I think you said, Jim, was the interest rate
impact particularly in the business fixed investment area and the
export area. Is that correct?

MR. KICHLINE. I think that's right. I would say that we had
high interest rates in our forecast and we still had a recovery. So,
looking back, I'd say either we misestimated the impact of those rates
or attitudes changed. But it's very clear to me that one can't ignore
the rate impact in terms of what is happening in the economy.

MR. PARTEE. The velocity numbers have been very unusual,
haven't they? We've had pretty good monetary growth throughout but
velocity has been negative instead of positive.

believe.
MR. KICHLINE. Steve is going to be discussing that, I

-11-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who sees the recovery beginning?

SPEAKER(?). Beginning?

SPEAKER(?). Some flurries.

MR. CORRIGAN. I do get a little sense of it, at least in an
anecdotal sense; there certainly are no hard statistics at this point.
But I do have a very distinct sense of a bit of a change in business
attitudes and so forth just in the timeframe of the past month or so.
One place where it is very evident, as Jim mentioned, is in the
housing sector. There clearly is a little action developing--I don't
want to say a burst of activity--in the housing sector.

who is in the wood products business even acknowledged that
in a very forceful way last week. In terms
of the number of plants making wafer board and that type of thing, all
of a sudden they are back on 7-day workweeks. So, I think there is
something there. More generally, I do perceive in a variety of places
and contexts a sense that a bit of momentum is beginning to
materialize.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. There is going to be a substantial
decline in commercial construction next year, so even though lumber
may be benefit, net, I'm not sure that the overall construction impact
is going to be that significant.

MR. CORRIGAN. The commercial construction situation is
really very, very bad. Indeed, not only do I suspect that that sector
of the economy is going to remain very soft for a long time but I
think that is going to show through in another clustering of real
problem situations for the people who are financing these buildings
that are just being finished.

MS. TEETERS. What is the state of the farm economy?

MR. CORRIGAN. It's not good. Certainly, the price situation
is terrible. These people, though, really do have remarkable staying
power, in our District anyway. I sent my staff out to visit 6 or 8
major agricultural lenders to try to get a first-hand picture of what
they thought was going on, and I was astonished. We are seeing a lot
of problem situations and problem loans and all the rest, but it's
still the Main Street [retailers] and the implement dealers [that are
mainly affected]; the farmers themselves are hanging in there pretty
well. The livestock people, again despite low prices for livestock,
are benefitting obviously from lower grain, feed, and energy prices.
So they actually are hanging in there in a reasonable fashion. But
with regard to farm-sector purchases of any equipment, they are
virtually non-existent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask the question the other way in
the interest of even-handedness. Who sees a continuing momentum of
decline?

MR. MARTIN. I'd like to speak to the housing sector.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll come back to you in a second.

-12-



11/16/82

MR. GRAMLEY. Let me just make one comment. I have always
found it interesting and useful when I'm uncertain about whether my
forecast is right or not to do what I call a "National Bureau
exercise" in which I look at what I think are the better leading
indicators of economic activity to see whether they confirm or deny my
thinking. Of course, I play this game in my own way; I choose the
ones I think are best. I don't look at the leading indicators, but I
look at things like the average workweek in manufacturing, initial
claims for unemployment insurance, orders for durable goods, and
industrial raw materials prices. And they are all still going down.
I'm quite convinced we will find that the recession not only has not
ended in October but that it will not have ended in November either.
And while I would make a forecast like Mr. Kichline's that recovery
probably is right around the corner, I made that same forecast at
midyear, as he did, and I was dead wrong. So, I think we have to
reckon with a quite high probability that recession may well continue
through the first quarter of 1983.

MR. CORRIGAN. There's a point that I think is lost here. We
keep talking about the fact that interest rates have come down. I
don't know what the real interest rate is, but if you look at the
relationship between current nominal interest rates and current rates
of inflation, the reduction in real interest rates, if it's there at
all, certainly is not very significant.

MR. GRAMLEY. The other aspect of this interest rate movement
that I think we need to take carefully into account is that this
recession is quite unlike earlier ones in terms of the international
component. A very large part of the decline in real GNP since the
middle of 1981 can be explained by the drop in real merchandise
exports. Now, that's a consequence partly of a worldwide recession
but also of a very substantial increase in the value of the dollar in
exchange markets. And the drop in nominal interest rates has not
reversed that. That negative effect is still there in spades, as the
International Finance Division has reminded us.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Even though unemployment levels don't
track real GNP that quickly, the view on Wall Street--I would say the
consensus view--is that unemployment will continue to rise. I hear
estimates of from 10.6 to close to 11 percent. Some people say it
will peak by the end of this year but others say it will peak in the
first quarter of '83. We could have some plus--a tiny little plus--in
real GNP and still get rising unemployment.

MR. PARTEE. Oh, sure.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But that wouldn't be perceived as
recovery, I think.

MR. WALLICH. Well, we're not thinking in terms of interest
rates very much. We should remember that when we used to do this we
allowed for a lag of 6 to 9 months before [the economy] turned. I
would think these lags have shortened, particularly in housing, and
expectations tend to shorten them. But this fall in interest rates
wasn't all that long ago that we could expect very great results by
now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.

-13-



11/16/82

MR. MARTIN. I've noted along with President Corrigan a few
signs of housing recovery. Like Jerry, I've talked with both lenders
and developers and found from them the first sparks or glimmerings or
very preliminary indications of some recovery. But we have to put
that into the changed institutional framework in which the lenders and
the developers and the sellers of existing housing now operate. One
of the positive indicators, of course, is the substantial upswing in
FHA applications. That is a positive, but those FHA applications
generally deal with housing, in submarket by submarket, that is at the
lower percentiles of the housing market. It would be difficult to
have a 1.3 or 1.4 million housing start number based only on that
segment of the market. It would be difficult to have that kind of
recovery in housing from the 800,000 to 900,000 level unless existing
home sales revive and continue to support the month or two upswing in
new home sales. The question is whether even that one or two month
increase in new home sales will persist. The question is where the
financing is going to come from to handle the need for the financing
of the foreclosed properties--and they would be foreclosed if they
didn't have to be shown in certain asset categories of the thrift
institutions and the commercial banks. That kind of financing, of
course, is taking and will continue to take first priority over
adjustments and accommodations to the regular borrower. I note that
there is a question about the thrift institutions with this marvelous
new account, which is primarily a transaction account and will be
looked on by their managers as a short-term source of funds. Do we
really expect them to make 30-year fixed rate, fixed term loans with 5
or 10 percent down? That kind of contract is going to be what it
takes to get to a 1.3 million level, supported by some multiple of
existing home sales of 5 million or whatever it takes to support the
1.3 million. I don't see it that way.

MR. PARTEE. You don't think the public will buy a variable
rate mortgage?

MR. MARTIN. I think the public will buy a variable rate
mortgage. That gets us to the complication of qualifying the buyer,
particularly the young buyer, in what more often than not won't be a
variable rate but a renegotiable rate mortgage. That gets us to the
second problem of qualifying the young buyer particularly and other
buyers where the lender demands a pledged account mortgage--where a
savings account has to be put up in order to qualify the borrower
because the income-to-debt-service requirement is such that they can't
handle it without debiting a pledged account. In other words, the
institutional context in this recovery period for housing is
significantly different from any recovery period we've had before.
So, if you foresee a consumer-led recovery with housing as the
harbinger, I suggest you take another look.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Jerry Corrigan
captured the theme that I wanted to express. And that is that the
discussions in October with businessmen and bond dealers in our area
and at our board meeting involved probably the grimmest, gloomiest
reports on the business outlook that I've experienced since I've been
with the Federal Reserve. Interestingly, at the most recent board
meeting and in meetings with businessmen in November, there was this
glimmer of hope that things indeed were getting close to improving.



11/16/82

There was some report, for example, that housing in the Oklahoma-
Colorado area particularly, which has been a very vigorous economy, is
continuing fairly strong.

As far as the agricultural sector is concerned, while I do
agree with Jerry that the agricultural sector has great resiliency, in
talking to the farmers and [others] and also as a result of a
quarterly agricultural farm survey that we conduct, we find that the
foreclosures or the estimates of near foreclosures, which include
substantial sales of assets in order to provide liquidity to the
producer, are increasing or expected to increase rather dramatically
in our area. One other thing we hear from farm credit people as well
as bankers is that they are very conscious of [the desirability of]
not putting very much foreclosed farm real estate onto the market
because the market is already depressed in value by some 25 percent
from a year ago. They are going to hold that farm real estate in some
fashion rather than flood the market with it, which would push values
and prices down [further], thus jeopardizing the collateral on
outstanding agricultural loans. The bright spot in agriculture is the
red meat area; hogs and cattle, for example, both are in the black as
far as profits are concerned. So there is some hope.

MS. TEETERS. How much of the glimmer of hope you are seeing
stems from the drop in interest rates and the anticipation of their
going down further?

MR. GUFFEY. Nancy, I'm not sure I can identify all that goes
into that glimmer of hope. But the fact that interest rates are lower
certainly has to be an important factor. There is obviously some
broad anticipation of a further drop in interest rates. I'd just
suggest that without a further drop or with some backing up I think
that glimmer of hope could vanish immediately. It would not only go
away but that would worsen the potential outlook.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

MR. BALLES. Just to reinforce what Governor Martin was
saying on housing, the forest
products industry, one from one of the biggest firms in the West, say
that there indeed have been signs of a little pickup. Translating
that into what it means for 1983 as a whole, they are still pretty
bearish in the sense that 1.3 million would be about as much as they
are looking for in new housing starts. And in a broader sense that
industry is still in the doldrums because of what the foreign exchange
business is doing to log exports; that is a very, very severe blow.
And finally, the pulp and paper business, which is another important
leg of that industry, is really in the doldrums. So, at least in our
forest products firms, I don't find any great optimism these days.

If I could finish with a question, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to
ask a question of Ted Truman, at the risk of repeating what perhaps
already has been said, which I didn't understand. In view of what has
happened to interest rates in this country, with lower nominal
interest rates at least, is there any good reason you can think of why
that darn exchange rate is not only hanging up there but getting
stronger?

-15-



11/16/82

MR. TRUMAN. Well, as was noted earlier, it has moved down a
little and may be coming [down more]. But the staff, at least at the
Board, has pretty much run out of what I might call good reasons on
that. And, not satisfied by the staff, I've noticed that several
people we've had in here--the Board [staff] having been exhausted--
were asked the same question. One clear factor seems to be the
uncertainty and the safe-haven arguments. There is something there;
how much one can't say. That kind of argument is very difficult to
measure in terms of how important it is. Another factor is this
recent phenomenon, as Sam mentioned, that there does seem to be a
sense in the market that even though U.S. interest rates have moved
down, foreign interest rates, even if they didn't move down in this
period, are expected to move down further. We saw some of that
phenomenon in the market yesterday when there were reports that
British interest rates were going to drop very dramatically over the
next six months; that knocked down the pound quite markedly against
the dollar and other currencies at that time. So, there is a sense in
which there is a decoupling of interest rate policy [whereby rates
coming down in] other countries at the same time our interest rates
are coming down has led to some marking up [of the dollar]. One thing
that we do sometimes lose sight of is the fact that our inflation
performance has been better than expected and better relatively than
expected. All three together suggest that the dollar in a sense is
not quite as high as we think it is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I have [heard] the comments that would
suggest that emotionally there is perhaps a better tone in the market,
but I really think it's only because the previous period had been so
very, very bad. In answer to Nancy's question, I think [the weakness]
is entirely interest-rate driven. With rates having been so high,
that created such a very bad attitude that a reduction, even a modest
one, has been well received. But looking aside from the emotion into
the basics, I think the situation is continuing to deteriorate. The
basic industries, particularly those in the Midwest, are continuing to
decline. That tone comes through in the Redbook; the Redbook made for
pretty consistently gloomy reading this particular time. I think we
are at a point where, if the rate structure doesn't stabilize or
indeed doesn't continue to go down, this emotional improvement is
going to deteriorate pretty rapidly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, I would pretty much be where Roger and
Jerry are. My overall reading of the Eleventh District [based on] our
own internal forecast that we've just gone through at our Bank is
slightly more optimistic certainly than the Board staff's forecast. I
don't know how much of this is hope. But I see things that I find
very hard to understand. This is strictly anecdotal, but with regard
to housing, Sunday afternoon out of curiosity I visited two housing
developments in Dallas. At one, the builder apparently was pretty
optimistic; he had just completed 10 specialty homes beginning at
$375,000. And the crowds [were so big] you could hardly get in the
houses. I was impressed with that, so I went across the road to
another new development, and the lots began at $250,000.

MR. PARTEE. The lots?



11/16/82

MR. BOYKIN. The lots.

MR. BLACK. That's low income housing in Texas!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a lovely countryside.

MR. GRAMLEY. Each has its own golf course!

MR. BOYKIN. Three homes had just been completed and were on
show and we could not get in them because of the crowd. They begin at
$1 million and they have "for sale" signs on them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People aren't buying; they're looking.

MR. BOYKIN. But what builder has that kind of financing and
that kind of optimism to build a million dollar [spec house]? And one
that is about half completed is going to be priced at $1.8 million.

MR. MARTIN. Bob, there's an old maxim that builders use,
which is: "I'll build anything [the lenders] will finance."

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But, Bob, isn't the number of rigs in
use up?

MR. BOYKIN. The rig count has improved. There is a question
of whether it is a real improvement or seasonal for tax purposes and
so forth. But the rig count is up slightly. On the other hand, the
seismic surveys are not showing that much improvement, so it does
raise the question of whether it will hold.

MR. BLACK. Bob, doesn't your housing information support
Pres' statement that the strength is going to be in the low income
part of the market?

MR. MARTIN. In Texas, that's low income!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. Well, I would say I get pretty much the same
readings. I've been through three of my six locations in the last two
weeks and there was a marked change from the last go-around. About
half of my branch directors and Atlanta directors are now saying some
positive things; it's pretty much concentrated, as others have
reported, in housing and housing-related areas, which are sensitive to
rates. One of was absolutely euphoric.
He said he had an infinite improvement in building permits; in
Montgomery, which is a city with a few hundred thousand residents,
permits went from zero to thirty. Of course, that was
[unintelligible]. Another reported that he'd seen trucks going out of
the local lumber mill for the first time in a long time; that is
housing-related and is supported by some statistical data that are
coming out.

We did a special survey of thrifts with regard to the
questions that Governor Martin reported on and also the question of
where the money is going. We looked at nineteen of the biggest thrift
institutions in the Southeast and they account for $1 billion of the
nationwide total of all savers certificates. Half of it disappeared.



11/16/82

We compared September 20 to October 20 to see what happened to the
money, and about $500 million ran off from the all savers
certificates. The thrifts were pretty cheered by the fact that the
biggest chunk of it--$150 some odd million--went into passbook
accounts; they wish it were permanent, but they doubt it will be.
Another big chunk--about $30 to $40 million--went into IRAs, which is
long-term money. That might be the partial answer for why NOW
accounts and IRAs and deferred comp accounts are starting to build up.
Basically, I guess I have to go along with the general thrust of the
reports here, which is that the only real optimism or rays of hope
that we see are in housing and housing-related industries. There are
a few minor exceptions; there's a bit of tourism and a little
improvement here and there, but overall it is in the rate-sensitive
sectors.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Consumer credit interest rates are
not coming down very much. I gather they are running 18 to 24
percent. Many department stores are keeping their rates at 24
percent. The argument is made that they had losses earlier when there
were usury ceilings that they have to make up. Some of the banks say
it is longer-term money that they have to borrow in order to finance
automobiles, for example. Some of the upstate bankers in New York
have said that their auto credit business has not picked up
significantly. But one banker told me that he has offered a 12
percent rate on the condition that the customer open an account or had
an account in his bank. And he said he is absolutely deluged with
applications and that he did an enormous volume of financing of new
auto sales at 12 percent. Now, Karl Otto Pohl in Germany made a
public plea to the banks to pass on reduced interest rates in the
consumer credit area, and a few of the banks followed with a one
percentage point reduction. I don't know whether Chairman Volcker is
thinking of making a comparable appeal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you recommending it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes, I think it would be a good idea.

MS. TEETERS. I wasn't aware that consumer credit interest
rates moved with the cycle. I thought that automobile and mortgage
rates moved with the interest rate cycle, but that everything else was
always at usury ceilings.

MR. MARTIN. Well, we have the impact of personal bankruptcy
behavior patterns that lenders are taking into account a bit more than
they did in the previous so-called recovery.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. In looking ahead, I think it's important to keep
in mind several fundamentals. I don't think any economist I have
heard from or read about really equates this recovery with other
recoveries from troughs in economic activity in recent times. People
are almost unanimous in anticipating that the fourth quarter of this
year, which is the time we're speaking of right now, will be
essentially flat and that there might be, and hopefully will be, some
pickup going into next year, with maybe 2 percent real GNP growth at

-18-



11/16/82

best in the first half of next year. Some of us get exceptionally
gloomy when we don't see the dramatic increase that has characterized
previous recoveries. Just last week we had the chief financial
officers of the largest companies in our area in for lunch. What many
of you have reported was indicative of their points of view. They did
recognize a rebound in home building and home-buying activity, but it
was essentially in higher priced properties. The one significant hint
of meaningful improvement came in the retail area where two large
national retail firms, and another, said that they were
sensing what they thought was an improvement that they hoped would
carry over into Christmas as a significant improvement. But I think
it's important when we get around to making policy that we not react
in an inflationary manner to a gradually improving probability because
I don't think there is any way that we will get the sort of dramatic
upswing that has occurred in the past without fueling the
[inflationary] engines to an extreme. But we saw glimmers of
improvement among the contacts we had in the Eighth District.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Ms. Horn.

MS. HORN. I suppose if I were grasping at straws to say
something optimistic from the Fourth Federal Reserve District point of
view, I would say that the comments I've heard since the last meeting
have [conveyed] in some sense more confidence. But if one goes below
the tone of the comments and into the statistics business people have
been basing them on, in fact, the statistics don't seem to show any
improvement in the capital goods industries. We hear about continuing
deterioration and backlogs, for example. And the farm sector is much
as several people have reported, in terms of what farmers buy and
extremely weak land prices. But, in fact, the comments do seem to
have a little more confidence in them, perhaps really because people
are now beginning to say that they are going to take market share away
from somebody else and somehow be at a competitive advantage rather
than that they are seeing an overall improvement in the economy. I
see this as heavily reflected in the consumer sector in the Fourth
Federal Reserve District as in any other [sector]. But I could put an
optimistic face on what continues to be perhaps not a negative set of
data but a stagnant to negative set of data in our District.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One last comment I'd like to make is
that I met with a group of about fifteen business leaders, and those
among them who have been doing well in the last two years--three or
four of the fifteen--continue to do well. Those who have been doing
very poorly say they see the situation as absolutely flat; though it
is not deteriorating further, they don't see any signs of recovery
yet. And I found it interesting that when I asked about salary and
wage increases, all of them, including those who were doing well,
talked about increases in a range from zero to 6 percent, with the
exception of the New York financial community.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'd say that you weren't talking to the
New York bankers.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The wage increases that the New York
bank community expects to pay within the next 12 months were running 8
to 10 percent, but the increases expected in the industrial community
ranged from zero to 6 percent.



11/16/82

MR. PARTEE. I wonder whether the type of people you all talk
to might not be considerably influenced by the 250 point increase in
the DOW. It seems to me that that is one of those things that color
attitudes. It may not add that much to consumer spending or anything,
but most business leaders and most people who would buy a million
dollar house have a considerable stake in the equity market one way or
another, and they probably are feeling quite a bit better.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We can turn to Mr. Axilrod.

MR. AXILROD. [Statement--see Appendix.]

[Coffee break]

[Secretary's note: The meeting resumed at this point with
more limited attendance.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have to come down to making a
decision. The assumption of the Bluebook is that we will keep the
same general framework we had last time. I thought this [distortion
in] M1 from the all savers certificates would sort itself out by this
time. I'm not sure that it has; it appears that it has not. We still
have that problem. A much more fundamental problem, implicit or
explicit in the earlier conversation, is that the business situation
doesn't look red hot. It has a lot of international complications.
And, certainly, the relationships between the money figures and the
economy have run way off the postwar track. We may be ending up with
a tighter policy than we intended for that reason and not because we
let [the aggregates] run above track. That's a judgment that has to
be made. Without any question, they are off track; and whether they
are going to return to track in the foreseeable future is a matter of
faith. It doesn't surprise me, particularly, that they are off track
now, but one can't judge the amount. I'm not so sure if we're really
going to disinflate. We have all kinds of institutional problems with
M1, but extracting from the institutional problems I think the basic
trend in velocity might change. I've said that before, but I can't
prove it. It certainly has changed in the short run and I'm not sure
why. I would think that the basic trend in M2 and M3 ought to change.
But that's really a problem for next year and not for next month.
It's just a matter of judgment how much we allow for these liquidity
pressures, and I suppose that gets mixed up in interest rate
judgments. Who would like to approach the problem? Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Paul, I would like to start. I have made a list
of the key points that have been made. We clearly have a weak economy
and the prospects for recovery are elusive at best. The point has
been made about some glimmer of hope at the emotional level, but I
think that is largely a result, directly or indirectly, of lower
interest rates, and it can evaporate very quickly if rates reverse.
The foreign situation, at least from my perspective, is just plain
scary. And there is the point that you just made: That the money
supply figures have to be viewed with increasing skepticism in terms
of their economic meaning, at least at this point and maybe for a long
time. I might add a point that has not been made. We have had a much
improved inflationary situation. There is no room for an inflation
scene [but] I think we have to be prudent about the inflation problem.
As I add all these up, and admittedly it's a judgmental issue, they



11/16/82

make a rather convincing case for a monetary policy that encourages
some lowering of interest rates.

As for the alternatives in the Bluebook, that pushes me in
the direction of "A." It may be "A" to "B," but I'm certainly closer
to "A" than "B." If we did that, I would think that the funds rate
would drop to 9 percent or a little under, and that also would open up
a window for an appropriate drop in the discount rate, which I think
has been discounted to some extent in the market. Unless we get some
move there, we may give up some of the progress we've made on lower
rates since the last meeting.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think we've gone a long way
toward dealing with our long-term inflation objectives. That is not
saying we won't have to deal with them in the future, but it seems to
me that the immediate, imperative policy is to find the level of
interest rates that is going to permit the economy to turn around. I
think the evidence at the moment is that the current level of interest
rates is too high and that the economy is still sliding downward.
Quite clearly, the monetary aggregates are giving misleading signals.
Their strength clearly does not reflect strength in the economy, but
quite the opposite. It's a reflection of the weakness of the economy.
In large part, I think the growth in the aggregates reflects the fact
that the business community has not been able to fund their debt in
the long-term bond market in the normal cyclical manner. And that has
produced the unusual phenomenon of growing, indeed rapidly growing,
business loans at banks all through a recession. I can't recall that
ever happening before. Again, this sustained business loan demand,
which has contributed toward the strength in the aggregates, as well
as the liquidity preference factors are giving us very misleading
numbers on the aggregates.

It seems to me that at the moment we have to go for
alternative A; it is the only alternative that makes any sense to me.
We have to set aside the aggregates as our prime objective at the
moment. But if we go for "A," and I hope we do, that does mean we
will have to inform the markets in some way that it is not necessarily
our objective to bring M2 and M3 within their ranges because, if we
get the markets anticipating that the Fed is determined to bring M2
and M3 within their ranges by the end of the year, we could very well
not have the kind of response that we want. But that's a problem for
you to figure out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will be making a little speech tonight.
Mr. Roos.

MR. ROOS. Well, I see this somewhat differently from Frank.
First of all, I would ask Steve a question because I may be analyzing
this incorrectly. One of the reasons for shifting our emphasis or
attention away from M1 was to accommodate the distortions that the all
savers certificates and other instruments might be causing as the all
savers certificates [matured]. If we have the M1 growth that is
implied in any one of these three alternatives and if we project that
growth from the present time, aren't we in effect projecting 5 percent
in the case of alternative C, or 6-1/2 or 8-1/2 percent from a base
that includes the all savers certificates where they are now? In



11/16/82

other words, don't we in effect validate that bulge that is a result
of the all savers certificates termination? Don't we take off from
that higher level and doesn't that give us for the year growth in that
aggregate that is way above the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Are you talking about 1983?

MR. ROOS. I'm talking about 1983, yes. What I'm trying to
say, and I guess I'm saying it in a very clumsy fashion, is that I
would feel no discomfort with 6-1/2 or 5 percent growth from October
to December if that growth were after the effects of the all savers
certificates have washed out.

MR. PARTEE. He's talking about the bulge.

MR. ROOS. I think we're really moving from an inflated M1
because of its all savers component; if we put in a 5 or 6-1/2 percent
growth rate above that, we're really getting a much higher rate of
growth relative to our original targets than we had originally
contemplated. I don't know that I'm asking quite--

MR. PARTEE. One can see that; it's on the chart here.

MR. AXILROD. Well, the growth rates we have here are
certainly higher than we assumed at the last Committee meeting would
be consistent with your original M2 targets. The M2 target may be
slightly higher, but not very much. A problem, as far as we can see
from the casual information we get on bank deposits, is that the all
savers certificate money that went into demand deposits has not come
out yet. And we don't know when, in fact, it will come out. For all
I know it may sit there and jump into this new money market instrument
that the DIDC has authorized. So, in some sense, that temporary money
is still in there and is raising these growth rates. I think that's
what is causing these numbers--

MR. ROOS. Well, I would see the effects of this on interest
rates differently from the way Ed Boehne and Frank Morris perceive
them to be. Regardless of what we know about the behavior of the
aggregates, there are a lot of people out there doing a lot of
figuring. And if money--whether it's M2 and M1 or a combination of
these various Ms--continues to grow at anything like the rate it is
growing presently, even though that money growth is authorized as a
means of achieving lower short-term interest rates, I believe the
opposite is going to occur, and I think it will occur very quickly.
In other words, we will start to get articles and a reaction that will
boost rates rather quickly in the belief that we will reinflate.
Frank, I don't think we can turn this inflation [fight] off and on in
any orderly way; people are still skeptical as the devil as to whether
we are going to hang in there and keep our anti-inflationary posture.
If we have three months or four months of really fast money growth, I
think we will see these rates skyrocket instead of coming down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with those who
have already suggested that we must find an appropriate interest rate
level that will further our economic recovery. I'm not sure that

-22-



11/16/82

9-1/2 percent isn't it, but it certainly hasn't given a good signal
yet that it is the appropriate level. That implies to me that we
ought to move interest rates to a modestly lower level, and that lower
level is, I suppose, something this Committee should decide. All the
talk about targeting reserves and looking at M2 for some informational
content as to what policy should be I think is a bunch of baloney in
the sense that we are targeting interest rates. And we ought to
recognize that. In that context, I think there are a couple of ways
to go. First of all, let me say that I am not suggesting that we do
away with or abandon the regime of targeting reserves and money
supply, at least for public consumption. But around this table it
seems clear to me that [we are on] an interest rate regime and we
ought to target on the interest rate we think is appropriate to get
the economic recovery started again. Having said that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think that's quite accurate,
Roger, if I may interject. Speaking for myself, I would have lower
interest rates if these aggregates weren't rising so darn [fast].

MR. MARTIN. Would you?

MR. PARTEE. I agree with that.

MR. GUFFEY. I agree that we have to be concerned about--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's not exactly what I would target.

MR. GUFFEY. Well, notwithstanding growth of the aggregates,
I would propose that some lower interest rate is necessary to trigger
the recovery. The way to get there is what this Committee has to deal
with. Others have suggested alternative A and that has some
attractiveness to me. But there are a couple of ways to engineer
lower interest rates in the intermeeting period. And I would prefer
doing it by adopting "B" and having an initial borrowing level below
that suggested in the Bluebook, which was $350 million. I would make
it $250 million or maybe $300 million, thus setting the reserve path
in such a way that we would get a fairly immediate drop in interest
rates; and coupled with a discount rate decrease, that would bring the
funds rate to the 9 percent area. The reason I'm not terribly
attracted to "A" is that, if I understand the Bluebook projections
correctly, "A" [contemplates] about an 8-1/2 percent fed funds rate in
the intermeeting period. That's a full percentage point decrease in a
five-week period. That may be a little quicker than I'd like to see
happen. I'd like to go down gingerly and see what happens so that we
could continue a downward trend. And thus, I would opt for "B" with a
lower initial borrowing level as the prescription.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Teeters.

MS. TEETERS. Well, what I would recommend is not new. I
think we have to get interest rates down to get the economy started.
Therefore, I'd opt for alternative A. I did an interesting thing last
week. I realized I had never actually looked at the numbers from the
early 1930s, so I went back and took a look at them. There is no
question but that we are not in a situation like the 1930s. [Then the
economy] just went straight down; in the current situation, it has
been going sideways for three years. But there is one thing that is
very similar to the 1930s and that is the international crisis. What



11/16/82

made the depression so extended was that all international credit
flows essentially stopped. Our interest rates, the lack of recovery
in this country, and the high international value of the dollar are
creating a situation in the international field that could lead us
into something very similar to the 1930s, and I'd be very careful.
So, not only for domestic reasons but also for international reasons,
I think it's imperative that we get our interest rates down and down
to a level that will start a recovery. In addition, more and more
people and more and more members of Congress are pointing the finger
at us, saying that the lack of recovery is solely a result of either
high nominal or real interest rates. If that continues and more blame
is heaped on us, the possibility of major institutional changes is
looming in the next year. I wouldn't change [policy] solely for that
reason, but the economic and international outlook are such that we
can't afford to stay at these rates. Therefore, I would strongly
support "A."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a couple of words about
the international situation. We have an IMF agreement--letters of
intent anyway--with Mexico and Argentina. Their problems are far from
being solved, but that's a very important step. Mexico still doesn't
have much money and their economy is winding down for lack of imports
and other things. There is going to have to be a big negotiation with
the banks to get them to put up some credit. I don't anticipate that
we will be asked to do anything more but it's not inconceivable [that
we may be asked]. I just don't know how much [it might be] in the
short run. The U.S. government is certainly going to be asked to do
something on Argentina. I don't think it necessarily is going to
involve the Federal Reserve. I have taken the opposite view. It's a
very complicated situation. It depends upon what kind of security
arrangements can be developed and it depends upon whether any foreign
central banks will join in. It's in a state of being unresolved.

As for the Brazilian situation, they had their election
yesterday. I don't know what happened. It probably will take them a
week to count their votes, but at least they have that behind them.
They may have special vote-counting techniques for all I know.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Are they counting the way they do it
in Illinois?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That comment doesn't go in this report.

My only point is that it may clear the way for a more open
discussion of the Brazilian problem. There was an article in The New
York Times a day or two ago, which you may have seen, that is fairly
accurate. That is going to burst upon the world's consciousness a
little more fully in the next few days. The Treasury has provided
$500 million to Brazil already and probably will do another $200 to
$300 million very shortly just to keep them afloat until the timing is
right for them to go to the Fund and try to deal with the problem more
openly, which is certainly going to have to be done. It is still a
very uneasy situation. The IMF negotiations, on the other hand, are
being speeded up, and that should be of some assistance. I think that
will be resolved in the next month or so in terms of enlarging quotas
in the special fund. I interject that because it arose in a couple of
comments. Mr. Gramley.

-24-



11/16/82

MR. GRAMLEY. I am with the majority view that is beginning
to develop. That view is that we have to do something to make sure
that a recovery begins soon. Frank used the word "imperative" and I
think that is quite right. It's a matter of urgency. Looking at the
domestic economy, I have a feeling that the widespread expectation of
the business community at midyear that the recession was over and that
a recovery would begin led to actions that were deeply disappointed
when the growth in final sales that was expected to come from the
consumer sector didn't happen. We had a very serious worsening of
expectations during the course of the summer and a drop in the demand
for business fixed investment among other things. And I think there
is more than a small risk that it might happen again. If I were
forecasting, I suppose I would say it is probable that the recovery
will begin sometime early in 1983. But there are no concrete signs as
yet that the recession is over.

I agree with Governor Teeters that the international
considerations are pointing strongly in that direction, too, as well
as considerations about what Congress might do. It's not just a
question of potential anti-Federal Reserve legislation, but we badly
need to have action that is going to reduce the prospect for growing
deficits in the out years. And it's going to be extremely difficult,
if not impossible, for the Congress to go in that direction if the
economy is still falling. I look at the present level of interest
rates and I have to acknowledge that I'm not sure the present level of
interest rates is inconsistent with recovery. But if it's the wrong
level, it certainly is not that interest rates are too low. On the
contrary, they are more likely to be too high. I don't think there's
any significant danger that what we do between now and the end of this
year is likely to provoke a massive turnaround of inflationary
expectations. I think we have established our credibility. I think
we have to follow a course now that prevents any possibility that
interest rates might go up. So, "C" and "B" are quite unacceptable to
me. I wouldn't want to take such aggressive action that the markets
would think we were throwing in the towel. I would be inclined,
therefore, to go somewhere between "A" and "B" with an initial
borrowing of maybe $250 million, as Roger Guffey suggested. I
wouldn't be reluctant to stick with the growth rate of M2 in "A" and I
certainly would want to keep in the directive the statement that we
included last time about uncertainties leading to exceptional
liquidity demands. We ought to err on the side of providing more
growth rather than permitting less.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I don't know what I can add to what seems
to be an emerging consensus for alternative A.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The consensus is mostly among non-voting
members.

MR. PARTEE. I noticed that.

MR. KEEHN. I think interest rates really do matter. And
given the noise in the aggregate numbers, we really can't be in the
business of slavishly following statistics that may or may not make
sense whereas interest rates, as I say, really do have a significant
impact. All the sectors I deal with in the Midwest are precariously



11/16/82

positioned: The agricultural situation is serious; the industrial
situation is serious also; and the consumer is at this point just
plain scared. And I think consumers are not going to begin to move
out until they get some confidence. Nothing will build confidence
like a slightly lower rate structure and, therefore, I would be in
favor of "A." I certainly hope that the fed funds rate would be under
the 9-1/2 percent level--that it would tend to be around 8-3/4 or 9
percent and no higher than that. I think the borrowing level to
accomplish that would be $150 to $200 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Solomon.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I won't repeat the reasons that have
been offered already on why I also share the view that interest rates
should come down. Summing up, I think there is only a 50-50 chance
that we will get a recovery. We need a little more margin there. We
need some further relief on the international scene. So, the question
is how to do it. It seems to me that even if we reduce the borrowing
to $250 million--and I can't see it going safely below $200 million or
probably $250 million--the most we are going to get is less than a
half-point drop from open market operations. It is going to take a
discount rate cut to move it a half point. If it doesn't offend
anybody's integrity, I would prefer to put a figure of 9-1/2 percent
for M2 but have a $250 million borrowing assumption and use the funds
rate range of "A." The funds rate range doesn't have the same
relevance it did earlier because if we have the same kind of language
in the directive that we had last time, there is a considerable
flexibility for the Chairman and the Manager. That's the combination
I would prefer, but I could live with a straight "A" if others felt
that it would be very inappropriate to have a 9-1/2 percent target for
M2.

MR. BLACK. Is that 9-1/2 percent you are talking about for
M2 for September to December, Tony?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Yes.

MS. TEETERS. Could we achieve that with a 9-1/2 percent
federal funds rate?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. What I'm assuming is that there would
be a discount rate cut within a relatively short period of time. If
that happens, then whether we have 9-1/2 or 10 percent doesn't make
that much difference. Maybe it does by the end of the intermeeting
period; I don't know. Steve might want to comment on this. Assuming
we had a discount rate move in the next week or two, how significant
would the difference be with an initial borrowing such as I talked
about?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we defer that question until we
get into an elaboration and just get the general views now. Governor
Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I, like everybody, would like to see lower
interest rates. But what is the way to get them? The basic reason
they are so high, I think, is indeed that the targets were too tight;
they were calculated on the expectation of something like 3 percent
velocity gains and we've had the opposite. So there is less money in

-26-



11/16/82

the economy than there should be unless this turns out to be a
temporary situation, as it quite conceivably may. We have suspended
M1 temporarily; I think targeting on M2 is a good thing to state as a
principle, but it's not a very easy thing to do operationally. The
basic decisions we have to make are about the funds rate and the
borrowing assumption. I think we have a certain degree of leeway as
far as departing from the targets is concerned. The market has
responded, I think, very well to our statement that we weren't going
to adhere closely to M1. It hasn't had the effect of causing the
long-term rate to go up, which would be the interpretation of a strict
monetarist position; the long-term rate has come down. How long this
condition will continue is a real question. Bob Eggert asked this
question of his forty economists and got a response that no doubt
ranges from 0 to infinity. But eliminating the [outliers], he arrived
at seven months as the period of time over which perhaps a departure
would be accepted by the market before people would begin to become
uneasy and long-term [rate movements] would begin to become perverse.
So, we have some leeway and we must make the optimum use of it. I'd
be reluctant to spend it all right away and reluctant particularly to
do what the market seems to want and to expect us to do right away,
which does look like throwing the book at the recession now. So, I
would like to postpone a more drastic action and would go with "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Corrigan.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, the way I view the current
situation is that I just don't think it's possible that the economy
can stumble along at essentially zero growth for much longer. The
financial strains that are there just won't permit it. If we float
around zero for too much longer, with very little difficulty we could
end up in a more severe downside situation. It is clear from the
international side that the LDCs need to generate some exports. On
the domestic side, I suppose some consolation can be drawn from recent
developments in the financial markets but, underneath all that, the
extremely serious financial strains are still very much with us. My
own bet is that, even with the current interest rate structure or
something very much like it, the prospects for some growth in real
terms emerging in early 1983 and getting up in a range of 4 percent or
so are reasonably good. But at the same time, while that is my own
bet, I have to concede that the amount I'd be willing to wager at the
moment is not much more than a nickel.

There is another characteristic of the outlook for 1983 that
I'd like to mention, too. All the forecasts, of course, assume that
unemployment is going to stay high no matter what. I think something
is going on that may make it stay even higher than the conventional
forecasts. And that is that a lot of businesses have really cut into
their management and white collar work force during this correction
period, and I think they are finding that they didn't need all those
people. As we begin to see a recovery, that phenomenon is probably
going to make unemployment stay higher than it normally would, which
simply is going to add more fuel to the fire.

Having said all that, in terms of the alternatives that are
before the Committee, if I understood them or if I thought they meant
anything, I would be inclined to alternative B. That may in one sense
seem to contradict what I said earlier, but I don't think it really
does. Again, I'm not sure what any of it means, but the thrust of my

-27-



11/16/82

position is that I would tend to be a bit on the cautious side right
now, [given] the monetary growth that we are seeing--whatever the
numbers mean. The potential is at least remotely there that we could
find ourselves facing a bit of a problem in early 1983. The problem,
other things being equal, might even call for a slight increase in
interest rates. It seems to me that that is a total no-win
proposition. That view is reinforced, at least in my mind, by the
peculiarities of the operating environment that we are in. If we have
to snug up, regardless of what alternative we are working from, given
the way the path is drawn and the operational mode that we are in, the
snugging up process inherently is going to be slower and less precise
than it would have been under the former procedures.

The last thing that is relevant, in terms of being a bit
cautious, is this new [financial] instrument. It really won't hit
until December, but it seems to me that it is going to depress the
growth of M1 when it hits; and on top of that it is going to produce a
shift from higher reserve requirement instruments to lower reserve
requirement instruments, which as that begins to happen would in turn
mean that a given reserve path, however drawn, might have different
implications for the amount of money growth, however defined, one
might have assumed in the first place. That, too, leads me to the
view of being a little cautious among those alternatives. I would
hedge my bet along the lines of Mr. Guffey's suggestion of putting the
borrowing level down a bit from the $350 million that the staff
associated with Alternative B so that we could see a reduction in the
funds rate coupled with or followed by a reduction in the discount
rate. I might even be prepared to go one step further. If for
technical reasons, we aren't able to orchestrate that, I'd be inclined
to take my chances with a reduction of the discount rate even with the
fed funds rate trading about where it is right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask you to expand a bit
on a statement you made earlier, which was that you would like to see
lower interest rates if that could happen in an environment of less
money growth. I'd like to hear you talk about how much lower interest
rates you think the market might tolerate in the context of various
kinds of money growth. As I look across the alternatives in the
Bluebook, it seems one could construct a situation where any of the
three alternatives could be consistent with lower interest rates. I'd
just like to hear you expand your comment a bit.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. My comment was a casual one, not an
analytic one, but I will try to make a more analytic comment. I just
meant to say that if I were plucking an interest rate out of the air,
I'd pick a lower one if I weren't constrained by worrying about how
fast the aggregates were growing. I don't know how responsive I can
be to your question. Somebody--I guess it was Frank Morris--said that
there may be a perversity in the aggregates' growth at the moment. I
think we do know at the moment, whatever it means for the future, that
there has been an increase in liquidity preference. It almost seems
to me tautological that we would get a decline in [velocity] of the
kind we got. People want to hold more money; they want to hold more
M2 and more M1 relative to economic activity. And it has persisted
long enough so that it has been of some cyclical significance. What
motivates that? Well, Steve gave a complicated explanation, which I'm

-28-



11/16/82

not sure I followed entirely, about the differences between liquidity
preference and spending preference or whatever. I'm sure it was
analytically all brilliant. But there is some element of uncertainty
here. People want to be more liquid but that is something I can't
measure. To the extent that is true, I don't think it's inconceivable
that if people had more confidence and saw the economy growing, at any
given level of interest rates we would get less growth in the
aggregates because they might invest in stocks, for instance, or put
more in bonds, or lengthen maturities, etc. People would begin to
look at assets that are outside these very liquid assets. I guess
that's what Frank may have had in mind in part. I don't think it's
the interest rate itself so much as a general feeling about the
economy, which may be tied into interest rates. It isn't 100 percent
certain, but if over a period of time--I'm not talking just about the
next month--we got a different set of economic expectations, we might
find these aggregates growing more slowly rather than more rapidly
simply because of a return of confidence. One could argue--I don't
know how far I'd want to carry this argument--that by taking a chance
in the short run and departing from the usual analysis or the usual
expectation of the way these things work that we might end up with
lower growth in the aggregates than we would expect if indeed there
were a change in the atmosphere and people had some confidence in the
economy looking out three or four months ahead. But I can't prove
that.

MR. RICE. Can you imagine that we could do anything about
confidence without reducing interest rates somewhat from their current
levels?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I can imagine it, yes. Things could
just get better at current interest rates. What I'm saying is that if
we chose to be more liberal on the reserve-supplying side in the short
run, though this analysis suggests that that would produce higher
aggregates we might be pleasantly surprised over a few months and find
that it didn't work that way. Nobody will ever know because we won't
know what would have happened if we had done the opposite. But the
differences in these aggregates projections are so small; they are
well within the range of our capacity to foresee developments, within
a month anyway.

MR. ROOS. Do you have any uneasiness or any fear that if the
markets perceive the aggregates to be growing [rapidly], the movement
in interest rates would be upward instead of downward? Is that a
[concern] that should be factored into our decisionmaking?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, [though] we may be in an impossible
situation. The economy does not always develop in a way that there
are any answers except after the passage of longer periods of time
than we are thinking about. And I think that is a danger. That's why
I pay some attention to these aggregates. What we have to balance is
how much we think we can get away with, even if we recognize the
dangers in the business situation and want to get interest rates
lower. Even if we think that's where the balance of the risks is, we
can't throw discretion to the winds for the reason you are suggesting.
Where is that balance? I think that's what we are talking about. I
think one would have to conclude from what has happened in the market
that people haven't been that upset by what they've seen so far. I
don't have the figures right in front of me but in fact the surprising



11/16/82

thing is that while Treasury bill rates and the funds rate are [not
much] lower than they were in early September, CD rates and private
rates are. And bond rates are way down, which seems to be the inverse
of what you would worry about if there were, at this point anyway, a
great fear about what the monetary expansion was doing to us. Now,
there are obviously anticipatory effects, but that is roughly right,
is it not, Mr. Axilrod?

MR. AXILROD. Yes, [but] the 3-month, 6-month, and one-year
bill rates are down [some].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Once we get out in the maturity range,
including as short as 6 months, rates came down [more].

MR. ROOS. It does take a little while, though, for the
recognition of the change to sink in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's the judgment we have to make.
The biggest protection we have against that is that things have
changed. I suppose what the market is telling us is that people are
not going to get worried about that when they have a sense that the
economy, if anything, is still declining. That raises the question of
what will happen as soon as they get a sense that the economy may be
in recovery; but we've got to get to the recovery first. Everything
else is just an extreme example of what we are doing, which is
balancing risks. If we had a clear answer, it would be easy to dump
it into Mr. Axilrod's computer and he would tell us. But I don't
think his computer is that good.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. One thing that puzzles me in the
market comments is that there is a very widespread view that even if
rates come up again in the early part of 1983, they will trend
downward during 1983. And yet these are the same people who believe
there will be a modest recovery. I'm not sure how they arrive at that
view. They have a feel for what everybody else is thinking in the
market.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they have seen what is going on.
But what I am saying explicitly in answer to Mrs. Horn's question is
that I do not discount the possibility that with a feeling of economic
recovery we could get a very rapid reversal of this velocity movement
in M2. I wouldn't be so certain about M1. I think M1 is just [in a
whirl] with interest being paid on it and a change in inflationary
expectations and all the rest, so I don't have the same feeling about
M1. But for M2 it's a little hard to see why the velocity should go
down indefinitely--why people should change permanently the
relationship between their liquid asset holdings and income. One
could argue, I suppose, that institutional competition has made those
instruments so much more relatively attractive than they used to be
that we have had a structural shift in terms of how much of that kind
of money people want to hold as opposed to stocks, bonds, or whatever
else they can hold their money in.

MR. PARTEE. That's a good argument.

MR. CORRIGAN. One can't entirely dismiss that either.

-30-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe. I wouldn't dismiss it. The
interesting thing is that M2 really hasn't budged for three years in
terms of its growth rate, including this year. It has been
practically the same every year while the economy is going up and down
and generally trending lower in terms of inflation and in growth. We
have had some tendencies toward a decrease in velocity for some time,
although it has only been this year that it has become really
pronounced. So, maybe there is a structural change here.

MR. CORRIGAN. If one looked at the composition of M2 three
years ago, what percentage were demand deposits and savings accounts
then? I don't know but it was pretty big, wasn't it?

MR. AXILROD. Yes. There has been a shift toward things that
have a market rate of interest.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It is rather interesting. Nothing could
have been much steadier than the growth in M2 over the past three
years while all this other stuff has been going on.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. And we are going to have the same
amount of overrun this year as last year.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We keep the target the same and only
slightly overrun it. One would certainly think, given that inflation
is down, real growth is down, and nominal GNP is down, that if M2
growth remains at the same rate, obviously something structural is
going on. But this year it must be something cyclical, too. I don't
know whether that helps you. You pay your money and take your choice!
It comes down to balancing out, as so many people have said, the need
for providing some protection on the down side, so to speak, against
the danger that it's possible to overdo it, as Larry Roos keeps
reminding us. The way to reach that judgment is what we're trying to
do today. Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. I'd like to join all those who feel that interest
rates need to come down from their current levels for all the reasons
that have been given, both domestic and international. I won't try to
go through all those reasons again. I'd just like to say that it's
clear to me that real rates are too high to permit a recovery and,
therefore, they have to come down from where they are at present.
Like Governor Gramley, I don't know to what level they need to come
down. And for that reason we ought to try to get them down gradually.
We ought to be careful not to overdo it. But at the same time I think
we have to do what we can to move rates in the right direction--
downward--but gradually. I also agree with Governor Wallich that we
have a limited amount of time during which we will be able to maintain
our credibility and we ought to use that time wisely. The clock is
ticking and we don't want to wait too long to have some effect on the
current situation. I would conclude that we had better use some of
that creditability soon in order to encourage recovery while we have
time. If we wait too long, we may not make effective use of this
credibility. Therefore, I would support alternative A in the belief
that that will encourage a gradual decline in rates. I also think, if
I understood correctly, that alternative B would not result in any
decline at all in interest rates from their current levels. Is that
correct, Steve?



11/16/82

MR. AXILROD. Well, if the aggregates came out that way, yes;
it's set that way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And if all these other assumptions are
correct.

MR. RICE. So, to support "B" doesn't seem to me consistent
with the objectives that we all say we have. I would be content to be
somewhere between alternatives A and B provided it resulted in some
downward [interest rate] movement. But alternative A seems perfectly
safe at this time and that's the way I think we should go.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Ford.

MR. FORD. May I ask a quick question? If I did my
arithmetic right, the midpoint of the fed funds range in "B" is about
1 percentage point below the current fed funds rate.

MR. AXILROD. Yes, for "B" we just put in the range that the
Committee adopted at the last meeting. But our expectation was for a
funds rate more like it is now.

MR. FORD. And in "C" the midpoint is about where today's
rate is.

MR. AXILROD. Yes. We started with "B" as the range the
Committee had, but the range--

MR. FORD. Well, I think you have characterized it exactly
right, Mr. Chairman, in saying that we are at a point where we are
weighing the [unintelligible]. The consideration is whether or not
we're in a historical discontinuity. When I first joined this
Committee I thought it was a line-up of Keynesians versus monetarists
as to just what we needed to stimulate the economy. I'd like to
review briefly what kind of stimulus we are now putting in from both
[the fiscal and monetary] sides. As everybody knows, the deficit
spending of the government really didn't explode until the second half
of the last fiscal year. That is, through the spring we were running
a deficit about the same as the previous year at about a $60 billion
annual rate. It was in the last six months ending with September that
on a seasonally adjusted basis it went from around the $60 billion
annual rate up to $110 billion. That means that fiscal policy has
only recently become dramatically more expansive. We now apparently
are running a deficit somewhere in the range of $120 to $130 billion
[or as much as] $150 billion for this fiscal year. In other words,
fiscal policy was made much more expansive in the last few months.

Likewise, as Lyle mentioned last time, the question of what
is happening to the real money supply depends on what kind of monetary
theory one likes. If you look at what is happening to the real money
supply--I'm sure you've all seen the little chart that shows that it
has only been since last summer that the nominal money supply, M1 and
M2 both, has been growing. And with the drop in prices, the fact is
that what is happening right now is that the real money supply is
expanding very rapidly whether one measures it in terms of M2 or M1.
That, too, is a quite recent phenomenon; it has only been occurring
during the last few months. Those two conclusions, together with the
normal lags in the impact of fiscal and monetary policy, lead me to

-32-



11/16/82

the conclusion that the current set of policies on both the fiscal and
monetary sides are very expansive. In terms of the fiscal thrust, the
deficit is running at 5 to 6 percent of GNP; in terms of the full
employment deficit, [the federal budget] is now in deficit at any
reasonable definition of full employment. Real monetary policy is
just expansive. And all that says to me is that we are sitting here
reading each other the gloom and doom report, but unless we are at a
historically discontinuous point in our economy, which a number of
speakers have suggested in different ways [may be the case], we are
running a high risk of throwing both of the throttles in our economic
airplane fully to the wall and the plane has to take off. The great
danger is that it will surge forward in the next few months after the
normal lags on both fiscal and monetary policy take hold and then we
will be in a position of having the worst of all worlds, namely,
higher long-term interest rates--we may manipulate the short ones, but
the long ones will get to us--higher unemployment, and price inflation
starting to turn around against us, all without any significant drop
in unemployment. And that's the scene that concerns me on the other
side of this judgment we are making.

Given that we haven't allowed for the normal lags, I would
say we need to wait a little longer and risk keeping policy where it
is--that may mean something more like "C," whose average interest rate
is right about where we are now--and see after another quarter if the
economy does or does not respond to this tremendous stimulus we're
giving it now. If at the end of that time, by late in the winter, we
still see everybody pushing their forecasts of recovery forward, I
would be more inclined to share the judgment a number of you are
making, which is that we are already at a historical discontinuity.
Then I would say we should go into our mode of being preventors of the
great depression. If the problem is that we have had not just four or
five quarters of unusual velocity behavior but that we are looking at
six or seven quarters of it and the number is getting bigger and
bigger in the wrong direction, at that point we should push this kind
of stimulus. But until then I want to emphasize the risk on the other
side, as noted in the comments of Mr. Wallich. All the business folks
are saying they will give us a period of grace of, say, seven months;
they will watch this and after that the indicators of expectations
turning against us should probably start to break. I look at four
things in terms of those indicators: the price of gold, which is
turning against us; the exchange value of the dollar, which is
currently all right or more than all right as a number of you noted;
long-term interest rates, which are still declining, and as you said
the market hasn't turned on us yet; and sensitive commodity prices,
which are still reasonably okay. But if we go for "A" or anything
like "A" to "B," I think we will start to see these things turn
against us, and with the economy surging we really will be in the soup
six or nine months from now. So, while I'm worried about what the
Congress is going to do to us and I'm also very worried about the fact
that most of you may be right and we may be [witnessing] a historical
discontinuity, I still think we should lean on the side of not
overdoing the monetary stimulus to complement the excessive fiscal
stimulus that everybody agrees we now have. I'd go for "C."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Partee.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I'm pretty sympathetic to what Bill Ford
had to say. I don't think we have allowed enough time to see the



11/16/82

effects of what is obviously a considerably more expansive monetary
policy that was developing increasing momentum as we went through the
summer and into the fall. It is very much like 1980 as a matter of
fact. And the fiscal policy setting is certainly on the expansive
side. I don't know that I would characterize it as expansive as you
do, Bill, because I think we do need to look at the 6-1/2 percent full
employment setting. It is negative but it's not so terribly negative
at this point, though probably it will drift up rather than down
because I think all the Congressional sentiment will be to raise the
deficit rather than reduce it, in pursuit of particular job creating
policies.

On the business situation, I agree most with Lyle. I think
it is quite poor. And I'm very worried about the marginal indicators.
Jerry Corrigan mentioned that employment may not do at all well, and I
think that's quite right. I know of a plant that has reduced its
office force from 1300 to 500. They are not doing much out in the
yard, but they are going to have to do a lot more in the yard before
they add back to that 500 they have in the office. That plant happens
to be in a deeply depressed industry, but its [action to reduce office
staff] is a mark of what a lot of business people are thinking about
because they are very squeezed on cash flows and very scared about
their financial condition. So, I don't think business is very good
and it isn't going to get very good in the immediate future, but I do
think we need to have some time to see what the effect of these
policies may prove to be.

Over the years the Committee frequently has made serious
errors by not allowing for the lag in [policy] effects because we
always expect to see instantaneous results and we never get them in
economics. I think we ought to wait a little while. I don't know
whether interest rates are too high or not. I agree that one
sympathetically thinks they ought to be lower because the real rates
are so high; on the other hand, we have this structural problem in
that they have to be disproportionately higher because of the
government's financing needs. That is, the government is interest-
insensitive in its demand for funds and it is going to take a
substantial share off the top, so real rates have to be higher than in
past settings in order to have a balanced economy with that kind of
deficit. So, Paul, I come out for "B;" I think "C" is perhaps a
little draconian. And I feel rather strongly that we shouldn't be
posting in the directive expectations for the aggregates that are as
far out of our expectational range of just 6 weeks ago as those in "A"
would be. Even if we shade the funds rate range in "B," I think we
ought to keep the specifications for the aggregates that are in "B"
and wait until we see this staff paper and have a little more
experience in order to see whether we have to shift our focus entirely
in terms of aggregates. The 1930s do suggest that we might have some
kind of change in the function here and that we might be back to that
because we certainly are going to have many more failures in this
economy and many more failures abroad in the year to come. Maybe that
means that we have to have more liquidity relative to economic
activity. But I don't feel prepared to commit myself to that at this
point. So, I would go for "B," and I feel pretty strongly that I
wouldn't want to see aggregate growth ranges above those specified in
"B" by the staff.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Martin.

-34-



11/16/82

MR. MARTIN. I think the case for saying that we are in a
period of discontinuity is a mixed one. I don't think any of us can
sit here and say that indeed the liquidity preference schedule has
shifted--that the employment of liquidity and debt by the corporate
sector or the private sector has really changed. But certainly there
are a number of indications that indeed this may have taken place. To
the extent there is credibility in the argument, one can look at the
past two or three years and see two recessions back-to-back, with
really no recovery. My colleague, Governor Teeters, occasionally
asks: If one discounts the pseudo-recovery, isn't this the longest
period ever of depressed growth? It's an intriguing idea. Obviously,
there are many things to go by. That's the trouble. We know so many
things that aren't [typical]: this very recent experience in the
holding of liquidity; the recent experience of business firms
restructuring themselves in terms of employment and outlook on
markets; and the apparent significant change in the international
situation. Those are facts that can be considered cumulative and they
make the discontinuity argument.

I am not impressed by the current jargon on how narrow the
opening of the window is--that it's only seven months or 19-1/2 days
or whatever--because there is an awareness in the markets, as distinct
from the flow of articles, Larry. I read all those articles and
newsletters and whatnot, too. That is a cottage industry. I'm glad
we have nearly full employment there! But I do believe there is a
significant difference between what traders and portfolio managers do
in the markets and what some very interesting people write in the
newsletters and in the financial press. I'm relatively unimpressed by
the flow of articles, although I'm vastly entertained by them.
Looking at the recent experience of nonrecovery over more than a
2-year period, looking at the benign effect of lower interest rates,
if you will, what has been the effect of the decline of 150 or 200
basis points in short and long rates in terms of the international
situation, in terms of the amelioration of the fragility of our own
economy? People are still failing there. I have major mortgage
lenders who come in here and tell me that "they are still putting our
friends out of business," a [reference] I take it to adhering to
supervisory pressures to clean up the loan portfolio. The down side
is still a specter that must be contended with and, therefore, I am an
"A" to "B" person. I am bothered by a target of borrowing of $150
million; it seems to me too low. I can live with $200 million. I
certainly can accept $250 million in the short run. I am greatly
bothered by the alternative B notion that we might behave in such a
way as to produce a 10-1/2 percent federal funds rate.

MR. PARTEE. Take about 1/2 point off.

MR. MARTIN. I think a 10-1/2 percent federal funds rate
would be a significant negative in the markets. They would understand
that. They might not pay attention to 19 articles in that direction,
but get that funds rate to 10-1/2 percent and I think we will continue
to do damage to the economy. We have done damage to it. We, fiscal
and monetary [policy] both, had to do damage. But there comes a point
where the battering must stop. And 10-1/2 percent to me is cruel and
unusual punishment. So, I'm an "A" to "B" person. I would hope to
see $200 to $250 million as the borrowing target.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Balles.

-35-



11/16/82

MR. BALLES. I come back, Mr. Chairman, to your excellent
statement on the balance of risks, and that has me in a coin-flipping
stage, I guess. I join everybody around the table in wanting to get
interest rates down as fast and as much as possible, but hopefully
keeping them down. And that's the hang-up. In a day or so, I assume,
Murray [Altmann], the directive from our October 5th meeting will be
published and at that time the public will know of just one more key
thing that they don't already know, and that is that we set a range of
8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2 and M3 [growth] at that time. They
won't be too scared because the October M2 that has just been
published shows 8 percent and that's so far so good. What they don't
know and what we do know is that in October M2 was considerably higher
than the path plotted by the staff. I'm afraid, given the low
assumption on M2 that the staff made for October, that if we get a
continuation of accelerating M2 growth in November, which clearly
seems possible--I think I heard Steve say that--we could be in
[danger] of letting things get out of hand on the up side.

Personally, I'm glad that we did in fact have the rapid M1
growth of August, September, and October, and that we got [interest]
rates down in a rather dramatic way. But I'm a little afraid that we
may begin to get some perverse reaction in the long-term bond market.
This is always a judgment call, and judgment will differ around the
table, but I begin to worry a bit--not that one swallow makes spring--
about the articles I see such as the one on the front page of today's
Wall Street Journal in the "What's New" column. The article said that
officials of OMB and Treasury are beginning to worry now that we will
see higher interest rates, higher inflation, and higher unemployment
if the current monetary and fiscal policies continue. There are fears
that the Fed's monetary policy has become too expansionary, [as
reflected by] the fact that the money supply announcement yesterday
was received poorly in the bond markets and bond prices went down. So
far I think we've been lucky--not lucky in one sense because we have
deserved what we have gotten, which is very good treatment--in the
sense that our [monetary] expansion over the last three months has
been accompanied by a downward drift in long-term interest rates in
particular. I wouldn't want to overdo it; I wouldn't want to
overplay our hand and carry that too far. As you said. Mr. Chairman,
we just can't throw caution to the winds. And it's difficult to judge
when you're overplaying your hand. I would join several of those who
have already spoken in favor of tugging on the reins a little and,
therefore, going with alternative B.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think you expressed very well the
dilemma that we face in trying to decide what to do today. I don't
think there's any real difference among any of us around the table as
to the objective we want, but we have some obvious differences about
the means. At the last meeting I understood full well why we decided
to deemphasize M1, given the international situation, the precarious
domestic situation, and the noise in the M1 statistics. I thought we
made a bad mistake when we did that but in retrospect I think it had a
pretty salutary effect upon expectations, and it accounts to a large
extent for this improvement we've seen in attitudes. But I do think a
caveat is in order. Despite its having been maligned a great deal, it
seems to me, from what I can understand in the literature, that M1
over the long run is still the best predictor of inflation and nominal
GNP. Money thrown out to satisfy these high demands for liquidity in

-36-



11/16/82

a period of recession like this remains around; and when the demand
for money shifts in the other direction, it can come back to haunt us.
So I'm very much concerned about the [money] growth we've had in the
last several months and I fear that this may go on into November.
Bill Ford and Chuck Partee after him expressed much better than I my
feelings on this. I believe the battle today--if there is a battle or
if one can call it that--is going to be fought over the question of
whether we move the federal funds rate down deliberately or whether we
are going to stick with a steady money market directive somewhat like
we did the last time. My choke point is right at that point. If we
decide to keep the federal funds rate about where it is now, I can buy
that. If we decide to deliberately push it down in the absence of a
weakening in the aggregates, I choke over that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. In trying to balance the risks, the down side is
very frightening. There is a possibility, though, that there is a
little [risk] on the up side. Obviously I'm influenced somewhat by a
slightly more optimistic view of where the economy is heading. With
regard to the lag effect, the argument has been made that we really
have not had time to see the full effect of recent policy actions. I
find that to be a fairly persuasive argument [so] the cautionary
approach also has appeal to me. I think we can remain cautious and
not take a very overt action at this point to deliberately try to
bring rates down. So, if I were voting today, I would vote for "B."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me make a couple of additional
comments. I gave you a finely balanced statement of pros and cons
before, I suppose. I have no doubt in my mind that we've had a change
in liquidity preference. The argument is over how long that will
last, but it has lasted for five quarters. Well, I don't know if one
can say it has lasted for five quarters; the numbers always have bumps
up and down in a quarterly series. But when velocity has declined for
five [successive] quarters for the first time in the postwar period,
something is different.

MR. PARTEE. Four quarters.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Axilrod told me it was five.

MR. PARTEE. Including the fourth quarter?

MR. AXILROD. Including the fourth quarter of last year.

MR. PARTEE. And the fourth quarter this year?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He's projecting this quarter.

MR. AXILROD. Yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. It seems a fairly good guess, Chuck.

MR. FORD. Is that what he said, or did he say since 1960?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. He went backwards only with quarterly
figures. I used to watch velocity figures in the '50s and I will tell
you they were rising, because I used to write stories about the belief

-37-



11/16/82

that they had risen so much they had to stop rising. And they've
risen every year since then!

MR. GRAMLEY. You were sort of premature on your forecast!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That shows you how great an expert I am on
velocity! I remind you of Milton Friedman who, looking at a hundred
years, wrote his book and said that velocity will always fall. Money
is a luxury good and the most certain thing about monetary policy is
that velocity is going to fall. Like all scholars he has caught up.
I used to write internal memoranda; he had to get a book published.
By the time the book came out velocity was already rising and it has
risen every year since then, until last year. I think something is
going on there; that is the only point I'm making. I have no doubts
about that, but that doesn't tell you how long it will last.

In terms of the business situation, and putting the
international dimension into it--I'm not thinking just of the
financial strains, though they are very real--we have a world in
recession the way we have never had it before. And now we have
additional deflationary pressures rising in a developing world that
are very strong and certain. There's no escaping them. In talking to
my foreign central banking colleagues, which I have done a bit
recently, they are approaching the stage of being--if I wasn't going
to be recorded, I would say frantic. Discomfited, maybe, is the
better word. There is virtually a unanimous feeling that some efforts
ought to be marshaled to push--if that's not too strong a word--
interest rates 2 percentage points lower. I don't share that feeling,
but I cite it as a symptom of the atmosphere in the rest of the
industrialized world based upon their observations and their appraisal
of the prospects in their own economies. They may all be wrong. The
picture is very sluggish and I think the risks are on both sides, but
predominantly on the down side.

For better or worse, we're faced with an indefinite period
that we are not going to be able to figure out M1 just purely for
institutional reasons. I think there is a case to be made that it was
the most reliable variable in the past, but I don't think that case
can be made looking into the future simply because of the
institutional changes, even abstracting from the issue of whether
there has been any basic change in velocity on an unchanged concept of
M1. We are not going to have an unchanged concept of M1. I think we
have to hedge the risks a bit; it's a question of to what degree.

That brings us to the specifics. I think we have a choice,
given where the weight of opinion lies. Mr. Solomon long ago
suggested that we stick with the 9-1/2 percent [for M2 growth], which
is within the range that we had last time. We could eliminate the
8-1/2 percent side of it, if I followed him correctly. There's quite
a lot of feeling that we ought to reduce the borrowing level, starting
off anyway. That is a feeling I share and it is the principal hedge
that I would recommend.

MR. FORD. From what to what?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know where it is now, frankly, but
we have had various proposals: $150 million is the lowest one I see
in my notes; more people mentioned $200 or $250 million; and the

-38-



11/16/82

highest was $300 million among those who in general wanted to make it
a little lower. Some people may not want to make it lower.

MR. PARTEE. Could we ask where it is? What is the case?

MR. STERNLIGHT. The borrowing level now?

MR. PARTEE. Yes, abstracting from that--

MR. STERNLIGHT. This current week [we expect] $550 million
because we started out with $3 billion in borrowing on last Thursday.

MR. AXILROD. The last weekly number that we had that was
independent of this problem Peter mentioned was something like $366 or
$367 million. We never quite obtained that. Borrowing for the last
five weeks has run, in millions, $248, $405, $273, $263, and then $530
million last week, which was also influenced by that high Wednesday.

MR. PARTEE. Well, $200 million or $150 million would
certainly be lower.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no question about that. To put a
number on the table--it is around the midpoint of what a number of
people suggested and leans [in the direction favored by] those who
wanted to hedge the bets this way--I'll say $250 million.

MR. FORD. You're taking the alternative C growth [for M2] of
9-1/2 percent? Do you mean for October to December?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I assumed the 9-1/2 percent meant
September to December.

SPEAKER(?). Right.

MR. FORD. So you're on "B" for the growth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. For the lower--

MR. GRAMLEY. Were you thinking of retaining that statement
about precautionary demands for money? That would be a critical part
of the directive, I think, saying that expected growth in September
through December is at levels which might well imply the need to
change the nonborrowed reserve path fairly soon.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I can't find [my copy of] the directive.

MR. PARTEE. Well, of course, we're virtually unaffected
anyway by overshoots.

SPEAKER(?). Why not?

MR. PARTEE. The 2 percent rule.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is not true. We increased it--in a
muted way, I think it's fair to say--but we increased it from the way
we [started out].

MR. PARTEE. You say muted and I say virtually unaffected.



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, virtually unaffected pushed the
funds rate up and stopped the interest rate decline and reversed the
stock market.

MR. GRAMLEY. The market went down again today, I understand.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The stock market is way down today.

SPEAKER(?). It was against inflated expectations. But there
certainly has been a trend in recent weeks toward a firmer tone rather
than the reverse. It is quite noticeable in the market.

MS. TEETERS. What federal funds range do you get with the
$250 million?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, all those federal funds ranges
encompass anything I could see happening, so I don't feel terribly
sensitive to it. I'd say it's at least time to knock the 1/2 off the
10-1/2 percent.

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I thought so, too.

MR. GRAMLEY. And why not make 6 to 10?

MS. TEETERS. Yes, 6 to 10.

MR. GRAMLEY. So we're not narrowing the range still further.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I personally don't have any big problem
with that, but with the present situation we aren't going to get down
to 6 percent, given anything I see developing. Maybe we should, but
we aren't.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10
percent either.

MS. TEETERS. We don't want 10-1/2 percent.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. But we don't want to go up to 10
percent either. I don't think we're going to hit either of them.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're considerably closer to 10 percent
than we are [to 6 percent].

MR. PARTEE. Yes, I could imagine 10 percent, but 10-1/2

percent would be a shock to the market.

MR. FORD. 10-1/2 percent is where it is now, right?

SEVERAL. No, 9-1/2 percent.

MR. GRAMLEY. I know he means the [upper end of the] range.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Where the range is now.

MR. FORD. The present range is "B," right? So if we drop it
to 10 percent, that indicates a further loosening of policy in the
sense of where the band is.

-40-



11/16/82

MR. PARTEE. Very little.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The way we're operating now, we are
not going to hit either end of these ranges. So it's partially
psychological. I would assume that if the economy stays this
depressed and we saw the rate going up to the 10 percent area, the
Chairman would either feel he had enough leeway to make an adjustment
or he'd schedule a conference call.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I assume more specifically that the
funds rate is going to be within range of wherever the discount rate
is. What is going to happen--

MR. FORD. May we ask what your feeling is on the discount
rate? Should it be dropped another notch or left where it is?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Going back to what I said earlier, if I
were picking interest rates out of the air, I'd make them lower. So,
I have some predisposition in that direction. Whether we have the
stage set for it properly against all these other considerations, I
don't know. But I wouldn't let a good opportunity pass.

MR. GUFFEY. In that connection, I think the question is
whether we continue to do what we say we have done, which is to follow
the [market] rate down, or whether this is an appropriate time to
[lead] by moving the discount rate down.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Personally--I can't defend this very
strongly, but just as a matter of tactics--I'd rather have the
discount rate down and the borrowings higher, for any given
constellation of forces. I feel a little more comfortable when the
banks have to borrow a little.

MR. GUFFEY. If we had some assurance that there will be a
discount rate decrease, I would agree to a little higher borrowing
level for the intermeeting period.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The trouble with that is that it gets too
fancy and is hard to explain. We'd have to face the fact that we
would reduce the discount rate [without] a clear signal from the
market. But I wouldn't be unhappy to end up in that position somehow.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, I think what you're suggesting
is okay. I don't think the funds rate range makes much difference.
If we want to make the top side 10 percent, we could make it 7 to 10
percent or 6 to 10 percent. It's strictly psychological; it has no
operating significance at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think the crucial point is where we
start the borrowing. Frankly, I wouldn't put it above $250 million.
I wouldn't be unhappy to go lower than that, the way I see things.

MS. TEETERS. How much seasonal borrowing do we get on this,
Steve--about $50 million?

-41-



11/16/82

MR. AXILROD. It's running fairly low, Governor Teeters. We
have had $50, $77 and $90 million recently. It has been below $100
million for the last five or six weeks.

MS. TEETERS. And the extended borrowing isn't in that number
at all?

MR. AXILROD. No. That has risen a little; it's about $190
million.

MS. TEETERS. But that's not in the--

MR. AXILROD. It's not in this number, but the seasonal is.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I suppose I am affected by believing that
in the short run the economy is still declining and industrial
production is going to be down in November. Maybe I'm all wet there.

MR. KICHLINE. The way it looks now, yes. We have some
information on raw steel output, and auto assemblies are down. It
looks as if it's going to be a negative number.

MR. GRAMLEY. The other thing is, looking at the structure of
industrial output in October, there isn't any evidence that it is
consistent with an immediate turnaround. That is, one normally would
expect in an economy that is about to pull out of recession and
flatten out that production of materials will not go down as much as
final product. In this case what we saw was a flattening out of
materials production in the early summer and then it resumed [its
decline] again and is still going down rapidly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I really cannot over-emphasize the extent
to which my foreign brethren feel strongly about this. I don't care
how conservative the central banks are, they are all in that direction
and very strongly. I also do think that the current level of the
dollar is catastrophic. As surely as we are sitting here, it's not
only depressing the economy today but it is going to turn. We talk
about the kind of current account deficits that are projected. I find
them almost unbelievable because I don't know how we would finance
them. We are going to be in Mexico's situation. The implication is
that we are going to have a declining dollar and expect to raise $50
billion in capital abroad. Well, who is going to put money into the
dollar when they sense it is on a down trend?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Carter bonds. We made a lot of money
that way!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we can do the Carter bonds once the
dollar has dropped by 30 percent. That atmosphere is going to be
awful if it develops.

MR. CORRIGAN. What about the exchange rate situation?
Doesn't that situation give us a little more leeway in terms of being
able to do something directly with the discount rate, without having
to worry about finessing the market?

-42-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the discount rate were reduced, I think
we would have to explain it as a straightforward concern about the
economy and, in part, the dollar.

MR. GRAMLEY. Put more generally, the level of the exchange
rate gives us more freedom to do something with money supply, interest
rates, and so on without worrying that somehow it is going to have an
immediate inflationary or expansive impact. We are not getting a
symmetrical response to changes in interest rates. The movement
upward in interest rates carried with it a very substantial increase
in the exchange rate, so we had a lot of negative effects on exports
from that. The decline in interest rates, it seems to me, has not had
that effect. It's a lot less than the opposing effect on the up side.

MR. PARTEE. I think Paul is probably right that when it
starts to run, it's going to run pretty fast.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are not going to be left alone in any
interest rate decline that develops here. And, of course, that's one
of the reasons the exchange rate stays so high. I guess Ted or
somebody mentioned that there is--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. They are going to match it point for
point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And maybe more than that.

MR. MARTIN. They are holding their breath.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm repeating myself, but there is a deep
degree of depression and feeling of disturbance in every other
industrialized country.

MR. RICE. Do you think this proposal of $250 million on
borrowing and, say, a 7 to 10 percent funds rate band is consistent
with a decline in interest rates?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, it would take the edge off the federal
funds rate, presumably. It may not right away; we're going to publish
a high borrowing figure this week, but I presume the funds rate--

MR. MORRIS. It would take a cut in the discount rate,
wouldn't it, to do something?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, and I think this might be consistent
with the funds rate going slightly below the discount rate. It has
been below it for months. It does not imply a change from where
interest rates have been for the last month, in my opinion. That in
itself [would require] a reduction in the discount rate. Even then
I'm not sure it's a lot.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Short-term rates now generally are
working on the assumption of an 8-3/4 to 9 percent funds rate. They
did not align even with a slight upward movement. As I understand it,
at least from some of my banker friends, short-term rates are lower
than would be indicated by a 9-1/2 percent fed funds rate.

-43-



11/16/82

MR. RICE. Well, we would have to wait a while to reduce the
discount rate in this current market environment. Interest rates are
going the wrong way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we would tell them that we
don't like to see them going that way.

MR. RICE. That's why I think we have to do something here.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's a more difficult decision.

MR. RICE. We have to do something to nudge market rates down
and then we can reduce the discount rate.

MR. KEEHN. How about using the fed funds range of
alternative A the way it is written [in the Bluebook]?

MR. FORD. That puts me on the other side of the river.

MR. MARTIN. 6 to 9-1/2 percent?

MS. TEETERS. We could put it at 6 to 10 percent, which would
give us a 4-point range.

MR. CORRIGAN. There you are.

MR. GRAMLEY. That doesn't have any meaning.

MS. TEETERS. I know it doesn't.

MR. PARTEE. Well, it does have some demonstrable meaning; I
think 6 to 10 percent is okay.

MR. GRAMLEY. You mean when it's published.

MR. PARTEE. Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me sum up my own view another way. I
think this general pattern is acceptable. It is playing it very close
to the vest, considering what I see going on. The risks are
unbalanced but they are on both sides. The risk is that this is not
enough.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Or [the Board] could drop the
discount rate a whole point. I'm not recommending it; I'll be sending
in a 1/2 point recommendation this week. But there is just no more
room in this nonborrowed reserve path. There isn't any room to do
much more than what we are doing. If we go significantly below $250
million, that runs some serious risks that we could have a very screwy
market situation. We are better off with a move on the discount rate.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One way of looking at it, I think, is that
what we have been doing for some time is letting these aggregates run
a little high because we recognize that there are liquidity pressures
and we haven't wanted to move strongly against that. We haven't been
very forward in pushing them higher. If we really felt that liquidity
was changing and the market was terribly sour and it was going to last
for a while, we would take that additional step and push them higher.

-44



11/16/82

We haven't done that and I don't think what we're proposing does that;
one might argue that "A" verges on that. If it turns out that
velocity keeps declining, we should have done that.

MR. PARTEE. And we may need to do that, but it's premature.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Then we would really have a problem
communicating that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's easier to communicate the sourer the
economy, I can tell you that.

MR. GRAMLEY. I think the case for waiting was a saleable one
at midyear. But too much time has elapsed since then. I no longer
think it's saleable to say that we will wait to see whether or not
this velocity trend continues. It has been going on too long. So, I
think we've got to err on the side of setting specs that give us a
high probability that we will not see any upward movement of interest
rates and that the greater likelihood is that they are going to move
down. It's not guaranteed; one can't guarantee anything in this
world. But I'm afraid if we have another recurrence of the
disappointment that we have had with an economy not recovering, we're
going to see a souring of attitudes, and this economy is going to get
away from us. We then are going to have to take some very, very
strenuous action on both the fiscal and monetary sides to rescue it.
The international complications make this a profoundly different kind
of recession than we ever have had before in the postwar period.

MR. ROOS. If you count four or five months into the future,
I'll be fishing and you all will still be wrestling with this. But
let's assume that by forcing rates down a little you do achieve an
improvement in the economy and this stimulus starts causing interest
rates to rise next spring as this long-sought recovery is reaching
meaningful proportions. Yet money has grown so quickly that the
prospect of inflation is heightened. Are you all going to be willing
to apply the brakes at the time? If you don't apply the brakes at
that time, we're going to be right back into double-digit inflation
rates in a few years.

MR. MORRIS. Somehow, Larry, that scenario doesn't fly with
me. I don't think that's the situation we're in.

MR. GRAMLEY. I'd sure be a lot happier about applying the
brakes if the car were rolling rapidly down the hill than to roll it
backward down the hill.

MR. PARTEE. We'll think of you though, Larry.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't discount that [scenario] entirely.
It is complicated by the budgetary situation. I don't know that it
would happen as soon as this spring, but I think it is possible. As I
said before, we will not find this particular monetary growth
[pattern] again. I don't know what M1 is going to look like then.
I'm not sure we're going to find M2 all that rapid in those
circumstances, but we'll have to wait and see.

MR. CORRIGAN. But if we do something like setting borrowings
at $250 million and do whatever you want with the federal funds rate,

-45-



11/16/82

it seems to me that we have some reasonably high degree of assurance
that we're not going to see interest rates higher than they are now;
and depending upon finessing the market or [the Board's] willingness
to do something with the discount rate in any event, there is the
clear potential for lower rates. In the worst of conditions, [the
Board could] reduce the discount rate even if the fed funds rate is at
9-1/2 percent; [you would] just bite the bullet and do it. My
personal view is that the markets and everybody else would accept
that.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The markets would love it.

MR. CORRIGAN. But I don't see that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not so sure what would happen with
reducing the discount rate by 1/2 point. They have all been expecting
it and for that reason it may have very little impact.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. No, I'm not saying it will have much
impact, but if you don't do it--if you wait too long--there will
clearly be a backup in rates. If we actually wanted to move the bond
market and the stock market up--I'm not saying we should--then we'd
have to consider a one-point move. But I'm not recommending that. I
think, though, that you have to move 1/2 point.

MS. TEETERS. But 1/2 point doesn't have to be the end.
However it develops, we can move the discount rate down to 8-1/2
percent after a 2- or 3-week delay and it's still--

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. This is true. Judgments can be made
as we go along.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's just see where we stand.
Looking back at the directive, if I can find it, what I suggested and
others have suggested is to put in 9-1/2 percent [for M2], which is
within the range that we had but it looks a little easier. We can put
the funds range at 6 to 10 percent if that's where the--

MR. PARTEE. We aren't using a range, though, [for M2]?

MS. TEETERS. No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "around."

MR. PARTEE. [This draft] doesn't have "about" or "around"
9-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about that phrase, just in
terms of its internal consistency, "taking account of the desirability
of somewhat reduced pressures in private credit markets." I'm not
sure we're saying that this is going to produce in and of itself lower
interest rates. We might just leave that phrase out.

MR. PARTEE. I would be inclined to take it out because we
moved to the 9-1/2 percent on the M2 from 8-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent. We
have already taken account of it.

-46-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the private credit markets, as
distinct from the public credit markets, have improved during this
period. This great tiering and backing up tendency we had in those
markets is not evident today.

MR. WALLICH. I would like to see that phrase removed.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does this suit, as well as anything
is going to suit?

MR. BLACK. Could we ask Peter and Steve to tell us what they
think would happen to the fed funds rate with this kind of directive,
in the absence of a change in the discount rate?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I think $250 million on borrowing would tend
to produce a funds rate right around, or a shade below, the discount
rate.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. A shade below the present discount
rate.

MR. STERNLIGHT. Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. So, if [the Board] doesn't move the
discount rate, it won't go down to 9 percent; it will stay at around
9-1/4 to 9-3/8 percent.

MR. BLACK. You are saying we really have a money market
directive--a very tight money market directive, probably--if there is
no move on the discount rate.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think we'd have much scope for a
downward movement in the funds rate with a $250 million borrowing
level without a discount rate change.

MR. BALLES. Mr. Chairman, I have one other point to make on
this directive. I'm a little concerned about the phrase in the
opening paragraph that reads "the reinvestment of funds from maturing
all savers certificates and the public's response to the new account
directly competitive with the money market funds mandated by recent
legislation." The latter half of that statement really flies in the
face, I think, of what is said on page 7, paragraph 9 in the Bluebook.
It is made pretty clear in the next to the last sentence of that
paragraph--and I agree with what is said there--that the new money
market account will only have a small [quarterly] effect on M2 when it
becomes available in mid-December for the simple reason that it is not
going to be around long enough in the fourth quarter. I tried my hand
at writing a slightly different version of a directive. I don't know
whether this will help or hurt the cause. The bottom line is to take
out that phrase in the current proposed directive which reads "the
public's response to the new money market account competitive with
money market funds mandated by recent legislation." I agree it is
going to be a big problem when we get into the first quarter; I don't
think it's a problem for this quarter.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise a question. Why do we
need this paragraph at all now? We needed it the last time to explain

-47-



11/16/82

what we were doing. Would we lose anything by just dropping the whole
paragraph?

MR. AXILROD. No. The last sentence of paragraph 9 is our
feeling about it. We're not certain when we--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably we will say something
about this in the [policy record] discussion. But is there any
operative need to put it in the directive at this point?

MR. AXILROD. No, but I do think there is some uncertainty
related to both the all savers certificate and the new instrument
about what is going to happen in the interim, [which should be in the
record] for discussion purposes. I don't know where people are going
to store their money in anticipation of those things. But you don't
need it for operational purposes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only significance of taking it out--
maybe it is too much--is that it says "much less weight." The fact is
that it has some weight. If M1 had happened to be dropping off the
table in the last couple of weeks, we would have behaved somewhat
differently. If we leave it out completely, we lose any flavor of
that.

MR. BALLES. Yes.

MR. PARTEE. Well, I think we would have to explain why we
haven't specified it. That is, the earlier paragraph [on the
Committee's long-run objectives], which isn't here in the Bluebook,
talks about the Committee's expectations for M1 and M2 and so forth.
So we have to continue to say why it is that M1 is not figuring in
this instruction to the Manager.

MR. WALLICH. That's very important, because otherwise we are
in fact implicitly still giving weight to M1.

MS. TEETERS. It also has the advantage of showing that we
were right for a change.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm not quite sure what your particular
suggestion is, John.

MR. PARTEE. This talks about M1, John. It seems to me that
you were talking about M2.

MR. BALLES. Well, I was talking about both. I happen to
have some copies of this here for distribution. Maybe the easiest
way, if it could be helpful, is to distribute them. The main burden
of the message is that it backs away a little from what we said last
time. There is still uncertainty about M1, but not as much as last
time. The opening sentence is that the specification and behavior of
M1 over the balance of the year are subject to fewer uncertainties now
than at the last meeting in October. You may not agree with that, but
that happens to be my view.

SEVERAL. No way!

-48-



11/16/82

MR. GRAMLEY. I don't want to give any kind of
[unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we leave it the way it is now and
just say the difficulties of interpretation of M1 continue to suggest
that less weight--I don't care whether we say "much less" or "less
than usual"--is being placed on movements in that aggregate during the
current quarter. And we can forget about that M2 sentence, if that's
troublesome.

MR. BALLES. I ended up the first paragraph by saying:
"Nevertheless, the difficulty of interpretation of M1 still suggests
that less than usual weight be placed on movements in that aggregate
and more than usual weight be placed on M2 during the current
quarter." In order not to scare the heck out of everybody, I was
wondering what we would really tolerate in M1. In the second
paragraph, after noting whatever range we decide would be appropriate
for M2 and M3, I'm toying with the idea of a proviso clause for M1--
"provided that M1 does not exceed x percent over the same period."

MR. PARTEE. 20 percent!

MR. BALLES. Well, you name it.

MR. GRAMLEY. That's just not the way to go now. Later,
maybe. We just have not had the uncertainties clarified [enough to
determine] that figure.

MR. FORD. Paul, this really raises the question I wanted to
ask, which is based on your perception of the usefulness of M1. I
have the feeling that in your mind M1 is permanently [distorted],
especially in light of what the DIDC is doing [and] the all savers
certificates. If the consensus of the Committee is that M1 will never
be used again, or at least not in the foreseeable future, then I think
we ought to come out and say it and see what happens.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's a bit of an overstatement of
my feelings at the moment. I'm not saying never; never is much too
long a period. The question is how soon we are going to be able to
make some sense out of it, which is really the subject of this paper
we are going to get next time. I wouldn't be too sweeping about any
judgment until we have had a chance to consider that explicitly.

MR. PARTEE. Well, of course in January we have to specify
aggregates ranges, and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I know. What I'm concerned about is
what we specify next year, because I anticipate that probably by some
time next year we will have full interest payments on transaction
accounts at least of individuals. I think we are hanging by a thread,
frankly, in terms of having reserve requirements on individual
transaction accounts at this point. The new account is so close to it
that I can see the lobbyists saying we have this account, which is
practically a transaction account without reserve requirements, and
you can't go back and put reserve requirements on something that is
only marginally different from what Congress just told you to give us
without a reserve requirement.

-49-



11/16/82

MR. FORD. Why don't you change the reserve requirements from
1 percent on transactions to one that they allow? When you get to 12
percent--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This new account, depending on how it's
developed, is going to be so close to a transaction account that maybe
we ought to put it in M1.

MR. PARTEE. We'd get some phenomenal annual growth rates--a
thousand percent!

MR. CORRIGAN. That will occur with reserves declining.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. That would be quite impressive,
though, wouldn't it--having a component in M1 that doesn't have any
reserve requirements?

MR. MORRIS. When it reaches maturity in 7-1/2 years then we
could do it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would be inclined, in the interest of
completing this [discussion], to modify this language to a more
minimal degree. I'd say "considerable" or something like that instead
of "unusually great". The second comment is not a sentence is it?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. The dash is left in.

MR. PARTEE. After circumstances.

MR. GRAMLEY. Two dashes.

MR. FORD. Are we looking at John's [version]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at the present one.

MR. AXILROD. I guess there are special circumstances in
connection with--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have done a great sample of two people
who had all savers certificates. I was not making the survey, but
much to my surprise in my sample of two both put the funds in demand
deposits and still have it there. One of them is my wife. The other
is a distinguished ex-member of the Federal Reserve Board.

MR. BLACK. Not even in NOW accounts, Mr. Chairman?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. I don't want to nit-pick, but I don't
see the point of deleting the words "much less than usual weight," as
suggested because the Fed watchers are going to wonder what that
means. They will wonder if that means we're giving it somewhat more
emphasis now. Why don't we just leave it alone the way it was?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have it left alone in my present
version. All I have is "Specification of the behavior of M1 over the
balance of the year remains subject to considerable uncertainty." I
think that's singular--["uncertainty" rather than "uncertainties"].

"Substantial uncertainty," I think.

-50-

MR. PARTEE.



11/16/82

MR. WALLICH. I think we should say "continues to be" to
refer back to what we said earlier.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It says "remains." "Subject to
substantial" is it?

MR. PARTEE. "Considerable" seems rather [unintelligible]
compared with "unusual."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "...substantial uncertainty because of
special circumstances in connection with the reinvestment of funds
from maturing all savers certificates and the public's response to new
accounts directly competitive with money market funds mandated by
recent legislation. The probable difficulties in interpretation of M1
continue to suggest that much less than usual weight be placed...."

MR. PARTEE. And then drop the last sentence.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes.

MR. ALTMANN. Are you leaving "probable" in?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I meant to leave out "probable."
Well, unless there are some other proposals on main points, we are
talking about 9-1/2 percent, 6 to 10 percent, and $250 million. Any
comments? If not, we will vote.

MR. ALTMANN.
Chairman Volcker Yes
Vice Chairman Solomon Yes
President Balles Yes
President Black Yes
President Ford No
Governor Gramley Yes
President Horn Yes
Governor Martin Yes
Governor Partee Yes
Governor Rice Yes
Governor Teeters Yes
Governor Wallich Yes

Eleven for, one against.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay. I have a few things I have to do.
We have to discuss a couple of things.

MR. ROOS. Mr. Chairman, may I just ask one question? Do we
accept that the ground rules for this meeting are that we don't
discuss even with our senior economists what we have done?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I guess we better discuss that while we
are in this limited session. It occurs to me that I have a speech to
give tonight, unfortunately. Let me just read what I have here; I
don't know whether I have to alter anything. Frankly, I think we
ought to say something; I don't know if we have to, but this is how I
started it:

-51-



11/16/82

As you know, most of the monetary and credit
aggregates that the markets watch so closely are
running somewhat above the targets we set for
ourselves at the start of the year. So far as M1
is concerned, the data plainly came to be distorted
by institutional change--particularly in October by
the flow of funds into checking accounts....
Prospectively, the introduction of new forms of
transaction or quasi-transaction accounts is likely
to distort the figures further, although the
direction of impact is less evident. In the
circumstances we have had little alternative but to
attach much less weight to that aggregate in
guiding the provision of reserves until the
institutional changes settle down.

More generally, current developments with respect
to the growth of money and credit have had to be
interpreted in the light of all the evidence we can
gather with respect to the economy, price
developments, interest rates, and financial
pressures. Taken together the evidence is strong
that the desire for liquidity has strengthened
appreciably this year, as sometimes happens in
periods of exceptional economic uncertainty. The
turnover or velocity of M1, for instance, has
declined appreciably this year instead of trending
upward, as has been the pattern throughout the
postwar period. M2 velocity--generally stable in
most recent years--has declined even more sharply.
In all these circumstances, the Federal Open Market
Committee remains willing for a time--as we
indicated at midyear--to tolerate monetary
expansion at a somewhat higher rate than the
targeted annual rate. That approach, in the light
of the evidence of exceptionally strong liquidity
demands, should in no way be interpreted as a lack
of continuing concern about inflation--and happily
I don't believe it has been so interpreted by the
markets. The fact is that, with velocity patterns
obviously shifting at least for a time, rigid
pursuit of the targets would have the practical
effect of a more restrictive policy than intended
when those targets were set out. It's not without
relevance, in that connection, to note that growth
in bank credit, or private credit generally, has
been relatively limited this year, tending to
confirm that the greater liquidity provided has not
spilled over into inflationary private credit
expansion.

-52-



11/16/82

What recent developments do emphasize is that, in a
time of rapid institutional economic change, we
must be wary of highly simplified rules in the
conduct of policy. That is why we have always
looked to a variety of monetary and credit
"targets" and retained elements of flexibility and
judgment in pursuing those targets.

What we do not have the flexibility to do is to
abandon broad guidelines for monetary and credit
growth as the means of judging policy over a period
of time. The danger of creating excess liquidity
is not so much immediate when there is so much
surplus capacity and unemployment, but rather when
the economy begins to regain forward momentum.
That is why we must continuously balance the need
to meet liquidity needs today against the risks of
building in fresh impetus to inflation tomorrow.

Then the speech goes on to talk about the budget imbalance.

MR. PARTEE. That's fine.

MR. ROOS. I don't mean to be a broken record, but I think
it's important that we have uniformity in what we say or do not say to
our own immediate, fairly eminent, associates such as research
directors. Are we all going to talk about the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me talk about the public side
first. What is distressing about this to me is that it obviously
affected the markets and affected policy. Maybe we came out of it all
right and maybe we didn't; I don't know. But it certainly gave rise
to more dangers about misinterpretation of our intentions than I had
bargained for. I might also say that we had a leak--and maybe more
than one--about the Greenbook, as you know. I don't know whether it
was from the Administration or the Federal Reserve. I have heard all
sorts of allegations from the market--they may be without substance,
but it worries me every time I hear this--that there has been an
occasional leak of an M2 figure or an M1 figure, or whatever. I hope
that is wrong, but it makes me uneasy when I hear about it. What
worries me, just looking ahead, is this lack of discipline--if I can
put it that way. It's like the vultures going after carrion. Every
reporter in the world is challenged to make his own story, and the
reporters who may have been involved the first time are all the more
challenged to keep it up. I think there is a tendency on the part of
any organization, for people to say "Damn it! If somebody else is
leaking, I'm going to talk to a reporter, too, and get my story out."
Unless this is stopped, it's just going to cut us up.

I am convinced that in a way it enormously complicates the
policy problem because so much of policy is what people think it is or
think our attitude is over a period of time as opposed to what we do.

-53-



11/16/82

This whole situation is intolerable to me. This organization, above
all others in Washington--I used to think the Treasury was this way,
but certainly do not now--does not leak. And I think it has been to
our advantage to have that be both the impression and the reality. It
has enormously increased our credibility, the credibility of official
statements over the years, and the credibility of policy. I don't see
any way we can operate other than on that presumption. We are dealing
with a Committee; we are dealing with a lot of people. We can't have
a lie detector at the door coming in or out of the office. We
ultimately have to do what is right because there is a consensus that
that is right and an understanding of what the rules are--an
understanding of the people around the table and our associates.
Frankly, I think we perhaps should tighten up the distribution of some
of the materials--to go to your point--partly as a reminder of the
sensitivity of this business. And we will be proposing some changes
in that connection. Joe Coyne might just talk a minute about his
understanding of the rules and then we'll have a more general
discussion of this or of any ideas anybody else might have.

MR. COYNE. To be brief, my understanding is that the policy
record, of course, comes out the Friday after the following meeting,
and what that means is that we do not talk about what happened at that
[earlier] meeting until that time. There are very, very, few
exceptions to that. We can say we had a meeting; we can give the
starting time and the closing time, and the attendance. And that's
it. That has been my understanding since the Committee adopted the
rules.

MR. WALLICH. That includes telephone meetings?

MR. COYNE. No, we do not mention telephone meetings until
they are reported in the policy record. That is only for our face-to-
face meetings.

MS. TEETERS. This is to reporters, Joe? This doesn't apply,
say, if we are talking to the chief economist at a Reserve Bank?

MR. COYNE. This is to the outside world.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We are now talking I think about the
outside world.

MR. COYNE. Yes, anybody in the outside world.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What I think I am bound to suggest at the
moment is that we just don't talk to reporters for some interval after
the meeting, however innocuously. The Washington Post this morning
had a comment attributed to a Federal Reserve source. It was not the
wildest thing in the world, obviously.

MS. TEETERS. It was just "a source"? It didn't say--

-54-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, no. There was one comment that said
"a Federal Reserve source." And it was the kind of comment somebody
could make. The article is a little odd because it makes it sound as
if the Federal Open Market Committee sets the discount rate. It said
some Federal Reserve source said the option was between blank and
blank or something. In the present environment even that kind of
comment just feeds this atmosphere. I think it's fairly simple for
us, let's say in the first week, not to talk to reporters. People
talk to reporters once in a while, and it has to be done, I suppose.
But it doesn't have to be done that first week. We typically meet on
a Tuesday; it doesn't have to be done during the course of that week.

MR. COYNE. If I might, Mr. Chairman--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just to repeat the obvious: You could
make a comment that seems pretty innocuous to you, and the reporter
finds three more people to make a comment that is pretty innocuous to
them. And then if he is any good and knows what the issues are, he
begins putting together a story which may be partly right, as that one
in The Washington Post was; but the total essence of the article I
think was substantially misleading. And that's where we are going to
get torn apart even with the most innocent of motives.

MS. TEETERS. Mr. Chairman, I presume we'll talk about this
after lunch, but we could finesse the whole issue by releasing [the
directive] right after the meeting, [as I proposed in a recent
memorandum to you, which I also sent to all Committee members and
other Reserve Bank Presidents].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is something I want to talk about
during lunch or whatever, but let's assume that is not going to
happen.

MR. PARTEE. It may be time to do it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't mean that. Does anybody
else have any [comments]?

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Did Joe finish?

MR. PARTEE. A blackout of the press is a little difficult.

MR. COYNE. About the points the Chairman made, a lot of
reporters will do a round robin and call as many people as they can
and compare answers.

MR. FORD. May I ask this? My feeling about this has been
that we don't discuss it with outsiders, as you suggested, but that
[is] the role of a Federal Reserve official, a senior Federal Reserve
official especially, giving you the first shot at talking. For
instance, the last time you should have had the first shot at that

-55-



11/16/82

meeting down at the Greenbrier. Now you are telling us you are going
to do it tonight. But after that--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. These are very vague comments as you
heard.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. We should be guided, no matter how we
feel individually, by the line that you are expressing. Basically, in
a polar case there are two choices: Either we refer all calls to you
or we make a best faith effort to state what the official line is,
based on the way you interpreted it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, we are talking about a specific
decision at a specific meeting. Obviously you have to talk about the
general policy line, so to speak. That's quite a different category.
But you have to be careful about it. There is a real distinction
between that general policy line and this--what the argument was at
the Committee meeting, with views attached to individuals. The most
damaging thing is to say "This is what we really meant or somebody
really meant..." and getting into that kind of thing.

MR. ROOS. I think we have a potential problem, though, with
our economists, some of whom are rather like prima donnas who have
their noses out of joint by being expelled--correctly, I agree with
you--from this meeting. And unless there is some agreed upon way of
handling that, one of those fellows will go and tell somebody that the
gag rule is on. I'm not disagreeing, Paul, with anything you have
said, but I'd just like to get some agreement on this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's certainly a relevant question.
You obviously have to talk to your senior people. I guess we have to
leave it to you to talk with discretion and convey to them certainly
the essence of the message that is more or less the common ground
here. I would talk with each of those people specifically about this
problem. Make sure they understand it. And if you are satisfied they
understand it, you obviously have to talk about the policy decisions.
I think you could use a certain amount of discretion in [not
providing] blow-by-blow accounts, which are inevitably distorted.
Everybody goes out of the meeting with a different impression of what
was said or even what was decided in some sense except to the extent
that it is written down. And people interpret every comment in the
light of what they think; in some instances it may be quite different
from what the fellow talking thought he was saying. And it might get
dangerous when this kind of stuff gets talked about. I hope that we
can get away from [attendance at] these sessions being as narrow as it
was [today]. But maybe we can have it someplace in between for a
while.

MR. FORD. If one is on the [morning] call and can't share
[the policy decision] with our [appropriate senior staff], whoever
that is, I don't see how we can have a meaningful thing to say other
than to listen to the bell ring on the call. My people go to a lot of

-56-



11/16/82

trouble to keep track of your procedures. As I understand it, if we
are on the call, we are supposed to be a representative of the group;
we do not reflect our own views but whether we think the policy is
being instituted in accordance with whatever the decision was. To do
that we need somebody to try to track at least roughly how the
calculations and decisions are made.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think your senior people have to know
about the mechanics of the decision and the essence of the decision.

VICE CHAIRMAN SOLOMON. Well, what about next time? Are you
going to settle that now, or are you going to [wait]?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would welcome any suggestions that you
have. Let's not deal with them at the moment, but you can contact me
later. We'll pick up this other issue later. Let's go eat.

[Lunch recess]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. [Unintelligible] tell it to me with
enthusiasm and let me just give you one point that may or may not be
in this memorandum. [Secretary's note: A copy of the memorandum,
"Immediate Release of FOMC Decisions: Pros and Cons," from Messrs.
Axilrod and Sternlight and dated November 12, 1982 has been placed in
the Committtee's files.] I can understand an argument that the way
the directives have been written it would be much less of a problem
than in other instances. But once that precedent is set, whatever
operating technique we use, whatever kind of directive we use, we're
stuck with it, I think, forever. If we really were operating as we
used to on an interest rate target and we announced a different
interest rate every month--in effect came out of the meeting and
announced an interest rate--we would then be stuck with it and we
couldn't change it without a subsequent public announcement. Then I
think we would be in great trouble. That's just one other extreme
form. When we are giving a directive of the sort that we've been
using, it doesn't have quite the immediate interest rate implications;
it doesn't freeze us in quite the same way. But it does require that
every time we have a special meeting in which a decision is made--
however much of an emergency the situation is--we would have to put
something out right away. And it might be exceedingly inconvenient.

MS. TEETERS. I don't think that's necessarily so. I'd say
two things, Paul. If we have to have telephone conference meetings or
emergency meetings, I don't think we have to announce them. The
[dates of] FOMC meetings are public knowledge. And when we were
operating under an interest rate target, the market usually found it
out by noon the next day. What we had done was not a secret at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think they found out; they obviously
groped for it. But those [directives] were not worded in such a way
as to [suggest that we would] stay there until the next meeting.
There were certain criteria under which we could change. It wasn't



11/16/82

that the interest rates changed; they changed very little typically.
But there were changes during the period which the market always was
searching out.

MS. TEETERS. Well, I already have a call from The New York
Times.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's great! Everybody just has to
stay in this room and go three days without any [unintelligible].
We have a bathroom facility right across the hall!

MR. BALLES. And meanwhile all the telephones in the building
are tapped!

MR. BLACK. Get me another sandwich, please!

MS. TEETERS. I honestly don't think that [immediate release
of our decisions] will do any harm. It would solve the problem of
leaks. And with a group even as large as this one--and the group was
cut down from what it was--the idea that we can keep something a
secret for seven or six-and-a-half weeks is really a big presumption,
it seems to me. The way it's working now, if we do have these leaks--
and there will be speculation, considering all the attention that has
been given to it--the speculation may finally come down to a consensus
of speculation as to what we did or didn't do. In effect, we're
giving an advantage to the people who have a little inside knowledge
instead of making it available to the public generally. And I think
we're better off, even if we want to change the way we write the
directive, if we make it publicly available. That doesn't mean that
we are frozen into it. We can change our mind. We don't necessarily
have to announce those changes in our mind. I think basically the
public has a right to as much information as they can [receive] at
this point. I don't think the leaks are really going to disappear,
Paul. I think that you're going to get caught as I once did.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If they don't, I'll disappear soon!

MS. TEETERS. Well, one gets cornered in an odd way. I once
got caught--not here--but something got partially leaked and a
reporter called me up and said "X happened." And I said "No, it was
X+1," and I immediately realized that I'd done the wrong thing. If we
have this speculation out there, we're going to get these wrong
stories. And the temptation then becomes very great on people to
correct those wrong stories.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct.

MS. TEETERS. We announce discount rate changes; we announce
changes in reserve requirements because we have to. I don't see that
this is greatly different from that. Under interest rate targeting
they found out pretty well where we were. I think they have correctly
interpreted what we've changed to this time around, with some help.

-58-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is no
leaks.

MS. TEETERS. I have heard

outside the System.

MR. BOEHNE. I have an open mind on the issue of releasing
the directive. If it were up to me, I'm not sure how I would come
down. But I do have a question. Suppose the directive that the
Committee just approved were released this afternoon. What would that
really tell the market? It says that the M2 [growth consistent with
our objectives] is around 9-1/2 percent; there may be a little message
there. It says that the funds rate range is 6 to 10 percent. And
then it has a lot of other gobbledygook that could mean a lot of
different things. Maybe somebody could just answer my question.
Suppose the directive were released this afternoon. What kind of
information would that really convey? Or would there just be
increased speculation on what that directive really means in an
operational sense? How much would we have bought in terms of
satisfying the public's and the press's appetite for knowledge about
what we're doing?

MR. CORRIGAN. I think one thing we would buy is inquiries
for more information.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think you have [a point]--a lot more.

MR. CORRIGAN. If they see the directive, they are going to
say: "Well, I want to see the forecast that it is based on and all
the rest of it."

MR. MORRIS. What if we were in a situation where the economy
had picked up for a while? If we had announced a 6 to 10 percent
funds rate range after one meeting and we announced immediately after
the next one that our range was now 8 to 13 percent, what sort of
market reaction would you expect in that kind of situation?

MR. PARTEE. Very little trading below 8 percent.

MR. FORD. You're positing that the band would be widened at
both ends.

-59-



11/16/82

MR. PARTEE. He said 8 to 13 percent.

MR. BOEHNE. I suspect what the Committee would do is that it
would gravitate toward even more vague directives.

MR. MORRIS. Precisely.

MR. BOEHNE. And then there would be a hidden meaning, which
we'd all understand but the directive that we'd publish would give us
so much flexibility that we could drive a truck through it a couple of
times.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Again, I think it would invite a lot of
probing at the bottom [to determine] what the real decision was.

MR. BOEHNE. Yes, that's the question I'm asking.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I share your instinct.

MR. RICE. Won't they do that now?

MR. BOYKIN. In fairness to Nancy, her argument, though, is
that publication might tend to cause something that we were trying to
make happen anyway happen just a little sooner.

MR. GRAMLEY. If it happened in a nice smooth fashion, that
would be all right. I would not worry much about immediate release if
I were quite sure we were going to stay with the operating procedures
we now have. But we were talking earlier today about what will happen
if [banks] begin to [pay] interest on all types of money. And I think
the answer to that is that we would have the same kind of problem
targeting on M2 that we now have on M1. It would make it very, very
difficult to do. And we may end up deciding that, in fact, what we
have to do is target on interest rates. And if we start targeting on
interest rates and say that this month, by golly, our interest rate
target is 1 percentage point lower, the markets are going to go
absolutely bananas. And I'm not sure that's what we want.

MR. PARTEE. I didn't think you'd ever say that, Lyle.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the whole problem would be that we would
come up with a bunch of mush that could mean anything.

MR. MORRIS. And we'd get to the point where we were back in
the Martin years.

MR. PARTEE. If we got back to an interest rate target and we
couldn't put the target in the directive, we wouldn't be saying much.
But that's a big if. It seems to me very likely that we'll always
have some proviso on interest rate movements. I certainly am totally
disenchanted about interest rate forecasting and I don't think I'll
ever return to it. But I think we'd have some proviso. And it would

-60-



11/16/82

be measured relative to some objective performance indicator--maybe
not money or maybe not even credit, Frank, but some objective
indicator.

MR. MORRIS. If you eliminate both of those, you don't have
an awful lot left!

MR. PARTEE. You have the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Congress would just tell us to target
interest rates also.

MS. TEETERS. I can't foresee that we're going to make any
radical change, even as much as 2 or 3 percentage points, at any given
meeting. Even when we targeted interest rates, I think the most we
ever moved [the funds rate] was 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point. [Under
current procedures] we've been moving it a percentage point in a 400
basis point range. We gradually move them up and down; I don't see
that we're going to get major market shocks or anything of that sort.
We did have one major market shock and that occurred when we changed
to reserve targeting and a [wide] band on the interest rate target.
And the market survived; it was shocked but it did survive. And then
it settled down within the space of about a week. So, I don't see
that we would be giving away that much information.

MR. MORRIS. But the kind of problem I'm concerned about is
this: Let's say that we're in a period of uncertainty.

MS. TEETERS. We always are.

MR. MORRIS. Well, suppose we think that whatever we are
targeting on is going to strengthen greatly between meetings, but
we're not sure. So, we give the Manager a wide funds range in which
to operate and he is supposed to use that range if the target shows
great strength and not use it if it doesn't. In that case we would be
publishing a much higher upper limit, and the market would be likely
to move quickly toward that limit. Then if the events did not occur
to justify the move, the Manager would not move the funds rate. Then
the market would be stuck up here, and it would have to come down
again. This would produce increased instability in the money market.

MS. TEETERS. There couldn't be much more instability than we
have right now.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I tend to agree with that, but I retain
this great hope that it is going to settle down some day.

MR. BLACK. If we ever get into contemporaneous accounting
and we really are targeting total reserves and controlling total
reserves--



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we have any reserves left at that
point!

MR. BLACK. That's an "if." If we have a very wide federal
funds rate range, I wouldn't worry about telling the market except for
one thing, and I think that's the first argument against it. I'm very
sympathetic to what Nancy says, but [I don't like] the idea of
political pressure being exerted upon the Committee to change before
the policy is fully implemented. And asking anyone who has dissented
to justify his dissent when there's [as yet] no [written] explanation
as to why he or she dissented in that directive, I think would be very
divisive. That is what bothers me, although all my predilections, of
course, are for releasing it because I hope we do get to that kind of
total reserve targeting some day.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me point out that we live in a world,
a Washington world anyway, in which somebody has to trot up and
testify about last month's consumer price index, which has no policy
content at all. If we are going to announce our decisions after a
Federal Open Market Committee meeting, I don't think it would be very
long before we had a congressional hearing scheduled that afternoon.

MR. BLACK. That's what really worries me. That's the very
point that tips me against releasing it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. John Balles.

MR. BALLES. If I could respond first to Bob's concern: If I
dissent or somebody else dissents, that would come out immediately
before the explanation came out as to why others had voted the other
way. The way our minutes of action come out now--if we can keep them
in that abbreviated form, not citing individual views--I could see the
directive plus those minutes of actions being published on very short
notice. And in my view--you might not agree--that would take care of
the particular problem you were mentioning.

MR. BLACK. Yes, that would be a lot better.

MR. BALLES. To return to the various points that Nancy is
making: I sent around a memo generally supporting her proposal, as
you may remember. It has occurred to me that there is another reason
for supporting immediate release, but originally I was reluctant to
put it in writing. I'm even reluctant to mention it now, but I'm
going to nevertheless. It is bad enough to have leaks of the type we
had, say, in The Washington Post on October 8, but even worse in my
opinion is the risk of a leak we may never hear about. And that is
somebody with access to our policy record feeding it to a trader, an
investor, or whatever. If anything like that ever happened and was
disclosed, that would be such a major black eye to us that it would
make the leaks recently pale by comparison.

-62-



11/16/82

MR. GRAMLEY. When that sort of thing has happened with
government statistics, though, the word gets around. The word gets
around because it has a market effect and other people in the markets
begin to learn about it and they call in. I agree with you that it
would be a terrible black eye. But as far as I know, there is no
reason to think that that would ever happen.

MR. BALLES. I hope you're right, Lyle. I'm not all that
positive myself. For example, though I don't have all the numbers
with me--I wish I'd brought them--and I'm not sure how much they would
prove implicitly what happened, my recollection is that the very day
after our last FOMC meeting, Wednesday, October 6th, there was a major
rise in bond prices and stock prices.

MR. PARTEE. Starting at 3 p.m. in the afternoon.

MR. BALLES. Yes, exactly.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right.

MR. BALLES. And I'm adding 2 and 2 and getting 4.

MR. MORRIS. There was a statement by the Secretary of the
Treasury on Wednesday.

MR. PARTEE. No, that was Thursday.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You're talking about Wednesday?

MR. BALLES. Yes, sir.

MR. PARTEE. The very next day, we had an afternoon rally.
In fact, I went around to Joe Coyne and said "What's up?"

MR. COYNE. The Secretary of the Treasury's comments were on
Wednesday morning.

SPEAKER(?). Yes, they were.

MR. MORRIS. Wednesday morning they were on the telerate.

MR. RICE. Peter, isn't it true that you get calls from
people in the market saying that they know that other people have
gotten privileged information?

MR. STERNLIGHT. We sometimes get calls that some statistical
release from Commerce or somewhere is out early, yes.

MR. GRAMLEY. That is the sort of thing I was referring to.
When we have heard that, we've typically heard back from the market as
to what the information is all about and where it probably came from.

-63-



11/16/82

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, these are the suspicions that I've
had reported to me recently, more or less casually, but they are
worrisome. They are statistical, such as what the money figures are
going to be tomorrow. The last one was what the M2 figure was going
to be. Just to clarify what I know about this last episode: I had
breakfast with the Secretary of the Treasury the morning after the
meeting, as I do every week. The only thing I told him concerning
what we had discussed was that we were going to put a lot less weight
on M1 because of all the problems he knew about. We had a very short,
two-minute or so discussion; he knew what the problem was. I also
said I was going to explain this to the public on Friday because I
would be going to the Business Council and it would be a good
opportunity to put it in the right perspective. Two hours later, it's
on the tape, because he literally walked out of that breakfast and
went to a meeting of the dealer bank association--of all things, a
public meeting--and said something about it. He said something vague
about it when he was asked a question. What he said was accurate.
But there it was. And then he didn't say anything else. Then Ken
Bacon was snooping around. I don't know, but Joe Coyne's story is
that Ken Bacon was speculating on this privately, as many of these
things go, and assumed that we might have to come to that decision.
It got confirmed by what the Secretary of the Treasury said and he ran
with the story. He may not have had any other leak. The article was
pretty accurate except for the headline, which said the Federal
Reserve was easing or something. That wasn't the point. That is
obviously not what I wanted to say. But except for that first
sentence, it was a pretty accurate story. My speculation is that one
reporter got something in the paper, which wasn't itself all that
damaging, and it sent the other bloodhounds on the scent. They then
got more substantive comments directly, obviously, out of the Federal
Reserve. And that was the damaging thing, really. I was upset enough
about the Secretary of the Treasury's performance and that story, but
the really damaging policy story was the one the next day, which
obviously did come from the Federal Reserve. I think it's a perfect
example of how one leak generates another.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's the problem. In terms of the argument
that releasing the directive would take care of the leak problem, I'm
concerned that it will work the other way. If we put out the
directive on the day of the meeting, in the form in which it is now
written, we inevitably are going to get reporters snooping around
asking "What does this really mean?" and trying to get
interpretations. And we will end up with more confusion and not less.

MR. BALLES. Not if we don't talk to them.

MS. TEETERS. That's right. We don't have to take their
calls.

MR. CORRIGAN. That's easy to say. But over a period of
time--say we've put an absolute restriction on talking to the press
for a week or something like that--that doesn't solve the problem.



11/16/82

MS. TEETERS. It would solve the problem though, Jerry,
because by Friday it's a non-story.

MR. CORRIGAN. I don't know.

MR. MARTIN. No, anything about the Fed is a continuing
story. This is a continuing saga of the mysterious--

MR. FORD. Wait a minute. I have to defend Nancy on this.
The logic of it has to be that at the end of a month--with our next
meeting only being a month away--they will have it. But somewhere
between releasing it the same day and after one month, it becomes a
non-story. That is witnessed by the fact that we usually don't get
stories about the minutes when we release them.

MR. MARTIN. Yes, but by that time we've had another meeting.

MR. PARTEE. Our theory on the [release date], though, Bill,
is that the directive is no longer current. We don't release it until
after the next meeting has occurred and there is another directive.

MR. CORRIGAN. Until we've had another meeting.

MR. PARTEE. So that's an old directive.

MR. GRAMLEY. Well, the fact that somebody got some
information and put it in the press did not reduce interest in the
question of what was going on. It intensified it enormously. I think
if we release the directive, which has in it some rather mysterious
language about M2 and the fed funds rate ranges, and the language is
changed a little--if instead of "is" it says "remains" and "unusually
great" becomes "substantial"--then the phones will begin to ring off
the wall. People will ask: "What does this mean? Did you guys cave
in or not?" It just isn't going to change that problem at all.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is a growth rate figure there of x,
so they will look at every figure. They will see if we are above or
below X and ask if we are going to tighten up next week or three days
from now or, if not, why not? That's what the directive says.

MS. TEETERS. They do it anyway.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They do it less, surely, now.

MR. GUFFEY. I don't agree with those who say that releasing
the directive will avoid the leaks. I agree with those who say that
it might even increase speculation. But I'm a bit troubled with the
proposal that we release the directive early, based upon the fact that
we think we had a leak after the last meeting. I don't think that we
could control leaks by releasing the directive immediately after a
meeting. I think the issue that has given rise to the discussion
today can't be cured by an early release. I'd also add a detail:

-65-



11/16/82

That we don't know how we are going to operate in the future and how
that directive might look and how we might have to move one way or the
other in the intermeeting period. As a result of that, it seems to me
to be paramount that we maintain that kind of flexibility. If we
can't control the leak problem by early release, then I would adopt a
motto that has been used by others in the past and that is "If it
ain't broke, don't fix it." I would continue to do what we are doing,
since we can't control the leak problem in my view, and I would not
opt for early release.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hope we can control the leak problem.
We may not control it by that device, and it may aggravate it, but
this institution has had a very good record on not leaking.

MR. GUFFEY. I'm just making the point that I don't think we
would cure it by early release--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I just wanted to clarify that.

MR. GUFFEY. --so why try to cure something we can't cure?

MS. TEETERS. But this is the second one this year. There
was a leak between the end of June and the 20th of July on the
Humphrey-Hawkins report. This is the second time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is right.

MR. FORD. I hear rumors--I don't know because I wasn't here
--that we've had sporadic leaks over the years. You may be right that
we have fewer leaks than, say, Treasury, but haven't we had problems
with leaks of this type for many years?

MR. PARTEE. Very occasionally. It has been very rare.

MR. FORD. Are you saying there has never been a leak until
the last two times?

MR. PARTEE. No, there have been--

MR. GUFFEY. There have been a lot of other instances. I
remember when Dr. Burns was Chairman that we did have a leak or a
suspected leak, and certain members of the staff were excluded for, I
think, two meetings.

MR. ROOS. If you do this, you'll deprive a lot of retired
Federal Reserve people of a very important source of income, Mr.
Chairman, trying to figure out what you folks are doing!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think you're wrong. I think it would
increase the market. There would be text-analysis as well; we'd get
all the English majors as well as the--

-66



11/16/82

SPEAKER(?). They couldn't use English majors, Paul!

MR. WALLICH. I have been sympathetic to this proposal in the
past. It has a lot of merit. What gives me pause is the argument in
this memorandum about the impact on the policy process. We have some
experience with open meetings. The public sits right there. They
scribble, but they're not allowed to speak and, as far as I can see,
have no real impact on our deliberations. It certainly doesn't
embarrass me to say what I say. I have a sense that if I knew the
next day there might be a hearing or that there might be a great press
reaction, I would find it more difficult both to think and to decide,
[particularly] to decide to do something drastic. Most of the time
there's nothing to it. It's the critical instances where one worries.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me put this in extreme form. You
referred to these quiet little meetings we have in public. I'm not
sure it has no effect at all, but those involve relatively
noncontroversial issues by and large. We discuss consumer credit and
some arcane regulations. Let me go on the other side of the spectrum
where I've had a certain amount of experience. Those DIDC meetings
are a zoo. Anybody who does not think the substantive result is
controlled by the fact that those meetings are held in public doesn't
have his head screwed on right. Now, we are not talking here about
having a public meeting, but I'm afraid it's a step in that direction.
In a public meeting one cannot make effective arguments or explore
alternatives. And you cannot get anybody to change his or her mind
once they have made a statement. And you end up with miserable
decisions, in my humble judgment. And that is [true of the DIDC
meetings] obviously because they are filled with enormous lobbying
interests. You can imagine what interest monetary policy would have--
not quite interest groups, and maybe that would diffuse them, but
political groups. If we ever got to that point, we could forget about
having any coherent policy except by subterfuge. Somebody would talk
beforehand and would announce that this is what the policy is going to
be and everybody has agreed to say yes or no. In my opinion, that's
the way those things have to work, if [the group] is going to make an
intelligent decision at all.

MR. MARTIN. I don't believe that the extreme public scrutiny
of our every word and our every action and the pseudo-actions that are
attributed to us has made us a better functioning organization. I
agree with those of you who say that immediate publication of this
mysterious [document] would heighten the tension. The staff's memo
indicates that the actual individual votes would be recited, and that
would focus attention on individual differences. These are operating
statements; they attempt to be helpful operationally. The public's
right to know, I think, extends to our objectives, our performance,
our structure, our composition as individuals here, and our
backgrounds. The public interest is not endowed in the operational
aspects of the organization. That's a different category. The
approaches that we are taking to reduce leaks of information are



11/16/82

separate topics from this release [and putting us] in the spotlight.
I would lean against the immediate release.

MS. TEETERS. Well, Pres, we already have computer systems
that ring a bell and turn on a red light every time we enter the
market in various--

MR. MARTIN. Is that good?

MS. TEETERS. Well, it exists. They are not going to get rid
of it. My question to Peter is: Would it make any difference in the
operation of the Desk?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't really think so. There would be
times when an immediate release would have a market impact that we
might not want. At times it could help to bring about the desired
thrust in policy earlier. I may be out of order saying this, but
having been associated with this for many years and having filed one
of the statements in that Merrill suit in which I took a position on
the ill effects of immediate release, I would say, after thinking
about it long and hard for many years, that I don't think I could make
that same kind of statement today because of the different nature of
the directive.

MR. PARTEE. I did the same thing for the Board, Peter, and I
have the same feeling. I couldn't support it now.

MR. AXILROD. I did the same thing, but I haven't changed my
view.

MR. BLACK. Two flexible people and one inflexible one!

SPEAKER(?). You people with conscience!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's worthwhile
carrying this on any further. I don't detect a strong consensus to
publish.

MR. FORD. I want to call facetiously for a vote, so I could
be recorded as voting with Nancy on this.

MR. RICE. I would like to propose facetiously that we put it
out for comment.

SPEAKER(?). For a year!

MR. WALLICH. It's very desirable to discuss this. Maybe we
should take it up again at a future time when things are not quite so
tense. I think we are doing something that we shouldn't be doing if
there weren't strong reasons. We owe the public. That is the key
more than the leak issue is the key. But I think the reasons against
it are persuasive at this time.

-68-



11/16/82

MS. TEETERS. Henry, may I say that, given the center stage
that monetary policy has moved into in the past 15 years, I doubt that
we will ever find the time when pressures are not on us again--when we
will be operating in a relatively quiet back-water sort of way.

MR. RICE. I was just going to ask if the Bundesbank does not
hold a news conference after each meeting in which the result was some
change in policy. If they change policy, they have a news conference
immediately after the meeting. Is that not true?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No. I feel as if I'm an expert on this,
having consulted with my counterpart on this precise point. I'm not
sure I know every detail. They do often have a news conference. But
typically they are announcing a Lombard rate change or a discount rate
change or something like that. Of course, we announce that, too, if
we make a change. That is the typical reason for their having a news
conference. If I remember correctly, they don't always have one even
for those purposes. They specifically do not discuss open market
operations, or their equivalent of open market operations, except in a
rare instance, which is the issue here. That is what I asked them
about. In fact, it has never occurred to them, according to him, to
make a public announcement--except on the rare occasion when they want
to--that they are going to provide more of less liquidity to the
banking system. Sometimes they do that, but they don't do it as a
matter of course.

MR. BOEHNE. I was going to add on to Henry's statement. I
think the reasons are convincing to a lot of people around the table
for not releasing it. I suspect that we would have a hard time
convincing outsiders of the validity of those reasons. I think we all
did hide behind the ideal that somehow [the release of the directive]
would help rich people and give succor to the speculators, and I think
that served the purpose for us. If we stood up in public and tried to
give a convincing speech on why we ought to do it [the way we do], I
think it would be difficult. That doesn't mean that I'm not
sympathetic to not releasing it; I'm saying that if we tried to
convince somebody from the outside, it would be pretty much an up-hill
proposition.

MR. WALLICH. The not helping speculators is a better public
posture. It is a less good argument.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is correct. Look, this memorandum,
Mr. Altmann is reminding me, has no indication of confidentiality. I
wouldn't like to see it spread around simply because the arguments
that seem to us persuasive may seem, precisely for your reasons, less
persuasive to others.

MR. FORD. That says a lot.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I think it simply says that our
interests may not entirely coincide with theirs. I would even go so

-69-



11/16/82

far as to say that we presumably have the public interest closer at
heart than all those people who have reasons for wanting to see a
different answer.

MR. BOEHNE. It says that central bankers have a wisdom that
exceeds those of the more normal few.

MR. CORRIGAN. Is there any question of that?

MR. BOEHNE. No, not at all. I said it as a statement of
fact!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know as we can carry this
any further. I suspect we may want to return to it someday. Maybe
somebody can come up with a more effective argument on one side or the
other and dispose of the issue definitively; I doubt it. I'm
[pressed] for time myself. I have a legislative update, if you want
to hear it. [Our FOMC agenda is completed.]

END OF MEETING

-70-




