











































FOMC Conference Call Transcript, January 16, 2009


 

 

  

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 1 of 69

Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

January 16, 2009 


A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Friday, January 
16, 2009, at 10:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 

Ms. Duke 

Mr. Fisher 

Mr. Kohn 

Ms. Pianalto
 
Mr. Plosser 

Mr. Stern
 
Mr. Warsh 


Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. 
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 

Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Mr. Sheets, Economist 

Mr. Stockton, Economist 


Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, 
Sniderman, and Tracy, Associate Economists 

Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Slifman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 

Messrs. Leahy and Levin, Ms. Liang, Mr. Reifschneider, and Ms. Stefansson, Associate 
Directors, Divisions of International Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics,  
Research and Statistics, and Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 



 

January 16, 2009 2 of 69

Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  
Governors 
 

 

 

 

Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, respectively  

Messrs. Altig, Potter, Rudebusch, Sellon, and Sullivan, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, San Francisco, Kansas City, and Chicago, 
respectively  

Mr. Gavin, Vice President, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis 

Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 



 

 

 

January 16, 2009 3 of 69

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on 

January 16, 2009 


CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  The principal item on the 

agenda today is to have a preliminary discussion on inflation objectives and that range of 

communication issues, and I will come back and provide some more introduction to that shortly.  

We also should take the opportunity to talk a bit about the structure of the FOMC meeting, which 

we can then apply to the regular meeting coming up in about ten days. 

Before we get into the regular agenda, though, I would like in a moment to ask Scott 

Alvarez to describe the terms of the Treasury–FDIC–Fed deal with Bank of America.  That deal 

was originally scheduled to take place—or to be announced—after the close of markets today, 

and so my hope had been that I would be able to present this to you before completion or 

announcement.  In part because of market conditions, the bank asked for an acceleration to this 

morning, and so that news, obviously, is already out.  I apologize that we were surprised and 

weren’t able to provide as much advance warning as we would have liked.  In any case, I am 

going to turn to Scott and let him just outline what we did and why we did it.  The Richmond 

Bank was very much involved in this, as was New York.  After Scott’s comments, President 

Lacker, if you would like to add anything, you are welcome at that point to do so, and then we 

will have any Q&A that people want to do.  Let me turn now to Scott to give us a quick overview 

of the transaction. 

MR. ALVAREZ. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying 

that a tremendous amount of effort went into this deal, and the folks at the Richmond 

Reserve Bank—in particular the lawyers and the exam staff there—with some
 
support from the New York staff did a phenomenal job in putting this together.  This 

proposal was motivated by significant losses that Bank of America announced this 

morning. There are two kinds of losses. They announced some losses that were a 

little above market expectations for Bank of America itself.  This is their first quarter 

of losses, and the market is now expecting that this is the first of several quarters of 

losses for Bank of America.  They are one of the more thinly capitalized banking 




 
 

   
 

 

 

January 16, 2009 4 of 69

organizations, so losses for them are taken pretty seriously.  What was most important 
was a very large loss that Merrill Lynch declared for the fourth quarter today, much 
larger than market expectations—in the mid-20s pre-tax.  The concern was that a 
large loss on the Merrill Lynch acquisition, which Bank of America just closed on 
January 1, might shake market confidence in Bank of America itself. 

The proposal that Bank of America requested from us and that we ultimately 
agreed to provide is in two parts. One is a capital injection of $20 billion from the 
Treasury from the TARP funds—that is in the form of preferred stock.  It is very 
much like the preferred stock that was issued in the CPP (capital purchase program) 
to other banking organizations, except that the interest rate is higher.  It is a uniform 
8 percent interest rate right from the start, rather than 5 accelerating to 9, I believe, 
under the CPP.  The capital injection has some conditions tied to it.  One condition is 
that dividends be restricted to a penny a share per quarter for the next three years.  
There is also an executive compensation requirement that is more severe than the 
executive compensation requirements that apply under the CPP but very much like 
the exec comp restrictions in the Citi deal.  So the highest management of Bank of 
America, roughly the top thirty officials, had their bonuses cut 40 percent for the next 
two years, and their bonuses are based on the 2007 performance.  There are also 
restrictions on corporate activities, on the use of corporate jets, and on various extra 
corporate expenditures, which are subject to Treasury review. 

In addition to the capital injection, the U.S. government agreed to provide some 
downside protection for a period of time on a pool of ring-fenced assets.  This part 
was also modeled on the Citi deal.  The maximum size of the pool is $118 billion.  
The pool includes a variety of residential and commercial real estate securities, 
including some structured instruments—CDOs and the like.  The underlying assets 
include a range of prime, subprime, and alt-A assets.  There are also some 
derivatives—in fact, a large derivative book on real estate and other corporate 
assets—and some leveraged loans.  The term of the downside protection is ten years 
on the residential-mortgage-based assets and five years on everything else.  The way 
it is structured, Bank of America has a deductible of $10 billion.  That is the first loss 
position on any losses in this pool. After the Bank of America loss position, the U.S. 
government will share losses on a 90/10 basis with Bank of America, the government 
taking the next 90 percent and Bank of America, 10 percent, for another $10 billion.  
That $10 billion of losses is shared between the Treasury and the FDIC on a pari 
passu basis, which is slightly different from the Citi deal.  The Treasury will take 
$7½ billion in losses potentially, and the FDIC is willing to take $2½ billion. 

In exchange for providing that protection, the Treasury and the FDIC are getting 
$4 billion in preferred stock and some small amount of warrants as a premium.  The 
losses will be based on actual losses that are incurred in the maturity and sale of 
assets from the pool, not on mark-to-market losses.  So if the pool continues to exist 
after they have gone through that series of $20 billion in protection, then the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond stands ready to make a loan to Bank of America on the 
basis of the assets remaining in the pool.  That loan would be on a nonrecourse 



 
 

 

January 16, 2009 5 of 69

basis—so recourse only to the assets in the pool.  Again, Bank of America would 

share 10 percent of the losses alongside the Reserve Bank in that pool liquidation.  

The Reserve Bank is getting a commitment fee on this loan that begins immediately 

on signing the documents.  The fee is 20 basis points on the outstanding amount of 

the assets, which represents the potential amount that the Reserve Bank could lend 

against.  Once the loan has been drawn, the Reserve Bank would also get an interest 

rate of OIS (overnight index swap) plus 300. That interest rate is the same that we 

have used in the Citi deal. The restrictions that I went through on the preferred stock 

that the Treasury gets are also part of the asset ring-fencing proposal and will last as 

long as the ring-fence continues to exist.  That is the summary of the deal.  President 

Lacker may have other comments to make, and I am happy to answer any questions. 


CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. In putting this together, our staff benefited tremendously from what has 

been learned over the past two months in New York from trying to put pencil to paper and 

negotiate the details of the legal agreement pursuant to the term sheet for Citi.  We were able, at 

the margin, to improve in several respects on a couple of the provisions of this ring-fencing 

arrangement.  In our case, actually, the collateral isn’t going to be the underlying securities.  It is 

going to be just Treasuries. But the loan agreement stipulates that the repayment amount is the 

amount of the outstanding balance of the loan minus the amount of credit losses they incur on the 

underlying assets.  In addition, we have a trigger point for advancing the credit that is a bit 

tighter than before and a couple of other minor things. 

But I want to thank the New York staff and the Board staff as well for doing a great job 

in helping us put this together. This obviously is an uncomfortable thing for any central bank to 

do. The terms of this deal are very consistent with the Citibank terms, so it seems like a 

consistent follow-through in terms of the conditions involved for the institution that triggered 

this intervention and the terms and structure of the intervention.  So we were happy to cooperate 

with the System in carrying this out. 



 

 

January 16, 2009 6 of 69

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks, President Lacker.  I agree with Jeff that this is 

uncomfortable. It is a significant improvement, I would say, over some of the things we have 

had to do in the past in that the Treasury obviously is taking by far the bulk of both the capital 

investment and the fiscal risk and the FDIC is fully engaged as well.  The FDIC also announced 

its intention to expand the loan guarantee program to allow for up to ten-year covered bond type 

of instruments, which will be interesting.  They are going to go out for comment on that, and we 

will see how that works out.  So they are very much engaged. 

I would make a couple of other points.  One is that we also had the benefit of knowing 

somewhat longer in advance than had been the case in other situations and so had more time to 

determine what strategy to follow.  I think the agreement will reflect that greater time and greater 

attention. Finally, and this perhaps anticipates some of our later discussion, we have been very 

attuned not only to the credit risks but also to the monetary policy implications of these deep-tail 

loans. We don’t expect to have to make the loans, but if we do, we want to make sure that they 

don’t create balance sheet problems in terms of our monetary policy.  Both in this case and in the 

final negotiation with Citi, we have worked it out in a way that, if we make loans, it will be on a 

tranched basis so that we wouldn’t have to make a loan of $300 billion or $100 billion in one 

shot—rather, somewhat smaller loans that could be better managed from a monetary policy point 

of view. So that is the overview. Let me see now if there are any questions for Scott, for me, or 

for Jeff. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  You may remember 

that, back when we first started down this path, we had a discussion—at least I raised the 

subject—about a decision tree and about our assessing possible outcomes.  I can say this in front 

of the group; this is an inside question.  After that discussion, President Geithner and I had 



 

 

January 16, 2009 7 of 69

substantial phone conversations, and I was assured that there was a decision tree and that we 

were thinking through all the different possible outcomes.  My question is the following: What 

probability did we assign to this kind of problem arising from B of A, particularly when they 

announced the merger with Merrill?  I am curious as to whether we envisioned this as a 

possibility. If so—and, of course, circumstances change over time, and nothing is perfect—what 

reasonable probability did we assign when that merger was announced that we might have to 

step up to the plate?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a follow-up question that is not related to 

this about an outside response to a question that I anticipate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, the agreement took place over the Lehman Brothers 

weekend in a situation of considerable stress and anxiety.  But it was a freely negotiated 

agreement between Bank of America and Merrill.  There was no government assistance, and 

there was no request for government assistance.  It was a commercial decision.  At that time, we 

were actually quite happy to see it happen because we were concerned about the pressures on 

Merrill. But it was their decision, and we had no particular reason to think that there would be 

extraordinary losses in this case. 

Of course, the world has changed in just a few months, and this whole situation was 

stimulated by a call from Ken Lewis just a few weeks ago to the effect that the losses that Merrill 

Lynch was going to report at the end of the fourth quarter had risen on the order of $10 billion or 

$15 billion in just a couple of weeks, in terms of what they were reporting to Bank of America.  

So these losses were not anticipated, certainly not at the time of the merger agreement, and they 

were actually quite a shock. We were a little disappointed in Bank of America’s monitoring in 

that they seemed a bit behind the curve in terms of following the developments at Merrill Lynch.  

But there were enormous losses at Merrill Lynch that emerged very quickly and that surprised 



 

January 16, 2009 8 of 69

Bank of America and us as well. I don’t know if I am answering your question, but we did not 

anticipate this problem when the transaction was originally agreed to.  You had a follow-up 

question? 

MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a separate question:  How do we 

expect to counter concerns that we are basically underwriting greater concentration as we go 

through time?  In essence, what we are doing here is providing emergency lending to underwrite 

heavy concentration by virtue of a merger.  So I would just appreciate your thoughts or perhaps 

the thoughts of other members of the Committee on how we deflect that kind of concern if it 

arises in the marketplace. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It is a legitimate question, President Fisher.  This particular 

transaction, as I was just saying, was different from, say, Bear Stearns, where our intention was 

to arrange a merger in order to stabilize the company.  In this case, as I said, it was a freely 

undertaken business transaction in which the government was not involved. 

It is clear that, on the one hand, we are seeing a consolidation of firms and some increase 

in concentration. At the same time, the industry overall is shrinking and needs to shrink, and that 

is going to be a structural problem going forward.  I think the right approach—and I have said 

this most recently in my speech this week—is that there needs to be a wholesale policy response 

to the question of “too big to fail.”  President Stern, of course, is very familiar with this issue and 

has written on it. That could involve breaking up firms.  It could also involve a tougher 

regulatory regime for so-called systemically relevant firms.  There are different ways to address 

it. It must be addressed.  It is very important to address. 

But right now we are doing the best that we can to address the immediate threats to the 

system.  I think we are making progress.  As I said before, the Fed’s role is still there, and it 



January 16, 2009 9 of 69

shouldn’t be there at all ideally, but it is now at least subsidiary to the Treasury and the FDIC.  I 

am hopeful that going forward the Administration will be able to develop a systematic, 

comprehensive approach to the banking problems that will leave us out of it entirely, or at least 

keep us in our appropriate liquidity provision role.  So the answer to your question in short is that 

it is very important, but we can’t address it simultaneously with addressing the near-term threats 

to the system. But the regulatory and legislative response clearly has to address those issues. 

MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Again, I pray that we keep this in mind, as 

obviously we are doing, as we go through time because our actions might counter our intentions 

if we are not careful. Thank you for addressing the issue.  I appreciate it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think that speaking about it is, obviously, one useful 

way of counteracting the concern.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN. My question was whether the Treasury had a criterion for when 

they thought ring-fencing was the most appropriate way to deal with a problem versus alternative 

ways of dealing with these problems.  We have had two cases now in which we have done ring-

fencing. The circumstances have been very different.  So is there a criterion that is being worked 

with the Treasury and the FDIC for when those are appropriate actions to take and when other 

options should be considered instead? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, first, there are three classes of firms.  There are the 

so-called healthy firms that are eligible for the CPP.  There are the very sick firms that require 

emergency assistance.  And somewhere in the middle are the targeted-investment programs— 

Citi and BAC are now the two examples of that.  These are firms that were not immediately in a 

state of failure but were obviously under serious stress, and there is a set of criteria for those 

firms and the way we approach those firms. 



 

 

 

January 16, 2009 10 of 69

The specific combination of capital and ring-fencing is, to some extent, a matter of 

judgment—you know, looking at the situation of the individual firm, the market conditions, and 

so on. But there is a general feeling—I think we all may be seeing this—that the preferred 

capital approach is reaching its limits.  The markets don’t view preferred capital injections as 

being a perfect substitute for common equity. On the other hand, there is resistance on the 

Treasury’s part to injecting significant amounts of common equity because they don’t want to 

own the bank, among other things.  So you need another mechanism, and ideally the mechanism 

would be a good bank/bad bank or a purchase of assets—a way of getting some of the downside 

risk off the balance sheet. This has been the most effective way essentially to provide contingent 

capital without creating a capital instrument.  As we go forward, I expect to see more 

combinations of what are effectively capital injections and removal or ring-fencing or insuring 

troubled assets.  I think we will see more of that going forward, but a substantial amount of 

individual analysis of this particular case led to the particular combination of measures.  

President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. I just wanted to follow up on a couple of things that President Fisher 

asked about and add a bit of color to your response about earnings.  There are press reports today 

coming out of the Bank of America earnings call that suggest that they learned about these losses 

only in the days following their shareholder vote on December 5 or something like that.  These 

were actually accumulating from just early November, and the erosion of earnings took place 

over a five-week period at Merrill, so they accreted within the organization.  They knew about it 

to some extent, as it was happening in late November and early December. 

In response to Richard’s question about a decision tree, the way this played out over the 

Lehman weekend is notable.  This initiative of the two firms was a direct response to hearing a 



 

 

 

January 16, 2009 11 of 69

conclusive, definitive statement from the Secretary about his unwillingness to provide 

government support for Lehman.  So for all that has been said about the handling of the Lehman 

case, the difference between the orderly resolution of Merrill, given this merger, and what would 

have transpired had they tried to take a chance on going it alone has to be counted as a beneficial 

side effect of Lehman—a kind of rare, direct evidence of some incentive effects here. 

One thing I am concerned about with these ring-fencing aspects—this is a comment to 

you, Eric—is that they leave a substantial part of the risk, both upside and some downside, on the 

books of the institution. So they have the inconvenient property that defraying some of the costs 

of that risk is part of the calculus of anyone considering injecting new equity in the firm.  Some 

prospective equity investor that takes them a bit out of the hole of this thing is going to be 

benefiting existing debt holders as well.  This debt-overhang problem ought to be the subject of 

some attention here because ultimately we want to get away from dependence on government 

support. To some extent, these preferred injections, because they are dilutive, have us in a 

tipping point kind of thing in which equity holders are scared off by the prospects of future 

dilutive injections. So we are sort of stuck with just the government as the potential equity 

source until they come far enough out of it that the tail risk for debt holders is large enough.   

I think that deserves some thought.  Initially we took a look at an SPV (special purpose 

vehicle) approach, more like Bear, specifically for this reason—that it would lift the assets out of 

the institution and help us get more rapidly to a point where we didn’t have this debt-overhang 

problem.  My understanding is that there was a concern at Treasury that this should resemble, as 

closely as possible, the Citi deal, so that it was patterned after that and could be sold as kind of a 

continuation of the Citi-like structure.  This issue about common versus preferred was a surprise 

in this—in December we learned that there was a real concern about the appearance of B of A’s 



January 16, 2009 12 of 69

tangible common equity ratio, which is below that of some top-tier banks like JPMorgan but 

above that of Citi.  They were concerned about the erosion of that, and that was their chief 

investor-confidence issue that motivated this.  Understanding that a little better and what 

motivates that on the part of the investor community would be useful as well. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG. Just a quick question. Given the way AIG was structured and the 

possibilities of being able to pay back the loan with a sale of assets or operating units, and 

Citicorp is now looking to sell off units, have we given any thought to requiring that, if these 

things aren’t dealt with even in an extended period of time, they would be required to sell off 

units to pay this back?  That would address some of Richard’s and my concerns about the 

enabling process that we are providing for this continued increase in concentration of these 

resources that are themselves unsound. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I would welcome any assistance from an appropriate 

governor or supervisor. We have been concerned about Citi from a supervisory perspective for 

some time.  One of the key problems was the difficulty of managing and dealing with risk in 

such a complex and loosely structured organization.  So we—the Federal Reserve, the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York—had been pushing Citi to try to rationalize, sell off assets, refocus, 

and improve risk management and management competency for some time.  That wasn’t 

motivated primarily by a concentration issue but was just trying to make Citi a more viable firm.  

Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  A couple of things. First, in the Citi case, as an example, the markets are 

putting a lot of pressure on them to slim down and sell off assets.  I think that, as quickly as they 

can rightly restore their brand and their business, they and their shareholders will have every 



 

January 16, 2009 13 of 69

incentive to do so. I think that is already happening.  Under the terms of the CPP, negotiated 

chiefly by the Treasury, the company has the option to get rid of the government ownership at 

different periods. I think it will be a sign of strength when they are able to do so. 

In addition, there is an incentive—and Scott can correct me on the terms—that, if they 

were to pay back the government by year-end ’09, then the options, the warrants in effect, that 

the government would get would be half what they otherwise would get.  So generally under the 

CPP you will see the strongest of this group looking to distinguish themselves for being stronger, 

by November/December of this year—to try to say that they are different, that the options and 

warrants they have given the government will now be reduced because of the redemption feature.  

But in square answer to your question, there isn’t some compulsion that somehow the 

government needs to be paid back first among the order of preferences for their liquidation. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD. Thank you. Just coming back to President Fisher’s question:  How are 

we going to play this going forward?  Should we expect more deals in the category of Citi and 

B of A?  How are we going to draw the line sometime in 2009 about how to do this? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, speaking for myself, I am not going to draw the line 

somewhere that involves the failure of a firm the size of Bank of America.  But that said, we 

need to find better solutions to this problem, and the new team—Geithner, Summers, and 

Christina Romer—is very focused on trying to use the available TARP money, which of course 

was just approved yesterday, plus other funding and other authorities, to develop a more 

systematic and more comprehensive approach to the banking crisis.  We have been trying to 

support that analytically, and we are certainly also going to support it politically, because it is 



 

 

January 16, 2009 14 of 69

very important that this be done both in a consistent and a well-thought-out way and that fiscal 

authorities take the appropriate responsibility. 

So let me just say that I know President Lacker was uncomfortable with this arrangement.  

I am certainly very uncomfortable with it.  But for whatever reason, our system is not working 

the way it should in order to address the crisis in a quick and timely way.  Until the 

reinforcements arrive, I don’t think we have much choice but to try to work with other parts of 

the government to prevent a financial meltdown.  But I am very sympathetic to the view that the 

faster we can get a comprehensive, appropriate fiscal response—and that is the goal of the new 

Administration—the better off the country will be and the better off the Federal Reserve will be. 

Okay. If there are no other questions, maybe we could turn to the main topic of inflation 

objectives. Let me make just a couple of very short introductory comments.  First of all, 

obviously, we have talked about this issue many times before.  I think in 1995 President Yellen 

was involved in a debate or a discussion on this topic, so it is an oldie but goodie.  The reason 

that there has been interest—and I feel this interest has welled up to some extent from the 

Committee as a whole—is that, in the current situation, there are some circumstances that might 

make an explicit numerical objective more attractive. 

There are a number of considerations, but the two I would mention are, first, that we do 

face, if not deflation, certainly some disinflation; and disinflation, if it proceeds too quickly, can 

be counterproductive because it raises real interest rates.  So to the extent that we can, through 

expectations management or policy communication, reduce disinflationary pressures, that is a 

positive.  This is one way perhaps to do that.  At the same time that we are using every power we 

have to try to fight this incredible crisis, there are concerns on the other side that, by expanding 

our balance sheet and the like, we risk inflation increasing in the medium term.  It is important 



 

 

January 16, 2009 15 of 69

for us to communicate that we will be effective and timely in removing that stimulus, so that we 

will not have an inflation problem during the exit from our current policies.  In that respect, there 

may be some special features of the current environment that make this topic worth thinking 

about once again. 

Now, we have been through this process a number of times.  As I mentioned, we have 

made some steps in this direction with our communication strategy—our projections, for 

example, particularly the long-term projections we are planning for January.  So I think the 

question is whether we want to take another step.  If so, what should it be?  We all agree—and 

we have discussed it also on numerous occasions—that this has to be managed very carefully 

from a political perspective.  I think we need to go slowly on that front.  Don and I and the staff 

met this morning with some representatives of the Administration.  I did not detect any strong 

opposition on the substance, but they didn’t want to incur heavy political costs themselves or use 

up political capital at the beginning of the Administration.  Their view was that whatever we did 

needed to be very carefully managed to avoid getting blown out of proportion in the political 

sphere. So we will work very carefully and closely with the Administration in thinking about 

this, not only in the substantive details but also in terms of the political communication. 

One point that was made in the meeting this morning, which may affect our thinking on 

timing if we do decide to go forward, is that the new President has already appointed one 

member of the Board and will have two more slots to fill.  We should pay attention to the 

schedule of appointments, and to the extent that appointments by the new President can be 

known and can be consulted in this process, it might ease the political consideration somewhat.  

That is something we may have to take into account, and it may somewhat affect our timing. 



   
 

                                                 
  

January 16, 2009 16 of 69

So we do want to discuss today a bit of the substance of what we would like to do.  But I 

think we should all have a sensitivity—whatever steps we take—to the need to do it very 

carefully from a political perspective and perhaps think about the extent of the change, the step 

we want to take, to balance a more dramatic or discrete step against whatever additional costs or 

risks there might be from a political perspective.  I just want to emphasize that and note that it 

probably suggests that we should go a little more slowly than at the January meeting.  Certainly 

it is a good idea at this point to get a sense of the Committee’s preferences to give me guidance 

in doing my consultation and getting feedback on further steps. 

Let me turn now to Brian Madigan to introduce the topic, and then we will do a go-round 

on this issue. Brian. 

MR. MADIGAN.1  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  You have made some of the points 

that I was planning on making, so let me turn directly to the questions that the staff 

circulated for discussion at this meeting.  The first question is on the principal 

benefits and costs of an explicit objective for inflation.  One of the key issues in this 

regard is the consistency of a numerical price objective with the Federal Reserve’s 

dual mandate.  Unlike some other central banks, the Federal Reserve is charged with 

promoting maximum employment as well as price stability.  Some FOMC members 

have previously expressed concerns about this consistency.  Thus, one of the 

questions for your discussion is, Do you see any conflict with the dual mandate in 

setting an inflation objective?
 

That question is posed in a somewhat abstract fashion, and your answer to it may 

depend on how a numerical inflation objective would work in practice—a set of 

issues that is teed up in question 2. In particular, how would the Committee’s 

conduct of policy be affected by the quantification of its price objective?  For 

example, would the specification of the price objective mean that the Committee 

would put more weight than at present on deviations of inflation from its objective 

and less weight on deviations of output and employment from their steady-state 

values?  Or would you anticipate that a numerical price objective would be used 

primarily as a device to make the Committee’s intentions clearer and, thus, to help 

anchor inflation expectations so that the short-run conduct of policy would be little 

affected?  A related question is the effect of a numerical price objective on the 

Committee’s policy choices when it is concerned about the risks of financial 

instability.  For example, in circumstances in which inflation was projected to remain 

near target but asset-price developments pointed to incipient financial instability, 


1 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are attached to this transcript (appendix 1). 



 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

January 16, 2009 17 of 69

would the Federal Reserve be inappropriately constrained from using its monetary 
policy tools to help address the emerging financial instability?  Or would you argue 
that monetary policy tools should be used only in such cases to address the potential 
effects of the financial instability on output or inflation and, thus, that there is no 
conflict? 

The third question goes further into the general framework for establishing an 
inflation target. In establishing an objective, do you think that the Federal Reserve 
should set specific time frames for comparing realized inflation with its target?  
Would it set timetables for the return of inflation to target following a deviation? 

Question 4 raises the issue as to whether the Committee should establish an 
inflation objective or an objective for a gradually increasing price level.  
Theoretically, a price-level objective has certain desirable properties.  At a basic 
level, a credible commitment to a price-level objective should ease households’ and 
businesses’ long-term planning by eliminating the base drift that can occur under 
inflation targeting. Moreover, in potentially deflationary circumstances, it might be 
helpful for the central bank to make clear that any undershoots of the desired price 
path in the near future would be recouped down the road through above-average 
inflation that would bring the level of prices back to the desired path.  In principle, 
building in this error correction would help keep medium-term inflation expectations 
from falling excessively in response to inflation undershoots and thus would help 
prevent inappropriate increases in real interest rates.  However, a number of difficult 
questions surround the possible establishment of a price-level target.  Would the 
public view such a target as credible?  Or would analysts be concerned that the Fed 
might have difficulty meeting its price-level target or that it might eventually renege 
on its commitment to permit higher rates of inflation in the future, if necessary to 
offset temporarily low rates of inflation in the near term?  Indeed, you yourselves 
might be uncomfortable with a policy that intentionally pursues relatively high rates 
of inflation, even as an offset to previous undershoots.  For example, you might be 
concerned about the implications for economic and financial stability of those 
temporarily higher rates of inflation partly because you might worry about your 
ability to subsequently bring inflation back down to its optimal level. 

Questions 5, 6, and 7 focus on certain practical aspects of setting an inflation 
target. Should the objective be framed as a single number or a range?  What price 
index should be used?  What inflation buffer, if any, is appropriate?  Has the current 
episode of a very large negative demand shock led you to revise up your views of the 
appropriate inflation buffer?  Alternatively, do you see the present downside risk to 
output as sufficiently large as to warrant a temporarily higher objective for inflation? 

The final question addresses the relationship of a quantitative inflation objective 
to other aspects of the Committee’s communications.  At the December meeting, 
participants generally seemed to agree with the subcommittee’s recommendation to 
collect and publish longer-term projections on a quarterly basis.  The SEP (summary 
of economic projections) questionnaire would ask each participate to “provide your 



 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 18 of 69

best assessment of the rate to which each variable would converge over the longer 
term (say, five to six years from now) in the absence of shocks and assuming 
appropriate monetary policy.” An important question for today’s discussion is how 
such projections would relate to a medium-term inflation objective.  There are at least 
two possibilities. In one view, the establishment of a medium-term inflation objective 
would obviate longer-term projections. In this view, longer-term projections are 
useful solely because of the information they provide about the Committee’s inflation 
objective. Indeed, some participants may be concerned that publication of longer-
term projections of GDP growth and the unemployment rate could be interpreted 
incorrectly as implying that the Committee has speed limits on growth and 
employment.  Under an alternative approach, the Committee would both establish a 
numerical inflation objective and extend its current projections process to include 
long-term projections for output growth, unemployment, and inflation.  The 
advantage of this approach is that it would allow the Committee to present, in its 
summary of economic projections, a fully articulated picture of the economic outlook 
and how the Committee’s conduct of policy was intended to be consistent with 
closing any output and inflation gaps over time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That 
concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there any questions for Brian?  If 

not, would anyone like to comment on this issue?  I see President Yellen.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This topic, as we have seen in previous 

discussion, is bedeviled by difficult issues. But in the spirit of the pragmatic responses that we 

have taken throughout these challenging times, I would like to take a straightforward approach.  I 

am going to organize my remarks around two questions.  First, what is the communication 

problem we now face regarding inflation and inflation expectations?  Second, is there a solution 

that we can implement quickly and readily?  I agree with the characterization that you offered, 

Mr. Chairman:  The main communication problem we now face is that most of us anticipate a 

period that may be quite extended in which inflation will be below the mandate-consistent rate, 

even with monetary policy pulling out all the stops, especially given that we are at the zero 

bound. That can result in a pernicious increase in real interest rates.  So we do need to 

communicate very clearly that such a decline in inflation is both unwelcome and undesirable and 



 

 

January 16, 2009 19 of 69

that we will do everything possible to return inflation over time toward higher levels consistent 

with the dual mandate. 

But I also agree with your remark that a second problem has developed, and we need to 

address it, too. There is growing concern that the Fed is printing money with abandon to 

stimulate the economy, and the combination of trillion dollar deficits and trillions of dollars of 

money creation can have only one outcome in the long run, which is high inflation that debases 

the currency.  Now, I think this reasoning is completely misguided, but it is out there, and I think 

we need to consider it because it is dangerous for our credibility as an institution.  So I also think 

we have to say that we are not willing to tolerate very high inflation. 

I think uncertainty about what our inflation goals are could be reduced by clear 

communication about our expected path for the economy and especially inflation.  Greater 

transparency about how we think the future will likely unfold could help anchor inflationary 

expectations and reduce their dispersion, which is now very large.  But our existing FOMC 

projections, which have the three-year forecast horizon, obviously aren’t up to the task.  Given 

the enormous negative shocks to the economy over the past year, our forecast for inflation over 

the next three years falls quite low, and that may support the deflationary fears of some.  In 

addition, those who are worried about an inflationary surge may argue that a three-year horizon 

is too short to display the full extent of inflationary consequences of our balance sheet policies.  

The obvious solution to this problem is to provide economic projections with a longer horizon, 

and that is exactly what the Subcommittee on Communications recommended in December.  

Based on the trial run we conducted, these projections, especially with the rich narrative that 

accompanies them, appear to be useful in conveying important information about the 

Committee’s goals and the strategies for achieving them over time.  Especially under current 



 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 20 of 69

circumstances, I think there are clear benefits from that approach, and I hope that we can decide 

to implement the subcommittee’s recommendation. 

The enunciation of an explicit numerical inflation objective is certainly another 

possibility. It is one I have long been in favor of doing, but I don’t expect the associated gains 

from transparency and better anchoring of inflation expectations to be a lot larger than those that 

we would achieve just from extending the forecast horizon.  I am concerned that there are a 

number of subtle issues in setting a numerical objective that I would not be eager to rush through 

or just sweep aside in the interest of getting this done quickly.  Most important, I wouldn’t want 

consideration of those issues to delay us from implementing the extended projections that we had 

recommended.  For example, among the issues I am concerned with, the issue of time horizon 

for an explicit numerical objective—Brian asked about this—is not straightforward to answer.  

Brian’s questions were all cast in terms of a medium-term objective, whereas in the past this 

Committee’s discussions have always been cast in terms of a long-term goal. 

I think that the distinction between long term and medium term is not semantic—it is 

substantive. From macroanalysis, I consider short term as referring to less than, say, a year or 

two, medium term as ranging from around two to six years, and long term as anything beyond 

around six. Articulating a long-term inflation objective would be consistent with our past policy 

behavior and with, for example, the kind of optimal policy scenarios in recent Bluebooks that 

show convergence only after around a decade. In contrast, I would interpret a medium-term 

inflation objective as one that we would be committed to hitting within several years.  Even 

during normal circumstances, this would often require deemphasizing the employment part of 

our dual mandate.  At this time, though, with such a huge adverse shock to navigate through, I 

don’t think a medium-term inflation objective is necessarily even attainable. 



 

 

January 16, 2009 21 of 69

There is a view among some economists that stating a medium-term inflation objective 

would go a long way toward achieving it, but I am not so confident in the power of our words.  I 

think that the inflationary psychology that exists right now is especially delicate and doesn’t 

correspond well to our theoretical models. For example, my sense is that, in present 

circumstances, many people are really relieved by the recent fall in consumer prices, which has 

translated into a boost to real wages, after several years of being battered by ever-higher energy 

and food costs. That makes me skeptical about the desirability of right away setting a 

temporarily high medium-term objective for inflation.  In contrast, if falling prices and wages 

became entrenched, as in the Great Depression, I believe the psychology would change a lot, and 

a promise of higher inflation or a price-level target could prove useful.  It is something I 

wouldn’t want to see taken off the table. In today’s situation, though, I think an approach like 

that would be confusing and counterproductive.  Even if we agree on a long-term horizon for a 

numerical inflation objective, a lot of important issues remain regarding its formulation and 

communication. 

My preference is now, as it has been for some time, that we have a long-term inflation 

objective specified in terms of the total PCE price index.  We have had success with that in our 

Monetary Policy Report.  As we have discussed previously, I prefer a total measure to a core 

measure.  With respect to a specific number, I think the welfare function is pretty flat over a 

range of values, but I think an inflation buffer is appropriate because of potential adverse effects 

of downward nominal wage rigidity, especially in situations with low productivity growth.  Now 

that we have had a couple of brushes with deflation, all in all I have concluded that a long-term 

numerical inflation objective of 2 percent for the PCE price index would be preferable. 



 

January 16, 2009 22 of 69

There are process issues about choosing a long-run inflation objective.  I believe that we 

should try, as a group, to arrive at consensus or general agreement among the full set of FOMC 

participants, not just by a formal vote of the members, which was in essence the decisionmaking 

process that was proposed in the last Bluebook where this was raised.  Consensus among 

participants is the way in which we usually decide communication issues, because everyone has 

to live with the consequences. If we do adopt an inflation objective, I think we should revisit it 

on an annual basis. Of course, if we do reach consensus on a numerical inflation objective, 

communication of that consensus is very important.  I think the objective needs to be announced 

in the context of a clear and convincing statement of our commitment to both parts of our dual 

mandate.  A single sentence in an FOMC statement, which was what the last Bluebook 

contained, doesn’t seem sufficient to me.  I think we would need a special press release, and I 

think the long-term nature of the inflation objective would have to be clearly explained to the 

public in the context of the dual mandate.  I think we should stress that the implications for near-

term economic and financial stability would always be taken into account in deciding how to 

move toward our inflation objective. 

So let me summarize what I see as the way forward.  Essentially, I am hopeful that 

extended projections along the lines recommended by the subcommittee can accomplish most of 

what we need right now in terms of better anchoring inflation expectations, and I believe that is 

something we can implement this month.  Ideally, sometime perhaps further in the future, we 

could also formulate an explicit long-term inflation objective to accompany our extended 

forecasts, and then the forecasts would naturally illuminate the path from the present to our long-

run goals. But I wouldn’t want to postpone implementing what the subcommittee proposed, 

which is four-fifths of a loaf, which is our extended projections.  I wouldn’t want to postpone 



 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 23 of 69

that to potentially get a whole loaf with an inflation objective down the road.  Finally, I have said 

in the past, and would say again, that I think guidance on the path of future short-term interest 

rates that implicitly accompany our quarterly economic projections could be quite helpful in the 

current circumstances.  The market at this point has priced in a fairly steep upward trajectory to 

the path of the funds rate, at least relative to the Greenbook.  So I think there would be value in 

conducting a trial run on this issue to get a sense of whether that is workable. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. We have had some work here by the staff 

about what kind of press release we might do, and the focus has been on explaining how it 

relates to the dual mandate in some particular situations.  So I think this is absolutely right. 

President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I have argued at previous meetings, I am 

in favor of the Committee’s establishing a numerical objective for price stability and announcing 

that objective to the public.  My view of this is based on the importance of price stability and the 

effective functioning of our economy and the financial system.  In thinking through the details of 

how to implement such a numerical goal, I am guided by the important roles that credibility, 

commitment, and transparency play in our ultimately achieving this goal.  I believe that 

specifying a numerical objective for medium-term inflation would focus our policy discussions 

and help anchor expectations, preventing them from drifting either too high or too low.  By 

reducing the public’s uncertainty about our goal, long-run expectations would become less 

responsive to changes in short-run inflation. Again, this should help enhance monetary policy’s 

flexibility to respond to economic shocks as we deem appropriate. 

Numerical specification appears to have been associated with better-anchored 

expectations in foreign countries that have adopted it.  It seems to have produced a moderate 



 

January 16, 2009 24 of 69

improvement in monetary policy, and inflation outcomes have improved without negative 

consequences for output growth. But to be effective, the Committee’s stated commitment to the 

objective must be credible.  Transparency can help strengthen the credibility of our stated 

commitment.  Thus, in choosing specifics of how we implement the numerical objective, we 

should be guided by those that enhance our transparency and credibility in the process.  Just 

saying that we have an objective isn’t enough.  We need to design mechanisms and take actions 

that help achieve that objective and make that objective and those mechanisms transparent. 

In normal times, when policy is implemented by a fed funds rate target, the path of the 

target itself can serve as a nominal anchor for the economy.  Including the funds rate in the set of 

variables included in our economic projections would be a way for the Committee to 

communicate how it planned to achieve its goal.  I know there has been some reluctance to do 

this for fear that it would undermine the Committee’s policy flexibility.  But reporting the central 

tendency and range of fourth-quarter averages of funds rates, as we do with the unemployment 

rate, wouldn’t seem to be too constraining and would help inform the public about how we 

anticipate hitting our goal, thereby raising our credibility and our stated commitment. 

However, we are not operating in normal times at the moment.  Because our funds rate 

target is effectively zero and is expected to remain at that level for a while, the funds rate cannot 

now serve as a nominal anchor.  In implementing credit policy, we are operating without a 

controlling nominal anchor at this point, and this could jeopardize our ability to ensure price 

stability. Missing our goal could seriously undermine our credibility.  Thus, I think it behooves 

the Committee to do some serious thinking about how we ensure that the current credit policies 

we are pursuing today don’t put price stability seriously at risk in the future.  This includes limits 

on the growth rate of our balance sheet overall or perhaps of individual credit programs.  At the 



 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 25 of 69

very least, we should be monitoring these and developing metrics to assess the implications of 

credit policies for the future of price stability. It would be a mistake, I believe, to declare a target 

and fail to conduct policy consistent with that target or fail to communicate how our current or 

future policies and actions relate to that target and that intermediate objective for price stability.  

I don’t think words or communication is enough.  They need to be linked to actions in some 

specific way. 

In terms of the details of implementation, there are some aspects about the design that I 

feel more strongly about than others, and some of the choices are interrelated.  For example, a 

longer-term horizon should mean a tighter control range.  A longer horizon makes the choice 

between headline and core less important.  A longer horizon in my view means that the choice of 

core would be less compelling.  Regarding which price index, in general I prefer a headline 

index, even though it is likely to be harder to control than the core in the short run.  I prefer 

headline because I do not want to convey the idea that we are insensitive to the wider array of 

prices that influence behavior.  It also affords us the opportunity to use core in our 

communications when explaining why we might or might not have policy react to a temporary 

blip in headline. 

This is similar to the practice in other central banks that have announced numerical goals.  

I note that there is some justification for measures of inflation that include only the sticky price 

components, as some monetary models suggest that optimal policy should be aimed at stabilizing 

those sticky prices. But the core measures of inflation do not necessarily correspond to the 

sticky price sectors. For example, apparel prices are more volatile than food prices.  The 

experience of foreign banks, almost all of which use the CPI, gives us some indication that using 

the headline CPI can work. The headline CPI is the measure most understood by the public, and 



 

 

January 16, 2009 26 of 69

unlike the PCE, it is not revised.  I think the fact that it is not revised is very important because it 

aids transparency.  The public and we will be in a better position of assessing whether we have 

achieved our goal when metrics aren’t revised.  That seems to me like a salient reason to prefer 

the CPI over the PCE. 

Of course, I think it will be important for us to consider how we will respond and 

communicate about inevitable misses from our target.  Presumably, the larger the miss, the more 

burdensome the communication requirements should be on us, similar to the requirement, for 

example, in the United Kingdom for a letter to the Chancellor.  Presumably, a miss should be 

calibrated also to the variability and measurement precision in the underlying inflation measure 

used. Small deviations from targets should not be considered misses, but large deviations clearly 

should require more explanation. 

Regarding a point goal versus a range, I continue to prefer a point goal.  In reality, there 

is a range around this point goal reflecting the precision with which policymakers can control 

inflation. This control range will differ depending on the inflation measure we use and the time 

horizon. However, I would be reluctant to announce such a range as part of our goal unless we 

could ensure that the public would not interpret this range as a tolerance range.  I think that may 

be a very difficult communication task. For headline CPI, I would be happy with a point target 

anywhere between 1½ and 2 percent.  It is not as critical to me—having a goal is the important 

part. I think that this is consistent with our goal of price stability—the estimated measurement 

error of the CPI being a little less than 1 percent—and gives us a margin for reducing the chances 

of getting into the zero bound situation. 

Regarding the time horizon, I feel strongly that we need to specify a time horizon so that 

we can be held accountable for meeting or missing the goal.  If the horizon becomes too long, it 



 

January 16, 2009 27 of 69

imposes less discipline on the Committee and therefore presumably reduces the benefits of a 

numerical goal in the first place.  So I oppose making the horizon much too long.  Because I 

favor using headline CPI, which is more difficult to control than the core, I am comfortable that 

something like a three-year horizon is appropriate and achievable, given the typical shocks that 

hit the economy and the volatility of the CPI measure.  If the Committee prefers a shorter 

horizon, that might be a reason to think more precisely about the core. 

Regarding targeting the price level versus inflation—price-level targeting I think has 

some attractive features, especially when we are near the zero bound, as we have talked about in 

the past couple of meetings.  We could operationalize this by defining an average inflation goal 

over the time period so that, if inflation increases above this average for a time, we would need 

to bring inflation below the average for a time in order to achieve our goal.  But I think it would 

be difficult to communicate price-level targeting to the public and get them to understand what 

we are doing and why we are doing it. The increased transparency of it persuades me that, at 

least as a practical matter, stating our objectives in terms of an inflation objective is probably 

preferable. 

Finally, I am in favor of the Committee’s including the longer-term projections for GDP 

growth and unemployment in its projections.  These would be interpreted as steady-state values 

for the variables, and I think that would be a good thing.  Presumably, in most situations our 

inflation goal will be our long-term projection for inflation.  As I said earlier, I am in favor of the 

Committee’s including forecasts for our target policy rates as well in these projections.  Again, 

that would be a form of communication.  The range and central tendency of these variables, in 

let’s say the fourth quarter of each year, would give the public information on how we are 



 

 

 

January 16, 2009 28 of 69

planning to meet our inflation goal.  I believe this would increase the benefits of stating a 

numerical goal by making our commitment to that goal more credible. 

Mr. Chairman, I also recognize the political sensitivities in this matter and certainly am 

willing to defer to your judgment.  However, I do think that dragging the process out too slowly 

may have some unintended consequences and perhaps lead us to lose some of the near-term 

benefits that having a goal might provide us.  If you conclude that we have a window of 

opportunity here, both politically and practically, I would urge you that we not let this window 

close on us. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I ultimately favor an inflation target, but I am 

concerned that this may not be the right time.  Nevertheless, I am open-minded.  First, I do 

ultimately favor an explicit inflation guideline.  Inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  How the 

central bank responds to everything around it determines the range of inflation outcomes.  Once 

inflation fell to a range closer to price stability in the 1990s—as we have already mentioned, we 

had this debate in 1995—it seemed reasonable to me as a monetary economist that clarifying our 

inflation objective would improve the public’s expectations and the effectiveness of our policies.  

Because trend growth and natural rates of unemployment are determined by technology and the 

structure of the economy, we cannot similarly dictate their steady-state levels.  We can and do 

provide information on that in our longer-term forecasts. 

Despite my preference for an explicit guideline, I worry that now might not be a good 

time to adopt an explicit target.  I can be convinced otherwise, but I think the dangers might 

outweigh the likely benefits. I think that many would see such a move as overly opportunistic.  

Our intentions may be questioned, and these criticisms could undermine our credibility.  I am not 



 

 

January 16, 2009 29 of 69

concerned merely about the reaction of political officials who may not understand the value of 

clear inflation goals.  Earlier this week we hosted a group of academic economists who would 

normally be very sympathetic to this suggestion. But as the discussion turned to the reported 

arguments that adopting an inflation target might help us with our current policy dilemmas, there 

was great resistance, and I was really quite surprised.  Many thought this was taking advantage 

of a crisis without working to build the necessary political consensus.  Some also thought it 

would make the Fed look out of touch.  The debate over inflation targeting is not fresh.  As you 

mentioned earlier, it is a long-standing debate, and it seems somewhat orthogonal to the financial 

crisis. At a minimum, there is a mountain of effort and persuasion required to pull this off 

successfully. Now, any reluctance I have about setting an explicit inflation target is due simply 

to the current difficult environment.  If we can overcome this—and, Mr. Chairman, I would rely 

on your judgment there as well that this has reasonable prospects of being successful—I would 

favor this proposal. 

Turning to the other questions circulated to the Committee, I don’t see those as 

generating substantial concerns, at least from my standpoint.  For example, I don’t believe that 

our dual mandate stands in the way of adopting an explicit numerical price objective.  Most of 

my thinking on this is consistent with quadratic loss function analysis not much different from 

the Bluebook discussion before each meeting.  The key elements are an output-like gap and an 

inflation deviation from target.  The policy responses implied by such a loss function have a 

partial adjustment of inflation toward its target value.  The rate of adjustment will depend on the 

size of the output gap in obvious ways.  If we adopt an explicit inflation target, we can find 

straightforward language to communicate how these adjustments respect our dual mandate 

responsibilities, in my opinion.   



 

 

January 16, 2009 30 of 69

How does this affect the conduct of monetary policy?  Well, the loss function approach 

indicates that we would balance any conflicts within our dual mandate goals.  This is not that 

different from the current situation, in which we have implicitly agreed on an inflation range, at 

least according to our longer-term forecasts.  With regard to financial stability considerations, 

most of the time it would be enough to say that policy takes into consideration financial market 

pricing and volatility through the way in which they influence the evolution of the economy and, 

hence, our dual mandate goals.  Of course, there can be regime-switching or nonlinear financial 

risks. We are certainly experiencing those.  In those events, we would need to balance more 

considerations. For me, this issue does not seem any more relevant for the inflation target 

discussion than our other policy goals. 

In terms of timing, it is probably useful to adopt the medium-term language and try to 

define the elastic ways it will be used—that is, in a state-contingent way.  I would provide an 

average time frame for medium term, such as three to four years.  I would then use some 

language based on the loss function framework to indicate that the size of the output gap would 

tend to influence the actual timing of medium term. 

Regarding price-level targeting, I am not convinced that it is a better tool for minimizing 

the costs associated with inflation and deflation, and the temptation for the Committee not to 

follow through when it is uncomfortable to do so would be large.  That would be a big credibility 

hit. On the particular numbers, I would favor using the total PCE index at 2 percent.  That seems 

to be more likely to avoid zero lower bound issues.  I agree with President Plosser.  I think just 

finding an explicit goal would provide most of the benefits, not so much the number, as long as it 

is not too large. I would prefer a target around which we behave approximately symmetrically.  I 

don’t want us to panic over deflation every time we move under the target.  Now, my staff has 



 

January 16, 2009 31 of 69

talked to me quite a lot about the fact that optimal policy could imply some asymmetry with 

respect to inflation being above and below the target.  For example, we might need to be more 

aggressive fighting below-target inflation, as we are today, because the costs of a moderate 

deviation in that direction could be higher than those of a comparable deviation above the target.  

In that case, the guiding principle is that optimal policy should seek to equalize pain above and 

below target, not the time spent above and below.  This is a clever idea, but this equilibrium 

relies heavily on rational expectations and full credibility with the public, and I am just a bit 

skeptical of that. To conclude, my bottom line is that I like an explicit inflation guideline at the 

right time.  I am not completely sold that this is the right time, but I am open-minded.  If you 

have a reasonable expectation or assurance that this could be pulled off, I would favor it.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am in favor of an explicit inflation 

target, and I think now might be a fairly good time to embark on this.  Echoing your opening 

comments, I think today’s expectations are extremely fluid.  Should they become entrenched, 

they will dictate inflation over the next five years and may lead us into a particular regime, one 

that involves a side of the two-sided risk that we face—either a Japanese-style deflation or a 

1970s-style resurgence of a volatile inflation environment.  So I think naming an inflation target 

now would help a lot to avoid both of those possibilities.  If we can exit the current crisis with 

inflation at target, we will set up the next long expansion along the lines of the 1990s expansion 

that increased incomes substantially in the United States.  I think that should be our goal, even 

though we are in the heart of a financial crisis right now. 



 

January 16, 2009 32 of 69

My reading of the foreign experience is that it has been extremely valuable for countries 

whose monetary policies were somehow at a crossroads—they had a lot of problems in the past, 

often with managing exchange rates, and then they were able to move to inflation targeting and 

get good results from that.  That hasn’t been the case for the United States, but now may be a 

different time.  You might think that we are at a crossroads right now and that we could lose 

control of the inflation situation, either on the high side or the low side, during 2009 and 

therefore we might want to take the step at this moment. 

Let me talk for just a minute about interference with the dual mandate.  My view on 

inflation targeting is that this point is the most misunderstood in the public domain and actually 

also in some places inside the central bank establishment.  The whole point, at least in my view, 

is that anchoring expectations is part of the optimal policy from the point of view of a typical 

household in the economy. That is the Woodford analysis of inflation targeting.  You name your 

inflation target exactly because this is the optimal policy from the utility point of view of a 

typical household in the economy.  It does not mean that you ignore any part of the equilibrium 

of the economy. It means that this is the best you can do with monetary policy in terms of 

shaping an equilibrium, which delivers the most to the median household in the economy.  So if 

we are able to communicate that and get that across in a public debate, that would go a long way 

because, really, everyone should be for inflation targeting from that point of view. 

There is a question here about excessive declines in inflation.  I guess I am maybe more 

concerned than some of my colleagues on the Committee here, but I do see this as a real risk.  I 

might mention that five-year TIPS are at minus 35 basis points today.  That is the inflation rate 

implied by the five-year TIPS.  I know there may be distortions in this market, but that number is 

making me nervous.  If that actually materializes—that is, we have declines in prices over the 



 

 

January 16, 2009 33 of 69

next five years—I think there is no question that we will be in a Japanese-style equilibrium for 

the foreseeable future. I am very concerned about that possibility, and maybe the inflation target 

would help us on that. 

As far as the FOMC’s conduct of monetary policy, I don’t think actual policy conduct 

would change that much because I think implicit inflation targeting is going on inside the 

Committee, and much of the discussion about monetary policy is based on implicit inflation 

targeting. This, to me, is all about communicating to the private sector in a very turbulent time 

what it is we are trying to do. Also, I don’t see any hindrance to our ability to address financial 

stability issues. In fact, we are addressing financial stability issues right now, and we are saying 

that, because we can reverse programs later on, the inflationary effect is minimal. 

I don’t have strong opinions on the time frame.  I think it should be a medium-term 

target. We should be looking at average inflation over several years.  I do think that setting a 

price-level target might work in some models that depend heavily on rational expectations.  As 

much as I love those models, I think they may not be ready for prime time as far as actual policy 

is concerned. So going to a price-level target at this juncture is just too difficult, and it would be 

difficult to maintain credibility if we went in that direction. 

As far as a single number or a range, I have always liked a single number.  For me, a 

range doesn’t make any sense.  I think it implies that you have a region of indifference about 

inflation—that inflation in a certain range is all the same—and I don’t think that is what we 

really think. So I prefer a point for the objective.  As far as which basket, I would prefer the 

headline CPI. As much as possible you want to get to prices that households actually pay.  That 

came up all through 2009, when we were emphasizing core inflation and other prices were 



 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 34 of 69

moving radically. That harms our credibility.  Also, the CPI is not revised later.  Core would still 

be used as a gauge, but that is not the ultimate objective. 

For the numerical value of the target, I think inflation is quite distortionary for the 

economy.  That is my reading of the literature on the topic.  Not least among the many types of 

distortions that occur is significant interaction with the tax code, which is that the tax code is 

necessarily imperfectly indexed to inflation. So when you get inflation, you are changing taxes 

all around. We know that that is distortionary in the economy, and it is an unintended 

consequence. I would suggest 1.5 percent as the target. 

One question was whether we should have a higher inflation objective in the medium 

term, saying that we would come down to a lower level of inflation at some point further in the 

future. I would really not want to do that.  I think that is playing with fire.  It seems to me that a 

press release that says something like that might ignite exactly the 1970s-style of inflation, and I 

wouldn’t want to go in that direction.  It seems to me also to be opposite to the general idea of 

inflation targeting, which is to anchor expectations and to reassure the private sector that you are 

not going to shift inflation around on them unexpectedly.  I have a few more comments, but in 

the interest of time, I am going to stop my comments here.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Also in the interest of time, I’ll be brief.  We 

have said a lot about this subject—it is hard to picture much that hasn’t been said.  Yes, I do believe 

that we should adopt a specific numerical objective for inflation.  We should be clear why and what 

we’re doing.  I just can’t help but start thinking about this question from the point of view of our 

taking actions over time in a repeatable process that generates a consistent pattern of behavior.  That 

point of view leads you to certain answers to some of these questions.  From that point of view, 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 35 of 69

whatever we do and whatever we imagine for that policy rule, surely it generates an average rate of 

inflation.  So the question before us is, Why not reveal that?  Why not state that?  Why not figure 

out what that is and state that to people? 

Now, contrast that with some suggestions and some discussions that seem to have the flavor 

of let’s state now what we think, on a one-shot basis, that inflation is going to be from 2010 to 2015.  

I think of this as announcing a consistent pattern of behavior that we think we’re sticking to.  That 

approach has a real advantage over the long-term projections approach.  If we’re going to be doing 

long-term projections every quarter, I don’t see how we avoid the problem we’ve had with the third­

year-of-the-projection approach to signaling our inflation intentions.  Every quarter that projection 

could come out differently, and that’s going to be an acute problem in the coming months when the 

composition of the Committee changes, obviously.  How does it relate to our dual mandate?  I agree 

with Jim.  It’s no problem.  Let’s imagine that we’re following a pattern of behavior that we view as 

optimal with respect to our dual mandate.  Surely that generates an average rate of inflation.  Why 

not announce that?  If we announce that, it does not have any implications for our pursuit of our 

dual mandate. 

The time frame is sort of a separate question, I think.  This is a question for what we say in 

any given meeting or in any given quarter about how we view the economy evolving over the next 

couple of years—what we view as our outlook.  How we view inflation is likely to come back to 

what we view as its long-run average, and, gosh, that could change.  It could be quick in some 

instances; it could be longer in some instances.  I don’t see any reason to pin ourselves down to a 

particular time horizon. 

How would this change the way the Committee does its work?  Well, I think it would 

inevitably change how it communicates.  I think we’d pay a little more attention to inflation.  In 



 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 36 of 69

particular, we’d tend to underemphasize language that treats inflation as an autonomous 

development in the economy (which we tend to use too much now), and we’d use more often 

language that implies our responsibility for the path inflation is likely to take.  I think we would 

serve ourselves best by not changing our inflation target very much at all and communicating about 

it in a way that conveys that we intend to revisit this only very, very rarely.  I do not think this 

would interfere with our ability to deal with financial stability.  It is hard to picture how allowing 

uncertainty about our inflation objectives would help with financial stability.  If anything, it seems 

as though the opposite would be true, especially given the experience in the 1970s.  About these 

other questions, a single number to me seems obviously preferable.  Total PCE and 1½ percent 

would be my choices.  That concludes my remarks, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For many years now, I have believed that 

providing the public with an explicit numerical inflation objective would enhance the effectiveness 

of monetary policy for a variety of reasons.  One of the principal benefits would be an improvement 

in communication, thereby enhancing the FOMC’s ability to fulfill both of our mandates.  I believe 

that an explicit numerical inflation objective would help to anchor inflation expectations, and 

strongly anchored inflation expectations should improve the efficiency of wage- and price-setting 

decisions and lead to better economic performance.  Although the research findings are not 

conclusive, I think that foreign central banks operating with explicit numerical objectives have, on 

balance, more firmly anchored inflation expectations than have other central banks.  Anchoring 

inflation expectations also could be especially crucial during current economic conditions, but my 

support for specifying a numerical objective is based on my regard for its value in all circumstances. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 37 of 69

In principle, establishing an explicit numerical inflation objective need not diminish or 

assign less weight to our objective for maximum employment.  Rather, establishing a numerical 

inflation objective should help us achieve our employment goal over the long run.  Because the 

Committee has already reached a broad consensus on an implicit inflation objective, announcing an 

explicit inflation objective should not materially change the way we respond to economic 

conditions. However, an explicit inflation objective may be most valuable in times when achieving 

it appears to be more difficult.  Right now, as several have mentioned, people are concerned both 

about the possibilities for future deflation and future inflation.  The existence of an explicit 

commitment would enable us to explain more clearly to the public what we are trying to accomplish 

and how we intend to do so.  It would require us to explain how we plan to achieve our objective 

when we see actual and projected inflation deviating from our objective. 

I favor an objective expressed in terms of an average over the medium term of, say, three to 

five years, but the communication value I see is not that tightly connected to a specific time frame.  

Evidence of successful inflation targeting should be revealed in a closer alignment of inflation 

expectations with the inflation objective, particularly in the case of the longer-term horizon.  My 

preference for a total versus core inflation measure depends on the time frame chosen, but a longer-

term target specified in terms of total CPI inflation seems like the best option to me.  I favor the CPI 

because it is not subject to revision, and many contracts are specified in terms of the CPI. 

Concerning the issue of an inflation objective versus a price-level objective, I prefer the 

inflation objective.  I am more persuaded by having at least the experience of some foreign central 

banks in implementing inflation targets than by purely theoretical arguments for price-level 

targeting.  I think our objective should be stated in terms of a number with an acceptable range 

around that number.  While I prefer the CPI, I recognize that the PCE measure has become the focus 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

January 16, 2009 38 of 69

of our attention, and I have been on record as suggesting an objective for PCE inflation of 

1¾ percent.  But in light of our recent experience, I am now leaning toward an objective for total 

PCE inflation of 2 percent to provide a larger buffer against zero lower bound events.  I would 

provide a range around that number of plus or minus 1 percent to let the public know that some 

variation in actual inflation is acceptable during that time frame.  But, again, the size of that range 

would depend on the horizon that we select.  Recognizing our dual mandate, I think publishing our 

longer-term growth and employment projections would remain a valuable part of our 

communication strategy. 

So in conclusion, I do regard the establishment of an explicit numerical inflation objective as 

a natural step forward in our Committee’s progress toward better communications.  I recognize, 

however, that gaining support for such a framework at this time could be challenging.  I would feel 

much better about launching this endeavor if I thought that this step in our communication strategy 

would be welcomed by the Congress and the Administration rather than resisted, but I will leave 

managing the politics up to you, Mr. Chairman.  As you said clearly in your opening comments, you 

are well attuned to the political environment.  I also agree, though, with President Yellen that 

extending the Committee’s economic projection horizon buys us a lot of what we are trying to 

achieve without some of the political risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As a general statement, I think I am on record 

as having supported and continuing to support an inflation objective.  A numeric inflation objective, 

as we have talked about before, would help communicate the Federal Reserve’s commitment to 

price stability. Of course, that said, we all realize that in the past this Committee was reluctant to 

push for its implementation in part because such an articulation of price stability mandate needs 



 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 39 of 69

strong support from the Congress.  In the current circumstances, this support may be likely; but in 

the longer term, if inflation were to require strong tightening policy, I think support would fade 

quickly away.  Also, it may be difficult to make the case for quantification of only one of the 

mandates as we have talked about before, thus making this action, if we were to move toward an 

explicit target, a temporary action just by circumstance.  I would be opposed to establishing a 

numerical inflation objective at this time if it were only a temporary measure in response to the 

current crisis. 

In my view, if we go this way, we need clear congressional agreement, at least in a 

resolution, and the mandate should be considered by all parties as permanent.  I see little benefit in 

adopting a temporary numerical objective.  Such an approach would likely undermine our 

credibility in establishing a permanent objective at a future date.  If by circumstances or if we think 

the odds are fairly high that an explicit numeric objective at this time would be temporary, I believe 

we would be better served by focusing instead on our communication strategy, as President Yellen 

has outlined—at this time, for example, clearly indicating that inflation below 1 or some percent 

was unacceptable and would call for aggressive policy action, as we have already taken. 

In terms of implementation of a permanent numerical objective, though, I would favor a 

medium-term range of 1 to 3 percent.  I would prefer overall CPI but certainly can live with PCE as 

we have been doing at this time, with an explicit statement that we are targeting the midpoint of 2 

percent.  That makes it a target, and the range gives some maneuvering room, but we are headed 

always toward 2 percent.  This is as other central banks have done.  I would say I am not in favor of 

price-level targeting at all, in part because of the difficulty of communicating such an approach to 

the public in any successful way.  If, however, we are going to decide to go down this road toward 

inflation targeting or even price targeting, I guess I would back off this idea of longer-term 



 

 

 

January 16, 2009 40 of 69

projections just because I think of the added confusion that it would perhaps cause.  I will leave my 

comments at that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Hoenig.  President Stern. 

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I have long favored adoption of inflation 

targeting, and as with the policies to address “too big to fail,” it appears to me that the time has 

finally come to go down this path.  I think the arguments in favor of inflation targeting are by now 

pretty familiar.  I don’t view it as a significant departure from the way we conduct policy in normal 

circumstances.  Obviously, the past 18 months have not been normal circumstances.  So in many 

ways, I think it is institutionalizing and making explicit things we have typically done in any event.  

I do think inflation targeting has the potential on the margin to improve accountability, to address 

the potential time-inconsistency problem, and to improve communication.  I am struck by the fact 

that, if we had an explicit inflation target, it would probably help in the current circumstances, 

where there is, indeed, a good deal of concern both inside the organization and externally about the 

potential for deflation.  I think it would have also helped six months ago, when there was a good 

deal of concern that inflation was getting away from us and getting out of hand because of what was 

happening with commodity prices and so forth.  So I think it would be valuable in all of those 

regards, but I do not want to oversell it.  I think, as I said, it is largely institutionalizing the way we 

have conducted policy for several years now under normal circumstances. 

I will certainly leave to you the political judgment as to how to best proceed and what the 

timing ought to be.  Let me just make a few other comments here.  As several others have said, Jim 

and Jeff among them, I do not see any problem on the substantive level with adopting an inflation 

target and the dual mandate.  In the long run, sustainable growth and price stability go hand in hand, 

and indeed I think we can explain that.  I would have a mild preference for adopting a range rather 



 

 

 

   

January 16, 2009 41 of 69

than a point estimate just for credibility reasons.  If you adopt a single numerical target, I think 

people are going to say to themselves, “Well, there is either an implicit range around that or their 

ability to hit that number right on the button is low.”  But I do not think that is a show stopper, quite 

honestly, one way or the other. I do not worry about our ability to respond to financial crises.  I 

think the central bank always has the flexibility and the responsibility to respond to those situations 

when appropriate, and even preemptively, if we see something in asset prices that the Committee 

judges at the time to require a response on our part. 

I do think an important issue, and one on which personally I would like to see more 

evidence and more work done, is what the appropriate time horizon is.  Presumably we are going to 

conduct policy as we have been to achieve our objective of price stability over time.  If the time 

horizon is too short, you run the risk of excessive volatility in interest rates, assuming that’s your 

instrument but perhaps even if not.  If the time horizon is too long, it is meaningless.  My guess is 

that we are talking about something like four or five years, but I would like to see more evidence on 

that particular subject. 

I do have a preference—it is not a strong one—for the PCE index only because I think that 

is a better measure of inflation and the one we ought to be paying attention to.  With regard to the 

numerical specification, I have long favored something like the European Central Bank target of 

2 percent or a little under.  That gives us some room on the downside.  But having been around this 

Committee for quite a while and observing the great concern with deflation not only in the current 

circumstances but back earlier this decade when the economy was, in fact, expanding, I think we do 

need to recognize that and be careful that whatever number or range we pick is not too low.  After 

all, most of the benefits of selecting and achieving an inflation target come from maintaining 



  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

January 16, 2009 42 of 69

inflation at a stable, low level. It probably does not matter very much whether the number is 1½, 2, 

or even 2½, as long as it is low and as long as we achieve it.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Evans, I met with my 

academic advisory council this last week.  It is composed of a variety of academic economists from 

around Boston. As you might expect, there were widely divergent views on the advisability of 

inflation targeting and the nature of what it should look like, but I nonetheless think that some of the 

observations they made were of interest.  First, those who thought that a target was a good idea 

thought the lower bound of that target should be 2 percent.  That’s higher than they would have 

advocated previously and certainly higher than many members of the FOMC have advocated.  

Second, those who thought a target was a good idea argued for a large range, at least 100 basis 

points, reflecting the difficulty of actually remaining in our target range and, again, larger than I 

think many have discussed in the past.  Third, many felt that we would have a difficult time 

explaining to the public our target because we might have great difficulty hitting that target and it 

might make the Federal Reserve look ineffectual.  So there was a surprising concern about actually 

moving toward a target at this time. 

My own view is that a target may make sense to highlight that we will take actions 

necessary to avoid deflation and that we will remove the accommodation quickly enough that 

inflation will not be a significant problem when the economy does eventually recover.  I do have 

some caveats.  First, as I have mentioned before, this is the second time this decade we have been 

concerned about a zero lower bound, and it is significantly limiting our actions at this time.  We 

should take into account the cost of being in this position too often, and I think that argues for a 

higher target rate than I would have argued for two years ago.  At a minimum, the middle of the 



 

  

 

 

January 16, 2009 43 of 69

range should start with a 2, not a 1.  Second, as we experiment with a target and given the variability 

we have seen in all inflation measures, we should start with a larger range than I would have argued 

for a few years ago, probably 100 basis points is reasonable.  Third, just by observing where 

inflation has actually been over the last decade, it seems as though a revealed preference for 

inflation ranges has been roughly 1½ to 2½ percent.  I think an open question is whether our 

preferences should change based on hitting the lower bound this time. 

In terms of the other questions, I will just be very brief.  Like others, I think it will be very 

difficult to have a price-level objective.  I just think it is too difficult to communicate.  It will be a 

big enough challenge to explain inflation targeting.  So I would not be in favor of moving to a price-

level objective.  Second, the Congress may ask that we also provide a target for the unemployment 

rate if we adopt an explicit inflation target, and we should ask ourselves whether that is a tradeoff 

we are going to be willing to make.  Finally, regarding communication, most of our communication 

recently has been on the PCE measure.  I think changing as few things as possible probably makes 

sense. So I would be an advocate for using the total PCE.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is always desirable to have inflation 

expectations well anchored and better anchored, and I think the benefits of having more firmly 

anchored inflation expectations are higher now than they have been at any time I can think of at 

least in the recent past.  As you remarked, Mr. Chairman, on the one hand we face the threat of 

prolonged disinflation and weakness with a potential adverse feedback loop with declining inflation 

expectations raising real rates and feeding economic weakness, which in turn further erodes 

inflation expectations; on the other hand, we face concerns about the longer-term potential 

inflationary effects of our large operations to get the credit markets moving.  I do think that being 



 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 44 of 69

clearer about where we think inflation is going over the long run and where it should go over the 

long run can contribute to anchoring these expectations and, by anchoring the expectations better, 

will support meeting the dual mandate, especially in the current situation. 

We need to be careful not to expect very substantial, huge gains by what we do in terms of 

anchoring inflation expectations.  Expectations are already well anchored in the United States.  I 

thought the memo on the international experience was interesting in the sense that you could see 

this last spring and summer when, in the context of rising oil and commodity prices, longer-term 

expectations in the United States were anchored no worse and in some cases better than 

expectations in inflation-targeting economies.  So I do not think we have a big problem right now, 

but there is a threat of a bigger problem.  If, as seems likely, inflation and output are weak over an 

extended period, probably the most important question that we will face about expectations and 

credibility will be whether we can actually get inflation up before many years have passed, not 

whether we want to raise inflation and output.  Still there are enough studies about reactions to 

incoming data in inflation-targeting countries and the dispersion of inflation expectations to suggest 

that there are gains. There will be marginal gains in anchoring inflation expectations if we are more 

explicit, and as I said, I think that is particularly important in the current situation. 

I think we should strive to specify an objective in a way that does not materially affect the 

conduct of policy.  I do not have significant concerns about the way policy has been conducted over 

the past several decades.  I would not want to sacrifice flexibility or put less emphasis on the output 

gap. I agree that the better expectations are tied down, the more scope we should have to pay 

attention to other objectives.  But we need to remember to take advantage of that scope.  I thought 

policy last spring and summer was appropriate, and the question I have asked myself is whether it 

would have been harder to ease as much as we did last spring or hold off tightening as inflation rose 



  

 

 

  

 

 

   

 

 

January 16, 2009 45 of 69

last summer if we had had an inflation objective. In concept it should have been easier, but I think 

we need to be careful—if we are more explicit—that we retain our flexibility.  I remind ourselves 

that the most frequent criticism we get now is that we paid too much attention to the forecast for 

consumer price inflation in 2003-04, allowing a housing and credit bubble to develop.  I am not 

convinced that we should lean against the wind of asset bubbles with monetary policy, but we do 

need to be careful that an inflation objective does not constrain our ability to address financial 

instability when necessary. 

There is a whole range of alternatives we could choose to be more explicit about our 

inflation objective.  The first would be the extended projections that the subcommittee endorsed a 

couple of months ago—the range and central tendency of individual views.  Second would be the 

Committee’s voting on a long-run inflation objective:  What are we aiming for over the medium to 

long run? Where should inflation return to after it deviates from the objective, but with no pre­

commitment on the horizon?  A third alternative would be one that has what I would call an 

inflation target that has a medium-term priority and that the Committee expects to achieve within a 

couple of years. This is what President Plosser was talking about. 

I think that the extended projections seem like an obvious step, a natural evolution.  They 

will give us a lot of the advantages.  They will give us reference points for talking about the fact that 

inflation might be lower than we would like and why we will be acting to make it go higher.  I do 

think that getting to a vote on the longer-run inflation objective—not the medium-term inflation 

target but the longer-run objective—eventually would have some advantages over just the extended 

forecast. It is a better sense of commitment and clarity.  It will help in Committee discussion if we 

are all talking about policy to get to the same objective, and if we are not specific about the time 

frame, we should have enough flexibility to avoid undue constraints on our behavior. 



  

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 46 of 69

Then how far to go and when to go depend importantly on building the case, as President 

Evans remarked, both in the public and in the political environment.  We need to convince people 

that this is consistent with the dual mandate.  So I think the speed with which we move through a 

potentially staged process would be dependent, Mr. Chairman, on your sense of where the political 

process is, where it is going, and what the costs and benefits are. 

On the specific points, I would go for a point rather than a range.  I would go for something 

around 2 percent on the PCE index.  The range to me has difficult properties about how we would 

react. If we said around some number, I think we could react very little to small deviations and 

more to larger deviations, and that makes some sense.  I would make it PCE.  That is what we have 

been dealing with.  It is a more comprehensive measure.  Even if we moved toward a more explicit 

inflation objective that the Committee voted on, I would continue with the long-run projections.  I 

think it is important to emphasize them in our information to the public about what we think the 

long-run properties of the economy are, and they emphasize the dual mandate.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have gotten a lot out of the discussion 

today. I have to say that I am still really forming my opinion both on some of the more important 

arguments in favor of this or that and on the details.  But I think what I can best do at this point is 

just to give you a sense of how I am leaning, which I think is broadly in line with what many of the 

members have already stated.  I favor an explicit target.  I think going beyond simply the approach 

of extending the forecast makes sense.  I favor an inflation objective versus a price-level approach.  

I think the price-level approach, particularly for the broad public, will be more difficult to 

communicate. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 47 of 69

I can see arguments on both sides of a point versus a range.  On balance, I favor a point 

forecast of 2 percent, a round number.  For many observers of our policy, some range would be 

understood, and I do like a range from a management point of view because it gives us a better 

chance of hitting it. But from the point of view of clarity with the general public, I could be 

convinced that a point, as long as it is a round number, would make sense. 

I tend to view the approach that I am laying out as really espousing what I call a “serious 

guiding principle,” which allows for pragmatic consideration of conditions at any given time and, 

therefore, does preserve some flexibility, as Governor Kohn emphasized.  Of course, if it is too soft 

a guiding principle, then it is not taken seriously.  It is not credible.  So I think we want to 

communicate it so that it is understood that, as a guiding principle, it is to be taken very seriously.  I 

do not see this in conflict with the dual mandate.  I think we would be communicating a guiding 

principle for the inflation part of our dual mandate.  I tend to favor a medium-term horizon—three 

to five years.  I think that is a credible horizon.  I also favor a headline number.  Because we have 

been using the PCE measure, although it requires a bit more education for at least the broad public, I 

think headline PCE is a good approach.  But I would certainly be easily convinced to go with 

headline CPI. 

To anchor expectations on the part of households, as President Bullard discussed, I think the 

approach needs to be one of simplicity.  One test that I would use would be to find out if the average 

informed citizen can recite our policy or our approach back to us.  That is why I favor a round 

number of 2 percent—because it is memorable and because I think the average person would get it.  

What we are doing here really is formalizing a consensus that already exists.  In that respect I find 

myself broadly in favor of what most have emphasized.  I do like a staged approach to deal with the 

politics of the matter.  Under the current circumstances, there is such sensitivity out in the political 



 

  

 

 

 

   

January 16, 2009 48 of 69

world that it may require a staged approach.  I agree with the comment made earlier, Mr. Chairman, 

that you would be in the best position to judge how to stage it.  So as I said earlier, I am still forming 

my opinion, but those are my leanings at this point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Fisher—back from the Galapagos, by 

the way. 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, and where you can see how creative destruction works over very 

prolonged periods, Mr. Chairman.  I recommend it to anybody who would want to truly get away 

from what we constantly worry about. 

Mr. Chairman, you have heard a broad range of views, and that broad range of views 

indicates the difficulty of reaching a decision in short order here.  In terms of my own preferences, 

from a theoretical standpoint rather than go through each particular aspect, I would basically ask 

that I be recorded almost point by point as President Plosser early on articulated.  We are in exact 

agreement from the standpoint of what we might seek to achieve theoretically.  I was taken by 

President Evans’s comments, however, in terms of the validity of ultimately having a price 

objective, but his concern that now is not a good time.  I was particularly struck by his phrase that 

this exercise may be orthogonal, as he put it, to the current financial crisis.  The only disagreement I 

have with President Plosser is that issue of timing, and I would probably say that, unlike President 

Evans of Chicago, I am not open-minded on the subject.  Let me explain. 

I do not believe the issue right now is the political environment. We went through this 

argument before in 2007.  My views are clearly recorded.  I was quite concerned about the politics 

of this, given my background and given that I am neither an academic nor as intellectually potent as 

the rest of the people around this table or on this video screen.  I worry about those things.  What I 

worry about most, though, is the last time we discussed this we were basically fiddling while Rome 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 49 of 69

was beginning to burn, and I worry about the market perception of our focusing on this issue at this 

time.  Let me be blunt from the standpoint of what we have been able to achieve. 

We basically are working our way out of a deep end zone, just to use a football analogy.  

Charlie will appreciate this since they decimated the Dallas Cowboys.  We have fumbled 

sometimes, and we have been sacked a few times, but I think we are beginning to build street 

credibility, and that street credibility comes from the evolution of our understanding of these issues.  

As President Lacker and you said earlier in discussing the Bank of America transaction or the new 

support program, we are learning more as we go on.  I think we have more respect in the 

marketplace. I think the New York Desk is gaining—not that they did not have credibility before— 

and we have achieved a great deal in terms of these new programs we are undertaking.  We have a 

financial crisis upon us.  I do not believe that has been alleviated, and I think we are just at the 

beginning of the game.  We are deep in the end zone.  We are beginning to work our way down the 

field, and I worry that being viewed as engaging in a theoretical discussion, which has lots of 

niceties to it and a lot of attraction to it ultimately, may just make it look as though we are not 

keeping our eye on the ball or keeping to our game plan. 

So I would argue very strongly from my sense of those with whom I talk in the marketplace 

that this is not a good time to proceed with this endeavor.  We can think about it.  I think the 

discussion today has been very thorough.  Again, I line up with President Plosser in terms of what I 

would ultimately like to do.  I do not have much of a difference of view there.  But I do not think, 

Mr. Chairman, that this is a good time to proceed from a financial market perspective and the way 

we are being perceived in the outside world, whatever the validities may be; and I do not think 

anybody can doubt, certainly on the hawkish side, my credentials on this issue of inflation, even to 

the point of standing all by myself against a much wiser majority.  I am deeply concerned about the 



 

  

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 50 of 69

deflationary gearing that we are encountering right now.  But I do not think it is the time to talk 

about this, and I think we should just keep our eye on the ball of what we have been doing and 

basically running the business that we are running the way we are running it currently. 

I want to conclude with just underscoring another comment by President Plosser, which is 

that words and communication are not enough.  Our actions speak infinitely louder than our words, 

and right now I think our actions should be devoted to getting ourselves out of the mess we find 

ourselves in.  I think we are making progress on that front, and I do not want to be distracted from it.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. First Vice President Cumming. 

MS. CUMMING.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe it would be very helpful under the 

current circumstances to adopt an explicit numerical objective for medium-term inflation of 

2 percent for PCE inflation, given the real risk of deflation and the likelihood that deflation fears 

will become an important part of the public’s concerns about the steep global downturn that we are 

now in.  In some ways, as many have noted, it would be a small step.  The analyst community and 

much of the public already believe that we have an implicit objective of 1½ to 2 percent, and our 

effective reaction function probably also reflects that.  We could emphasize that continuity with our 

past practice if we adopt such an objective.  But it is also a large step, as the Chairman himself noted 

at the start of the discussion.  The implications of such an explicit objective in the current 

circumstances for our behavior are very important and not necessarily easy to explain—for 

example, that we would be willing to accept some inflation above our objective for some time—and 

really requires a carefully crafted speech or even a series of speeches, as well as that political 

dialogue. I note again that, much as the Chairman’s speech earlier this week really laid out what our 

current monetary strategy is, such a speech or series of speeches could be very useful. 



 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 51 of 69

What would give that kind of education campaign real power is a unified FOMC behind the 

speech.  Being unified means a wholehearted endorsement and a consistent message from all of us 

about the explicit objective, right down to the chosen number.  The normal, healthy debate during 

benign times can produce great anxiety in stressful times like these, and it would be a large step 

because, to be effective, this move could not be portrayed as temporary or until the crisis seems to 

lift.  It would be a real advance in our practice, consistent with where we have been headed to 

date—others have noted this in a discussion earlier on this same topic—and also where overall 

central bank practice has been heading.  Of course, it would be correct to evaluate the success of 

such an objective sometime down the road. 

I would also like to see us keep it simple for the most effective communication, as many 

have noted.  So I would see that as a medium-term objective of around 2 percent for the PCE; 

inflation at a flexible horizon, and here we would be thinking on the longer end of medium, as 

President Yellen described it, maybe leading into the longer term; and overall inflation, not core.  

We do have a lot invested in PCE as what we believe is the right inflation measure, and I would 

advise continuing.  We would have an opportunity to relate that PCE inflation target to an 

equivalent in the CPI—for example, a CPI of 2½ percent with a PCE inflation target of 2. 

If we go ahead with long-term projections, which I would recommend, an explicit objective 

obviates the need for participants’ long-term forecasts of inflation because in the medium term we 

would all be working toward and would expect to meet the shared objective.  In such a framework, 

though, participants’ views on the long-run values of GDP growth and unemployment would be of 

great use to the public.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 52 of 69

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will keep my comments short mostly because I 

do not think my views have changed materially since we last took up this discussion.  On the merits, 

I remain skeptical of the benefits of establishing an explicit inflation objective, and in terms of 

timing, I think the timing is really quite poor at this moment.  Part of the reason for the skepticism is 

that I do not believe an inflation target would have or should have changed our conduct of policy 

during this period or most other periods that I could envision.  In substance, I think that establishing 

the objective is of far less consequence than the conduct of policy and the actions of this body.  Our 

credibility and commitment come from those actions—come from our reaction function to changing 

circumstances—far more than from what we say, and I think that is particularly true in times like 

this. I am convinced that the benefits of an inflation objective are small relative to the prudent steps 

that we have taken in terms of our longer-run projections—along the lines that President Yellen 

mentioned—in keeping expectations well anchored.  I am far less certain, however, that the costs of 

establishing an objective are small, particularly in a period like this. 

President Evans talked about this discussion being orthogonal to the financial situation.  I 

think that is quite euphemistic.  Among the questions the world and the markets have about the 

FOMC, this is not on the top of the list or maybe even on the first page of questions they have about 

us at this moment. The very nature, role, and responsibilities of the Fed are central and are being 

asked about in all corners, both in the Congress and in markets, and I think that we should not 

burden those discussions by adding the discussion of an inflation objective to get some modest 

benefits thereof in this environment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say, first, that I have not been thinking 

about or discussing these topics since 1995.  [Laughter]  Nevertheless, before I got here I could have 



 

 

 

  

 

 

January 16, 2009 53 of 69

guessed pretty accurately what the intention of the Committee was and what the targets of the 

Committee were. From that standpoint, I am not sure that articulating a specific objective is going 

to do much more to inform the general public as to how this Committee might act.  After hearing 

the discussion, I could, frankly, support in normal times almost any consensus opinion as to what 

that target should be—how it should be expressed, whether it should be a point or a range, and what 

measure should be used.  However, these are not normal times, and all of the discussion assumes 

communication and credibility. 

On the communication front, I never thought I would see a time when it was almost 

impossible to articulate the role of capital in the financial system or even the role of the financial 

system in our overall economy.  So I think this makes it a very difficult time to try to inform the 

public about something like an inflation target.  The second piece would be credibility.  First of all, 

we are in a situation with a fairly high level of uncertainty and a low level of confidence in our 

forecasts, and we are responding to those forecasts with untested tools.  So I think it is really 

difficult to be precise in what we think the outcomes are going to be.  Second, we have already 

strained our credibility a bit in our inability to meet the fed funds target for a period of time, and 

then we moved the target down to where the actuality was.  So I think that those two would make it 

very difficult right now.  Finally, in the political environment, my concern is that, in our efforts to 

support the markets and individual firms, we are running very close to the political independence 

line. Any political capital that we use in that sense is political capital that we need, and I do not 

think this is a time to use up a lot of political energy on the subject of inflation targeting.  Thank 

you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you all very much.  Let me just try to summarize a bit 

what I heard and make a few additional comments.  We have had this discussion a number of times 



 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 54 of 69

before, but I actually am learning, and I think the views are evolving, becoming more subtle, and in 

many ways converging.  So I do find it useful, and I appreciate everybody’s willingness to 

participate in this. 

I was going to say before the last two or three speakers that I thought we had a pretty broad 

agreement with the idea in principle.  Now, maybe I cannot quite say that at the end of the round, 

but it is still the case that purely in principle it seems that the great majority of the Committee is 

comfortable with the idea of inflation targets.  Again, abstracting for the moment from political and 

other considerations, the Committee made both the general arguments that we have heard before 

about anchoring inflation expectations, reducing uncertainty, improving communication, and the 

like, while noting that there are some special features now including risk of deflation and concerns 

about inflation that might make a communication device of this type particularly useful. 

I think there is wide agreement in the Committee that an inflation target is not only 

consistent with the dual mandate but also supportive of the dual mandate in general and that our 

policies already approximate inflation targeting in that respect.  Such a change would affect 

communication more than policy.  For the most part, people agreed this would not affect our ability 

to address financial stability issues, although Governor Kohn mentioned the asset bubble question.  

I think that is an interesting question.  Just speaking parenthetically, when Mark Gertler and I wrote 

on this in Jackson Hole as academics about ten years ago, I think our message was misunderstood; 

our message was not so much that bubbles are unimportant but rather that a strong inflation-oriented 

policy would, as a side effect, be an effective response to bubbles.  But, anyway, there is an 

interaction, but most people today did not feel that it could not be overcome.  So, again, on general 

principles, I hear pretty widespread support for the idea. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 55 of 69

In terms of specifics, there remain some not heartfelt but nevertheless some differences 

about the details of what an inflation-targeting program would look like.  There remains some 

disagreement about the PCE versus the CPI.  One place in which there is agreement is that the 

headline inflation number is the right one—certainly if the range we are looking at is longer than a 

year or two.  I thought perhaps a slight majority was in favor of a point as opposed to a range, but it 

was not overwhelming.  For the actual number, I actually expected maybe slightly more interest in 

moving up from our so-called comfort zones, given our recent experience with deflation risk and 

zero lower bound. There was a bit of that, but people are still mostly in the 1½ to 2 percent range, 

in general. 

On the horizon, I think most people are comfortable with the implications of a quadratic 

objective function model that says basically that the horizon should be somewhat variable 

depending on initial conditions and preferences, although a couple of people talked about having a 

more long-run perspective that would be more aspirational and not as constraining in the short term.  

There were a couple of interesting comments about having more information about our funds rate 

expectations, which is something that we have not explicitly talked about much before and that we 

need to think about over time.  Certainly it is a direction that some central banks have decided to go.  

There was not much support for price-level targeting, as being too complex an approach and too 

hard to communicate. 

Let me say a word about the projections, particularly in light of the consensus that, if we are 

going to proceed with a target, we should not do it in a precipitate way.  I think that there was a 

pretty reasonable consensus—and I myself would support it—that we should go ahead with the 

long-term projections that we discussed and were recommended by the Subcommittee on 

Communications and that we should think about how we communicate those long-term projections 



 

 

 

 

  

January 16, 2009 56 of 69

and how that might be either a terminal point for the time being or a further step in the direction of 

an explicit Committee target.  So I think we ought to go ahead with that.  I heard a lot of appropriate 

concern about the political process, and I agree with it.  I think it is a very difficult period.  In some 

ways this could be a propitious time because of concerns about deflation, for example.  Periods in 

which there are concerns about deflation are periods when there is not, in a congressperson’s point 

of view, a tradeoff between inflation and growth, but rather inflation is in some sense promoting 

growth. So in some ways it is propitious and opportunistic, as President Evans described it.  But I 

think fairness to the process and fairness to the fact that we want to have a longer-term decision here 

suggest that we need to do this very carefully.  I will undertake to test the waters very carefully and 

with great sensitivity to the reactions that I get both from the Administration and from the Congress. 

A point that President Plosser made, which I think was a very good one, was that it is not 

enough to give a target or an objective but that it is important to be very transparent about the 

linkages between our objectives and the actions that we are talking.  I think this is very important, 

particularly in the current circumstances, when we are working with such unusual tools and the 

relationships between our tools and our objectives are much less clear even to us than normal.  So I 

am very much in favor going forward, whether or not we decide to have an explicit objective, of 

doing everything we can collectively and individually to provide information and clarity about the 

tools we are using and how we expect them to affect the economy and what our anticipations are for 

the future in terms of using those tools, the criteria we will be using, and so on.  I think that 

transparency in general—if we think about this in a broader framework—is extraordinarily 

important right now, and an explicit objective could be part of that.  But even if it is not part of that, 

creating more certainty for and understanding by the public about what we are doing is unusually 

important in this context. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 57 of 69

To summarize, I have heard a very interesting discussion.  It has been very helpful.  I hear 

for the most part support for the idea of an explicit objective in principle.  However, if we were to 

move in that direction, there was considerable concern that we do it in such a way that it does not 

use up too much political capital, create a backlash, or even create concerns that we were off 

message.  We would have to explain very carefully why this is not an off-message step.  I would 

propose to continue to discuss and evaluate this option and to do some gentle testing of it with the 

various political actors and meanwhile to continue with the projections, with transparency efforts, 

and with our discussion of this within the Committee as we go forward.  So let me just stop there.  

We do not have to come to any conclusions today.  I do think it is clear that it is very unlikely that 

we would take a vote in January, at the next meeting in 10 days, on this matter, but I will continue to 

report to you on what reactions I get as I test this out a bit. 

If it is okay, why don’t we just turn for a few minutes to the last item on the agenda, which 

is the meeting structure.  We received a couple of letters on this, which were posted.  We are 

obviously facing important challenges substantively in terms of finding a set of policies that will 

address the financial instability and its consequences, and in doing so, we have been very creative 

and have engaged in a number of unorthodox policies.  Those policies, in turn, have created 

governance and collaboration issues.  As I discussed at the last meeting, I think fundamentally the 

only solution for us if we want to, on the one hand, get the right policies and, on the other hand, to 

work effectively is to do this in a collaborative and mutually respectful way.  As a step toward 

facilitating that collaboration, I asked the staff to propose a structure of the FOMC meeting, which 

you received.  Let me just talk about it for a couple of minutes.  I do not know if we want to do a 

whole go-round, although I am happy to sit here as long as people want to comment, but I would be 

happy to take comments or questions about it. 



 

 

 

 

 

  

  

January 16, 2009 58 of 69

Although the Board has responsibility for the section 13(3) credit policies, these policies 

obviously have implications for overall monetary policy, including the effects on the balance sheet, 

the effects on our dual mandate, and importantly, the exit strategy, which we discussed today as 

well. So there clearly is an interest of the FOMC to have oversight for and input into the credit 

policies that are being used by the Federal Reserve. 

We discussed at the last meeting and I would reiterate why I think that setting a target, say, 

for the size of the balance sheet or the monetary base, as attractive as that might be in the sense of 

being similar to setting a federal funds rate target, is probably not a good way to go about it because 

of the heterogeneity of the programs that we are using and the difficulty of summarizing them in a 

single number.  An additional point about using a single number is that, given that with many of the 

facilities we have the usage is determined by demand rather than by supply, it is often the case that 

when conditions worsen we get more demand.  If we have a fixed target for the base or for the 

balance sheet, we would perversely be tightening supply in periods just when the facilities are more 

useful to the markets.  Again, I do not think that setting a target for the base or for the balance sheet 

is a very good summary statistic, not to mention the fact that many of our programs have variable 

sizes and, therefore, it is not straightforward that we could even meet such an objective. 

So how can we set this up in a way to work effectively together?  The memorandum that 

was circulated discussed a possible structure for the meeting.  Let me go through it very quickly.  

First, I proposed to make the meeting a joint FOMC–Board meeting.  The purpose of doing that 

would be to ensure that there is no barrier to discussing any of the programs, including those that are 

legally the province of the Board, and to emphasize that this is a collaborative process as we work 

together on these various policies.  The second element would be that the usual briefing about 

financial markets and the economy would be expanded to include a regular discussion of our 



 

  

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 59 of 69

various facilities, their usage, their effects on markets, their implications for the exit strategy and for 

the balance sheet, and any plans or proposals that might exist for future changes or additional 

programs so that there would be full information for the full Committee on these programs and our 

evaluation of their effects.  I propose that, after that and after a Q&A, we have an informal 

discussion, not necessarily a go-round, just to get a sense of the Committee about various aspects of 

these programs and their effects on monetary policy.  I think I should reiterate—as everyone knows, 

but I am going to state it again—that many of the components of these programs are, in fact, FOMC 

responsibilities, including those related to open market operations, to swaps, and to purchases of 

securities like GSE debt. So to the extent that we want to make changes or discuss possible future 

programs in those areas, we can do that certainly as a Committee and make decisions at some point 

during the meeting. 

With respect to the Board’s 13(3) facilities, I think it is entirely appropriate for us to have a 

full discussion of the implications of those present or future facilities for monetary policy and for 

the exit strategy.  I think that the Committee ought to express its views on the implications of those 

programs and that the Board should and will fully take into account those views in whatever actions 

it decides to take.  Following this discussion there would be the normal economic outlook go-round 

and the policy go-round, and there would be further opportunities for comments from the FOMC 

participants.  Then, of course, our discussions and actions would be reflected in the statement and in 

the minutes.  It was suggested—I think President Lacker suggested it—that another place to have 

this discussion would be in the policy go-round, and I am perfectly fine with that.  I think the 

advantage of having some discussion at the beginning of the meeting is to give people a chance to 

hear what others have to say and to get some sense of the Committee.  Then in the policy go-round, 



 

  

 

 

 

  

  

 

January 16, 2009 60 of 69

if people have views that they would like to express at that point, that will be informed by an earlier 

discussion.  So I see no conflict with that. 

That’s my general recommendation.  I will say just one more word about an alternative.  An 

alternative would be to have some kind of formal vote, resolution, sense of the Committee about 

balance sheet programs.  I am open to discussion of any such proposal, but I would just point out 

that, again, effectively the only programs affecting the balance sheet that are not under the direct 

control of the FOMC are the 13(3) credit facilities.  At this point going forward, it looks as though 

we have the TALF and maybe variants of the TALF for the main direction that it is going to go.  So 

I think it would be really quite effective for the Board to bring such proposals before the Committee 

and get their input and views, and it would probably be a more straightforward way to manage it.  

But I am not wedded to anything.  I really want to make sure that the Committee is comfortable that 

it is fully exercising its authority and responsibility and that its views are being taken into account as 

the Board takes any actions related to credit facilities and the like.  Those are just some thoughts, 

and I guess I would emphasize finally that whatever we do for January is an experiment.  We can 

see how it works, and we can evolve over time as we gain experience and information.  But let me 

stop there and just invite any comments or questions on this general topic.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Because I have made the case for balance 

sheet observation, I just thought I would share a couple of thoughts.  First of all, I appreciate your 

efforts and your thoughts on this matter.  I think the memo was informative and helpful, and your 

comments have been very welcome from my perspective.  I would make just one minor suggestion 

or at least comment.  My view about the balance sheet in terms of the FOMC’s role, in part, was not 

to set or particularly to target the balance sheet or a specific size of the base.  Both in the last 

meeting and currently, my point has been to think more broadly about putting caps either on sizes of 



 

 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 61 of 69

certain programs or on the balance sheet as a whole, recognizing full well, as you pointed out, that 

some of these programs are demand driven and they go up and they go down perhaps even from 

week to week in some cases.  I fully understand that, and my thinking along these lines is that we 

would try to set caps either for the overall balance sheet or maybe even for individual programs, that 

we would review them periodically and, if demand or circumstances arose where we felt it was 

appropriate to expand the size of the programs or create new ones and therefore adopt changes in 

the balance sheet accordingly, we could adapt the interaction between the Committee and the Board 

in that way. 

So I don’t want to be misunderstood as that I was trying to have a base growth target or even 

a balance sheet growth target in the way I was thinking about it.  I was trying to recognize—as you 

pointed out, Mr. Chairman—that there is an interaction here between the nature of monetary policy 

and the nature of the credit programs that we are managing.  We need to acknowledge explicitly that 

interaction and make sure, as these programs and these efforts evolve, that we take into account that 

interaction in an appropriate way.  That is the critical piece of what I think we need to think about.  

Moving forward, I agree with you that we ought to try some new strategies and discussion in our 

meetings. I hope in the process—as you said, it is an experiment—we will work through a 

collaborative effort to achieve our objectives.  But this does relate back—as you pointed out in your 

comments—to our earlier discussion about inflation targeting and, in any communicative effort, we 

need to be able to link our actions that we take as a Committee on monetary policy and our charges, 

relate that to what we are doing and to our objectives in a fairly systematic way.  As you pointed 

out, and I agree with you, right now that is very difficult to do.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Stern. 



 

 

 

  

January 16, 2009 62 of 69

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I am comfortable with what you have 

proposed for the organization and content of the meeting.  As you said, I think we ought to give it a 

shot in January, and we may learn from that experience that there are some ways to improve it, but I 

am certainly comfortable in starting with that.  The only other thing I would add is that I have tried 

to give some thought as to whether we could set some metric or numerical objective for the balance 

sheet, the base, reserves, or something that would relate in a meaningful way to our objectives and 

would help address this issue. So far all I can say is that I have been stymied and have not been able 

to make any progress on how we would do that.  So I think by the nature of the fact that our tools 

and programs are not, at least on the basis of history, related to our objectives in any systematic 

way, we are going to have to do this as best we can judgmentally.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really found this proposal of yours to be very 

helpful because my views have been evolving on this.  It is much more complicated, difficult, and 

interesting than even I guessed.  So I think our thinking will evolve on this, and it is an experiment 

as you mentioned.  I had previously thought that somehow introducing, as President Plosser 

mentioned, some type of cap on the size of the balance sheet or some range for that would be useful.  

But you have certainly convinced me that the size of these programs is going to vary depending on a 

number of endogenous developments as well as on what we do.  So that is probably not so fruitful. 

But in terms of the responsibility of this Committee, when we start talking about the exit 

strategy for winding down the programs and getting our balance sheet back toward where it was at 

the outset, I recognize that this is quite some time forward and we will be lucky when we get to that 

point.  We need to be thinking about how the balance sheet looks as we exit this, and that is going to 

be a real challenge. That is why I applaud all of the suggestions about how we look at these 



  

 

 

  

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 63 of 69

programs with respect to that exit strategy.  What we need to do is think about what the due 

diligence ought to be as we consider the risk that we are facing for policy.  Depending on how this 

plays out, there could be capital losses.  I do not know how large, but then as we try to wind this 

down, we might find that there is a lot more liquidity out there.  Our liabilities are larger.  We can’t 

extinguish that on our own, and that would have price-level implications under certain scenarios that 

would be very uncomfortable for us.  Now, of course, the Treasury could help us out with issuing 

certain notes, but then that gets us into how we are tied to the Treasury, and so that is just more 

complicated. Still I think that your proposal—for Bill Dudley and the New York Desk to talk about 

financial developments and the programs, being as explicit as possible and in a consistent fashion 

describing these programs and identifying the key parameters that will help determine whether the 

exit strategy is going more favorably or if we are at greater risk—I think that would be very helpful. 

When we get to the policy discussion on these programs, we could try to come up with some 

risk scenarios as benchmarks for things that we fear greatly or things that would go well.  These 

could be low probability.  Obviously, we are thinking that they are low probability.  The worst case 

would probably be if inflationary expectations rose and the economy were still in the doldrums or 

worse.  That is not my outlook, but if there was a loss of confidence in the United States relative to 

the rest of the world—again, I see that this is low probability—how would that influence what our 

balance sheet looks like coming out?  Even if it is a low probability, if it has a really high cost to our 

institution, at least being explicit about the risk that we are accepting as a Committee for the Federal 

Reserve would serve us very well. I am pretty sure that we are headed in directions like this, but I 

am just interpreting this now in terms of the due diligence that we might expect if somebody were 

supervising an institution like this and what they would be asking us to do.  I think that this will 

probably evolve, and I found this to be very helpful.  Thanks. 



  

 

January 16, 2009 64 of 69

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks.  I hope the kind of analysis that we can do for the 

Committee will be complementary with improving our explanation for the public as we develop 

metrics and criteria.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE. Mr. Chairman, as we have a number of different programs, all of which have 

different life cycles, I wonder if we might look at managing our balance sheet in the same way our 

financial institutions do.  That would be that we would communicate in terms of expectations and in 

terms of a strategy so that we would have a starting point, which would be wherever our balance 

sheet was at our meeting.  Then we might also adopt or at least discuss an expectation as to where 

that balance sheet is headed in the different subcategories.  For instance, in a bank you tend to talk 

of increasing or decreasing the loan portfolio at various levels.  In some of the programs, it might be 

an expectation of demand, and in others, it might be a specific decision as to supply.  But rather than 

discussing each proposal separately, we might actually take a look at the full balance sheet, if you 

will, and say in an intermeeting period that we would expect our balance sheet to move in this 

direction in terms of components. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think that is a good suggestion.  But you said intermeeting 

period, and I think we would probably want to look at longer horizons as well. 

MS. DUKE. And longer horizons as well.  But it would give some indication as to what we 

thought was going on with each type of program and the conditions that surrounded it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That’s a good suggestion.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Well, very quickly, Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Duke’s suggestion is 

very good, both short and long term.  I just want to thank you for the fairness of what you are 

suggesting here. I think it goes a long way to being inclusive and certainly to avoid 

disenfranchising the Committee, which is no one’s intention.  Like Gary, I’m stymied at trying to 



 

 

 

 

 

January 16, 2009 65 of 69

figure out a metric.  But I think the important point is that we will at least be having a full-throated 

discussion of the interactions and the monetary consequences of our initiatives, and I just want to 

thank you for the proposal that you have made.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just following up a bit on some of these 

comments, I was wondering if you thought that some kind of metric like the permanent component 

or the consistent component of the expansion of the balance sheet is really what we are thinking 

about in a lot of these comments.  Maybe that is the kind of measure that we are trying to put 

together. A lot of your comments and everybody’s comments are that there is much reversibility in 

many of these programs.  They are temporary programs intended to address the financial crisis, and 

they will go away once conditions return closer to normal.  But there might be components that are 

substantial and are harder to reverse, and somehow we would like to get metrics about that so that 

we have some sense of what we are doing in terms of price-level implications or inflation 

implications over the medium term.  I do not know if you think something like that is sort of where 

we are headed, or is that just too difficult to get a handle on?  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I think a more accessible way to say what you said was 

going back to what President Evans said and what Governor Duke said, which is to have forecasts 

or projections of the balance sheet, perhaps under different scenarios.  That is a way essentially of 

trying to figure out what the permanent component is or what the longer-maturity component is 

under different scenarios.  Any other questions or comments?  Again, it has been a long and very 

fruitful discussion, and I look forward to seeing you in Washington in about 10 days.  Thank you. 

END OF MEETING 




