











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, September 22-23, 2009


 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 1 of 212

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

September 22–23, 2009 


A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., 
on Tuesday, September 22, 2009, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, September 23, 
2009, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Mr. Bernanke, Chairman 

Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Ms. Duke 

Mr. Evans 

Mr. Kohn 

Mr. Lacker 

Mr. Lockhart 

Mr. Tarullo
 
Mr. Warsh 

Ms. Yellen
 

Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Messrs. Fisher and Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and 
Philadelphia, respectively 

Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 

Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
 
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
 
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
 
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 

Mr. Sheets, Economist 

Mr. Stockton, Economist 


Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Sullivan, Tracy, Weinberg, and Wilcox, 
Associate Economists 

Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for Management, 
Board of Governors 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________ 

 

September 22–23, 2009 2 of 212

Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Banking Supervision and 
Regulation and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors 

Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Reifschneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Divisions 
of Monetary Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respectively, 
Board of Governors 

Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  
Governors 

Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of  
Governors 

Mr. Connolly,¹ First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston and Dallas, respectively 

Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rasche, Rudebusch, and Schweitzer, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San 
Francisco, and Cleveland, respectively 

Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Mr. McCarthy and Ms. O’Connor, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York 

Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only. 



 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 3 of 212

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

September 22–23, 2009 


September 22—Afternoon Session
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon. 

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 

MR. KOHN. May I interrupt? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Please. 

MR. KOHN. I’d like to congratulate you on your reappointment.  I think you’ve 

provided critical leadership to the Committee through these past, sometimes difficult, years.  I’m 

glad the President recognized that you are the best person for the future, and I’m sure the Senate 

will agree very shortly, so congratulations.  [Applause] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. And many thanks to the Committee for the collegial work 

and discussions we’ve had through a very difficult period.  I appreciate how much we’ve all 

pulled together and dealt with some of these enormous problems. 

I need a motion to close the Board meeting. 

MR. KOHN. So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me first welcome Jim Lyon to the table.  Jim will be 

sitting in Gary Stern’s spot.  Gary retired, as you know, two weeks ago, and we will have a 

luncheon tomorrow after the meeting to honor Gary. 

The first item on the agenda is financial developments, open market operations, and 

System credit facilities.  We’ll start with a briefing from the Desk by Brian Sack.  We’ll have a 

Q&A after that, and then we’ll follow that with some additional staff briefings.  Brian? 



 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

                                                 
  1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

September 22–23, 2009 4 of 212

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Prices on a broad range of risky assets 
continued to rise over the intermeeting period, fueled by an improving economic 
outlook and the low level of financing rates arising from the current stance of 
monetary policy. Broad equity indexes, shown in the upper left panel, rose more than 
7 percent on balance, adding to the sizable recovery since the end of the first quarter.  
Corporate bond spreads, the upper right, edged down further, leaving them 
dramatically improved from their levels earlier in the year. 

The gains over the past six months owe primarily to a more optimistic assessment 
of the economic outlook and a perception that the downside risks to growth have 
diminished.  Indeed, as captured in our primary dealer survey in the middle left panel, 
the upward revision in the expected path of GDP growth from earlier in the year has 
been substantial. In addition, respondents also indicated that the downside risks 
around the expected growth path diminished notably over this period.  This shift has 
reduced the amount of uncertainty that investors see in risky asset prices, as indicated 
by the relatively low levels of implied volatility on equities, shown to the right. 

The gains in asset prices have been so dramatic that market observers have begun 
to wonder whether the markets have become too frothy, with some pointing to the 
extensive liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve as a contributing factor.  By 
many metrics, however, asset valuations do not look too extended.  The Board staff’s 
measure of the equity premium, shown in the bottom left panel, is still high by 
historical standards. Likewise, by many measures, corporate yield spreads still look 
relatively high, taking into account the outlook for defaults.  As shown in the bottom  
right, expected corporate defaults have fallen substantially since earlier in the year, 
which likely explains a considerable portion of the narrowing of corporate yield 
spreads. 

Overall, risky asset prices have come a long way over the past six months, but so 
has the economic environment that they reflect. 

In contrast to the more accommodative conditions in financial markets, banks 
continued to restrict credit to private borrowers.  As shown in the upper left panel of 
exhibit 2, the volume of private loans at commercial banks (the dark blue line) has 
declined sharply. This decline has not been driven by a lack of available funds, as 
deposits (the orange line) have risen sharply and other sources of funding have 
become more readily available.  In fact, banks have been accumulating Treasury and 
agency securities (the light blue line) over this period. However, they have less 
appetite for adding credit risk to their portfolios, as they continue to repair their 
balance sheets and face additional loan write-downs going forward. 

Part of the decline in bank credit also reflects weaker demand.  The business 
sector as a whole has little need to raise new funds, and net borrowing by the sector 
has been negative in recent months.  In addition, firms with access to the market have 
shifted towards corporate bonds as a source of financing.  This shift can be seen in the 



 
 

 

 

  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 5 of 212

amount of high-yield debt that has been issued since the first quarter, the upper right 
panel. The pattern for consumer credit is similar in some regards.  Overall, consumer 
credit is contracting sharply, despite the issuance of a decent volume of consumer-
related ABS. As shown in the middle left panel, ABS issuance reached $38 billion in 
the third quarter, near its pace from the previous quarter. 

Activity in the ABS market has been supported to a great extent by the TALF, 
with nearly all of the ABS deals in the third quarter brought to the market through the 
TALF. However, there are signs that dependence on the TALF is beginning to wane.  
Most notably, even though most issuance is TALF-eligible, the amount of that 
issuance that is actually financed through the facility has been declining, a sign that 
private credit markets have improved enough to make TALF financing relatively 
expensive for some borrowers.  At the September subscription, for example, only 
$6 billion of the nearly $17 billion of ABS issued ended up being financed through 
the TALF. 

The better financing conditions and the greater willingness of investors to take 
risk have led to a further decline in ABS spreads, shown in the middle right panel.  
Spreads for AAA-rated consumer ABS have returned to levels not seen since the 
middle of last year. 

Spreads also narrowed on outstanding CMBS, the bottom left, despite the ongoing 
worsening in the outlook for the commercial real estate sector.  The improvement in 
CMBS has been very much tied to government support programs, as the PPIP and the 
TALF have led market participants to anticipate greater demand for these assets.  The 
nine PPIP funds are in the process of raising capital and should begin purchases of 
assets later this year, and the TALF has now included three subscriptions covering 
legacy CMBS assets, financing over $4 billion of purchases.  In addition, a recently 
announced change by Treasury to the tax treatment of CMBS workouts seemed to 
provide a further boost to their prices.  Unfortunately, as shown to the right, issuance 
of new CMBS remains completely shut down, and the TALF has yet to fund any 
new-issue CMBS.  Thus, the commercial real estate sector faces a very difficult credit 
environment going forward. 

Despite the broad increase in risky asset prices, Treasury yields moved lower over 
the intermeeting period.  As shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 3, Treasury 
coupon yields declined 15 to 30 basis points, on net.  The most important sources of 
the decline in longer-term rates, according to our dealer survey, were a decline in 
inflation expectations, a reduction in upside inflation risks, and strong demand from 
foreign official institutions. Consistent with those responses, forward break-even 
inflation rates, shown to the right, moved down over the intermeeting period.  
Investors also see less interest rate risk, as suggested by the implied volatility 
measures shown in the middle left panel, which have fallen notably from their 
elevated levels over the summer.  The perceived reduction in upside inflation risk and 
the decline in interest rate volatility may have contributed to a narrowing of the term 
premium embedded in longer-term yields.   



 

 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 6 of 212

Investors also apparently marked down the expected path of monetary policy, as 
the substantial slack in the economy and other favorable inflation news supported the 
view that the Fed would remain on hold for an extended period.  As shown in the 
middle right panel, futures prices now suggest a later start to policy tightening.  That 
brings the market pricing closer to the results from our dealer survey.  As shown in 
the bottom left, most survey respondents do not expect the tightening to begin until 
the third quarter of 2010 or later. 

The FOMC’s decision to taper its purchases of Treasury securities, announced at 
the last FOMC meeting, was well received by market participants.  This approach is 
widely seen by investors as a prudent exit strategy, and the announcement did not 
prompt any response in Treasury yields.  At present, the Desk has completed 
$289 billion of purchases, and it plans to wind down its remaining purchases over the 
next five weeks, as shown in the bottom right panel, while still reaching a cumulative 
purchase total of $300 billion. 

The exit from the agency debt and MBS purchase programs could prove more 
challenging, however. As shown in the upper left panel of the next exhibit, option-
adjusted MBS spreads over Treasury yields remain unusually tight.  In our view, 
Federal Reserve purchases have had a substantial effect on MBS rates, partly 
accounting for this low level of spreads. Market participants seem to agree with that 
assessment.  As shown to the right, the responses to our dealer survey indicate that 
the purchase programs are seen as pushing down the current-coupon MBS rate by a 
significant amount, with an average response of about 60 basis points.  However, it is 
worth noting that only a subset of respondents chose to provide such estimates, and 
the responses vary over a wide range. 

Given these effects, some observers are concerned that the MBS rate will rise 
sharply as the Fed’s purchases come to an end.  The extent of these concerns should 
depend on one’s views about how the purchase programs affect the markets.  As we 
have highlighted in recent memos, the effect on market interest rates could come 
primarily through the stock of assets purchased, consistent with a portfolio balance 
effect. Under that perspective, even an abrupt end of the purchase program would not 
create market difficulties, as the stock of assets held outside the Fed would not 
change discretely. However, we have also highlighted the possibility that the flow of 
purchases could have some effect on rates due to various market imperfections.  In 
that case, one might be concerned about how the market would adjust to a sharp drop-
off in asset purchases by the Fed. 

To gauge the scope of these different effects, we asked the respondents to our 
dealer survey about their views on how the Fed’s asset purchases affect the market.  
The answers did not exactly settle the issue:  In rough terms, about one-third of the 
respondents said that the effects arise primarily through stock effects, one-third said 
primarily through flow effects, and one-third said through both.  [Laughter.] 
Moreover, in quantifying the effects of the purchase programs, most respondents saw 



 

 

 

 
 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 7 of 212

the effects identified in the upper right panel as either partly or fully diminishing over 
the six-month period after purchases end, consistent with the presence of some flow 
effects. 

Given the responses from the survey, it may be prudent for the FOMC to take an 
exit approach that is robust to the possibility of both stock and flow effects.  This 
consideration was the basis for the recommendation that the staff made at the last 
FOMC meeting to taper the pace of purchases gradually as the programs come to an 
end. For this meeting, we provided a memo with more details about potential paths 
for the purchases of MBS and agency debt. 

The strategy highlighted in the memo is to taper MBS purchases beginning soon 
after the current FOMC meeting, with the intention of finishing the purchases by the 
end of the first quarter. One potential path under this strategy is shown by the light 
blue line in the middle left panel.  This approach would give the market time to adjust 
to the declining presence of the Fed and to allow new purchasers of MBS to crowd in 
and replace the Fed, which might smooth any interest rate response associated with 
that process. Another potential benefit is that it would allow the Desk to start letting 
up on the gas pedal immediately, which could help to address any strains on market 
functioning arising from our current pace of purchases, although our impression is 
that market liquidity over the past month or two has been decent even at our current 
rate of purchases. 

The FOMC could consider an even longer tapering period that lasts through the 
second quarter, as shown by the red line. However, this would involve a steeper drop 
in purchases today, which would risk prompting some backup in mortgage rates in the 
near-term.  The Desk does not believe that the longer tapering period is needed for 
facilitating the market adjustment or for ensuring market liquidity.  Hence, any 
decision to move in this direction should be based on other considerations, such as the 
optimal amount and timing of the stimulus that policymakers desire. 

The memo also made a recommendation for tapering agency debt purchases.  The 
green line in the panel to the right shows that the pace of agency purchases would 
have to pick up considerably to reach the $200 billion limit by year-end.  The current 
pace of purchases is already causing some strain on market functioning, so such an 
increase is not advised. An extension of the program through the first quarter would 
allow the Desk to get to the $200 billion limit (the red line), though the amount of 
tapering would be limited under that approach.  Alternatively, the Desk could aim to 
reach $175 billion of purchases through the first quarter, which would allow a decent 
amount of tapering (the blue line).  One possibility is to allow the purchases to end up 
somewhere between $175 and $200 billion, depending on how market conditions 
evolve. 

The market effects of an announcement on tapering will also depend on whether 
market participants make any inference about changes to the total size of the 
programs.  In particular, there is some risk that the announcement of a slowdown in 



 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 8 of 212

the pace of purchases could be interpreted as a sign that the total size of the program 
is being reduced. This risk may be particularly acute when the program size provides 
flexibility in that direction, as is currently the case with the “up to” language.  When 
the tapering of Treasury purchases was announced, the FOMC decided to drop the 
“up to” portion of the targeted amount, which provided the markets with clarity about 
the total size of the program and avoided this risk. 

As shown in the bottom panels, our dealer survey suggests that market 
participants expect the Federal Reserve to reach the full $1.25 trillion limit for MBS 
purchases. That view is consistent with what the Desk has heard in conversations 
with a broad set of traders and market analysts.  The survey also indicates that agency 
debt purchases are expected to reach the full $200 billion limit, although discussions 
with traders indicate that this view is not held as uniformly or with as much 
conviction. In both cases, respondents expected purchases to continue into the first 
quarter. 

The ongoing purchases of securities have now begun to outpace the decline in 
balances at the Fed’s liquidity facilities, as shown in the upper left panel on the last 
page, causing the size of the Fed’s total balance sheet to drift higher.  We expect this 
trend to continue, with the balance sheet projected to grow from its current level of 
$2.1 trillion to a peak of $2.4 trillion by June 2010.  This process will continue to add 
reserves to the banking system.  In addition, the drawdown of the Treasury’s SFP 
balances from $200 billion to $15 billion over the next six weeks will boost the 
amount of reserves even further.  Overall, based on these developments, the level of 
excess reserves is likely to increase from its average of around $850 billion in the 
current maintenance period to nearly $1.2 trillion by the end of the year. 

I will conclude my briefing by describing recent developments in short-term 
funding markets and the associated effects on lending through our shorter-term 
liquidity facilities.  The rates at which some of the largest financial institutions can 
obtain unsecured credit have fallen impressively, as indicated by the LIBOR–OIS 
spreads shown in the upper right panel. The spread for the three-month maturity 
point has dropped all the way to 12 basis points—a level that was seen as normal 
ahead of the financial crisis. This improvement reflects greater confidence in the 
soundness of the financial system, a greater willingness to extend credit, and a 
gradual reduction in borrowers’ demand for funds.  For similar reasons, the market 
for borrowing by nonfinancial firms has also improved, as shown in the middle left 
by the tight spreads on commercial paper.  

However, while some firms face few funding constraints, others reportedly have 
much less access to the market.  Indeed, even in the LIBOR panel, there remains 
some degree of tiering in the pricing of credit across borrowers, and anecdotal 
evidence suggests that such tiering is much more extensive for financial firms outside 
the LIBOR panel. 

In terms of secured financing, the repo market is generally functioning well.  



 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

  
 

 

September 22–23, 2009 9 of 212

Repo volumes have stabilized after the steep decline that began late last year, and 
bid–asked spreads on many types of transactions have improved considerably from 
the high levels reached during the crisis.  However, there is now much more 
differentiation across types of collateral.  As shown in the middle right panel, haircuts 
in the repo market widened sharply for lower-quality collateral during the crisis and 
have remained very disperse.  This type of differentiation is expected to persist to 
some degree. 

Overall, the financial crisis has caused some lasting changes to the way short-term 
funding markets operate, with greater differentiation across both borrowers and types 
of collateral. Nevertheless, market participants seem to have adjusted to these 
changes, and access to short-term funding has been improving for many borrowers. 

This improvement has been sufficient to reduce the usage of the Fed’s liquidity 
facilities by market participants, as most facilities were priced to be attractive during 
periods of financial stress but uneconomical during normal periods.  The amount of 
credit provided by these facilities, shown in the bottom left, has shrunk dramatically 
from over $1.5 trillion early this year to less than $350 billion today—a decline that 
has spanned all of the facilities.  This decline indicates that the automatic exit strategy 
that was built into the design of these facilities has worked well. 

It is important to note, however, that these volumes might not be on a simple glide 
path to zero. The table to the right shows the number of firms that remain in the 
facilities, as well as the number of borrowers that have continuously relied on the 
facilities since June.  The Fed is likely to face an adverse selection problem in which 
firms with limited outside financing options prove the most challenging to push out of 
the facilities. Federal Reserve staff has begun to engage those firms remaining in 
each facility in discussions about their plans for exiting the program in order to ensure 
the least disruptive transition from these facilities once they expire. 

That concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Questions for Brian?  Governor 

Tarullo.  

MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, as you were discussing panels 27 

and 28, you made reference to some lasting changes in some of the credit markets.  Can you 

specify a bit which you expect to be lasting and which you expect to continue to improve? 

MR. SACK. I can. There’s a lot of focus on the LIBOR–OIS spread, which seems to 

give the impression that the market has completely returned to previous practices.  I wanted to 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 10 of 212

present some evidence suggesting that that’s not the case, but rather that the market does look 

different today from the way it looked several years ago.  In particular, as I said in the remarks, 

there’s just much more differentiation across types of collateral and, to some degree, across types 

of borrowers. Those are lasting changes, not only in that they have persisted to today, but also in 

that we expect them to persist, at least to some degree, indefinitely, as the market moves towards 

more reasonable pricing and a more reasonable structure going forward.  It makes sense.  There 

certainly should be a good deal of differentiation across different types of collateral.  For 

example, some of the collateral listed in this chart is riskier—it’s harder to put a price on it, so 

you don’t know the value of the collateral, so, certainly, the idea that the market would require a 

haircut for that kind of collateral seems reasonable.  That was the point. We see those changes as 

likely to persist, to some degree at least, going forward. 

MR. TARULLO. They’re not so much structural changes, though—you’re anticipating 

that, as things continue to normalize, there won’t be some sort of a reversion to the way things 

were before the crisis? 

MR. SACK. Correct. But I think there’s a possibility that we’ll see structural changes as 

well. For example, a working group has been formed to look at the triparty repo market and 

some of the credit issues that arose in that market during the crisis. In the end, depending on 

what the solutions are, structural change could also affect pricing in these markets. 

MR. TARULLO. Okay. Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Brian, my question is just out of curiosity about something I’ve heard you 

say a couple of times.  Why do dealers have different opinions on the Fed’s likely 

follow-through on our purchases of agency MBS versus the agency debt?  I have read 



 

September 22–23, 2009 11 of 212

commentaries and we’ve taken questions on whether or not we’ll follow through on MBS, but I 

haven’t heard the same about the agency debt.   

MR. SACK. I think there’s less conviction that we’ll follow through to the full limit on 

the agencies, and that’s primarily because there’s a recognition by market participants that the 

pace of purchases is causing some strain in the market.  And it’s also because the pace of 

purchases is not sufficient to get us to the $200 billion limit by the end of the year.  You can see 

that in chart 22—we’d need a pretty sharp increase in the pace of purchases to get to the 

mandated total.  So I think the inference that investors have drawn is that the Committee is less 

committed to getting to that total on the agency debt side than it is on the MBS side. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG. I’d like to follow up on that, Brian, and anticipate, perhaps, a bit of 

tomorrow’s discussion.  Looking at these spreads and where the market is heading, what is the 

likely reaction to our saying that, instead of going to $1¼ trillion we are going to $1 trillion for 

the MBS purchases, and we’re going to taper it so we end this at the end of the year, anticipating 

that the economy is recovering and therefore we have to begin to think about our exit strategy.  I 

know a bit of uncertainty about this may be out there, and I’d like to get your sense of how much 

turmoil was circulating around that possibility and what the effect would be. 

MR. SACK. At this point, I think that outcome would likely prompt some backup in 

MBS rates. It’s difficult to gauge the magnitude of that increase, but it wouldn’t be surprising if 

it were on the order of, say, 15 to 30 basis points, something like that.  In the past, the staff has 

looked at a variety of evidence and used rules of thumb suggesting that something like 

$100 billion of a surprise—in any purchase program—could be worth something like 6 to 

10 basis points on ten-year yields. So that estimate would be consistent with those metrics.  I 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 12 of 212

think it’s important to realize that market participants see a sizable effect today.  They seem to 

have a pretty strong conviction that the program will go all the way to $1.25 trillion.  So those 

two things mean that that announcement would be a surprise. 

MR. HOENIG. Given those basis points, and given the fact that you would have, then, 

time following that, are we talking about a bad thing, necessarily, given where the market is and 

that we’re in the process of shifting away from our having such a dominant role?  In other words, 

do you think that the action would be disruptive to the economy more broadly in terms of its 

effect on the market?  Now, if it lasted, that would be one thing, but if it were temporary, that 

would be another thing, given that the market may begin to work again. 

MR. SACK. I think it wouldn’t necessarily be disruptive to the market, at least in any 

sustained sense. Obviously, it would be a surprise upon announcement.  There would be some 

adjustment, but presumably the market would reprice and begin to function just fine.  I think the 

broader question of whether it’s a good thing is an issue for the FOMC.  It would mean a higher 

cost of housing and, obviously, the associated effects on the strength of the economy. 

MR. HOENIG. Fair enough. Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I just want to amplify on Brian’s answer.  First, I think 

the effect would be 15 to 30 basis points at a minimum, because by the end of this week we’re 

going to have done about $895 billion of agency MBS purchases. So to cap it at a trillion means 

you are only doing $105 billion as opposed to $355 billion.  So it’s a pretty sizable discrete 

difference. Second, the market would take it as an independent signal about how concerned or 

unconcerned the Fed was with the economic outlook.  They probably would also pull forward the 

timing of Fed tightening.  So there’d probably be a separate channel in terms of the effects on 



  

 

 

  

September 22–23, 2009 13 of 212

yields. I think Brian’s 15 to 30 basis points is conservative, if you add those two effects 

together. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that match up?  The dealers thought—what was 

it, about 50 or 60 basis points from the end of the program? 

MR. SACK. They see the effect today as 60 basis points. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. You’re pretty close to ending it if you only have 

$105 billion to go. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 

MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Are you talking about spreads or yields? And how would it affect the 

Treasury market? 

MR. SACK. I was talking about yields. The dealer survey question is about yields.  It’s 

true that we look at spreads, as indicated in the chart in the briefing.  We look at spreads as a 

useful measure to look for those effects, but I think ultimately we care about the effects on 

yields. So we were careful to phrase the dealer question to be about yields and not spreads.  I 

think you would assume some of that effect passes through to Treasuries, but, obviously, not one 

for one. 

MR. LACKER. But wouldn’t the Treasury view this as the Treasury market—damp the 

effect on yields, right?  I mean, if the spreads don’t move as much. 

MR. SACK. We’re talking about an effect on MBS yields.  So whether it’s 15 to 

30 basis points or up to 60 basis points, we’re talking about the effect on MBS rates.  I would 

expect some portion of that to pass through to Treasury yields and to yields more broadly. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 14 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions?  Let me just recognize you, President 

Bullard. But let’s not get completely into the debate at this point.  [Laughter] We’re still in 

Q&A mode.  President Bullard? 

MR. BULLARD. I just want to understand exhibit 4 and number 19, the MBS 

option-adjusted spread. You cited this figure as evidence that there was an effect on the 

purchase program, and I just want to understand how we should think of this.  If you look at the 

left part of the graph—from August 2000 to August 2003—that would be a period of recession 

and very slow economic growth following the recession, and the spread fell maybe 80 basis 

points, just eyeballing it. In the current episode, you’ve got a much more severe recession, and 

the spread fell maybe 100 basis points.  There was no asset-purchase program in the earlier 

period, and, if we control for recession effects, maybe there wouldn’t be very big effects from 

the asset-purchase program. Or do we not want to interpret it that way? 

MR. SACK. When we modeled MBS spreads—and we’ve used a variety of models— 

some of them included other credit spreads.  There does seem to be some co-movement between 

MBS spreads and other credit spreads.  I think that was probably the case in that earlier period, 

and, obviously, we see this pattern of widening into the crisis and then improving in other 

markets as well.  I think the difference is that the improvement in the MBS spread has been so 

sharp and has corresponded so strongly with the purchase programs that we don’t think this 

narrowing just reflects some improvement in credit and some cyclical effect.  We think it goes 

well beyond that. 

Having said that, I would like to say it is hard to determine how far beyond some 

sustainable level the spreads are.  Here, I’m showing a measure relative to Treasuries.  This 

spread is negative. That looks anomalous by historical standards, so you could look at this chart 



 

September 22–23, 2009 15 of 212

and eyeball it and say, “Well, maybe the spread is 50 basis points below what’s sustainable.”  

But if we measure it relative to swap rates, it doesn’t look quite as extreme.  I would say relative 

to swap rates it looks like MBS are maybe 25 basis points beyond fundamentals. 

Our general conclusion is that we believe the purchases have had a very large effect on 

the spreads. Starting from a disrupted market, I think it’s very fair to conclude that the purchases 

have collapsed those spreads more than 100 basis points.  The harder question is: Have they 

collapsed them to normal or through normal, and, if through normal, how far?  Based on the 

range of models we’re estimating trying to answer this question, something like 25 to 50 basis 

points looks like a reasonable guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. A two-hander, President Lacker? 

MR. LACKER. No, it was a one-hander, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. One-hander, okay. [Laughter] We’ll go one-hander to 

President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Well, if you want to continue on the mortgage-backed securities, mine is 

on another subject, so perhaps President Lacker would like to go.   

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m sorry.  Okay. President Plosser, yes. 

MR. PLOSSER. Two-hander. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Two-hander, okay. 

MR. PLOSSER. I’d like to go back to this estimate of the effects of cutting back 

purchases from $1¼ trillion to $1 trillion. I’m looking at exhibit 4, chart 20.  The effect on yields 

is somewhere—let’s just take a modal number—between 50 and 75 basis points.  I thought the 

argument had been that it is the stock that matters, not flow so much.  If we cut from $1¼ trillion 

to $1 trillion, that’s one-fifth of the total stock.  If you do a back-of-the-envelope calculation— 



  

 

September 22–23, 2009 16 of 212

divide 75 basis points by five—that would suggest somewhere between 10 and 15 basis points, 

not somewhere between 25 and 50 basis points.  So I’m not quite sure I understand the argument 

that by cutting the program by one-fifth we’re going to take away as much as half or three-

quarters of the basis point cut that the dealers seem to think there has been. Could you clarify 

that for me? 

MR. SACK. Well, there is a range of interpretations.  Let’s say we assume half the effect 

comes through stock, and half the effect comes through flow.  In this case, if the total effect is 50 

to 75 that means, say, we have 35 and 35.  You’re right about the stock effect not changing 

dramatically.  The expected stock effect is shifting, but if we take your one-fifth, we’re talking 

maybe 10 basis points, max.  But, of course, the flow effect is going to diminish as well. 

When we look at these responses, 50 to 75 basis points, and at how these respondents 

answered about how the effects would evolve going forward, they essentially almost uniformly 

assume that the effect would diminish from now to six months after the conclusion of the 

purchases. So, implicitly, they were putting a lot of weight on flow effects in those responses.  

We didn’t push too hard on that because it’s a small number of responses.  We didn’t really dig 

into it very much and follow up with them on why they had so much reversal.  But I think when 

we look at the dealer survey as a whole, it suggests that flow effects are a big part of this. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Would you like to finish? 

MR. SACK. No, that’s okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, this is sort of a statement disguised as a question, but I 

would still like to get your reaction, Brian. It has nothing to do with mortgage-backed securities, 

which I realize is the focus of a lot of this meeting.  It goes back to your first graph on equity 



September 22–23, 2009 17 of 212

prices. We have had—going back to 1923, 1924—15 recessions before the current one.  

According to the data, if my memory serves correctly, from the trough of the equity market as 

measured by the S&P 500 or its equivalent, to when we emerge from recession, the average rally 

has been about 22 percent.  Looking at chart 1, if you assume that we exited the recession in 

July, roughly, we have had the most significant equity market rally in history; this even 

outperforms 1929 to 1933. 

I am continually troubled by the issue of top-line versus margin enhancement and 

bottom-line growth.  I ask this question because I think it is very important.  We make almost a 

linear assumption in our baseline case of pretty positive equity market numbers going forward, 

after having had what is, historically speaking, the greatest stock market rally coming out of a 

recession in history. That is around 48 percent.  Now, from your standpoint as a market 

operator, or as someone who is more attuned to the markets than certainly I am, and I think the 

rest of us are, can you continue this process without top-line growth?  I’m just curious as to what 

your concerns are, if you have them, because, again, the baseline growth model that we have 

factors in some pretty healthy equity market numbers going forward.  So I’m just curious from a 

Desk standpoint what your feelings are about this.  And I realize this is guesswork—but still. 

MR. SACK. Well, I think we’ve had a very sharp rally reflecting the size of the revision 

to the economic outlook and the very substantial shift in the perceived risks around that outlook.  

So, yes, it is big by historical standards, but there is a very extreme update to the outlook among 

market participants.  The question is: Going forward, can you sustain that pace?  The answer is:  

Definitely no. Going forward, the equity market gains are going to be governed by changes in 

earnings revenue and by changes in the valuation or the equity premium that was shown in the 

chart. On the earnings revenue side, earnings have been good, but a lot of that good news has 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 18 of 212

come from cost-cutting.  We don’t have a lot of top-line GDP growth, so it will be hard to 

produce a robust enough earnings environment, given the GDP forecast, for that to be the engine 

of ongoing substantial equity market gains.  I think a bigger question is the equity premium that I 

showed in the bottom left panel.  There we have scope for further narrowing, so that could be 

one source of ongoing gains. But, as you can see, we’ve already narrowed a good amount, so 

even there we’re kind of losing capacity. 

But keep in mind that we’re going up very rapidly.  We had a 7 percent gain this 

intermeeting period, and for a while I was describing that as underperformance relative to the 

previous intermeeting periods.  So I think, of course, this can level out.  My main point was not 

that we should expect to sustain these increases, but that these increases have not necessarily set 

us up for some kind of a reversal, because the increases have not pushed valuations beyond what 

looked reasonable under some models.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you. When you announce individual auctions that you hold to 

buy Treasuries or MBS or agency debt, you don’t announce the amount, do you? 

MR. SACK. That’s correct. 

MR. LACKER. With regard to the total program, we talked about the value of clarity.  I 

was wondering why you don’t announce the amounts when you do individual auctions, 

especially if there’s a flow effect. 

MR. SACK. We try to retain some flexibility for varying the flow of purchases in 

response to market conditions and in response to the kinds of offers that we receive.  That’s the 

main answer.  I think it would be problematic if the market had no sense of what our pace of 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 19 of 212

purchases was going to be, or what kind of target we were trying to get to.  But they know all of 

that, so we just afford ourselves some ability to vary over time in response to market conditions. 

We do exercise discretion in terms of how much to push the markets on any given day, 

especially in the MBS program and in the agency debt program.  We will have a target for 

purchasing, currently around $25 billion a week for MBS, but what we actually realize in a given 

week depends on the market conditions that we see and how much we seem able to buy without 

causing problems in market functioning.  So the main answer is that we don’t commit to a 

schedule of purchase amounts, because we want to retain that flexibility. 

MR. LACKER. Okay. It sounds like the value of flexibility to you exceeds the value 

that providing clarity to market participants on that day would provide. 

I have another question, if I could, Mr. Chairman.  Brian mentioned strains in the agency 

debt market.  I would be interested in learning a little more about sort of what observationally 

that looks like. 

MR. SACK. First, let me just clarify one thing.  We don’t announce in advance paths for 

the size of MBS purchases. When we do Treasury operations, we do announce the size the day 

before the operation is conducted. 

MR. LACKER. For Treasuries. 

MR. SACK. But we don’t pre-commit to the size—that’s what I meant.  In the agency 

market, a lot of the feedback is anecdotal.  We look at trading volumes, we look at bid–asked 

spreads, but we also rely a lot on discussions with market participants.  And we see a number of 

things. For example, for a time we weren’t buying on-the-run issues.  We were only buying off-

the-run issues. And what we saw was actually a reverse on-the-run premium develop, in the 

sense that the on-the-run yields were actually higher than all of the off-the-run yields.   



 

 

 

                                                 
  

September 22–23, 2009 20 of 212

So we certainly look at this market and say, “Well, our purchases are really pushing 

prices a lot. They are taking a lot of the floating supply in the market.”  And we hear back from 

dealers that they are affecting dealers’ willingness to short issues out of fear that there is not 

enough floating supply to cover those positions.  So we look at a variety of evidence. 

This isn’t too controversial. We are very big in that market.  I think in the last briefing I 

indicated that our purchases were something like ten times the net issuance in the agency sector 

that we expected over the program.  So we are very big relative to issuance and the size of that 

market, and it’s quite clear that that’s causing some problems for marketing functioning. 

MR. LACKER. Do you think the market is better off with our intervention?  Do you 

think we’re accomplishing other things that outweigh the detrimental effect of these strains? 

MR. SACK. For the Treasury purchases and the MBS purchases, I would say the answer 

is yes, I think we’ve had a substantial effect on market interest rates.  Assuming your objective 

was to lower market interest rates and simulate economic activity, I think those programs have 

been very successful. It’s less clear how the agency debt purchase program has led to those 

effects. Obviously, there are indirect channels through affecting the agencies’ ability to finance 

themselves and maybe their purchases of mortgages.  But they’re not expanding their balance 

sheets, so I would say the benefits of that program are less clear to me. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Brian?  (No response.) Okay, seeing none, 

I’m going to turn to Bill English, who is going to give the first of three briefings on the balance sheet, 

reserve management, and associated issues, and then we’ll take questions for all three briefings at the 

same time.  Bill. 

MR. ENGLISH.2  Thank you very much.  I’ll be referring to the handout “FOMC 

Briefing on the Implications of Higher Reserve Balances.”  As shown in the top left 

panel of your first exhibit, the aggregate stock of reserve balances has increased from
 

2 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 



     

 

 
 

 

September 22–23, 2009 21 of 212

about $20 billion prior to the onset of the financial crisis to about $850 billion 
recently, and it is projected to peak at about $1.2 trillion during the first half of next 
year before gradually trending lower. This very high level of reserves raises two 
potential concerns, noted to the right.  First, high levels of reserve balances could, by 
increasing banks’ assets, put downward pressure on their regulatory leverage ratios, 
leading them to pull back further from lending or cut purchases of securities, with 
adverse consequences for the economy.  Second, and conversely, as the economy 
improves and banks become more comfortable with their capital and liquidity 
positions, they could try to take steps to reduce their reserve balances.  Because the 
banking system as a whole cannot reduce reserve balances all that much, banks’ 
efforts to do so could put downward pressure on some interest rates and boost bank 
lending. The result could be an increase in monetary stimulus at a time when the 
economy may already be expanding briskly and inflation could be at or above its 
desired level. 

As noted in the middle left panel, the first of these concerns was the subject of a 
staff memorandum and briefing at your June meeting.  The staff’s assessment at that 
time was that banks appeared to have sufficient capital to absorb the projected 
increase in reserve balances without putting undue pressure on their leverage ratios. 
Since that time, the staff has marked down substantially the anticipated increase in 
reserve balances, reflecting unexpectedly large paydowns of Federal Reserve lending 
programs, a smaller assumed size of the TALF program, and the more gradual pace of 
MBS purchases now projected. This revision reinforces the results presented by the 
staff in June. But, I should note that we do not know how large a capital buffer 
individual banking organizations want to maintain over regulatory norms, so it’s 
possible that elevated levels of reserves could yet constrain some banks’ activities.   

As noted to the right, to obtain further information on the second concern, staff 
consulted four banking organizations over the intermeeting period, including two 
large U.S. commercial banks, one key processing bank, and one large U.S. branch of 
a foreign banking organization. These four institutions currently account for 
35 percent of aggregate reserve balances and 17 percent of total bank credit.  Of 
course, this is a small sample, and the institutions are not typical of the broader 
banking universe. These firms were chosen because they represent a range of 
institution types and because their reserve balances are very high, suggesting that 
their plans could shed considerable light on the demand for reserve balances going 
forward. The consultations covered three broad areas of balance sheet management:  
The reasons for the firms’ current high reserve balances, their possible responses to 
further increases in reserve balances, and their intentions regarding an eventual return 
to lower levels of balances. 

The most notable reasons the banking organizations provided for their own 
elevated balances are listed in the bottom left panel.  All of the institutions pointed to 
substantial inflows of funds last fall, following the failure of Lehman Brothers and the 
strains in the money market mutual fund sector.  Three institutions also indicated that 
risk-adjusted returns on alternative assets were not attractive, and that loan demand 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 22 of 212

has been weak. In addition, the large commercial banks noted a desire to hold high 
balances as a liquidity buffer against the possibility that conditions in funding markets 
might deteriorate again.   

As noted to the right, we next asked how the institutions might respond to a 
further inflow of reserve balances to their institutions.  The large commercial banks 
indicated that their balances could rise somewhat further before they would take 
actions to reduce them.  By contrast, the processing bank and the foreign branch both 
reported that they would take steps to offset any addition to their reserve balances. 
The institutions generally reported that the actions they would take to offset an 
increase in reserves would include running off some managed liabilities and 
purchasing safe short- and intermediate-term securities.  The banking organizations 
pointed specifically to Treasury and agency obligations and other sovereign and 
sovereign-guaranteed securities, such as FDIC-guaranteed bank bonds.  None of the 
banks suggested that they would increase their lending to reduce reserve balances in 
this situation.   

The top left panel of your next exhibit summarizes the four banking 
organizations’ plans for reducing their reserve balances over time.  Each firm 
expected that these reductions would leave the desired level of balances well above 
pre-crisis levels, reflecting, particularly for the processing bank and the foreign 
branch, the impact of the payment of interest on reserves, and for the two large 
commercial banks, a general increase in concern about access to liquidity during 
periods of stress. 

The four institutions suggested very different timing for their anticipated 
reductions in reserve balances. The processing bank noted that it had already begun 
trimming its balances, and it planned to complete its adjustment by the end of the 
year. One of the two large commercial banks planned to make its adjustment next 
year and the other in 2011. The foreign branch suggested that there likely could be 
no significant reduction in its reserve holdings until the Federal Reserve began cutting 
the aggregate supply of reserves. It explained that its balances were primarily 
determined by volatile flows of short-term funds from its customers, and it had little 
ability to influence such flows without disrupting existing customer relationships.   

When they felt the time had come to begin reducing their reserve holdings, the 
banking organizations planned to make adjustments to both the asset and liability 
sides of their balance sheets, as listed to the right.  On the liability side, they planned 
to pay down their borrowings in wholesale funding markets and allow some large 
time deposits to run off.  On the asset side, they would increase lending in interbank 
and other wholesale markets and increase purchases of safe short- and intermediate-
term securities.  Only one of the institutions said that it might ease its credit terms to 
boost lending, and none reported an intention to ease credit standards.     

As noted in the middle left panel, there is some tension between our projected 
increases in reserve balances and the banks’ stated expectation that their demand for 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 23 of 212

such holdings will fall over coming years.  Individual banks are likely to take actions 
to reduce their reserves, but, as I noted earlier, they cannot, in aggregate, reduce the 
stock of reserve balances all that much.  Thus, the main result of the banks’ efforts is 
likely to be changes in the returns on various assets and liabilities that leave the 
banking sector content to hold the existing stock of reserve balances.  In particular, 
rates on shorter-term funding instruments are likely to fall relative to the rate paid on 
reserve balances, while yields on securities that are viewed as relatively close 
substitutes for reserves—particularly short- and intermediate-term Treasury and 
agency securities—should decline somewhat from their already low levels.  These 
changes will then be arbitraged into the yields on other assets as well.  By contrast, 
the consultations suggest that banks are unlikely to ease their lending standards 
significantly in order to boost loan growth.  Nonetheless, as the economy recovers, 
the demand for loans from creditworthy firms and households will presumably pick 
up, and risk spreads may well narrow as the outlook improves.  The result is likely to 
be a recovery and expansion in loans at banks that largely stems from factors other 
than reductions in desired reserves holdings.   

As noted to the right, these potential effects of very high reserve balances are the 
expected consequences of quantitative easing.  However, the size of such effects on 
interest rates and the aggregate economy is quite uncertain.  Evidence from the 
Japanese experience suggests that they may be fairly small.  Rates on interbank 
deposits and short-term securities are already quite low—indeed, bill rates are below 
the rate paid on reserve balances—and so are not likely to fall all that much further, 
given that we are at present operating so close to the zero bound.  Moreover, these 
effects may emerge only gradually as institutions decide on a bank-by-bank basis to 
reduce their reserves demand.  In addition, some banks’ actions may be constrained 
by capital concerns.  For these reasons, in the staff forecast the effects of elevated 
reserve balances are implicitly assumed to be quite small (though I should note that in 
the staff forecast the direct effects of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury, 
agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities on long-term yields are estimated to 
be large). 

To provide some background for the Committee regarding the possible 
macroeconomic impact of elevated reserve balances going forward, my colleagues in 
Research and Statistics and I constructed an alternative scenario using the FRB/US 
model. We started by assuming that the effects of elevated reserve balances on short- 
and intermediate-term interest rates are quite large—much larger than we believe is 
likely to be the case—and occur at the start of 2010.  In particular, we assume a 
decline of 50 basis points relative to the baseline in interest rates at maturities of one 
to five years, accompanied by a downtick in longer-term interest rates, a modest 
decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and a small rise in stock prices.  
Importantly, however, we assume that banks make no changes to their lending 
standards and terms.  The lower interest rates boost household spending on durables, 
business spending on equipment and software, and housing investment through 
mortgage rates (primarily on ARMs), while the lower value of the dollar raises net 
exports. Adding up the pieces, as shown in the bottom left panel, the effect is to 



 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 24 of 212

increase GDP growth by about 0.3 percentage point in 2010 and 0.4 percentage point 
in 2011, cut the unemployment rate by 0.3 percentage point by the end of 2011, and 
raise inflation just a bit.  While these effects, which we believe are likely a significant 
overstatement, are not negligible, they do not greatly change the general contour of 
the staff forecast. 

Of course, it is possible that this assessment of the effects of very high reserve 
balances is wrong—we’re in a new world—and that the result will be a larger dose of 
monetary stimulus next year, as noted in the bottom right panel.  For example, banks 
may prove far more willing to ease credit standards and terms than suggested by our 
consultations.  However, some FOMC participants may see additional stimulus as 
potentially beneficial.  In the staff forecast, the economic recovery is gradual, 
unemployment remains high through 2011, and inflation remains low.  Thus, some 
additional stimulus might be helpful in fostering economic conditions that are more 
consistent with your dual objectives.  On the other hand, very high reserve balances 
could undercut confidence in the Federal Reserve’s ability to maintain price stability, 
contributing to higher expected and actual inflation.  If very high reserve balances 
provide undesired stimulus or appear to be significantly boosting inflation 
expectations, then the Committee could choose to tighten policy sooner or more 
rapidly than it would have otherwise.  Jim Clouse will now update you on the work 
being done to prepare the tools that might be employed in doing so.   

MR. CLOUSE. Thanks, Bill. The staff has continued to develop reserve management 
tools—including term reverse RPs, a term deposit facility, and reserve collateral accounts— 
that, along with adjustments to the interest rate on excess reserves, should allow the 
Committee to raise the federal funds rate when it wishes to do so.   

As discussed at the August meeting, the Desk could drain reserves by conducting term 
reverse RPs with primary dealers or other counterparties.  The Desk will be prepared to 
conduct reverse repos on a sizable scale as early as a month from now, using Treasury and 
agency collateral and with primary dealers as counterparties.  Staff is also working on two 
significant expansions of this basic program:  the ability to do reverses against agency MBS 
and the inclusion of counterparties beyond the primary dealers. 

The informal consultations with four financial institutions that Bill described, along with 
the Desk’s conversations with primary dealers, indicate that there is considerable interest 
among dealers in participating in a term reverse RP program.  However, the primary dealers 
note that their participation in the program would be limited by balance sheet constraints.  

To some extent, such balance sheet concerns reportedly are connected with regulatory 
capital requirements.  While the SEC’s regulatory net capital charges for dealers explicitly 
exclude transactions with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, regulatory leverage ratios 
may be an issue for those dealers that are part of bank holding companies.  For these 
institutions, the financing of collateral reversed in from the Federal Reserve could have an 
appreciable impact on their leverage ratios at the consolidated bank holding company level. 



 

 

 
 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 25 of 212

Dealers have noted that in many cases balance sheet constraints also stem very 
importantly from internal guidelines regarding leverage; in part, such internal guidelines are 
based on the attention devoted to leverage in the analyses of credit rating agencies and other 
outside analysts. Staff continues to investigate ways to mitigate such concerns about balance 
sheet capacity. One avenue currently being explored is the potential for the Federal Reserve 
to participate in the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, a step that might allow for netting of 
primary dealers’ matched book repo transactions with the Federal Reserve and thereby avoid 
large increases in the size of their balance sheets. 

Based on conversations with about half of the dealer community and the staff 
consultations with banking organizations, staff estimates suggest that the primary dealers in 
aggregate could take on $100 billion to $200 billion or so of reverse RPs.  The apparent 
capacity constraint among primary dealers in conducting large-scale operations in reverse 
RPs puts a premium on expanding the list of counterparties beyond primary dealers.  Primary 
dealers have been informed that additional counterparties may be needed for an effective 
implementation of this program.  Work on this front is slated to start soon. 

The Desk has made substantial progress in laying the operational groundwork for a 
reverse RP program, including contract negotiations, the development of automated systems, 
and settlement processes.  Concerning contracts, the legal documentation to support triparty 
reverse repos is expected to be executed by the primary dealers and clearing banks later this 
month. The Desk has also negotiated agreements with the triparty banks on service levels 
and the general fee structure for triparty reverses.  This agreement is also expected to be 
finalized in the coming days.  Regarding automation and settlement, the Desk has tested the 
existing FedTrade system for use in conducting triparty reverse RPs.  The Desk is in the final 
stages of preparing for implementation and should be ready to perform end-to-end testing 
with primary dealers, clearing banks, and settlement systems in early October.  The basic 
version of the reverse RP program—triparty reverse RPs with primary dealers against 
Treasury and agency securities—will be ready to go by the end of next month.  Work to 
expand the range of collateral and counterparties is ongoing and should be completed later 
this year. 

Turning to the term deposit facility, the staff consultations with four banking 
organizations suggested that they could well be interested in participating in a term deposit 
program.  We do not yet have a reading on small banks’ interest.  The amounts that 
institutions would be willing to shift from reserve balances into term deposits would depend 
on various factors, including the maturities offered and the interest rate paid on term deposits, 
particularly relative to the rate earned on excess reserves.  The banks in our informal 
consultations indicated that they would want to hold more term deposits if there were some 
means by which such deposits could be utilized to meet an unusual liquidity demand, perhaps 
through an early withdrawal option or by allowing term deposits to serve as collateral at the 
discount window. 

A staff steering group has been established to oversee four work streams associated with 
the term deposit facility—program design, legal documentation, governance, and 
implementation. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
  3 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

September 22–23, 2009 26 of 212

The design team is studying various aspects of posted-rate term deposit facilities, 
including appropriate pricing and maturity structures, and it is also considering the set of 
rules that should apply if the System elects to issue term deposits via an auction.  

System legal staff is examining the legal basis for establishing term deposit accounts and 
is also considering the agreements between Reserve Banks and depository institutions 
necessary to support term deposit accounts.  

The staff has also begun to discuss governance issues raised by both the posted-rate and 
auction-rate approaches.  The key issue is ensuring that rates and quantities would be set in a 
way that ensures appropriate input from all Federal Reserve stakeholders. 

The implementation group has, for some time, been developing and testing the computer 
code necessary to support a term deposit program.  Using this code, DIs we to submit tenders 
through a web-based application.  This new code will be deployed at the end of next month 
and can be activated when the facility is ready to be implemented.  As noted in the August 
briefing, some lead time will be required to implement a term deposit facility, because DIs 
would have to request and receive electronic certificates to access the application.  Our 
expectation is that about one month of lead time would be required to have several thousand 
depositories positioned to participate.      

As discussed at the August meeting, reserve collateral accounts, or RCAs, would be new 
Federal Reserve deposit accounts designed to facilitate trading of fed funds on a 
collateralized basis. By reducing counterparty credit risk concerns, these new accounts might 
well enable sellers who utilize the accounts to obtain higher bids for the fed funds they sell.  

The staff has surveyed two GSEs about their interest in using RCAs.  Both are examining 
the option, and their internal staffs are reviewing the RCA as a new product.  They will share 
the outcome of those internal reviews with Federal Reserve staff in the near future.  The 
reviews are expected to yield a fairly rich set of information on those GSEs’ likely use of 
RCAs. 

 RCAs are entirely new, and the staff is still in a relatively early stage of analysis for these 
accounts. We are waiting to hear back from the GSEs before determining whether to 
establish a steering group to oversee future work in this area.  Internally, the RCA concept 
has been discussed with the System’s Accounting Management Steering Group (AMSG).  
The AMSG viewed the concept as feasible and similar in some respects to the recent 
implementation of excess balance accounts.  In addition, members of the Committee on 
Reserve Administration have reviewed the proposal.  Brian will now continue the staff  
presentations. 

MR. MADIGAN.3  Thank you. I’ll be referring to the handout labeled “Material 
for Briefing on Proposed TAF and TSLF Schedules.”  As noted in Brian Sack’s 
briefing, conditions in short-term funding markets have improved somewhat further 



 

 

 
 

  

 
 

September 22–23, 2009 27 of 212

over the intermeeting period.  As a result, the relative attractiveness of the Federal 
Reserve’s lending facilities has declined, given the penalty-rate pricing of most of 
those programs, and so usage of the facilities has continued to diminish.  However, 
the Federal Reserve still needs to make explicit decisions about the amounts of credit 
offered under the two main auction-based liquidity programs, the TAF and the TSLF.  
As announced on June 25, the Federal Reserve has suspended schedule 1 TSLF and 
TSLF Option Program operations and has reduced the size and frequency of TSLF 
schedule 2 operations to one offering of $75 billion per month.  The Federal Reserve 
also has reduced the offered amounts under the TAF in three steps so far, from a peak 
of $150 billion per auction to $75 billion per auction in September.  Those reductions 
in TAF auctions have been determined and announced one month at a time, based on 
observation of auction results and assessments of market conditions. 

However, the staff believes that it would be desirable at this stage to formulate 
and publish plans for the auction schedules and amounts to be offered over the period 
through January. These plans would incorporate a further reduction in liquidity 
support over that period while still providing assurance to market participants that the 
Federal Reserve will provide sufficient liquidity over year-end.  By making its plans 
explicit, the Federal Reserve would help reduce market uncertainty and would 
provide market participants with sufficient time to arrange other sources of short-term 
funding. 

The announced schedules should be designed to mesh with the Federal Reserve’s 
overall plans for winding down its liquidity programs.  As you know, most Federal 
Reserve liquidity programs are set to expire on February 1.  However, the TAF does 
not have a fixed expiration date. Indeed, when the TAF was first announced in 
December 2007, the Federal Reserve suggested that consideration would be given to 
making the facility permanent and indicated that public comment would be obtained 
before any decision was made regarding the establishment of a permanent facility. 

The staff recommends initiating soon the process of seeking public comment on a 
proposal for a permanent TAF.  Subject to your comments and approval by the Board, 
we would describe several possible TAF structures in the request for public comment.  
Those possible structures could range from a deactivated facility that was on the shelf 
but ready for use if circumstances warranted to regular TAF auctions of a substantial 
volume of funds.  Several intermediate alternatives could also be described.  The 
notice would probably be published for a forty-five- or sixty-day public comment 
period. The staff anticipates that the Board would also seek input from Reserve Bank 
Boards of Directors. Based on the comments received, the Board would decide late 
this year or early next year whether to establish a permanent TAF. 

Regardless of whether the TAF will become permanent, the near-term path of 
TAF operations has to be decided. The staff has developed proposed schedules for 
TAF and TSLF auctions for the next four months; they are shown on the last page of 
the package. Both of these schedules involve considerable reductions in offered 
amounts into January.  As I’ll explain, the TAF schedule could be part of a transition 



 

 

 

 

 

 
 

September 22–23, 2009 28 of 212

to zero, low, or still sizable auctioned amounts.  The proposed TSLF schedule is 
designed to allow TSLF auctioned amounts to move down to zero by February, 
consistent with the current expiration date for that program. 

As shown in the upper panel, the staff proposes that TAF auctions in the 28-day 
cycle, the unshaded rows, be held steady at their current level of $75 billion each 
through mid-January.  The purpose of leaving those auction amounts unchanged for 
the next few months is to provide substantial assurance of the availability of adequate 
liquidity over year-end. The current cycle of auctions of 84-day funds, the shaded 
rows, would be modified in two ways.  First, the terms would be reduced initially to 
70 days and then to 42 days. The purpose of shortening the terms is to align the 
maturity dates with those of the 28-day auctions.  And, second, the amounts of these 
longer-term auctions would be reduced from the current level of $75 billion to 
$25 billion in November, before those auctions are discontinued late this year.  
Beginning in December, the System would conduct only one auction per month, for 
28-day funds. By mid-January, a maximum of $75 billion of TAF funds would be 
outstanding; TAF credit outstanding currently stands at just under $200 billion.  
Depending on the decision regarding a permanent TAF, that amount could 
subsequently be brought down to zero or phased into the schedule for permanent TAF 
operations. 

Some policymakers have expressed a view that the minimum bid rate for TAF 
auctions should be increased from its current level of 25 basis points, equal to the 
interest rate on excess reserves, in order to provide a penalty for using the facility.  In 
the staff’s view, a significant penalty is inconsistent with an auction facility, and it 
would be incompatible with the effective operation of a permanent TAF.  And with 
bid amounts in TAF declining steadily and below amounts being offered in the 
auctions, it is not clear that a penalty rate is currently necessary to discourage usage.  
Moreover, once offering amounts are reduced sufficiently, the auction rate should rise 
above its minimum. 

The proposed TSLF schedule, shown in the lower panel, specifies that monthly 
auctions will be reduced in two steps from the current level of $75 billion to 
$25 billion by November.  The offered amount would be held steady at $25 billion in 
December and January.  The term to maturity of the December 3 operation is planned 
for 35 days so that the loans do not mature right at the beginning of January.  TSLF 
operations would cease in early February with the maturation of the January 7 
auction, consistent with the facility’s already-announced expiration on February 1. 

A draft press release is included in your package.  That document sets out the 
proposed schedules and states that the Federal Reserve will soon request public 
comment on a permanent TAF.  It also indicates that the Federal Reserve would be 
prepared to temporarily increase the sizes of TAF and TSLF operations or conduct 
additional off-cycle operations with terms that span year-end if needed to address 
transitory market strains. 



 

 

 

  

 

September 22–23, 2009 29 of 212

Finally, I should note that we will need to coordinate adjustments to the TAF with 

possible changes to the swap arrangements with foreign central banks.  Brian Sack’s 

and Nathan’s staffs will confer with foreign central banks to formulate plans for the 

eventual elimination of exposures under the current swap arrangements.  A related 

issue, which we plan to raise for your consideration at the November meeting, 

involves the advisability of establishing a set of permanent swap lines. 


That concludes the staff presentation. We would be pleased to respond to your 
questions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  According to the agenda, the sequence of 

the meeting goes as follows: First, questions for the staff; there will then be an opportunity for  

unstructured interaction on these issues; and then finally, of course, two full go-rounds.  So everyone will 

have ample opportunity to  express their views on all of these subjects. 

Let’s begin first with just questions for the staff.  Are there questions?  Vice Chairman Dudley. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I had a question for Jim.  Obviously as we contemplate the 

agency debt and agency MBS purchase programs, the issues are related to our ability to actually have the 

sort of “suspenders” in place, in terms of reverse repo or term deposit facilities, to be confident that we 

can actually do that if we needed to.  The reverse repo instrument, as you described, is a size constraint 

for the dealers. How confident are you that the reverse repo program  can be successfully introduced to a 

broader set of counterparties? Highly confident?  Not so confident?  I think the answer to that question is 

relevant for thinking about our balance sheet size. Also, are there potential legal impediments, or is this 

just an operational issue? 

MR. CLOUSE. I’ve had a number of conversations with Chris Burke and his colleagues—of 

course, Brian may want to comment on this as well—and I think that the perception is that it will be a 

challenge to pull in a lot of additional counterparties.  One obvious lending group would be the money 

funds. You would like to have them participate—conceivably, even banks that are holding huge volumes 

of reserves might want to be lenders of cash against securities.  So there are natural sets of institutions that 

you might want to target, but in order to get them into the system, you have to have legal agreements 

established with them—that takes some time, I have learned.  And there are also all sorts of operational 



 

 

   

  

 

  

  

 

  

 

  

September 22–23, 2009 30 of 212

difficulties in setting up collateral arrangements and having the monitoring in place.  There’s a 

perception, at least, that you could get a substantial number of additional counterparties in place by the 

end of the year, but I think Chris and his colleagues at your Reserve Bank have their work cut out for 

them. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess what I’m asking is, over the longer term—you said nine 

months from now—could you drain a trillion dollars of reserves if you had to?  Are you pretty confident 

you could do that?  At the end of the day, that’s really the key question. 

Actually, there are two questions.  One, do you think interest on excess reserves would be 

sufficient? I do, but I think other people would have some questions about that.  So then the second 

question is, to guard against the potential risk of that not being sufficient, what are the “suspenders”? 

Then the issue is: Are you highly confident that you could get the “suspenders” up in operation 

eventually?  I don’t think year-end is necessarily that relevant, but if you told me that you couldn’t get it 

up by midyear 2010, I would start to be nervous. 

MR. CLOUSE: My own personal view, for what it’s worth, is that the combination of reverse 

RPs and the term deposits could be very powerful nine months from now.  The term deposit facility, in 

particular, could drain a huge amount of reserves; obviously, it depends on the rates that we’re willing to 

offer. As for the reverse RPs, I think we could find a very large amount of lenders there, as well.  So I 

think the combination of those two programs will put us in pretty good shape. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN. My question follows along the same lines; again, it’s to Jim.  In thinking 

about the term deposit facility, could we use the term auction facility apparatus to do the term deposit 

facility, because one way of thinking about the term deposit is as a reverse discount window loan, right?  

We already have an apparatus that has an auction for loans, so if we were going to use an auction format 

for deposits instead, it would seem like we already have an apparatus to do it, and it would deal with some 

of the questions about the permanence of the TAF, if it could go either way during times when we wanted 



 

 

 

  

 

  

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

September 22–23, 2009 31 of 212

either to push out a lot of reserves or pull in a lot of reserves. So, when you’re thinking about the term 

deposit facility, are you thinking about it as being something like the term auction facility, or is it a very 

different structure? 

MR. CLOUSE.  I think one variation on it would be very much like the term auction facility in 

structure. The Committee could establish amounts that it wished to auction, take bids, and it would be 

very much like the TAF, just in reverse.  We probably wouldn’t use the existing technology, the program 

for submitting bids and receiving results and various spreadsheets that have been developed.  It’s not the 

most sophisticated automation, but Sherry Edwards and company have been working for about a year to 

develop the code in the Statistics and Reserves system to support an auction and to have all of the entries 

pass through to reserve accounting and to the Federal Reserve Banks’ accounting systems properly. So I 

think on that dimension we’re in very good shape for the term deposit program. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Conceptually, that seems much easier than depending on the primary dealer 

system, if what we wanted to do was pull out a lot of reserves. 

MR. CLOUSE. I don’t like to view them as competing things.  I really view them as kind of 

complementary, and it could be that both are very useful. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Bill and a related one for Jim, and 

then a suggestion on the press release. 

Here’s the question for Bill.  You put a lot of emphasis on downward pressure on short-term 

funding rates as these reserves came into play.  In the good old days, we used to think of the deposit rate 

as the floor for market rates, because banks would be willing to arbitrage.  I was wondering, as market 

conditions improved, bank capital increased, and they got more confident, whether they wouldn’t be 

willing to do more arbitrage and put upward pressure on short-term rates. 

MR. ENGLISH. Bring them up to 25 basis points? 

MR. KOHN. Up to whatever the deposit rate is—right.  I think the answer might be—or the 

problem might be—this leverage ratio.  But I was encouraged by your previous finding that the leverage 



 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 32 of 212

ratio wouldn’t be a problem with the amount of reserves, and I also was encouraged by the response of 

the banks, namely, that they were putting emphasis on risk-weighted assets rather than on total assets as 

they thought about their capital ratios.  So I wondered about that counterforce pushing those short-term 

rates up to the deposit rate. 

My second point, for Jim, is related to the same thing.  You said that there was a concern about 

bank capital relative to the reverse RPs, also related to the leverage ratio rather than the risk-weighted 

assets.  But we did say that the leverage ratio wouldn’t be a constraint for reserves.  So it shouldn’t be—in 

total, anyhow—a constraint for some other Federal Reserve liability, that is, reverse RPs.  Now, the 

difference might be that the reverse RPs were being done with a smaller number of counterparties, so all 

of the pressure would be on 15 of the largest institutions.  But they probably account for a lot of the assets 

anyhow. So I wondered whether it was a question of distribution, implying that the leverage ratio wasn’t 

a problem for reserves, but it would be a problem for reverse RPs. 

My final comment is on the press release.  I don’t think it should be commenting on what forms 

the TAF might take if it became permanent.  The Committee hasn’t had a chance to discuss it.  Who 

knows how this is going to come out?  I think it’s all right to say we’ll be looking at it, but not suggest 

what it could be. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have three questions.  First, for Mr. English, about 

the four banking organizations responding that they wouldn’t change lending terms.  I assume you’re not 

shocked they didn’t tell you they would ease credit standards. 

MR. ENGLISH.  In the last Senior Loan Officer Survey, we asked them when they would move 

back to more normal standards. 

MR. LACKER.  On the lending terms, aren’t a lot of loans priced as a spread over a market rate? 

MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  So if they say they weren’t going to change lending terms, would you interpret 

that to mean they wouldn’t change the spread? 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 33 of 212

MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER. So it’s sort of like a partial equilibrium response, and if other stuff that went on 

pushed down rates, it could push down lending terms as well. 

MR. ENGLISH.  It would push down those base rates.  That’s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Though I’m not sure that you’d get a lot of action there, at least on the business 

side, because one base rate is the prime—I don’t think it’s going to be cut much.  The other is three-

month LIBOR—it’s already pretty low.  But I agree conceptually. 

MR. LACKER.  Right. I have a question for Mr. Clouse on these reserve collateral accounts.  

When you think about, sort of, a “medical intervention,” you wouldn’t run around and do that on the basis 

of a two-month-old working paper; instead, you’d look for peer-reviewed research.  You guys are 

working hard on implementation.  What are you doing to check the robustness of the theoretical basis for 

what you’re designing this program around? 

MR. CLOUSE.  I’m not sure about the theoretical robustness, but I definitely think the staff 

shares your basic concerns about whether this would really function in the way the theory might suggest.  

One of the things that the staff has done is to consult with the GSEs to find out whether their view of it 

would align properly.  I think it’s also important that we consult with the other side of that transaction, the 

banks that would be putting these liabilities on their balance sheets, to find out whether they, in fact, 

would find it attractive, because it really takes both sides of that transaction to make this thing work, and I 

think it’s really unclear at this stage.  The staff has more work to do to vet this to be more confident that it 

could be useful. 

MR. LACKER. Do you have the results of the GSE conversations yet? 

MR. CLOUSE.  Not yet, no.  They’re actually doing a fairly extensive review.  They’re treating it 

as a new product, and they’re putting it through a fairly standard process that they would use in analyzing 

a new product, and they’re going to report those results back to us fairly shortly.  So I hope we’ll learn a 

good bit from those. 



 

 

  

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 34 of 212

MR. LACKER. Did you say they’re putting it through their standard new product evaluation?  

[Laughter] 

And finally, a point about term deposits.  You were talking about some features that would make 

these pretty liquid—they’d be able to pledge them at the discount window and withdraw them without 

penalty. If you make these things really accessible, then I’m not sure why draining reserves and putting 

them there would have any effect.  Why would you expect that? Don’t you need some stark, sharp, 

constraining differences in order for them to have any sort of monetary effect? 

MR. CLOUSE.  Absolutely.  First of all, just the pure operational dimension of having an early 

withdrawal option for a term deposit is really very difficult.  But, beyond that, to your point, certainly if 

there were a withdrawal option, you’d want to have a pretty stiff penalty associated with it, so that it 

wouldn’t just be relabeling reserves.  It would have to have a fairly clear distinction in order to perform 

the function that’s intended. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. I have a couple of questions for Bill and one for Brian.  One is just a factual 

question. In your first chart where you talked about the projected level of excess reserves, were you 

including in that the increase in the roughly $200 billion from the end of the SFP program? 

MR. ENGLISH. I think that’s the first peak. 

MR. PLOSSER. Is that the first peak? 

MR. ENGLISH.  Yes. 

MR. PLOSSER. Okay.  I just wasn’t sure whether it was included.  Second, I was thinking about 

the story and the analysis that you’ve done.  At the end, you say, well, okay, what if this analysis is 

wrong?  What would the outcomes be?  My question is how we should think about metrics and variables 

and things we should be looking at as we go forward during this period of very high reserves to get a 

handle on which way this story is actually going, because I think there’s a lot of uncertainty about how 

this might, in fact, play out.  How would we structure our ongoing analysis of what’s going on out there, 



 

 

  

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 35 of 212

so that we would be alert to whether or not the kinds of things that might be the alternative play out?  Are 

there metrics that we should be looking at?  Are there things that we want to monitor carefully to be able 

to get a handle on that? 

MR. ENGLISH.  There are, but I think they’re things we’re already monitoring carefully.  They 

would be things like the short end of the yield curve. How is it behaving?  If somehow the high level of 

reserves and reduced demand for reserves is causing some sort of arbitrage into short- and 

intermediate-term safe assets, you’d expect to see that at the short end of the Treasury yield curve. 

MR. PLOSSER. So is that like the decline in short-term Treasuries vis-à-vis the higher reserves 

that we witnessed recently? 

MR. ENGLISH.  At least over the intermeeting period, it’s across the whole yield curve.  So I 

don’t think it matches up with this sort of story, which I’d expect at least would be concentrated at the 

short end, because those are more substitutable. 

You’d also want to look at how banks are behaving.  If this story is really going to have legs for 

the economy, at some point, despite what they told us, banks are going to have to ease some standards and 

terms on their lending. So, clearly, we’re spending considerable time thinking about the bank lending data 

and the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey and how we integrate these things into our modeling. 

MR. PLOSSER. Would things like quantities of loans, quantities of various kinds, as opposed to 

just prices, become important? 

MR. ENGLISH.  Over the intermeeting period, as we discussed in the Greenbook, the survey of 

terms of business lending came in for the most recent quarter and showed another considerable widening 

of spreads on business loans.  We can look at some information we have on prices in the syndicated loan 

market and also, as you say, at the quantities.  Our weekly bank credit data may be informative about 

whether banks are beginning to move. 

MR. PLOSSER. All right. Thank you. I have a question for Brian on the TAF.  I’ll ’fess up— 

I’m one of the ones who keeps asking about price as opposed to just quantities, and I’m a little bit 

confused. Brian, we don’t want penalty rates.  The Committee made a conscious decision a while back, 



 

 

  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 36 of 212

when we cut the spread between the primary rate and the funds rate, to reduce the penalty rate of being at 

the discount window.  We did that as a conscious decision.  But for quite a while now, we have been in a 

situation where people can almost confidently predict that they’re going to get a lower rate if they go to 

the auction than if they choose to borrow from the discount window directly.  There are borrowers who 

come to our discount windows who are of a scale and size and scope where the TAF auction isn’t easily 

available to them in the amounts that they would like to borrow.  So, in fact, we’re taking one group of 

borrowers who want to go to the discount window, and we’re making them borrow at a penalty rate.  

Right now we’re in an environment where—and, de facto, we’ve set this up—if you’re big enough and 

want to participate in the TAF, you can get money at a cheaper rate. 

I remain a little bit puzzled about why we want to perpetuate that differential.  They’re both 

discount window lending.  Why don’t we want to make borrowers from both of these mechanisms more 

similar?  I understand that if you reduce the quantities enough at an auction, you can raise the price above 

that minimum, but TAF borrowing is longer term and there are some other restrictions.  So I still remain 

somewhat puzzled at the reluctance to move the minimum bid closer to the primary credit rate, the rate at 

which many banks still come and borrow from us.  Maybe I’m being dense here, but the logic is escaping 

me. I haven’t figured it out yet.  So could you help me out? 

MR. MADIGAN. Well, I think the basic distinction that we see is the difference between a 

standing facility and an auction facility.  I’m defining a standing facility as one where the borrowing 

institution comes to us seeking funds.  We want to provide incentives for that bank or firm to find funds 

in the open market before they come to us, and so we charge a penalty rate for that, which is consistent 

with traditional central banking theory.  By contrast, in the TAF and the TSLF, we’re trying, at least 

conceptually, to place fixed amounts of dollars into the system, that is, make fixed amounts of dollars 

available to the system and let the market set the price.  If we set any significant penalty, we’d simply be 

undercutting that attempt to provide the dollars into the market in fixed quantities.  We’d be driving off 

the borrowers. 



 

 

 

  

 

 

  

September 22–23, 2009 37 of 212

MR. PLOSSER. We have no idea what the quantities are going to be, because it’s underbid every 

time. So I don’t quite understand.  If we’re not maxing out on the quantities, then we really aren’t setting 

the quantities. The market is setting the quantities, and it’s setting the quantities based on a low price that 

we basically are offering.  So I’m having trouble reconciling all of this. 

MR. MADIGAN. Well, I think it’s fundamentally starting from a view that an auction 

mechanism simply is not consistent with the penalty price. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  The first is for Bill and the 

second one is either for Bill or maybe for Brian Sack.  When you presented the simulation results, I had 

been conflicted in reading the memo and responding to the fact that the banks were saying, “We’ve got 

these excess reserves.  We’re really not intending to lend them out.”  You did the simulation—I guess 

that’s kind of natural to look at the implications of lower short-term rates, and that would presumably be 

more accommodative.  But I’m wondering if you learn something else from the survey—that there might 

be added dysfunction in the lending channel if the banks aren’t looking to lend out excess reserves that 

they currently have available to them.  Did we learn more about their lack of intention to stimulate the 

economy through more lending, or is it pretty much the way we had thought about it before? 

And that led me to think about the second question. Earlier in the year, we talked a pretty good 

amount, I thought, in terms of market segmentation and how effective our various programs would be 

depending on how clogged up markets were.  Arbitrage kind of disperses funds that we would put into the 

financial system, but when it’s more segmented, we have a larger effect.  So I guess I’m back to the MBS 

question. Do you think that that program is more effective in a price sense?  Do we have more segments? 

I don’t think we have more segmentation.  Do we have less segmentation?  Regarding the rate effects that 

we might have estimated early on, would they be smaller now because these are more dispersed?  I think 

that’s what President Lacker was trying to get at with Treasuries, but I’m not exactly sure. 

And then there’s the next part of this question, which you can answer either today or later.  Do we 

have an idea of what an estimate of the MBS rates will be when we’re done with the LSAP programs if it 



 

  

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 38 of 212

were the full $1¼ trillion tapered at the end of the first quarter, and if we did what President Hoenig 

suggested, only $1 trillion tapered to the end of the fourth quarter?  What would those rates look like at 

the end of the first quarter?  I’m not sure I understand the different implications, or at least our thinking 

on that. 

MR. ENGLISH. Let me try talking about banks for a second.  I think what we learned from the 

banks on the whole was consistent with what we thought before, which is that they’re very tight, and we 

think that they will only gradually ease.  In the staff forecast, that’s basically what we built in—gradually 

over the forecast horizon, banks loosen up, they get more comfortable taking on risk, they build up some 

capital, they get more comfortable with their liquidity positions, and they start lending in a more 

accommodative way.  I think, broadly at least, that’s consistent with what the banks were saying.  They’re 

not going to be going out any time soon and lending aggressively, and, basically, we didn’t expect to hear 

that. 

MR. EVANS.  And the interest rate cut in the model analysis already takes into account some 

impediment from the normal type of lending? 

MR. ENGLISH. The baseline takes account of it. 

MR. EVANS.  Okay. Thank you.  Do we have an idea about market segmentation? 

MR. SACK. Our view is that it’s not that the MBS purchases have had an effect and the Treasury 

purchases just didn’t work.  It’s just that the sizes were disproportionate.  It’s easy to see the MBS effects, 

because the program was so large relative to that market; it’s harder to see the Treasury effects, because 

the purchase is supposed to work through supply, but net supply was actually going up quite rapidly. So 

we may have offset some upward pressure on yields. 

MR. EVANS.  Well, I was thinking about it differently.  You can do the MBS. You can do the 

Treasuries. If they’re segmented, they’re different.  If there’s no segmentation, there’s going to be some 

arbitrage across the different markets, so it almost doesn’t matter where you dump those funds. 

MR. SACK. Yes. I think the purchases take duration out of the market regardless.  There are 

some other differences.  The MBS purchases actually take some negative convexity out of the market, 



 

  

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 39 of 212

too, and you don’t have that with Treasuries.  So there are some differences.  But the big effect is all of 

these purchases pull out duration, and, in that regard, you would think they would have some effect on all 

longer-term assets, and I think that’s true to a degree. But I think one thing we realize is that there’s not 

perfect substitution across our asset classes, so when we talk about large-scale MBS purchases, we see the 

effect most pronounced on MBS rates. 

MR. EVANS.  But in March we were stymied by the segmentation, I thought.  We thought it was 

really big, and now things seem different.  So I would guess that the estimated effect would be smaller. 

MR. SACK. Well, I think it means that there are spillovers, but they’re just hard to see.  If we 

talk about the effect of the MBS purchases and we look at the spread and say, “Well, maybe it looks like 

the spread is 50 basis points,” so the effect on the spread is 50 basis points.  I think it means probably that 

the effect on the rate is actually larger and some of it has spilled over into Treasuries as well. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE. My question revolves around how your analysis and your conclusions would have 

been different if the banks had expressed a stronger willingness to lend some time in the near future.  It 

seems to me that when we started down this path, we did expect the rate we were paying to be a floor on 

the fed funds rate, and it turned out not to be.  But if the banks were strongly interested in lending and 

chasing loan funds, it seems as if that would be the point where it would turn out to be a floor.  Am I 

thinking about that correctly or not? 

MR. ENGLISH. It might well push up short-term rates, as banks were less likely to run off 

deposits and manage liabilities because they saw better lending opportunities.  In terms of the simulation 

that we did, one of the knobs we didn’t turn was an easing in credit.  If you turn that knob, you’d get a 

bigger effect on output and unemployment—still not huge, but a larger effect for sure.  So I think that, if 

the banks had been telling us, yes, we’re likely to ease our lending standards and terms early next year, 

then our exercise would have showed a bigger effect on output and probably a smaller effect on rates. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

September 22–23, 2009 40 of 212

MR. FISHER. First, Mr. Chairman, I agree with President Plosser’s question about TAF versus 

the penalty rate on the discount window, but we talked about that a long, long time ago.  I think it’s a 

good point to take into account. 

My question is for Bill.  We had four institutions in this little sample.  They account for 35 

percent of the excess reserves.  How many institutions would you have to take into account, say, to get to 

75 percent of excess reserves or 50 percent?  In other words, are they concentrated in the top ten?  Five? 

Twenty?  Guess? 

MR. ENGLISH. I don’t know the answer.  I’d have to check.  I think the whole industry is 

concentrated, so if you took the top 25 banks, you’d probably have a huge majority of the reserves, but I 

just don’t know for sure. 

MR. FISHER. I guess what concerns me is that these monies are languishing in the system.  

They’re unlent and they’re unmultiplied.  And, again, here we have differentiation in the market.  We 

have been worried about when—just to use an ugly analogy—this giant fur ball finally gets released from 

this big pipe.  We’re worried about a way to neutralize it.  But meanwhile it’s lying fallow in a sense, 

from the standpoint of people that want to borrow, assuming there’s loan demand.  If you go through each 

one of your boxes, we don’t know how much buffer people want over regulatory norms— no increase in 

lending.  Mr. Lacker pointed out no change in lending terms and standards.  I guess, again, like President 

Plosser, I may be a dunce on this one.  I’m not saying you’re a dunce, Charles.  [Laughter] 

MR. PLOSSER. I’ve been called worse things. 

MR. FISHER.  I’ll share the dunce cap with you.  I’m concerned that this money is unlent and 

unmultiplied and represses velocity.  I realize that the suspenders that President Dudley talked about go to 

what we’re trying to treat, but that’s not an issue presently.  I just worry about the distortions it creates in 

the system, and I wondered if you had any comments on that, or maybe I just need a basic tutorial from 

you also. 

MR. ENGLISH. I need a little help on what your concern is. 



 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 41 of 212

MR. FISHER.  It concerns me that we’ve ramped up reserve balances to $1.2 trillion, money that 

we’re almost incentivizing not to go out into the marketplace and paying a rate of interest, right?  It’s 

small but it does concern me that it’s not being put into the system.  We have an unlent, unmultiplied 

buildup in reserves. Now, we worry that it could expand too quickly and come back in the system and 

that’s all of these treatments that you went through in your second presentation was all about.  But in the 

meantime, it’s like they’re sitting in the system lying fallow.  Am I missing something here? 

MS. YELLEN. We could cut the interest rate we pay on reserves, and then it would be less likely 

to lie fallow. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It wouldn’t be in the system at all if we weren’t doing the 

quantitative easing, and it’s not constraining anything else because it’s not affecting leverage ratios. 

MR. FISHER.  As I said, this is what happens in quantitative easing. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right. 

MR. FISHER. Anyway, your chart number 1 shows a very rapid rundown.  I’m just questioning, 

I guess, that rapid rundown, given the unwillingness of people to lend and the incentives we’re providing 

for reserve retention.  But if it’s a dumb question, let’s take it off the table, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Well, I think the decline in the stock of reserves has to do with the fact that 

securities that we’re bulking up on now will mature, the mortgages will prepay, and so those assets will 

run off over time, and currency will grow over time. 

MR. FISHER. I guess what I’ve gotten out of this conversation is a better understanding of why 

safe, short- and intermediate-term securities have been priced as they’ve been priced and are yielding 

what they’re yielding, but I remain concerned that these monies remain unlent and unmultiplied in the 

short term. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, you had a two-hander? 

MR. PLOSSER. Yes. I wanted to follow up on Governor Duke’s question.  She asked about 

lending standards and banks’ behavior.  The way I interpreted what she was asking was about the supply 

side or willingness of banks to lend. But, as we witnessed in the last intermeeting period, a lot of the 



 

 

 

 

  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 42 of 212

private-sector forecasts for growth have been ramped up substantially in the last few months, both for this 

year and for next year in some cases, to varying degrees.  So, in some ways, the issue is not just the 

banks’ willingness to lend, but also what the new demand for loans is going to be.  While banks may not 

lower their lending standards, as the demand for loans from the private sector begins to ramp up with 

continued economic growth, they may not change their lending standards, but those excess reserves will 

get translated into loans as the demand for new loans goes up, and the price may rise as well.  So it’s not 

just what the banks are willing to do, but also how demand will evolve over the course of this recovery 

that will determine some of that.  You did mention that, but I think both of them are clearly important. 

MR. ENGLISH. I agree. As I think I said in my briefing, a couple of the banks pointed exactly 

to this. As the economy recovers, demand for loans will pick up even if they don’t do any easing at all. 

MR. PLOSSER. Exactly. 

MR. ENGLISH. They will have more creditworthy customers coming to them, and they plan to 

meet that demand. 

MR. PLOSSER. Using reserves to do so. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. I will follow up on a couple of things.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you 

talked earlier about where in the yield curve you would expect the effect of quantitative easing to show 

up, and you suggested the short end.  I guess you’re thinking six months or less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Well, the banks talked about short- and intermediate-term maturities out 

to two or three years. 

MR. LACKER. Two or three years.  Okay.  We’ve seen that.  But you’re saying that 

because we’ve seen effects farther out the yield curve.  That counts against quantitative easing as 

a monocausal explanation for what has happened over the intermeeting period.  But it doesn’t 

rule it out, right? 



September 22–23, 2009 43 of 212

MR. ENGLISH.  Well, it could be a piece.  I think it doesn’t rule it out, but, as I say, I 

would have expected a change in the shape of the yield curve.  What we got was pretty much a 

uniform shift. 

MR. LACKER. They hold a fair amount of agencies, is my understanding. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Agency MBS for sure.  I’m not sure about straight agency debt. 

MR. LACKER. Yes, I don’t think there’s much debt.  I think agency MBS. 

Brian, I have a question about your yield effect estimates: Shouldn’t that depend on how 

they are financed, like what we do on the other side of our balance sheet, right?  If our early 

purchases were essentially sterilized by offsetting reductions in borrowings, that’s going to have 

a different effect on agency yields than if we add enough to reserves that it induces those yields 

to fall. Do you see what I’m saying? 

MR. SACK. When you think about the effects through a portfolio-balance channel, 

you’re right that it depends on if and how the purchases are sterilized.  If you’re buying MBS 

and sterilizing that by selling long-term Treasuries, you’d be having a much smaller effect on 

duration in the market, and so it would be getting a smaller yield effect. 

MR. LACKER. Right. 

MR. SACK. If it’s sterilized through reverse repos, for example, even if the reserve 

paths aren’t different, essentially the portfolio-balance effect still works, because you’ve changed 

the duration and the supply of those assets in the market, which is what we think, at least 

partially, prompts the effect on yields. 

MR. LACKER. The estimate you gave us earlier—I can’t remember what it was.   

What was the estimate?  

MR. SACK. The estimate of the effect of total program purchases? 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 44 of 212

MR. LACKER. No, it was the incremental effect. 

MR. SACK. I said that if the MBS purchases were ended at $1 trillion, then perhaps the 

upward pressure on MBS rates would be 15 to 30 basis points. 

MR. LACKER. 15 to 30. 

MR. SACK. Again, it’s a very uncertain estimate, but just to put an order of magnitude 

on the table. 

MR. MADIGAN. If I could just break in for a minute, Brian’s estimates are consistent 

with our previous staff estimates, which were based on an event study methodology.  That, by its 

nature, should abstract from any effect due to changes in our financing of the securities.  We 

simply look at how much yields change during a narrow window of time in which 

announcements of our purchases were made, and we got estimates very similar to those that 

Brian did. 

MR. SACK. Right. This is really to a point Bill Dudley made.  We are talking strictly 

about supply effects, portfolio-balance effects.  Any signals about the path of short-term interest 

rates or the FOMC’s policy inclinations would be on top of that.  So if it were interpreted as a 

step towards tightening, and market participants, for example, moved up the expected timing of 

tightening, you would get further effects. 

MR. LACKER. Well, now I’m confused.  You gave us these estimates earlier in the 

year. Are you interpreting these announcements as being viewed by market participants as 

sterilized or unsterilized additions to the stock of our holdings? 

MR. SACK. I would say unsterilized. Certainly, the biggest announcements in March 

were beyond the period in which the Desk was sterilizing the operations. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 45 of 212

MR. LACKER. How does this estimate line up with what has happened so far, which 

presumably is sterilized? 

MR. SACK. I’m sorry.  What exactly is sterilized? 

MR. LACKER. You gave me some estimates of effects.  You were talking about 

estimates of effects that have occurred so far during a period where we have essentially sterilized 

them. 

MR. SACK. No, I would say we have not sterilized the purchases. 

MR. LACKER. I don’t see how you can say that.  Earlier in the year we were buying 

MBS, and you kept forecasting increases in reserves.  They kept not happening. Borrowing kept 

falling. It looks as if they were sterilized. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. De facto sterilized because of the offsetting movements. 

MR. LACKER. Yes. De facto sterilized by offsetting, right. 

MR. SACK. Okay. But if we’re talking about sterilization through short-term credit, and 

through the withdrawal of short-term credit, you’re still left with a change in the supply of the 

long-term asset, you’re still left with the shift in duration from the purchases.  There are different 

kinds of sterilization. If you’re sterilizing, as I said, by selling long-term assets, that would really 

work against the portfolio-balance effect.  If it’s being sterilized by reducing short-term credit, I 

don’t think it works against the portfolio-balance effect that much, because it is not affecting the 

fact that the market is holding that much less duration than it was before. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think I detected a little appetite for coffee around the table.  

[Laughter] So why don’t we take fifteen minutes and come back at 4:05 p.m.?  Thank you. 

[Coffee break] 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 46 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why don’t we recommence?  We’ve had a number of 

issues raised by the presentations. First, there were some recommendations from the Desk on 

large-scale asset purchases, including possible tapering strategies.  Second, we had some 

discussion of reserve management tools and the progress there.  Third, there was a proposal 

essentially on the TAF and the TSLF. Let me just mention parenthetically that, as I understand it 

from talking to Scott, no votes are needed to implement those proposals, because the TSLF 

directive in particular told the Desk to wind down the options as conditions permit.  I’d be happy 

to hear comments.  But if people would like to disagree with the press release or the plan, please 

say so. If we get more or less consensus around the table, we won’t have to take a formal action 

on that, I think. So those are three topics that we can talk about. 

This part of the meeting is billed on the agenda as an opportunity for informal, 

unstructured interaction [laughter], which I am going to duck, I think, in a minute.  I hope this is 

a chance for us just to have some interchange.  Let me just be very clear that we will not be 

making any decisions in this part of the meeting; the decisions on large-scale asset purchases, 

and so on, will be taken tomorrow in the policy round.  So please don’t feel that you are 

compelled to speak in order to get your voice heard—you will be heard.  But it would be useful, 

I think, to have some additional discussion. 

Before we get into that, I just wanted to say a word or two about the quantitative easing 

mechanism, because I feel as if there’s a certain amount of confusion going on.  So let me just 

say three straightforward things. 

The first point, and I think we all agree on this, is that any action we take—through 

purchases or auctions or whatever—to put reserves into the banking system, on net, will be 

expansionary, because whatever the banks do along the lines of what they told Bill English and 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 47 of 212

his colleagues—whether it’s buying other assets, or lending, or whatever action they take—will 

tend to be expansionary.  Of course, in equilibrium this will be reflected in lower short-term 

interest rates across a range of potential assets.  And that’s essentially how quantitative easing 

works. It’s meant to be expansionary, and I think it would be in the context that we’re using it 

here. President Yellen made a good point during the break, which was that quantitative easing 

should be expansionary even if the leverage ratio were binding.  The reason is that, in order to 

avoid the leverage ratio, firms would either have to get rid of managed liabilities or lower deposit 

rates and otherwise prevent the inflow of cash into their institution.  If depositors are not 

incentivized to put money into banks, they will go to money market mutual funds or to other 

types of short-term credit markets, and that, again, will have the effect of lowering short-term 

interest rates, and, therefore, be expansionary.  So I don’t think that there really is any barrier to 

quantitative easing being effective in our current institutional environment.   

The second observation I would make is based on Bill’s simulations; based on what we 

know, we think the quantitative easing effects are probably pretty small.  Short-term interest 

rates are already low. They might be made a little bit lower by quantitative easing, but I don’t 

see much chance of a huge overshoot in a short period of time.  I think that’s not what the 

evidence suggests. It’s not what the Japanese experience suggests.  So quantitative easing should 

be expansionary, but I don’t see it as being a major part of our overall monetary policy stance. 

And then, the third thing I’d like to say is that we can exit from the high level of reserves.  

We have, in fact, three methods to do that—we have two belts as well as a pair of suspenders.  

First of all, we have the interest on reserves, which may be leaky, but certainly if it’s raised high 

enough it will tighten policy—there seems to be little doubt about that.  Second, we have the 

various ways of sterilizing reserves through reverse repos or time deposits.  I wasn’t quite clear 



 

September 22–23, 2009 48 of 212

about the timing, but my sense is that these things will be coming online by early next year.  So 

over the time frame in which we would have to do a significant amount of tightening, we should 

have the tools in place to do that.  Then, of course, the third method we know we can do is sell 

assets. I think that that would not only have effects via the reversal of quantitative easing, but it 

also would have very powerful signaling and market effects.   

These are very important issues for us to understand.  But I felt there was an impression 

somehow that we were not in control of the situation.  I don’t think that’s true.  Obviously, it’s a 

difficult and novel situation, but I do think that the staff and all of us working together have a 

pretty good understanding of how to manage this and how this relates to standard monetary 

policy. 

So that’s my little homily.  Let me now open up the floor for any comments on asset 

purchases, reserve management, TAF, TSLF, any of those things that anyone would like to bring 

up, and I would invite interaction.  Would anyone like to raise any points?  Ah, President Lacker, 

I knew I could count on you. [Laughter] 

MR. LACKER. I just have a question about SFP.  If you want to talk about this more 

tomorrow in your presentation, and tee it up to do that, I’m fine with that, but it sort of gets to a 

broader issue. The SFP is now projected to fall, consistent with the Treasury’s announcement, 

and then rise again. I noticed that in our previous Bluebook it had been projected to stay longer 

where it is now, fall, and remain at zero permanently.  I was confused about the shift in the 

forecast after this intermeeting period, and I wondered what that represents. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, let me comment on that briefly.  First of all, I think it’s 

important for us to be able to do what we need to do without relying on the Treasury.  Obviously, 

we need to maintain that independence and that flexibility.  Whatever help they can provide, of 



 

September 22–23, 2009 49 of 212

course, is a bonus. I’ve had some discussions with Secretary Geithner and others, and the view 

was that because the debate on the debt ceiling—which will probably be toward the end of the 

year—could be contentious for a lot of reasons, it would be a good idea for us to have a low 

profile and not be part of this discussion. For that reason, I suggested to him that they run it 

down to a very low level until such time as all that discussion was completed.  Once the debt 

ceiling is raised, they are perfectly comfortable bringing the SFPs back up to some level.  Of 

course, at one point, it was over $500 billion—is that right, Brian? 

MR. MADIGAN. That’s correct. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So there’s some scope there, depending on how high the 

debt ceiling goes. But that being said, there is a sort of sine wave aspect of this, if we run into a 

debt ceiling again, for example, at the end of next year.  So I think it’s something that will on 

average be of some assistance if we get into a sterilization mode, but clearly we don’t want to 

count on that as an essential element of our strategy. 

MR. LACKER. It’s a $185 billion bulge, obviously.  And it adds a lot, right at the peak 

of that curve there. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. When is the peak in the reserves? 

MR. MADIGAN. It’s early next year.  It’s in Bill’s chart. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Middle of next year, I thought. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Well, I think there’s an early peak because of the SFP, and then the 

later peak because of the condition of our purchases. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. There’s a peak because of the SFP, but, of course, 

the balance sheet doesn’t max out until after the MBS would be settled sometime early next year.  

And by that time, if all goes well, the SFP would be back in action. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 50 of 212

MR. LACKER. You took into account the monetary policy effects when you discussed 

this with the Secretary? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, given that we’re not in a mode of tightening at this 

point, I think that the effects would occur only through quantitative easing.  I think they’d be 

modest. But if necessary, of course, we can adjust in other dimensions.  

MR. LACKER. The longer-run projection used to be zero.  Why were we projecting 

zero, and then we changed that to $200 billion? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I don’t know. 

MR. MADIGAN. On further reflection, we thought it might make more sense just to 

assume that the level was held up, because it is a possible tool for absorbing reserves in the 

future. 

MR. LACKER. Do we have an understanding with the Treasury about it returning to 

$200 billion? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. My personal discussions with the Secretary suggested that 

they were very comfortable raising it up again when the debt ceiling permitted.  But, again, I 

don’t think we should have either a formal understanding nor should we rely on it because of the 

independence issue. 

Vice Chairman, did you have a comment? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if we should 

talk about the agency MBS purchase program today or tomorrow, but it is 4:15, so today seems 

like a good time.  I think your comments on the exit were very appropriate in the sense that if we 

really think that the exit is manageable, then you really have to take that concern off the table in 



 

September 22–23, 2009 51 of 212

terms of thinking about the agency MBS purchase program.  So the discussion is then based on 

how do you want financial conditions to evolve over the next, say, 6 to 12 months? 

My view is that the end of the agency MBS purchase program is going to tighten 

financial conditions over that time frame, in any case.  We can argue about how much it’s going 

to tighten, but it’s going to move in that direction.  So the question is: Given that we’re already 

on a path that financial conditions are going to tighten, why would you want to pare back this 

program?  That would just exacerbate the tightening in financial conditions at a time that policy 

is not as accommodative as we would like.  If you look at the Bluebook, the unconstrained 

federal funds rate path is minus 4 percent.  So I really don’t see the logic for why we’d want to 

back away from this program, if we stipulate that we aren’t worried about the exit problem. 

If you are worried about the exit problem, then I can understand why you could care 

about whether the balance sheet was $100 billion bigger or smaller.  My view is that not only 

should we do the entire $1¼ trillion, I think we should commit to doing that $1¼ trillion at this 

meeting for three reasons. 

MR. BULLARD. Are we doing the policy debate now?  I can get into the policy debate, 

if you want. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let’s let him finish, and then you can respond. 

MR. BULLARD. You just said, “Don’t go off on your policy round today.”  He’s 

preempting the debate. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I’m happy to defer until tomorrow, if you’d like. 

MR. BULLARD. I don’t mind, but if you want to do it now, we can do it now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  Why don’t you defer that point until tomorrow? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. Fair enough. 



  

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 52 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there any other questions about the broader issues? 

President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had the impression from earlier 

conversations we’ve had that, at least at one stage, there were two mechanisms under 

consideration, one being the classic corridor system and the other being a mechanism more 

centered on interest on reserves, where the interest on reserves would become the policy rate.  Is 

it a foregone conclusion that we’re going back to a classic corridor system?  The whole 

discussion is about the ability to manipulate excess reserves in an interest on reserves regime to a 

degree that we could decouple those things.  Maybe I’m the one who is unclear, but are we going 

back to a classic corridor system?  Is that a foregone conclusion? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we weren’t really on a corridor system before.  We 

had a target, which was the federal funds rate, and we were manipulating reserves to hit that 

target. Our interest on reserves strategy would be a corridor system.  It would be a rate at which 

we would pay interest, which presumably would be the floor or would help establish the floor, 

and then there would be a lending rate, which would presumably be the ceiling. 

I think that’s a really good question.  Here’s the problem we have with the federal funds 

rate: Given some of the things we might be doing in order to try to get better control of reserves, 

we may make the federal funds rate a less informative interest rate.  For example, right now most 

of the liquidity in the federal funds market is coming from the GSEs.  If we start pulling their 

liquidity out in order to firm up the interest rate floor, then the federal funds market might be a 

very illiquid market.  There’s still a bank-to-bank market, but we don’t have the same kind of 

data on that. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 53 of 212

So I think we have three options—Brian, you and the staff can certainly comment.  One 

would be to find a way to do the federal funds rate, including perhaps additional information 

from bank transactions.  The second would be to choose another short-term rate, like the repo 

rate, which might work.  And the third would be to make the interest rate on reserves and the 

primary credit rate the announced variables, which, of course, we know we can do.  We could 

imagine a statement of policy that would announce changes in those two interest rates, plus some 

open market operations to sterilize a certain amount of reserves.  I’ve mentioned this to staff.  I 

do think we need to give this some more thought.  Brian, do you have anything to add? 

MR. MADIGAN. Just one additional comment, Mr. Chairman.  I think it would be 

helpful, and I wasn’t sure what exactly President Lockhart’s question was directed at in the 

following sense. I think it’s useful to distinguish between the transition phase, where there will 

be a very high level of reserve balances—and that may be over a matter of years—and the 

subsequent long-run steady state for monetary policy implementation.  They may involve two 

fairly different approaches to implementing monetary policy.  For instance, it may be the case 

that the excess reserves rate does serve as the floor, or at least a soft floor, during the transition 

phase, as the quantity of reserves is going down.  But the Committee would have it at its 

disposal, and the staff would come back to report to the Committee at some point on the 

possibility of a number of different operating frameworks further in the future. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You’re working on that? 

MR. MADIGAN. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, good. Any other points?  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  There was discussion in a memo about when we get to exit, and whether 

we should supplement those actions with asset sales.  There was also a discussion with plenty of 



 

September 22–23, 2009 54 of 212

caveats about what kind of losses could be realized on that portfolio if rates were to go up 100 

basis points. My first instinct was, “Boy, we could hedge that perfectly.”  [Laughter] But then I 

realized the imprudence of that.  If we don’t sell those securities, but, in a continued vanguard of 

transparency, the world is aware of these embedded losses, do we know how that would impact 

our reporting?  What kind of regime, both from a GAAP sense and also a public disclosure 

sense, would govern us? Is it the sale of these long-term assets that is the question, or is it the 

embedded losses that could potentially be the question? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Let me give that a try.  Just from a pure accounting 

perspective, we’re on a cost basis, so we wouldn’t be reporting any capital losses.  I think it’s not 

clear that the capital losses or gains are very material to anything for the following reasons.  So 

long as our cost of carry—which is zero on cash plus whatever rates we pay on deposits, and so 

on—is below the coupon on the MBS, then we would be making positive flow income, which is 

seigniorage to the Treasury. From an income perspective, unless we get to about 8 percent short-

term rates—I think that’s the number that was calculated in an earlier meeting—we’ll actually be 

making money in some sense on these transactions, which will then be reflected in payments to 

the Treasury. So I think from that perspective the politics is okay. 

If we sell a lot of assets, then we have to realize the losses.  That probably has not much 

economic meaning; it could have some public relations implications.  Since we’re dealing only 

with appearances and not with actuality, one way to deal with that would be to try to sell assets 

that are in the money first or pair them with assets that are in losses.  That would be one way to 

sell assets without realizing net losses.   

The final comment I would make is that I’ve had some discussions with the Treasury 

about this, because we’ll be returning to the Treasury very high levels of seigniorage over the 



 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 55 of 212

next few years. I think there would be some basis for withholding some of those earnings to 

augment our capital, so that if we do have losses, we’d be able to absorb them.  Those are some 

of the considerations. Would Brian or anyone like to add to that? 

MR. LACKER. A capital buffer for us? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, absolutely. 

MR. LACKER. Above our statutory? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We don’t have statutory capital. 

MR. LACKER. Above what we do now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 

MR. WARSH.  Just as a follow-up, Mr. Chairman, I have an accounting question.  I take 

what you say and it makes sense, but suppose we were to sell assets that were some subset of the 

overall pool and substantially similar to assets we didn’t sell.  Even though we’re in this cost 

accounting regime, I wondered whether or not some more explicit imputed loss would be 

attributed, if not in the consolidated financial statements, then in the balance sheet.  If we were 

in the world of a real bank and those unsold assets were similar, then you’d be stuck with that 

problem.  But, again, I don’t know if from a government GAAP perspective that’s a real 

accounting problem or if from a political economy or transparency perspective that begs the 

question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I’m no accounting expert, but because we buy and sell 

assets all the time and it doesn’t affect our cost basis accounting, I can’t imagine that that would 

have a direct implication. 

Governor Duke? 



  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 56 of 212

MS. DUKE.  There is a reason why we don’t mark them to market, and I’ve read it, and I 

can’t remember what it was. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, this may be it.  [Laughter] Did anyone have any 

concerns or comments?  President Plosser and President Fisher noted the issue on penalty rates, 

but did anyone have any other issues about the proposal to reduce the two auction facilities? 

Any other comments or observations?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. I’d just like to second the notion that the minimum bid rate is a policy 

parameter that we set, and I fail to see why an auction would be inconsistent with raising that to a 

penalty rate. And it’s a little odd that the term structure is inverted for those funds. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, I actually have some sympathy for this view, and the 

only thing that worries me a bit at this juncture is that it’s kind of a funny time to be changing the 

structure of the auction when we’re in the process of winding it down.  But I think that arguably 

we could have had a higher minimum bid rate earlier on. 

MR. PLOSSER. Just to follow up with that, I appreciate that comment.  I think what that 

should suggest to us is that the staff could begin to pursue how to think about a more permanent, 

longer-term life for the TAF.  This is an issue that needs to be grappled with so that in the future 

we don’t find ourselves having this same debate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Absolutely. My understanding is that, in order to have the 

TAF as an ongoing facility, even in reserve, we would have to do a rulemaking.  Is that correct? 

MR. MADIGAN. I believe that’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I believe that’s right. Scott? 

MR. ALVAREZ. Yes, that’s right.  In fact, we committed to putting the proposal out for 

comment before making the TAF a permanent facility. 



 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 57 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, we would do a rulemaking for comment.  That would 

be an excellent opportunity to make any revisions to the structure for our permanent facility. 

We do need to vote to ratify open market operations. 

MR. KOHN. So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any opposed?   (No response.)  Okay, thank you. If 

everyone is okay with it, why don’t we turn now to the economic outlook?  And the presentation 

will be by Dave Stockton and Nathan Sheets.  Dave. 

MR. STOCKTON. Thank you Mr. Chairman.  It was with some dismay that I 

listened to you at Jackson Hole last month wonder out loud whether the FOMC might 

actually improve its lot by seeking guidance from astrological forecasts, a proposal 

that I assume was motivated by your experience with the analysis of the staff.  I think 

we’ve shown ourselves to be appropriately eclectic in the tools that we have 

employed over time—a necessary reflection of our admittedly vast ignorance about 

many important economic relationships.  However, my colleagues and I want to draw 

the line at studying planetary alignment, tarot cards, or the entrails of chickens.  

[Laughter] Of course, I recognize that at least a few of you probably view consulting 

the entrails of a chicken and consulting an expectations-augmented Phillips curve to 

be observationally equivalent [Laughter]. 


In any event, I would like to argue this afternoon that the sizable revisions that we 
have made to our forecast this round did not reflect a reinterpretation of celestial 
events, but rather resulted, as is always the case, from a dispassionate and reasoned 
examination of flawed data through the lens of imperfect models.  What we took 
away from that examination was a view that the economy is expanding at present, and 
with more vigor than we had previously anticipated.  Indeed, the news on spending 
and production has been noticeably better than we expected just six weeks ago. 

One prominent area in that regard has been the housing sector.  Home sales and 

housing starts have been moving up fairly steadily since the spring and have 

continued to outstrip our expectations by an appreciable margin.  Inventories of 

unsold new homes have now been worked down to a very low level.  And house 

prices, which had fallen steeply and steadily since 2007, turned up in the second 

quarter in a fairly wide range of measures.  Expectations of house prices going 

forward also have improved, according to the respondents to the Michigan survey and
 
readings from futures on house prices. 


We still see difficulties ahead for housing in coming quarters, especially as a 

pickup in foreclosure-related inventories puts renewed downward pressure on prices.  

But to better balance the risks in our forecast in light of the more favorable incoming 




 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 58 of 212

data, we have a shallower decline in house prices in coming quarters and an earlier 
upturn than we had previously projected.  Accompanying this improvement, we now 
expect a somewhat faster recovery in construction activity, though to a level that by 
the end of 2011 is still well below those that prevailed prior to the downturn. 

Elsewhere in the household sector, consumer spending also has exceeded our 
expectations, even abstracting from the sizable boost that has been provided by the 
“cash-for-clunkers” program.  Much, though not all, of the surprise in non-motor 
vehicle outlays came in the form of a jump in retail control spending in August.  We 
are inclined to discount some of that strength because the data are noisy and the 
underlying fundamentals remain so weak.  But still, it was a positive innovation, and 
we have raised our forecast for the growth of real PCE in the second half by 
½ percentage point to an annual rate of 1½ percent. 

Likewise, business equipment spending has exceeded our earlier forecast.  Real 
E&S now looks poised to post a small increase, on net, in the second half, in contrast 
to the roughly 5 percent annual rate decline that we had projected in the August 
Greenbook. Supporting the somewhat firmer tone of the recent data, survey measures 
of business sentiment have improved as well.  That said, we certainly aren’t hearing 
anything that would suggest an imminent and powerful resurgence in capital 
spending, and we don’t expect the growth in equipment spending to pick up 
appreciably until a recovery in final sales becomes more firmly established toward the 
middle of next year. 

For some time, an easing of inventory liquidation has been a central element in 
our expectation that aggregate activity would turn up in the second half of this year.  
And that process appears to be in train.  Indeed, revised data now show that 
businesses made deeper reductions in stocks through midyear than previously 
reported, and with the final sales picture having brightened some, the inventory 
situation has become more comfortable.  That is certainly the case in the motor 
vehicle sector, where production is now being lifted to restore depleted stocks.  But 
inventory-sales ratios are off their peaks in a reasonably wide swath of industries, and 
a fairly broad-based pickup in factory output has occurred in the past couple of 
months—an uptrend that we think will be extended in coming months in light of 
indications that order flows have been improving. 

In addition to the implications of the stronger incoming data, a number of other 
important factors conditioning our projection have improved as well.  Most notably, 
the stock market is about 5 percent above the levels anticipated at the time of the 
August Greenbook, and longer-term interest rates are somewhat lower.  The path of 
crude oil prices is several dollars a barrel under the trajectory built into our prior 
forecast. And, as Nathan will discuss in more detail, the incoming data and outlook 
for foreign activity have strengthened further.  

Putting all of these factors together, we are now projecting real GDP to grow at an 
annual rate of 2¾ percent in the second half of this year, about 1½ percentage points 



 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 59 of 212

faster than anticipated in our August forecast.  Growth is then expected to pick up to 
3½ percent next year, an upward revision of ½ percentage point.  We project a further 
acceleration to 4½ percent in 2011. 

While that acceleration is a bit more pronounced than in our previous forecast, the 
basic contour of the projected recovery is still being shaped by factors that we have 
been citing for some time now.  Housing begins a modest upturn, the inventory cycle 
provides a boost to production, financial strains continue to gradually ease, and the 
drag from negative wealth effects diminishes.  As sales, production, and employment 
then begin to firm, activity benefits further from usual multiplier–accelerator effects 
and improving household and business confidence. 

Although growth rates of 3½ to 4½ percent seem pretty solid, especially by recent 
standards, I would still characterize our projected recovery as tepid.  In our forecast, 
real GDP doesn’t exceed the previous peak it reached in early 2008 until the final 
quarter of 2010, the longest such episode in the postwar period.  Even a year from 
now, we expect the unemployment rate to be in the neighborhood of 9¼ and 
9½ percent, and two years from now in the neighborhood of 8 percent, still nearly 
3 percentage points above our estimate of the NAIRU. 

One important reason that we anticipate such a modest pace of recovery is that 
businesses and households are expected to remain cautious in lifting production, 
hiring, and spending in response to a gradually improving economic and financial 
environment.  But I’ll admit that this forecast depends heavily on judgment calls 
about how to taper off the substantial negative residuals that have emerged in our 
spending equations over the past year or so.  And there isn’t a lot of science to guide 
those judgment calls. 

An important upside risk to the projection is that recovery could exhibit greater 
upward momentum than we currently project.  This isn’t merely a prospective 
concern. Since March, broader financial conditions have improved faster than we had 
anticipated, and it now appears that economic activity is turning up earlier and with 
somewhat greater vigor than we had expected.  As we’ve seen in recent months, 
better financial and economic conditions can feed off each other in a virtuous cycle, 
with further positive effects on sentiment and spending, just as they fed off each other 
in a negative manner on the way down.  Should that pattern continue, we could be 
looking at a noticeably stronger economy over the next two years than we are 
currently projecting. We illustrated some of these self-reinforcing dynamics in the 
V-shaped recovery scenario included in the Greenbook. 

Of course, we also see sizable counterbalancing risks to the downside of our 
projection. While I suspect that it is an acquired taste, I actually enjoy perusing old 
Greenbooks. Those from 2002 make for some interesting reading.  Early that year, 
we were surprised by how well aggregate activity was holding up after the terrible 
shock of September 11.  Not only did it appear that activity was getting a lift from the 
end of an inventory cycle, but final sales were coming in above expectations, 



 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 60 of 212

purchasing managers were reporting stronger order books, and consumer sentiment 
was improving.  The staff projection called for a noticeable acceleration of activity 
into 2003. But as the year progressed, activity did not continue to accelerate, and it 
became clear that sour business sentiment, continuing pessimism, and a lingering 
capital overhang were restraining the expansion by more than we had thought would 
be the case. There was, so to speak, a failure to launch. 

There is, similarly, a clear risk that the present improvement in activity will not 
transition into the modest acceleration that we are projecting, but rather will stall out 
at more meager rates of economic growth.  Despite the improvement in many aspects 
of financial market functioning, credit conditions remain tight and overall financial 
headwinds could prove stiffer than we have assumed in this forecast.  Moreover, the 
response of businesses and particularly households to the financial shock could prove 
larger and more durable than we have incorporated in our forecast.  We illustrated 
one aspect of that concern with an alternative simulation incorporating a much higher 
saving rate than in the baseline forecast.  If the economy fails to develop further 
upward momentum, then it would not be difficult to imagine giving back some of the 
recent gains registered in financial markets and experiencing a new wave of concern 
about the condition of banks’ balance sheets, with consequent effects on prospective 
aggregate demand and output. 

While both the upside and downside risks to our projection for real activity loom 
large and seem plausible, I don’t view the staff forecast as an average of two more 
likely outcomes—a boom and a stall.  I think the most probable outcome remains one 
of gradual recovery. But the probability distribution covering these outcomes seems 
pretty flat to me.  Moreover, even if a gradual recovery comes to pass, it will 
undoubtedly be characterized by fits and starts, rather than the relatively smooth 
acceleration that we are forecasting.  And that will add to the difficulties of 
distinguishing among these three possibilities for some time to come. 

Let me now turn to inflation, where we have made only modest adjustments to 
our forecast this round. We have revised up our estimate of total PCE price inflation 
in the current quarter by about ½ percentage point to an annual rate of nearly 
3 percent, but lowered our fourth-quarter forecast by ¾ percentage point to 
1½ percent. This pattern of revision largely reflects some sharper-than-expected 
increases that have been posted by retail gasoline prices, which we expect will be 
mostly retraced in coming months given the fallback in crude oil prices.  Food prices 
have surprised us to the downside, and early crop reports suggest that an ample 
harvest will likely hold down farm prices and, with a lag, retail food prices in coming 
quarters. The August reading on core CPI was a handful of basis points above our 
expectation and that, along with somewhat firmer prices for medical services in the 
PPI, led us to mark up our current-quarter forecast of core PCE prices by 
¼ percentage point to 1½ percent.  We are projecting core inflation to edge down to a 
1¼ percent pace in the fourth quarter. 



 
 

 

 

 
 

 

September 22–23, 2009 61 of 212

In response to the higher levels of resource utilization that we are showing in this 
Greenbook, we nudged up our core inflation projection by 0.1 percentage point in 
2010. But the basic contour of the projection remains unchanged.  We continue to 
believe that the very wide margin of slack in the economy will put further downward 
pressure on inflation but that this downward pressure will be tempered by relatively 
stable inflation expectations. Core PCE price inflation is expected to recede from a 
pace of 1.4 percent this year to 1.1 percent in 2010 and 1 percent in 2011.  Total PCE 
inflation is expected to move up from 1 percent this year to 1¼ percent in 2010, as 
food and energy prices turn back up, and then is projected to drop back to 1 percent in 
2011, close to the pace of core inflation.  Nathan will continue our presentation. 

MR. SHEETS. The global recovery that began in Asia now looks to be more 
broad-based than it appeared in August.  Recent data indicate that activity abroad 
expanded in the second quarter at a 1¾ percent pace, a full percentage point faster 
than we had expected, with positive surprises in both emerging-market and advanced 
economies.  This outcome—along with improving data on manufacturing and trade, 
further healing in financial markets, and the stronger U.S. outlook—has led us to 
revise up our projection of foreign economic growth ¾ percentage point in the second 
half this year and ¼ percentage point in 2010. 

The emerging-market economies are likely to lead the recovery, with growth 
averaging near 5 percent through the forecast period.  Activity in the advanced 
foreign economies should also pick up steam, rising from about a 2 percent rate 
during the second half of this year to over 3 percent in 2011.  The near-term global 
expansion is supported by a turn in the inventory cycle, improvements in business and 
consumer sentiment, and the ongoing effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus. 

Our forecast seeks to balance two competing considerations.  On the one hand, 
the remarkable depth of the recent recession and very low levels of resource 
utilization provide scope for a snapback in activity as improving conditions unleash 
pent-up demand.  On the other hand, strong headwinds from lingering stresses in the 
financial sector, weak labor market conditions, and expiring fiscal stimulus are likely 
to restrain growth over the next two years, particularly in the advanced economies.  In 
response to these considerations, we have penciled in a recovery that envisions 
foreign growth that is well above trend, but we also anticipate that significant slack 
will persist through the end of the forecast period. 

In China, recent readings on industrial production, investment, and retail sales 
point to continued strong expansion.  Following new measures by the Chinese 
authorities to moderate credit growth, bank lending slowed significantly in July and 
August. However, the authorities have issued assurances that their policies will 
remain accommodative until a sustainable recovery is at hand.  Until such time, the 
authorities are likely to continue to struggle to strike the right balance between 
constraining speculative behavior and maintaining an appropriately stimulative stance 
of policy.  As such, it remains to be seen whether the Chinese authorities will achieve 
a smooth dismount from the extraordinary stimulus implemented in the first half of 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 62 of 212

the year. Growth elsewhere in the region continues to be buoyed by demand from 
China, but domestic stimulus and rebounding private spending are also lending 
support. 

Going forward, economic growth in emerging Asia should remain strong, at 
around 6 percent, through the forecast period.  But key risks include the possibility 
that external demand may be slow to recover or that stimulative monetary conditions, 
coupled with the relatively favorable outlook for the region, may trigger 
unsustainable increases in asset prices.  

The contraction in euro-area GDP during the second quarter was much smaller 
than expected, as the German and French economies showed positive growth, 
supported by improved export performance.  In addition, automobile purchases 
surged as consumers responded to government incentives.  With these incentives now 
winding down, we expect euro-area consumption to weaken again, but a turnaround 
in inventories, further gains in exports, and rebounding business sentiment should 
fuel economic growth in the region of around 1½ percent in the second half.  
Thereafter, we see a moderate recovery taking hold, with GDP expanding at a 
2-3 percent pace, but headwinds from weak labor market conditions and stresses in 
the financial sector will constrain growth going forward. 

Recent signs also point to a near-term rebound among our North American 
neighbors. After several quarters of contraction, Canadian economic growth is 
expected to rebound to 2½ percent in the second half of this year, as improved 
conditions in the auto sector fuel a rise in exports and a strengthening in domestic 
demand.  The hard-hit Mexican economy, which over the past year has contracted 
nearly 10 percent (its largest decline on record), now appears to be reviving as well.  
Mexican auto production was up sharply in August, and business sentiment is rising.  
In line with these improvements, as well as a reversal of economic drag from the 
swine flu outbreak, the Mexican economy should begin to recover in the second half 
of this year. In 2010 and 2011, both Canada and Mexico should benefit from the 
strengthening expansion in the United States. 

We expect that headline CPI inflation in the major foreign economies will remain 
muted through the forecast period, with persistent slack preventing inflation from 
breaking out on the upside and well-anchored inflation expectations keeping inflation 
from dipping much on the downside.  In this environment, the major central banks are 
assumed to leave policy rates at their current low levels for quite some time.  The 
Bank of Canada has made a conditional commitment to keep its policy rate at 
25 basis points through the second quarter of 2010.  As such, we expect the Bank to 
wait at least until the second half of next year to begin its liftoff.  The Bank of 
England, which last month increased its asset-purchase program by £50 billion (with 
Mervyn King voting for an even larger increase), will likely refrain from tightening 
until early 2011.  And we believe that the ECB will also wait until 2011 to begin 
raising policy rates. 



 

 

 

 
 

 

September 22–23, 2009 63 of 212

The broad dollar has declined 1¾ percent since your last meeting, with an 
appreciation against the pound and the peso only partially offsetting a sizable 
depreciation against the euro and the yen.  We project that the dollar will remain on a 
modest downward trajectory, depreciating at an annual rate of about 2½ percent over 
the next two years. 

Turning to the U.S. external sector, nominal trade data for July pointed to a sharp 
rebound in both imports and exports.  In line with these data, as well as the projected 
bounceback in automotive trade and the strengthening of U.S. and foreign demand 
more generally, we now expect imports and exports both to expand at roughly a 
20 percent pace in the third quarter.  Thereafter, rising foreign economic growth and 
stimulus from recent and projected future dollar depreciation should fuel export 
growth at an average annual rate of 8¼ percent through 2011, while imports are 
expected to grow just a touch more slowly. 

Beginning with the fourth quarter, we have raised our projections for import and 
export growth roughly 3 percentage points relative to the August Greenbook.  
Although this revision in part reflects the stronger outlook for U.S. and foreign 
activity, we have also factored in a more aggressive judgmental rebound in trade.  As 
of the second quarter, real imports were down 20 percent from their previous peak 
and real exports were down 15 percent. This cyclical downturn was much larger than 
our models predicted.  With the improved global outlook, we are now writing down a 
bounceback that is also much larger than our models suggest, but which we believe 
better matches the behavior of trade during past economic recoveries. 

Taken together, net exports are expected to swing from a positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth of 1.6 percentage points in the second quarter to a negative 
contribution of about ¼ percentage point on average over the forecast period, just a 
bit more negative than in our previous forecast. 

In sum, we are more confident about the projected recovery abroad than we were 
in August, but much uncertainty remains about its breadth and durability.  One 
notable risk is that the boost from the turn in the inventory cycle may prove to be 
short-lived and that consumption and investment spending may remain sluggish for 
longer than we now anticipate. Similarly, it is possible that the recovery in global 
financial markets may have gotten ahead of itself, especially given continued balance 
sheet stresses in major financial institutions.  Finally, with high and rising 
unemployment in many countries, intensified protectionist pressures and increased 
trade barriers are an ongoing risk as well.  Thank you, and we’re happy to take your 
questions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Are there questions for our 

colleagues?  President Plosser.  



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 64 of 212

MR. PLOSSER. I have a question. Dave, both you and Nathan referred to financial 

headwinds as one of the downsides or stresses to growth going forward.  That phrase has come 

up a lot over the last couple of years. As financial markets have improved, I was wondering if I 

could get a handle on the degree to which financial headwinds affect this forecast compared with 

the degree that you marked down your earlier forecasts when you also saw headwinds.  Has the 

picture changed for you in some way?  I’m not saying that headwinds have necessarily gone 

away, but have they changed given the evolution of the financial markets, and, if so, how?  And 

how is that reflected in your forecast?  And, Nathan, for the international side, the same question. 

MR. STOCKTON. Between the August forecast and this forecast, there really hasn’t 

been any significant change. In our measures of financial stress, we haven’t learned anything 

more because we haven’t gotten another Senior Loan Officer survey to gauge bank lending. 

MR. PLOSSER. Since last spring, though. 

MR. STOCKTON: But since last spring things have changed.  We’ve tried to be 

symmetrical in our response to the deterioration.  As you know, we were marking down our 

forecast by more than would be suggested by the standard interest rate, wealth, and exchange 

rate channels. As things have improved, we’ve taken some of those negative add-factors out of 

our spending equations and allowed spending to come back more closely to the equations than 

was the case in our forecast in March when we had very substantial negative adds going out 

through the end of the forecast horizon, but not really lessening very much over the course of this 

year. As things have improved, we’re interpreting some of the upward revisions that we’ve 

made to the forecast, which are very substantial for the second half of this year, as a reflection of 

improved overall financial conditions, some of which operate through our model—the stock 

market, interest rates, the exchange rate—but others of which operate through channels that the 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 65 of 212

model doesn’t incorporate, such as through tight bank lending and other kinds of constraints.  I 

don’t have a quantitative number that I can just pull out of the air here, but I’d say a noticeable 

fraction of that improvement in the incoming data probably reflects the fact that we’re not 

getting as much restraint coming from those financial conditions as we had previously thought. 

MR. PLOSSER. Well, how much of the improvement of your forecast, in some sense, is 

reflected in the diminishing of the negative add-factors that you had been putting in before and 

how much of it is really the model?  I think you probably gave me as close to an answer on that 

as I’m going to get.  [Laughter] 

MR. STOCKTON. You may recall that, as we showed in a number of Greenbooks, we 

were consulting some reduced-form models that incorporated measures of financial stress.  We 

were looking at correlating those measures of financial stress with residuals in the FRB/US 

equation. They’ve generally moved in a more favorable direction— not uniformly, but generally 

in a more favorable direction.  The reason it’s so difficult to be very precise is that the 

magnitudes of that improvement differ a lot by those various measures and various models.  I 

think that if you look at what’s happened in the second half of this year and, given that it hasn’t 

all just occurred as an end of an inventory cycle —we’re seeing some better final sales as well— 

it reflects an improvement in these financial channels. 

MR. PLOSSER. Okay. Thank you. Nathan? 

MR. SHEETS. Just briefly, I’d say that there have been probably three major factors that 

have driven the upward revisions to our forecast since the March Greenbook, which was the 

trough. One is the very surprising rebound in emerging Asia.  Economic growth in emerging 

Asia in the second quarter was at an annual rate of  14.5 percent.  There’s no way that we would 

have seen that coming.  In particular, the fiscal stimulus in China came on much more quickly 



 

September 22–23, 2009 66 of 212

and powerfully than we expected. A second factor that’s operating on our forecast, particularly 

for North American countries—Mexico and Canada—is the markup in the U.S., which has a 

very powerful effect, and to some extent the markup in emerging Asia.  The third major factor 

has been the much more rapid improvement in global financial conditions than we would have 

expected. So it’s one of the three major factors.  I’m not sure exactly how we want to allocate it 

across those three factors, but that’s roughly the order of magnitude. 

One other thought that I want to articulate is that I look at these headwinds as being a 

factor that’s weighing on economic growth and affecting our central forecast, but, in addition, I 

look at it as a downside risk—these headwinds may prove to be more debilitating than what we 

factored into our forecast.  Therefore, because of these headwinds, we have a slower pace of 

foreign growth, particularly in the advanced economies, than we would otherwise; we also have 

a distribution of risk that’s more skewed to the downside than would be the case without them. 

MR. PLOSSER. Just one clarification: Would you characterize the improvement in 

financial conditions that we’ve seen outside the U.S. as of roughly the same order of magnitude 

that we witnessed in the U.S.? 

MR. SHEETS. Yes. 

MR. PLOSSER. And would you say that there’s not a great differential between what’s 

going on in the U.S. and what’s going on in the countries that are the most important for our 

growth?  In other words, would you say that they’ve improved by roughly the same order of 

magnitude that we have? 

MR. SHEETS. I would say yes, by a similar order of magnitude, but with the footnote 

that perhaps the headwinds in some of the emerging-market economies are not as great because 

their financial institutions have not been as affected by this crisis. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 67 of 212

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn, you had a two-hander? 

MR. KOHN. I was going to make the last point that Nathan just made.  We heard it from 

the BIS. I think that some of the emerging-market economies felt that their financial markets 

were coming back very quickly, and inflows of capital were resuming and, if anything, they were 

beginning to get concerned about rising asset prices. I guess this applies to Australia as well to 

the emerging-market economies in Asia. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Dave, this is probably more of an observation 

than a question. The alternative scenarios often present very interesting possibilities, and two 

that caught my eye this time were, one, the earlier liftoff and, two, greater disinflation.  These are 

diametrically opposed.  On the one hand, early liftoff has the inflation rate going to 2.8 percent in 

2013, whereas greater disinflation has it at 0 percent during that time frame.  Looking at the 

confidence intervals, they’re both outside of 90 percent during those time periods, so I take it you 

don’t see either of those as particularly likely.  But I guess the question is:  When can we know 

that we can take one of these off the table? What type of explanation would you be looking for 

there? 

MR. STOCKTON.  I suspect it will be a while before that occurs.  I think what we’re 

trying to illustrate is that thinking about the evolution of inflation expectations going forward is 

critical, and we don’t have a very good grasp in the current environment of what might be 

driving those inflation expectations. 

Now, the accelerationist Phillips curve—the faster, greater disinflation scenario— 

basically follows pretty closely the kind of disinflation you might get out of a backward-looking 



   

 

September 22–23, 2009 68 of 212

Phillips curve that fits the data, though not perfectly, over the past with some reasonable degree 

of accuracy.  But implicit in that is a very substantial decline in inflation expectations.  So the 

staff has been surprised that we’ve gone through a year in which the unemployment rate has 

risen as rapidly as it has, and we’ve really seen no signs that inflation expectations are breaking 

to the downside. 

On the other hand, there’s the earlier liftoff.  A number of you have expressed concerns 

that, given the current setting of policy, or the size of the balance sheet, inflation expectations 

could be unleashed to the upside.  So that scenario considers what happens if we get a faster 

recovery in a world in which policy is not being tightened aggressively.  Specifically, could you 

get some significant upward shift in inflation expectations? It seems possible. 

I think you’re right that we don’t see either of those two extreme outcomes as the most 

likely, but I don’t see any alternative other than to monitor very carefully what’s happening on 

the inflation expectation side and, going forward, obviously to look at all of the price and wage 

data and so forth that would be important.  But I’d consider expectations to be pretty central to 

that process. 

MR. EVANS. Okay. Thanks. Very well done. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. I have a question for Nathan regarding the dollar, and it relates to 

your tracking the tone of the market over the intermeeting period.  Yes, the dollar has stabilized 

in the last few days, but two or three weeks ago it was under pretty severe pressure.  I know it’s a 

tremendous exaggeration, but one begins to think about the dollar in a rout of some kind—the 

markets really selling off strongly—and, at least in theory, that could produce some response on 



  

September 22–23, 2009 69 of 212

our part. How do you follow and think about the dollar and, as I call it, the tone of the market? 

Are you in touch with people in the market, or are we just tracking it more quantitatively? 

MR. SHEETS. Let me give some background.  From July of 2008 through early March 

of this year, the broad index of the dollar appreciated by about 20 percent.  Since early March, 

the dollar has given back about two-thirds of that strength.  The story that we’ve told—and I 

think it continues to be the most compelling story—is that that appreciation of the dollar was 

driven by a sharp increase in risk aversion and risk appetite as people moved en masse into 

Treasuries; then, over the last six months, as conditions have improved, there’s been an 

unwinding of some of those risk-related flows, and the dollar has, accordingly, depreciated.  

We’ve also seen rather marked appreciations of a number of emerging market economy 

exchange rates, which would be consistent with the story that folks are more comfortable taking 

on risk. 

Now, specifically over the intermeeting period, we continue to hear this story about 

increased risk aversion. A lot of attention was paid to the bilateral rate with the euro—the dollar 

did fall quite a bit over the intermeeting period against the euro—but there was an offset to that 

due to an appreciation against the pound and against the Mexican peso.  So all in all, the overall 

move was relatively limited.  Nevertheless, tone is tone, and we continue to pay attention to it.  I 

have to say that I firmly believe that the dollar is traded in a market, and sometimes it’s going to 

go up and sometimes it’s going to go down. 

Ultimately, if the United States pursues sound policies, in my view, there will be 

attractive investment opportunities here, and that will support the dollar over the medium term.  

But it’s our responsibility to make sure that those sound and strong policies are being put in 

place. So all in all, I’m not too concerned so far.  But it’s something that we have to monitor 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 70 of 212

very closely, and we need to pay attention to what we’re hearing.  Why is the dollar falling?  Is it 

a lack of confidence in U.S. policymakers, particularly on the fiscal side? You hear murmurs 

from time to time that that’s a concern.  So the fiscal situation is certainly something that’s 

weighing on the dollar. But, why is it going down?  It’s the tone of U.S. policies, and it’s 

imperative that U.S. policies be able to deliver an array of investment opportunities so that we’ll 

be attractive for international investors. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Nathan, I think it’s worth pointing out, though, that the 

behavior of the yields on Treasuries is a little bit inconsistent with this whole story and gives us 

something of a puzzle. 

MR. SHEETS. Indeed. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, if I can, I just want to compliment the presenters.  Over 

the last five years the quality of these presentations gets better and better.  I particularly want to 

tip my hat—no offense Dave—to Nathan, because the understanding of these global 

interlinkages—without taking anything away from your predecessors—is far more erudite than it 

was before. I much appreciate it. 

My question is about productivity. I would expect that globalization would have an 

impact on enhancing the productivity of our own economy here at home, and I deduce from 

listening to my corporate interlocutors that, indeed, they have been driving to achieve greater 

productivity as they have worked their way through this recession.  I infer from the numbers I get 

from my staff that, indeed, productivity has held up rather well throughout this recession and, in 

fact, perhaps better than it has in previous U.S. recessions.  So my question is:  How does this 

affect your outlook for the pace of recovery and for inflation, if my assumption is correct? 



September 22–23, 2009 71 of 212

MR. STOCKTON. In terms of the productivity in the United States, we have been 

surprised in the first half of this year by its strength.  Our interpretation was largely that, as 

things started to collapse late last year, firms were a bit slow to cut payrolls.  Even though those 

cuts were huge, they were, in fact, fairly modest, relative to the size of the output declines, so we 

got a little cyclical downswing in productivity.  Since the first half of this year, firms have been 

exceedingly aggressive at cutting costs and extracting higher productivity gains.  In this forecast, 

we’re interpreting that as firms squeezing their work forces currently very hard and as being 

unlikely to let up quickly on that. But we do think there’s going to be a gradual return.  

Productivity is now probably above what we think the structural trend would be, and there will 

be some return to that structural trend slowly through a slowdown in the growth of productivity 

going forward. Firms won’t be able to continue to extract the 4, 5, and 6 percent increases in 

productivity that they’ve gotten in recent quarters; it’s likely to slow down to more like 

1½ percent. 

That’s an important risk in the outlook, because it’s clear that if, in fact, we were to have 

another year or two of gains in productivity that average close to 4 percent, we would be looking 

at something that looked more like a jobless recovery.  Even though GDP growth might look 

reasonably well sustained, it would be with less employment growth and a higher unemployment 

rate than is incorporated in the baseline forecast.  Why haven’t we put that into the baseline 

forecast? At this point I think that’s a serious issue and one that we’re going to have to confront 

if, in fact, productivity stays as high as it has been recently.  I guess we’re just reluctant at this 

point to interpret what’s happened over the course of the past two years as a big, positive supply 

shock to the U.S. economy. It’s possible there’s some sort of X-efficiency operating where 

businesses are under incredible pressure, and they’ll learn to do things differently, and they’ll 



  

 

September 22–23, 2009 72 of 212

continue to learn to do things more effectively in the future.  But right now, I think we’re staying 

agnostic about whether this is a negative or positive supply shock.  We resisted marking down 

our potential output a whole lot when the crisis first began and people were talking about a big 

negative supply shock. In retrospect, I think that still was a pretty good call, but we’re also 

reluctant to think that we’re going to get a big increase in sustained productivity growth going 

forward—but it’s possible. And I think a jobless recovery that’s generated through both faster 

productivity and maybe somewhat longer work weeks for workers is a real risk to the outlook. 

MR. FISHER. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Other questions?  (No response.) Okay, seeing 

none, why don’t we begin our economic go-round? And President Lockhart, you’re the leadoff 

hitter. 

MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First I have just a quick comment to 

Dave Stockton. Because of our trade policy, chicken entrails could back up in Georgia, and if 

you want to change your policy on that, we can help.  [Laughter] 

MR. STOCKTON. I’ve got to take a look, I guess. 

MR. LOCKHART. Much like the Greenbook, my views have moved in the direction of 

greater optimism since the last Committee meeting in August.  The incoming data have been a 

little stronger than were anticipated then.  At this late September juncture, I think the picture can 

be characterized as improving, but still with very mixed vital signs, and the outlook is somewhat 

more optimistic but tempered by awareness that this is an economy powered by a large number 

of government supports.  I agree with all who are declaring that a technical recovery is under 

way, but it is a tentative recovery, not well established.  Even with the improving data, I think 

there is substantial uncertainty around the question of whether the recovery has its own legs or is 



 

September 22–23, 2009 73 of 212

propelled by transitory government programs.  Governor Tarullo in the last meeting talked about 

a relapse scenario. I see the economy as still vulnerable to relapse. 

Over the last two weeks, our Sixth District contacts provided a lot of support for this 

view of the current reality. Sixth District realtors and homebuilders reported that the first-time 

homebuyer subsidy noticeably boosted new home sales and construction of moderately priced 

properties. The “cash-for-clunkers” program provided a big lift to Southeast auto dealers and cut 

deeply into new car inventories. In response to the Board’s request, our regional executives 

contacted six state budget officials.  They told us that the stimulus money, as intended, has 

helped support construction activity, but it represents spending that would have been cut or 

funded by running down rainy day funds. This input supports the view that stimulus spending is 

mainly eliminating a negative in the outlook. 

In this contact cycle involving directors and other business leaders, we tried to probe their 

sense of factors critical to transitioning from government support to sustained growth based on 

private demand. Our business contacts said that the inventory drawdown is slowing but may not 

be followed by an increase even as sales increase.  As the Chairman pointed out at the last 

meeting, in the near term, inventories don’t have to rise to improve economic growth, they just 

have to fall more slowly. Nonetheless, we’re hearing claims on the part of some businesspeople 

of permanent adjustments to inventory requirements and businesses.  Apart from a modest rise in 

back-to-school spending, general merchandise retailers reported continuing restrained consumer 

demand.  Transport firms reported very little in the way of increased activity, and the Sixth 

District survey of purchasing managers reveals a drop in new orders and production after more 

promising numbers in July. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 74 of 212

As regards employment, we heard that layoffs have subsided, but there is no indication 

yet that firms anticipate hiring.  In summary, the nascent optimism expressed by my contacts just 

before the last FOMC meeting has been supplanted with unease over the economy as the 

influence of public support programs diminishes. 

We are revising up our third-quarter GDP estimate and are inclined to do the same for the 

fourth quarter, but in comparison with the Greenbook, I remain much less bullish about 2010 and 

2011. There are reasons at this juncture to question whether the economy will have healed 

enough for a significant expansion of private demand.  I would cite several factors likely to 

weigh on the economy through the medium term:  high unemployment, cautious business 

investment, diminished consumer finance, the potential drag on the banking system from 

commercial real estate, the slow repair of the banking system, and slow-moving adjustments, 

such as intersectoral labor movements. 

Regarding prices, the incoming data show disinflation to be more persistent and more 

broad-based than the Atlanta bank put in its last forecast submission.  I think these disinflation 

trends bear watching, but at the moment, I still judge inflation risks to be roughly balanced. 

As regards growth, the incoming data have clearly been more positive, and I would judge 

the balance of risks to be more balanced than was my view in August.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business conditions in the Third District 

continue to indicate generally sluggish activity, and nonresidential investment remains soft.  

Nevertheless, a number of positive trends have begun to emerge.  Our September Business 

Outlook Survey index of general activity came in quite a bit stronger than it did in August.  The 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 75 of 212

gain was primarily driven by increases in shipments.  It’s hard to parse out what part of this 

increase in shipments was due to drawn down inventories and what part was new production.  

Most likely it was some of both.  This rise in the index seems consistent with the general signals 

of improvement in manufacturing coming from other regions of the country, even Richmond. 

Prices paid and received by manufacturers in our region seem to have firmed a bit, as 

well. The BOS current prices paid and current prices received indexes have all been positive for 

the last two months.  In fact, the index for prices expected to be paid six months from now will 

increase to a number over 40, a very high number.  Manufacturers thus seem to be more attuned 

to the prospects of higher prices than falling prices.  These data might mitigate some of our 

concerns about the risk of deflation or deflationary expectations taking hold. 

As in the nation as a whole, employment has continue to fall in our three-state area, 

though the pace of decline has lessened somewhat, as it has in the nation.  The BOS future 

employment index rose in September and has been positive for five consecutive months.  

Evidence is mounting that the employment level in the three-state area is at or near the bottom. 

Overall, conditions in the Third District look slightly better than they were six weeks ago, 

and signs are pointing to a gradual strengthening of economic activity in the coming months.  On 

the national level, the data we have received since our last meeting are indicative of an economy 

where recovery is gradually taking hold, and it now appears that the worst of this recession is 

quite likely behind us. We are, in my view, in the midst of that transition period from 

contraction to expansion. The level of employment is still depressed, but, given the trends in 

job-loss and job-finding rates, it seems to me that we can begin to expect employment to increase 

and growth to return in the near term.  The signs of financial stress that also concerned us so 

much this time last year have greatly abated, as we’ve discussed. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 76 of 212

While these indicators are not all back to their pre-crisis levels, they are about where I 

would expect, given the current state of the economy and economic conditions more broadly.  

The bottom line is that current economic conditions are much better than they were, and they are 

better than what we and many private-sector forecasters were expecting just a few months ago.  

They underpin a substantial upward revision in near-term GDP forecasts both from the 

Greenbook and from many private-sector forecasters. 

However, I remain highly skeptical of the staff’s forecast regarding inflation, which, by 

and large, has been unaffected by the upward revisions to growth in their forecast.  In particular, 

I continue to see stronger inflationary pressures over the next few years than is implicit in the 

Greenbook forecast. Many other forecasters also see more inflation than is in the Greenbook.  

For example, the Greenbook 2010 CPI forecast is below both the average and the median CPI 

forecast among the fifty-two forecasters in the September Blue Chip consensus.  I think we need 

to consider seriously that there are upside risks to inflation, particularly to the staff’s forecast of 

inflation, when we think about policy. 

Let me discuss why I have some concerns about the inflation outlook. First, it’s quite 

clear from the staff’s write-up that forecasted inflation paths depend importantly on inflation 

expectations, as Dave Stockton mentioned.  With those expectations well anchored, estimates of 

economic slack going forward become virtually the sole determinant of the path of inflation in 

the forecast.  The forecast anchors those expectations at 2 percent, which is lower than the 

readings of inflation expectations that we have been receiving.  In particular, while they seem to 

be anchored, longer-term expectations of inflation as measured by surveys are still in the 3 

percent range. My own view on longer-term inflation expectations is closer to the public’s, as 

reflected in those various surveys, than the staff’s. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 77 of 212

The dependence of the staff’s inflation outlook on inflation expectations remaining 

anchored over the forecast horizon brings to the fore my second concern with the Greenbook 

outlook on inflation. In my way of thinking, expectations of future inflation will ultimately 

depend on the public’s expectation about the future path of monetary stimulus.  In the Greenbook 

forecast, the funds rate is held constant at least through the end of 2011 and probably into 2012, 

while the public seems to believe we’ll be raising the funds rate by the middle of next year.  

Clearly, there is more monetary stimulus built into the Greenbook forecast than the public 

currently expects. If we were to endow the public with this knowledge, I seriously doubt that 

inflation expectations will stay near 2 percent.  Thus, the Greenbook assumption of longer-term 

expectations being anchored at 2 percent over the forecast horizon seems to me at odds with this 

divergence between the market’s expectation of policy and the proposed policy path in the 

Greenbook. Inflation expectations could rise in this context and could easily overwhelm the 

effects of economic slack that the Greenbook relies so heavily upon for its forecast. 

My third concern is the fact that the model underlying the Greenbook forecast does not 

appear to depend explicitly on forecasts of liquidity or other quantities in the banking system, 

such as forecasts of excess reserves, required reserves, or loans. And despite the results of the 

consultation with banks that we heard about earlier regarding the high reserve balances and the 

simulation exercise, it seems only a matter of time before those huge reserves in our banking 

system begin to flow out into the economy, particularly with growth rates at the level that they 

are. And that time may come sooner than many people think, given the upward revisions in our 

forecast. Needless to say, this outflow will not have an immediate effect on current inflation, but 

expectations of inflation may become more sensitive to such a rapid increase in liquidity.  

Nevertheless, the outflow will undoubtedly create the preconditions for an eventual rise in 



  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 78 of 212

inflation expectations and inflation.  We need to be prepared to soak up those excess reserves, as 

we’ve been discussing. 

Of course, knowing when to raise rates and when to reverse course is always a challenge, 

but it will be more difficult in this complex environment, as we are near the zero bound.  That 

brings me to my fourth concern.  While I believe that we have a range of tools to control excess 

reserves and reserves in general, including interest rates on reserves, asset sales, and some of the 

other techniques we talked about this afternoon, I think we still have some work to do to figure 

out what the right metrics are that we need to be looking at that will signal to us when the time is 

right. For instance, as I noted in my question to Bill English, I find it curious that Treasury 

yields fell over this intermeeting period, given the better-than-expected economic data.  A staff 

memo on high reserve balances noted that at least one respondent adjusted their reserve balances 

downward, and another was getting ready to make adjustments.  Could these yields be a result of 

downward pressure from cash equivalents to induce reserve demand to equal reserve supply? 

Yields abroad fell, too, but foreign central banks are also providing high levels of liquidity.  

What implications does this have for the increase in reserves that will follow on the heels of our 

increased MBS purchases? What implications does it have for inflation expectations?  Is a small 

rise in the inflation compensation in five-year forwards over the past few weeks a precursor to 

that in the near future? 

My final concern has to do with the reduction in the Treasury’s SFP balances and how 

this Committee plans to address that.  The staff estimates that the reduction in the SFP program 

will add about $200 billion in excess reserves to our balance sheet.  If we choose not to sterilize 

this expansion in reserves, I think this additional source of stimulus will add upside risks to 

inflation. Even if one believes that the reduction in the SFP program is temporary, as the balance 



 

September 22–23, 2009 79 of 212

sheet projections assume, there doesn’t seem to be any reason for us not to sterilize this increase 

by reducing our own LSAP program. When and if the SFP rises again—and I’m not sure we 

want to encourage it to rise again, for that matter, from an independence point of view—we can 

alter our approaches if we deem it appropriate.  The amount of stimulus we apply to the economy 

should remain the decision of this Committee and not be passive or be choices made at the 

Treasury. 

The bottom line for me is this.  Given the amount of stimulus that’s in the forecast, given 

the size of the balance sheet and excess reserves, given the uncertainty regarding our ability to 

know when to act, I largely see only upside risks to inflation relative to the latest Greenbook 

forecast. Based on these concerns about the forecasted paths of inflation, my views on 

appropriate policy are fundamentally different from those underlying the policy assumptions in 

the Greenbook. Maintaining a funds rate so close to zero for so many years, in my view, can 

only reignite significant inflation. Moreover, given the lags between policy actions and the 

surfacing of inflation, we will have to act well before inflation pressures become evident.  

Otherwise we will be too late, risking both inflation and our credibility.  I believe we could have 

helped our own cause by adopting an explicit inflation target, but I fear we have missed the 

opportunity to advance that initiative when deflation fears were more widespread among the 

public and Congress.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The change in the Greenbook forecast for 

this meeting was really quite striking.  There were marked improvements in consumer spending, 

equipment and software, and residential investment for the remainder of the year, and it is 

notable to me that the improvement is carried through over the forecast horizon.  The turn in 



September 22–23, 2009 80 of 212

housing, for example, extends beyond the expiration of the homebuyer credit.  I haven’t been at 

this long, but I haven’t seen many revisions this large.  It strikes me that they are well supported 

by the data we’ve seen since the last meeting. Almost every indicator has surprised to the 

upside, and, taken together, they paint a picture that looks more like the beginning of the 

recovery than an economy trying to find where the bottom is. 

There are abundant reasons for caution, however, as one would expect at this stage in the 

business cycle. Perhaps chief among these is the labor market, which does look like it’s trying to 

find a bottom. We have seen definite improvement in the rate of change in employment, but I 

would feel more comfortable if the weekly claims numbers were falling a bit faster.  I think 

uncertainty about the labor market poses obvious questions about how hardy consumer spending 

is going to be in the next few quarters. Uncertainty about compensation growth poses similar 

questions. The Greenbook has marked up its forecast here as well, based on the notion that the 

weakness we’ve seen represents a one-time level adjustment, and that strikes me as quite 

plausible, but it will be great to see that in the numbers. 

The picture in the Fifth District is broadly similar to the national outlook, and I describe it 

as signs of improvement tempered by pervasive caution.  Our manufacturing index, which five 

months ago was the first among the regional surveys to venture into positive territory, held 

steady this month at 14.  Of particular note, the employment component moved into positive 

territory for the first time this month, as did expectations of manufacturing employment six 

months ahead. While our services index remained in negative territory also, overall it has also 

shown some recent recovery, especially on the retail side, where sales revenue and shopper 

traffic showed big improvements.  Service sector wages, both retail and nonretail, also showed 

their first positive reading since the beginning of the recession.   



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 81 of 212

The anecdotal information from around the District also has a cautious tone amid signs of 

improvement.  Suppliers of auto components report a significant uptick in industry demand.  A 

large packaging manufacturer reported a surprising surge in August sales.  Other contacts, 

however, report delays in investment projects due to uncertainty about the economic and political 

climate.  Commercial real estate continues to soften.  Contacts expect construction to be lower 

for the next two years, with the exception of the Washington area, where several federal agencies 

are embarking on building projects, apparently.  One large electric utility reports slower hiring 

because their current workers are staying on rather than retiring as they had planned. 

On inflation, I agree with the Greenbook’s assessment that the relative stability in the 

core is due largely to the stability of expectations.  It depends, in turn, of course, on the stability 

of expectations about future policy, as President Plosser pointed out, and that makes the large 

discrepancy that he commented on between market expectations and the Greenbook’s 

assumption regarding the funds rate something of a problem.  Personally, I think the market 

expectations are a bit closer to the mark. 

What’s happening in banking and financial markets since the last meeting is pretty 

striking, too, I think. At a time when economic reports have generally surprised on the upside, 

interest rates have trended down—the six-month rate, for example, went from 28 basis points to 

20. You would have thought that rates would have risen instead, in response to the good 

economic news.  Bill English was discussing interpretations of this downward shift in the yield 

curve. I would point out we were buying all across the spectrum, so the combination of our 

purchases and quantitative easing—some mix of those two—could easily have been operative. 

At our last two meetings, I’d been suggesting that we may start to see quantitative easing 

effects when our asset purchases completely displace short-term liquidity borrowing to the 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 82 of 212

banking system.  But over the past intermeeting period, our asset purchases have been only 

partially offset by reductions in short-term borrowing, if you take this point of view.  Our 

security holdings increased $191 billion, and our reserve balances increased $101 billion.  And in 

comparison over the previous intermeeting period, our security holdings increased by 

$149 billion, but reserve balances actually shrank.  Combining the behavior of borrowing with 

the increase in reserve balances and the decrease in interest rates suggests that we might already 

be seeing some quantitative easing as a result of our asset purchases. 

I’d note that, in the period from February to May of this year, we had a similar increase in 

reserve holdings and a similar decrease in interest rates—the six-month rate, for example, went 

from 46 basis points down to 30—and at that time bank demand for reserves seemed to be 

increasing; an anecdotal report suggested that preparation for the announcement of the stress test 

results, or the conclusion of the stress test, was inducing banks to build up bigger liquidity 

buffers.  This only partially offsetting effect that we might be seeing could occur if some banks 

are using us for wholesale funding rather than as a source of just getting the reserve balances 

they need. Some short-term borrowing is for up to three months, and that means delays in 

adjustments in response to our asset purchases, and for both those reasons, banking system 

borrowings might not shrink dollar for dollar with our asset purchases. 

Therefore, it looks to me as if there’s a good chance quantitative easing may have 

actually begun since the last meeting.  But even if that is not true, we’re certain to cross that line 

soon, because the Desk has made $131 billion in MBS purchases that haven’t settled yet, and the 

supplementary financing program is going to run down by about $185 billion.  So that’s 

$316 billion in additional reserves, even if we don’t purchase any more MBS, that are going to 

be added to the banking system. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 83 of 212

From my perspective, every additional purchase from here on out represents additional 

monetary stimulus, and it’s as if we were continuing to cut interest rates.  If you look at Bill 

English’s first chart, it’s going to take bank reserves well outside of its range over the last year or 

so. Now, if we were working with interest rates, and the fed funds rate were, say, 1 percent and 

we had the same macro data up until this meeting that we’d seen, I have a hard time thinking we 

would cut rates, given the improvement we’ve just seen in the economy.  I realize that’s open to 

debate, and we can discuss that.  But because of that, I’m not sure how I feel about additional 

MBS purchases, that is, whether it’s a good idea to add that stimulus right now.  I’m looking 

forward to hearing people’s views about the economy and these MBS purchases.  But in any 

event, I think we should avoid making any commitments at this meeting to the amount of asset 

purchases, particularly for our agency MBS.  We haven’t made any public commitment so far.  

Our statements have always said “up to,” and they’ve always said that we’re monitoring the size 

and composition of our balance sheet and will make adjustments to our credit and liquidity 

programs as warranted, right near the end of the statement.  I think we could get to the next 

meeting and decide additional monetary stimulus is unwarranted, and I think in that case we 

could want to finish up our agency MBS program before we get to the full amount.  So that’s 

where I am, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data since the last 

meeting give us more confidence that the economy is now recovering from the recession and the 

second half of this year will have positive economic growth.  But I expect near-term growth to be 

insufficient to make much progress on the very weak labor markets.  Most heartening have been 

clear signals we’re receiving indicating a bottoming out in housing markets.  Like many markets, 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 84 of 212

Boston has seen some increases in housing pricing, particularly for homes that are attractive to 

buyers looking to use the government’s first-time homebuyer tax credit. 

The disinflation that the Greenbook has been forecasting is being borne out by the data.  

Core PCE inflation for the past year is 1.4 percent, significantly below the previous year and well 

below where most of us expect the inflation rate to settle in the longer run.  According to the 

Survey of Professional Forecasters, the mean probability that the core PCE inflation is below 

1½ percent in 2010 is 50 percent, with only a 12 percent mean probability attached to a core PCE 

inflation exceeding 2.4 percent. While some market analysts cite the expansion of the Federal 

Reserve balance sheet as being inflationary, I do not believe that this poses much of a short-run 

risk. While we do not have recent historical experience in the United States with the effect of 

rapid growth in the central bank balance sheet, the experience in Japan is instructive.  Even with 

their substantial quantitative easing program, the Bank of Japan has been fighting deflation rather 

than inflation for the past decade.  Despite the rapid growth in bank reserves in Japan, the 

banking system was shrinking as banks reduced lending to satisfy capital constraints.  It seems 

unlikely that the expansion of the Federal Reserve balance sheet will have near-term inflationary 

implications for reasons similar to those in Japan.  Despite the buildup in U.S. bank reserves, 

bank lending remains constrained and is likely to be capital constrained for some time.  Thus, 

like the Greenbook, I expect that lower labor costs and the substantial slack in the economy will 

continue to generate disinflation, and, thus, over the next two years, we will likely be moving 

further below my inflation target of 2 percent. 

 Discussions with bankers in New England are consistent with the data showing 

continuing significant declines in lending.  Their biggest concern is with commercial real estate 

loans, where falling prices are making banks increasingly reluctant to lend.  One very large 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 85 of 212

builder highlighted the fact that, although construction costs and the costs of labor have declined, 

those cost reductions have not kept pace with the fall in prices of existing buildings.  Bankers are 

concerned with how commercial real estate loans will be treated at their next exam.  The 

mounting commercial real estate problems, along with nonperforming loans that are growing 

faster than reserves at many banks, make it increasingly unlikely that we will see much 

improvement in credit availability from banks in the coming year. 

While the real economy is improving, the robustness of private-sector growth once the 

government programs wind down is still uncertain and poses additional downside risk.  More 

importantly, the unemployment rate is likely to remain uncomfortably high and inflation well 

below my target for the next several years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, in the Eleventh District, retail sales remain anemic.  

Weakness in energy due to lower natural gas prices continues to be a drag on the Texas, New 

Mexico, and Louisiana economies, and commercial real estate remains mired in significant 

distress.  But there are some positive numbers that have been reported.  Private-sector jobs grew 

in July, and then pulled back a little bit in August.  Initial unemployment claims continued to 

decline. There are signs of improvement in the temporary staffing market.  Reflecting the 

activity that Nathan reported, exports—and Texas is the largest exporting state—rose in July for 

the second consecutive month; they’re up slightly in Q2.  Existing home sales are up through 

July. There’s actually a slight pickup in home construction as new home inventory levels 

stabilize. And we have a leading index that was up on all components, making positive 

contributions at the last measurement. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 86 of 212

Now, realizing that it may not be the case that “as goes Texas, so goes the galaxy” or “so 

goes the globe,” still, there are some glimpses of sunlight that come through from our anecdotal 

soundings and from the CEOs that I have talked to—the list of which I provide you before every 

meeting, Mr. Chairman.  Distillate consumption, which is strongly correlated with industrial 

activity, has picked up at least slightly.  And I note that electricity generation is also up slightly, 

which is a positive.  On the consumer side, Mastercard’s internal data were positive in terms of 

sales activity for the week of September 7, for the first time since October 30, 2008.  The 

broadcasters report that advertising is creeping back up.  In part, this is Ed Whitacre’s ego. 

There’s also political advertising on health care, but, more generally, it’s getting away from the 

trial lawyers and the lesser advertisers that we have seen and moving toward more general, 

normal, economic activity.  The semiconductors report a pickup in demand, which I find quite 

interesting. According to Texas Instruments, for example, in the first quarter customers actually 

reduced their original orders by 7 percent.  In the second quarter, they shipped 31 percent over 

their original order base, which indicates a rush to cover either inventory shortfalls or perhaps 

demand—they’re not sure which.  And, as of last night, their shipments in the third quarter are 

exceeding the original orders by 29 percent.  And, lastly, an odd positive to the recession, is that 

Wal-Mart reports that pilferage or internal theft is down 20 percent for fear of people losing their 

jobs. 

Despite those positive indicators and the aggregate data which we have heard presented 

by others and at this table, I would summarize the mood of my interlocutors as being wary of the 

purported recovery. They see some improvement in the statistics that they read about elsewhere, 

but, based on their own experience, they doubt them.  Some cotton to our outlook at the Dallas 

Fed, which is for a checkmark-shaped recovery, with less growth, as President Lockhart pointed 



 

September 22–23, 2009 87 of 212

out, in 2010 and 2011 than the staff are forecasting here at the Board.  But I heard from more 

than I hoped that they’re managing for what I would call a W-shaped recovery.  And if they’re 

wrong, they’ll be relieved. More than once I heard what I consider a new management bias 

described as being based on “process improvement” or “cost take-out” or “margin repair.”  This 

is the kind of nomenclature that now is ubiquitous amongst McKinsey and Bain consultants, who 

up until last summer were flogging techniques to enhance top-line improvement through pricing 

power. 

Our own measure at the Dallas Fed of global capacity utilization shows record lows.  It 

indicates that for some time incremental demand will be met by utilizing a greater share of 

existing capital rather than investing in new equipment or buildings.  And I can’t find a single 

sector where a leading CEO is budgeting to do anything other than to contain costs and only 

commit to vital and minimal cap ex in 2010. 

So, Mr. Chairman, that’s how it looks from a microeconomic perch.  It’s undoubtedly 

imperfect, but I think it’s illustrative.  There’s a disconnect between the way that the women and 

men who are managing the businesses of the United States view the economy and the aggregate 

data. And I don’t know how we will join that disconnect, but it’s clearly there.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What’s the difference between a checkmark recovery and a 

V recovery? 

MR. FISHER. The slope of the right side, from my perspective.   

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. 

MR. FISHER. It’s a Nike swoosh. [Laughter]  This actually goes to the point that 

President Plosser made, and I’m going to take advantage of your question.  Of course. Thank 



 

September 22–23, 2009 88 of 212

you for asking. We are eliminating a lot of negatives, as President Plosser said.  We’re 

beginning to accentuate some positives.  We do have a snapback.  We had a very sharp decline.  

The question is the rate of growth going forward.  And given the way businesses are managing 

and structuring their budgets going forward, the way they are wringing productivity—I think 

those are your words, Dave —out of their workers, I expect that final demand will be somewhat 

anemic.  So it’s not a sharp V. And going further out, after you come through the check on the 

checkmark, I expect a slower rate of growth. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You don’t go with a square root sign, though.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER. I have been informed it’s something that I fear.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, 

I think this is a problem.  Our tail risks are almost undefinable.  We could have that.  We could 

also have the kind of explosive growth that Dave was talking about earlier.  And I would like to 

hear, as you know, more decision tree analysis as to how we would respond from a policy 

perspective under all three scenarios.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy performed 

somewhat better than the U.S. economy as a whole during the summer.  According to our 

calculations, 16 metropolitan statistical areas in the Eighth District actually had slightly positive 

June–July job growth. As you know, the U.S. remained negative as a whole, of course.  Some of 

this reflected auto production recalls, but generally I took it as a positive sign for the Eighth 

District economy.  In fact, job growth has been less negative in 2009, generally, for the Eighth 

District versus the nation. 

However, anecdotal information does not line up with the national forecast for growth in 

the second half of 2009, and here I would agree completely with President Fisher.  A general 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 89 of 212

comment from directors and business contacts is:  “There’s official talk about recovery, but we 

don’t see recovery in our businesses.  And we’re not planning on recovery, and we’re hunkering 

down.” I find that somewhat worrisome, because it is ubiquitous, and because we’re already at 

the end of the third quarter. I would have expected to hear more positive anecdotes coming from 

the July–August–September period. It could be that these contacts are not seeing a return to 

previous levels. It’s always a little hard to interpret when you’re talking to businesspeople.  

They may only be seeing stabilization at a low level, and they’re thinking back to the good old 

days when they had much higher levels.  I did get just a few firms reporting that they’re more 

optimistic now and are seeing better business conditions, to the point where they might consider 

additional cap ex. One firm was in health care, and another was in transportation. 

On the national outlook, I agree that the U.S. economy is poised to return to growth after 

a year of declining GDP.  I am anxious, as many of you probably are, to actually see positive 

growth as opposed to just market anticipation of that growth or macro forecasts of that growth.  

The current scenario does seem quite a bit stronger than some of the darker scenarios from 

earlier this year when we took aggressive policy actions.  I hope that what we’re seeing is a 

durable bottoming out in housing, and I do find it heartening that the recovery internationally has 

been stronger than expected. I was one who was consistently worried that the global nature of 

this recession might present special problems for the FOMC, but I think that worry has subsided 

somewhat, as the bounceback in Europe and emerging Asia and elsewhere has been very strong, 

or stronger than expected. 

I remain worried about inflation expectations over the medium term.  Of course, we have 

lots of surveys and market-based measures of these expectations.  They seem to be well 

anchored. However, I’m worried that these may not be that informative.  I think the typical 



September 22–23, 2009 90 of 212

market participants or survey respondents are effectively saying that the policy looks a little bit 

crazy, but they kind of trust us to get the right inflation in the end.  And so they say, “Okay, I 

will predict 2 percent, even though I can’t really see how you guys are going to do it.”  I think 

that is what’s going on with a lot of the market-based measures and the survey measures.   

Let me just follow up on this.  It seems to me that people who hang around central 

banking and financial markets really don’t know what to think about the unconventional policies 

that our Committee is pursuing. And I’m not sure, really, that we know ourselves what to make 

of these policies, because we don’t have models or a lot of experience with them.  So the 

situation is that informed opinion is all over the map—you do see that when you talk to people in 

financial markets.  I think that creates a risky situation for the FOMC.  It may appear, based on 

surveys, that expectations are well anchored, but it’s masking a real uncertainty that’s out there.  

Some people think there might be a lot of deflation, and some people think there might be a lot 

of inflation, and they’re not sure what to think. 

In conjunction with this, I’m concerned that current policies do not have a clear 

state-contingent aspect to them.  The last 25 years of macroeconomics has argued that good 

optimal policy reacts to shocks, reacts to the incoming information on the economy.  The 

canonical Taylor rule is one way to do that.  But no matter what policy you want to pursue, you 

would want to have the state-contingent character to it.  How this reaction occurs needs to be 

communicated to markets.  That informs the market pricing and the interest rates today, so it 

does matter what people think your future policy is going to be, and that means some kind of 

mapping to how you are going to react to future shocks.  Those expectations, then, complete the 

equilibrium, and that’s how the equilibrium is supported. 



 

  

September 22–23, 2009 91 of 212

I’m concerned that we’re not doing that effectively right now.  At this meeting, we’re 

seeing that the outlook has improved substantially over what we thought earlier in the year.  But 

we’re going to largely continue, based on previous decisions, without very much explicit 

reaction to the change in circumstances.  That doesn’t sound like the optimal state-contingent 

policy we need. And we’re not communicating because, I think, we don’t know how we might 

adjust in the future.  So it strikes me that this is an area where current policy could be improved.  

If we could make adjustments in that direction, I think the benefits would include a more 

effective program for us and better economic performance for the nation.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks. On state contingency, I think I should just raise the 

possibility of corner solutions.  If you have a constraint, you could be up against that 

constraint—it wouldn’t be state contingent in that case.  Although we want to talk about future 

policy, and so on, but in terms of your actual instrument— 

MR. BULLARD. Do you mean that we’re at the zero bound? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, for example. 

MR. BULLARD. Definitely at the zero bound.  We’ve got other policies, though.  We 

could tell markets how we’re going to adjust.  Let’s suppose we get bad news in the January– 

February–March period, and the economy didn’t turn out the way we had hoped.  Markets would 

like to know now, if we got in that situation, how we’d react.  And I just don’t think we’re ready 

to tell them, but we’d like to be able to tell them as part of an optimal policy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. That’s a more eloquent way of stating what I was referring to earlier—or, 

at least, if not stating it, understanding internally how we would respond under different 

circumstances. 



September 22–23, 2009 92 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast has not changed materially.  I 

guess we were a little ahead of the Greenbook.  We are still looking for GDP growth to average 

about 3 percent over the next six quarters and then pick up to a pace more noticeably above 

potential in 2011. Virtually all of my directors and business contacts reported continued 

improvement and modest firming of recent positive developments.  Clearly, the evidence that the 

recovery is underway is getting stronger each month.  But many contacts also offered another 

more guarded flavor of commentary, probably along the lines of what President Fisher said.  

Now that the fear of a truly awful outcome has receded, businesses are increasingly coming to 

grips with the realization that, even though recovery is under way, it’s likely to be a slow one, 

with the unemployment rate remaining high for some time.  The weak labor market will weigh 

on their customers’ confidence, businesses’ planning, and the strength and momentum of near-

term expansion.  This guardedness is a natural reaction to events.  By itself, I don’t think it’s an 

independent cause for concern, but it’s something to be mindful of. 

I will just touch quickly on some of the high points from my economic reports.  Inventory 

restocking is clearly under way and is boosting production.  The implications for hiring are 

mixed.  The business segments that were hardest hit cut employment most deeply, and now we 

are bringing back some workers as they increase utilization.  But most others who cut less deeply 

are not hiring yet.  Many business contacts stated that the recovery’s momentum will be most 

uncertain in the first half of 2010 following the inventory restocking.  Reports of improvements 

in financial and credit conditions were widespread.  Several contacts involved in commercial real 

estate markets even reported substantial progress.  All in all, my discussions seemed consistent 

with an economy expected to grow for 18 months at a pace of about 3 percent.  This tepid growth 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 93 of 212

is from the bottom of a very deep recession and leaves the unemployment rate remaining above 9 

percent during this phase of the recovery. 

While there does not seem to be much disagreement over this outlook for the economy, I 

continue to be surprised by the lack of agreement over the implications of the resulting measures 

of resource slack for inflation. So let’s see what I can add here.  I think I understand the 

arguments implicit in last week’s communications from Presidents Plosser and Lacker on the 

Bluebook policy alternatives, as well as some public commentary about resource slack.  These 

arguments I think of roughly like this.  First, theory says inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  I 

think we all agree with that. Second, resource slack has tenuous and arguable implications for 

inflation and is measured with great uncertainty.  And, finally, many economists reject resource 

slack implications because of these concerns. 

But it’s an enormous leap to ignore entirely all measures of resource slack.  Output gaps 

are not unique in being unobservable and difficult to measure.  Inflation expectations are very 

important and are equally unobservable, heterogeneous, and the measures often are in conflict.  

Just look at variations in liquidity in the TIPS markets for the compensation measures that we 

look at. If you look carefully at the Michigan survey and think about how the survey participants 

respond, there are biases, the data are censored and massaged quite a lot—we know we can’t get 

the levels of inflation expectations right, either.  As I looked at inflation expectations data in Part 

2 of the Greenbook, the Survey of Professional Forecasters had 2.2 percent for ten years ahead, 

Michigan had 2.9, the TIPS at the five-year five-year had 2.9.  And these are all greater than our 

implicit target of 2 percent, but when I look at the charts they have been there for quite some 

time.  So getting the levels is really tough, and looking at changes in inflation expectations is a 

bit of a dodge in the same way that we take the resource slack as given when we look at it. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 94 of 212

Now, of course, the signal-to-noise ratios on our measures of resource slack are normally 

low; that is, noise is large.  But currently all measures of slack are pointing in the same direction 

with large magnitudes. The unemployment rate is just about 10 percent, so the signal-to-noise 

ratio is much better right now.  Just as importantly, I think that without the idea of substantial 

resource slack, it’s hard to understand what has been happening to inflation and inflation 

expectations. Hypothetically, if the economy’s need for structural adjustments explains all or 

most of the drop in employment and output, then why aren’t inflation expectations very high and 

rising?  In that scenario, the enormous growth in the monetary base would mean monetary policy 

is extraordinarily accommodative.   

So something else must be keeping inflation expectations reasonably stable, another 

unobservable factor. Is our credibility particularly high today?  Our legion of critics doesn’t 

believe that. And if I believed that resource slack was minimal, and then looked at our balance 

sheet, I wouldn’t think so either. Although I’m surprised that inflation expectations haven’t 

fallen more, I strongly suspect the reason that they have stayed moderate in the face of massive 

monetary easing is that the public sees equally massive amounts of resource slack and expects 

that slack to eliminate most price pressures. 

I share in calls for additional language and metrics to express the FOMC’s markers on 

inflation pressures.  I think that those comments are right on target.  Such additional conditions 

would help guide us and communicate to the public our ability and resolve to keep inflation and 

inflation expectations well behaved.  But currently I don’t have any hesitation in including 

resource slack in this list of markers.  It makes it tougher going back to my alma mater and 

talking to my advisors, but—[laughter] 

That’s it. Thank you. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 95 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We all have to make sacrifices.  [Laughter] President 

Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m much more optimistic about the nascent 

recovery than I have been in a long while, and I no longer see the risks around my modal forecast 

as asymmetrically skewed to the downside.  Over the last few months, conditions in a wide 

variety of financial markets have improved, and the economic news has been generally 

encouraging. Consumer spending appears to have bottomed out, and the inventory cycle, which 

is typically a key element in the transition dynamics from contraction to expansion, is now 

providing considerable impetus to activity.  Even the housing and manufacturing sectors, which 

were hardest hit during the recession, are finally showing signs of life.  To my surprise, house 

prices now appear to be reestablishing an upward trend.  Like the Greenbook, we have revised up 

our expectation for their future paths. 

The more positive outlook for home prices improves my confidence in the recovery for 

several reasons. First, the associated boost in housing wealth should have a favorable impact on 

consumer spending.  Second, stabilization in house prices will help put a floor on the value of 

housing-related securities, which, in turn, should bring more clarity to the balance sheets of 

banks and other financial institutions.  And, finally, a positive trajectory in future home prices is 

an essential element in changing the economics and the psychology of the housing market.  

Homeowners who were underwater, or close to it, are more likely to put off default and avoid 

foreclosure if they have some renewed prospect for house-price appreciation.  And potential 

buyers who have been holding off waiting for the bottom in house prices may finally be coaxed 

into the market.  In effect, the feedback loop from financial conditions to the real economy may 

finally be switching directions, supporting growth and even creating some upside risk. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 96 of 212

That said, there are also downside risks.  In addition to all of the risks surrounding 

commercial real estate, I’m concerned that some, and possibly a lot, of the improvement we’ve 

seen in the housing sector may result from policy supports that are about to unwind; in particular 

the first-time homebuyer tax credit, which is set to expire at the end of November, likely boosted 

activity, although perhaps at the cost of pulling demand from future quarters.  And our MBS 

purchase program does appear to have lowered mortgage rates significantly.  I was struck by the 

survey evidence from the Desk of 60 basis points.  Our own estimates are a full percentage point.  

There’s obviously a lot of uncertainty about what will happen when the program ends, but I 

certainly found it sobering to see that the dealers surveyed by the Desk anticipate that the impact 

of this program on mortgage rates will be fully reversed within six months. 

Even though I now believe that a recovery has taken hold and is likely to be sustained 

into 2010, my perspective on policy is importantly influenced by my expectation that it will be 

tepid by historical standards, leaving unemployment unacceptably high for a long time to come.  

Consistent with experiences around the world following recessions caused by financial crises, I 

anticipate that it will take quite a while for the financial system to heal to the point that 

something like normal credit flows can be restored.  In addition, even if the saving rate stabilizes 

and consumer spending again grows, we are not apt, given damaged household balance sheets 

and weak labor markets, to see the exuberant spending growth that characterized the years 

preceding the crisis.  Moreover, I see a substantial chance that the saving rate will head higher 

than in the Greenbook baseline. Finally, I foresee a jobless recovery with weak employment 

growth and persistently high unemployment.  My business contacts uniformly report that they 

have implemented productivity improvements in the downturn that will permit them to hold 

down hiring until the recovery is very well entrenched. 



September 22–23, 2009 97 of 212

Turning to inflation, it will surprise no one around the table that I anticipate that the 

prospect of high unemployment for years to come is a key factor shaping the outlook.  We must, 

of course, be attentive to the possibility that the NAIRU has changed, and, as I’ve noted in past 

meetings, I do think there is some evidence that the NAIRU has increased.  This round, the 

Greenbook edged up the staff’s NAIRU estimate to 5¼ percent on a temporary basis, in light of 

the large number of permanent layoffs taking place and a possible shift in the Beveridge curve.  I 

could quibble with these adjustments, but any fraction of a percentage point increase in the level 

of the NAIRU pales in size relative to the 5 percentage point jump in the unemployment rate 

over the past two years. Under any reasonable interpretation of the evidence, both labor and 

product markets have a considerable amount of slack.  And the existence of a causal link 

between slack and resource utilization and wage and price inflation is not only theoretically 

sensible, it’s also consistent with both anecdotal and econometric evidence. 

To collect some anecdotal evidence, we asked all of our head office and branch directors 

during the intermeeting period to provide us with their assessments of the extent of slack in their 

industry or geographic area, and to tell us what, if any, effect such slack and other factors are 

having and will have on their costs and output prices going forward.  Not surprisingly, our 

directors uniformly report that qualified job applicants are plentiful, that voluntary quits have 

plummeted, and that workers are thankful to have jobs and are readily accepting lower wage 

increases and even wage cuts. On the price side, the directors report pervasive price-discounting.  

Almost uniformly they are badgering every supplier and vendor for price reductions, and these 

negotiations are generally successful, with average price discounts on the order of 10 to 

15 percent. 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 98 of 212

With respect to econometric evidence, my staff has kept our computers running overtime 

estimating Phillips curves.  They find that, so far in this recession, out-of-sample forecasts from a 

simple backward-looking Phillips curve have been right on track in predicting the decline we 

have seen in core PCE inflation over the past year.  This model notably outperforms a random 

walk or other empirical specifications that include inflation expectations and/or lagged inflation 

but exclude slack. It is not that the Phillips curve is perfect—far from it—and, at best, a slack 

variable can account for only about 30 percent of the fluctuations in core inflation.  But as Jim 

Stock, Mark Watson, and other researchers have shown, it is the best empirical inflation 

forecasting framework that we have. 

With respect to my inflation forecast, the basic empirical Phillips curve model predicts 

substantial further disinflation. In contrast, the Greenbook projects very modest disinflation in 

core prices, under the assumption that inflation expectations will play an important role in 

anchoring inflation around 2 percent.  I, too, hope that inflation will not move much lower.  But 

there’s a lot we don’t know about how inflation expectations affect actual inflation and about 

how to measure the expectations that are relevant for price setting.  For example, our estimated 

finance models indicate that many of the recent fluctuations in the break-even inflation rate 

reflect movements in the inflation risk premiums and that inflation expectations have actually 

drifted down over the past year. We should, therefore, remain attentive to downside inflationary 

risks. 

I understand that at our December meeting we will have an in-depth discussion of 

inflation modeling and forecasting, and I look forward to that.  At our last meeting, President 

Stern aptly described the use of a Phillips curve to forecast inflation.  He said, “It takes a model 

to beat a model, and I don’t think we have another model in the short run.”  And I agree. 



September 22–23, 2009 99 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I should just say that for the December 

meeting, the current plan is to have a presentation—by Reserve Banks, I guess—on inflation 

dynamics.  So we’ll try to bring back the “continuing education” aspect of this meeting. 

We’re well into the 6:00 hour. Thank you, everyone.  Why don’t we adjourn until 

9:00 a.m. tomorrow morning.  There’s a reception and a dinner, but no business—it’s an optional 

dinner for your convenience. 	So I’ll see you at 9:00.  Thank you. 

[Meeting recessed] 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 100 of 212

September 23, 2009—Morning Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody.  I recognize the Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you.  I was remiss yesterday in not introducing 

Angela O’Connor, sitting next to Brian Sack, from the Markets group.  So I apologize, Angela. 

MS. O’CONNOR. Thank you. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Welcome. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Welcome.  Good. We can continue with the economic go-

round, and I have President Hoenig to lead off. 

MR. HOENIG. Good morning. Thank you. The Tenth District, like the rest of the 

nation, appears to be climbing its way out of the recession.  We’ve seen some slight 

improvement in retail sales, our manufacturing index is up above 50, and there’s clearly some 

improvement in our inventory situation, notably in housing, which has stabilized—in fact, we’re 

actually seeing some improvement.  Where we continue to struggle is, obviously, with 

commercial real estate, which is a big issue for us.  Our agricultural sector this year will be 

down, because prices are down, primarily for bumper crops.  Also, our labor markets are stable, 

they’re not improving. They may show some uptick, but very little, we suspect, as the economy 

and the region has settled out. Even our energy sector, which has been in the doldrums—as 

President Fisher said, because we produce a lot of natural gas—has at least stabilized for now.  

So we’re working our way out, and, I would say, in a manner similar to that for the nation as a 

whole. 

When we consider the nation and the outlook, I think that we are in recovery.  There are 

signs, in our region and elsewhere, of self-correcting mechanisms—the runoff in inventories, the 



September 22–23, 2009 101 of 212

rebuilding, manufacturing picking up.  Some of that is self-sustaining, hopefully, and will move 

us forward. 

As we’ve started this recovery, and as we look forward, there continues to be enormous 

stimulus that is yet to play out, both fiscal stimulus that is under way and will go through 2010 

and monetary stimulus as well.  And I think that’s very important to keep in mind as we look 

ahead. As we anticipate inflation and issues like that, I think it’s also important to remember that 

we do need to look many quarters ahead, because everything that’s happening today reflects 

steps we were involved in several quarters ago, or at least in the spring.  In that regard, I think we 

face a challenge looking at the immediate recovery, sustaining that recovery, and then looking 

far enough ahead that we don’t introduce new problems for ourselves.  And that’s what I do 

worry about regarding inflation and other asset issues that might come up. 

We’re going to be in a position of trying, as you say, to bring our monetary policy to a 

more neutral level in those quarters.  It’s going to take a long time to do that.  And we’ll be using 

instruments we’ve never used before—that means there’s going to be slippage, and that means 

there are going to be mistakes.  Anticipating the next discussion a little bit, as we think about 

first quarter, when I think there is a good chance the recovery will be sustained, I cannot help but 

wonder if one of our most important tools—and there is risk with every choice we make—is to 

do nothing in terms of buying assets that we would then almost immediately have to sterilize. 

On the matter of excess capacity, of course, we are just starting the recovery, so there is 

excess capacity. For example, a while ago, if you took a railroad in my part of the world and you 

asked the CEO about capacity, he’d have told you that he had cars parked that would just about 

cross the state of Kansas—and for those of you who don’t know Kansas, that’s a long way.  

[Laughter] More recently, though, his parked cars stretch only as far as Great Bend, Kansas— 



 

September 22–23, 2009 102 of 212

and for those of you who don’t know Kansas, that’s still a long way, but less so.  So the capacity 

is being worked off, and that’s the process that’s under way.  So we have to be thinking about 

when the capacity will be used up compared with when our monetary policy will be in a more 

neutral position. Those are the hard choices I think we have, and that’s why I am worried about 

our timing in terms of purchasing assets and continuing on that path.  So thank you very much, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My business contacts in the Fourth 

District continue to be wary about developments in the economy.  While most businesses 

reported incremental gains in their output levels earlier this summer, many have already seen a 

tapering off of those gains. Other contacts reported that orders are fluctuating with no 

discernible trend. Overall, I would characterize the predominant mood of the business 

executives I speak with as uncertain and cautious. 

One of the reasons there is so much uncertainty is that the improvements that we have 

seen in the critical industries appear to be tied to short-term stimulus programs.  District auto 

sales got a clear boost from the “cash-for-clunkers” program, and auto production plans have 

now been increased for both the third and fourth quarters.  There is also no question that there 

have been ripple effects through the supply chain all the way back to orders for steel.  This 

increased production in autos and industries related to autos was critical to the stabilization in the 

Fourth District output that we reported in the latest Beige Book. 

But the limited gains in the industrial sector to date do lead me to think that this recovery 

is very fragile. Underscoring the fragility is the uncertainty about just how sustainable the 

demand for car sales will be into and beyond the fourth quarter.  For similar reasons, my contacts 



 

September 22–23, 2009 103 of 212

in the real estate industry are concerned that sales may decline once the first-time homebuyer tax 

credit expires on December 1. They certainly aren’t complaining about the support, which is 

drawing in new homebuyers, yet they also report that an unusual number of sellers are renting 

rather than purchasing move-up houses.  One real estate executive said that, traditionally, four 

out of five sales are to move-up buyers, whereas he is only seeing two out of five sales to move-

up buyers in the current market.  The lack of move-up purchasing has limited the impact of the 

first-time homebuyer programs, and move-up purchasing is going to be critical once the first-

time homebuyer incentives are exhausted.  Again, the economy’s fragility is partly hidden by 

incentives, which, in this case, are scheduled to roll off later this year. 

Concerns such as these weighed on my outlook for economic growth, particularly in the 

fourth quarter. I anticipate a gradual and bumpy recovery.  My outlook does not have sustained 

above-trend growth until the second half of 2010, with the unemployment rate topping off at just 

over 10 percent early next year. 

Turning to inflation, two pieces of research done by my staff helped to guide my outlook.  

The first is a model of inflation expectations that does not rely on TIPS to estimate inflation 

expectations. Instead, the model combines inflation data, nominal bond rates, survey measures 

of inflation expectations, and inflation swaps to construct estimates of expected inflation.  This 

model shows that inflation expectations remain stable from two to ten years out.  Second, my 

staff, along with the staff at the Atlanta Fed, has been examining the detailed price data by 

splitting the consumer price index market basket according to whether prices of goods and 

services are sticky or flexible.  The stickier prices appear to be a particularly informative 

measure of core inflation, in that they more reliably predict future inflation.  Our staff analysis 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 104 of 212

shows that the inflation rate of the goods and services with stickier prices has shifted sharply 

lower this year. This trend points to suppressed inflation rates for the next few quarters. 

These results point to some crosscurrents I see in putting together an inflation projection.  

In the near term, resource slack is likely to depress core inflation numbers, while over the 

medium term, monetary and fiscal policies and stable inflation expectations should support an 

inflation trajectory toward 2 percent.  Specifically, I expect core PCE inflation to dip below 

1½ percent in 2010, but to increase gradually toward 2 percent in 2011. 

Overall, the risks to my inflation outlook remain balanced.  Regarding the risks to my 

outlook for economic growth, though, I think I appear to be in the small minority, because I still 

see the risks to growth to the downside. I am concerned that the gains that we have seen recently 

in the real economy are limited and are potentially just temporary reflections of the policy 

actions undertaken earlier this year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  First Vice President Lyon. 

MR. LYON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me first address the District outlook.  

Consistent with the incoming national data, the Ninth District economy is showing some signs of 

improvement.  For instance, survey data indicate that manufacturing activity in the Dakotas has 

increased and has remained steady in Minnesota.  We are seeing a modest, but nevertheless 

perceptible, increase in anecdotal reports of businesses’ plans to expand production.  Activity in 

the energy and mining sectors of the District economy is also showing a slight increase.  

Exploration activity is up somewhat, and there are scattered reports of plans to restart idle 

production and expand facilities. For example, a large iron ore mine in northern Minnesota has 

resumed production.  The health-care sector appears to have weathered the recession relatively 

well. Residential construction activity appears to have stabilized, albeit at low levels.  While the 



 

September 22–23, 2009 105 of 212

results vary across the District, we are now seeing some improvement in the level of home sales 

in various metropolitan areas. Commercial real estate, in contrast, continues to be weak.  

Commercial real estate markets have been depressed by a combination of lower economic 

activity, rising vacancy rates, tighter credit conditions, and rapidly falling property values.  On 

the flip side, lower rental rates should help the profitability of businesses that need space. 

Despite the recent improvement in the national data, District consumer spending has been 

soft, with the exception of auto sales, which have been buoyed by the “cash-for-clunkers” 

program.  Anecdotal reports on same-store retail sales indicate declines of 4 to 8 percent 

compared with a year ago.  Across the District, our contacts report that while the number of 

tourists has increased, the level of tourism-related spending remains somewhat soft relative to 

prior norms.  In agriculture, crop development is about two weeks behind normal due to late 

planting and a cool summer.  An early frost could significantly reduce production, which would 

negatively affect food processors, ethanol plants, and ranchers.  Unemployment levels across the 

District, from Minnesota to Montana, remain low compared with the national average, with the 

most recent readings from 4.3 percent in North Dakota to 8 percent in Minnesota. 

Turning to the national economy, most of the incoming data remain consistent with our 

forecast of a near-term increase in output and subdued inflation.  A reduction in the rate of 

business inventory liquidation, firming of consumer spending, and some growth in federal 

spending should support the resumption of economic growth during the remainder of the year.  

Developments since the last meeting have served to reinforce this view.  The August uptick in 

retail sales, data on orders and shipments of capital goods, business sentiment, and the rise in 

sales and starts of single-family homes, are all consistent with improvement in the level of 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 106 of 212

economic activity.  The gradual reduction of the adverse impacts of declines in wealth should 

also support a rise in consumer spending. 

As President Stern noted in August, our forecast in recent months has been for a bit more 

rapid growth than in the prior Greenbook. Given the markup in the Greenbook forecast since the 

last meeting, our forecast and that of the Greenbook are now more closely aligned.  While the 

outlook has improved since the last meeting, in my view the principal risks to our forecast are to 

the downside. Going forward, the expiration of some of the government programs that have 

been providing support to the economy creates uncertainty in the outlook.  Moreover, beyond the 

third quarter, the ongoing weakness in labor markets, particularly the very low rate of gross 

hiring by private firms, raises questions about where household earnings growth will come from 

and where workers, who are no longer building houses, strip malls, and SUVs, will be 

reemployed.  Prolonged uncertainty about job prospects and tight consumer credit markets could 

lead consumers to reverse course and cut spending this year or next, and this, in turn, could feed 

another round of production and inventory cuts.  While I believe that these risks can be avoided, 

I will feel significantly more confident in this view with a few more months of positive 

developments. 

Consistent with the Greenbook forecast, I expect improvements in employment will be 

gradual, and I believe that this is the inevitable byproduct of a necessary process of resource 

reallocation.  As such, I believe that, at least to some extent, we must be prepared simply to 

allow this process to unfold, recognizing that it may not be particularly responsive to incremental 

additional stimulus.  Despite the improved outlook for economic activity, I expect inflation 

expectations to remain well anchored and agree with the Greenbook forecast that inflation will 

remain within acceptable bounds.  Thank you. 



September 22–23, 2009 107 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy is clearly 

doing better.  All indications are that we will have a pretty strong bounce in activity during the 

second half of the year—3+ percent annualized real GDP growth seems likely, and the risks over 

the near term are probably to the upside, I think, of the Greenbook forecast, because inventory 

cycles can be very powerful. 

That said, I still think it is very premature to declare victory for several reasons.  First, a 

good portion of the growth will come from the swing in the pace of inventory accumulation 

rather than strength in final demand.  Second, the banking system is still impaired.  Bank credit 

outstanding has been declining. Small businesses and commercial real estate sectors are 

particularly starved for credit, and that is likely to continue for some time.  Third, payrolls are 

still falling, and the unemployment rate is still rising.  Fourth, we don’t know how households 

will respond to the sharp drop in net worth at a time that household debt burdens remain high.  I 

can imagine a combination of higher household saving and increased labor market participation 

as baby boomers postpone retirement.  The first would damp demand; the second would raise the 

amount of slack in the labor market.  Fifth, we are already in the process of removing 

accommodation—the purchase programs are going to move to the slower pace, the liquidity 

programs are being gradually unwound, and other government support to the financial sector, 

such as the money market fund guarantees and the TLGP, are being withdrawn. 

At a time when the unemployment rate is very high and is still rising, and when there is 

ample slack in the economy, I think we want to be cautious in moving too quickly to take back 

additional accommodation. What we want is a robust recovery that pushes the unemployment 

rate down quickly—that’s what we are going for. That doesn’t seem to be in the cards.  Nothing 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 108 of 212

that I’ve heard around the table suggests that that’s the expectation of the members of the 

Committee. 

Until we actually see that robust recovery, I think we’re getting well ahead of ourselves 

in talking about removing additional accommodation.  Although some are worried about the 

longer-term inflation outlook, over the next year or two, to me, the risks seem very much on the 

downside: Core services inflation has come down a lot; core goods inflation seems likely to 

follow, given the large amount of excess capacity available in the U.S. and abroad; we’re already 

below a rate of core inflation consistent with our longer-term forecast for the core PCE deflator; 

and core inflation typically falls during the early stages of recovery.  In fact, if the recovery were 

to turn out to be more robust than expected, I would expect that would lead to a further surprise 

on the productivity front and potentially even more downward pressure on inflation over the next 

year or two. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As many have remarked, there has been more 

good news over the intermeeting period, and I have been especially encouraged by the nascent 

recovery in private final demand—this is more than just an inventory cycle.  Importantly, better 

economic data are feeding and feeding off of continued improvement in financial markets, at 

least in many sectors of the those markets, so we’ve got a bit of a virtuous cycle in play, and 

that’s a nice change from where we were a few months ago. 

The repeated pleasant surprises on the economy and upward revisions to the forecast led 

me to question whether I had been missing some part of the recovery process and should mark 

the forecast up further than the staff, even though the staff itself is now a little bit beyond private 

forecasters. I looked at a couple of candidates.  One was the issue of pent-up demand for houses, 



September 22–23, 2009 109 of 212

consumer durables, and business capital, given the very, very low levels of spending on these 

categories, and, in the case of houses, declines in prices, which ought to boost demand.  As the 

V-shaped recovery scenario in the Greenbook notes, investment is low, even relative to 

replacement demand, much less relative to some tendency for the capital stock to grow over 

time.  So pent-up demand is quite a possibility and would be characteristic of other recoveries, I 

think. 

Nonetheless, there are reasons to doubt a strong rebound in the current circumstances.  

First, the recession started with a very marked oversupply of houses and, probably, of consumer 

durables given the overly generous supply of credit to households.  It’s true that the housing 

vacancy rate has come down a little bit—I think the last data we have are for the second 

quarter—but it’s still very high. For businesses, record low capacity utilization, high vacancy 

rates in many commercial structures, and, as most of you have noted in your comments, a very 

cautious outlook for sales, will hold back investment in that sector.  So I think stronger 

household and business investment spending is an upside risk, but it’s not part of my central 

tendency. 

The second candidate for a process I might be missing was more traction than anticipated 

for monetary stimulus now that the financial panic has abated.  That is, low levels of nominal 

and real interest rates along with massive amounts of reserves could be inducing a diversification 

into riskier assets, including foreign assets, which would lower the foreign exchange value of the 

dollar, and thereby raise bond and equity prices. This is exactly what we intended by our easy 

monetary policy, but it could be happening faster than we expected.  And I think elements in this 

story are certainly evident over the intermeeting period.  Like Presidents Plosser and Lacker, I 

was struck by the combination of higher equity prices and lower spreads with lower Treasury 



September 22–23, 2009 110 of 212

yields at the same time.  I think market participants gained confidence in the sustainability of the 

recovery, but they also gained confidence in the persistence of low inflation, given the incoming 

price data and the still-weak labor markets, which will keep demand from rising very rapidly.  

Greater confidence in the outlook, reduced uncertainty in risk premiums, and low inflation risks 

enabled market participants to push off the expected date of policy tightening.  Notably, this 

phenomenon was widespread internationally and not particular to the United States.  So I see this 

as more of a current and expected interest rate channel responding to macroeconomic data rather 

than reflecting some putting to use of the large volume of reserves we’ve put into the system.  I 

expect continued improvement of this sort, in part reflecting markets that will continue to 

postpone expected tightening as inflation stays low, but I expect this improvement to be gradual. 

An important limiting factor in this is the banking system.  The gains have largely been in 

securities markets. Bank credit to households and small businesses remains very tight, and, if 

anything, tightened further over the third quarter, as we can see in the spreads on business loan 

rates over base rates in the Survey of Terms of Business Lending, and the problems perceived by 

small businesses in the NFIB survey.  Credit card spreads and terms have been tightening.  

Banks are looking at rising losses on consumer and CRE credit; those banks below the top few 

don’t have the offset of higher profits from capital markets’ business.  The process of rebuilding 

bank capital and willingness to take risks is going to be gradual and prolonged, and, with 

securitization markets only partly recovered, our economy is likely to be more bank-dependent. 

President Plosser asked, “What should we be looking at to gauge whether reserves are 

being put to use?”  I’d be looking at both the price, or interest rate, and quantity of bank lending 

as important things.  We’ve already noted, I think, that prices stayed high, that is, the rates have 

stayed high. So, there is no evidence there. And the quantities also are very, very weak—if 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 111 of 212

anything, the pace of the decline in bank credit has picked up.  I think if it were just a shift in 

demand, I’d expect interest rates to come down while quantities were falling.  So I do think 

we’re looking at very, very tight, if not tightening, supplies.  To the extent that quantitative 

easing works through the money supply in the hands of the public, that, too, has been weak.  So I 

think greater traction for policy is an upside risk, but it’s also not in my central tendency.  My 

most likely outlook for activity is something like the staff forecast—strengthening growth as 

bank credit and lending capacity rebuild and as markets and households rebuild balance sheets, a 

very gradual rise in resource utilization, with the unemployment rate remaining high for some 

time. 

I think there are downside as well as upside risks to this forecast.  We’ve all cited 

household saving as one possibility—that is, households may decide to rebuild net worth faster 

in light of increased uncertainty about jobs, their financial position, and their reduced access to 

credit. There’s also a downside risk, as a couple of people have noted this morning, if it turns 

out that the improvement to the economy and financial markets has been more dependent on 

government support, both fiscal and financial, than we had been thinking.  As fiscal stimulus 

wears off over the next year and financial help and backstops are reduced by the Federal Reserve 

and other government agencies, I think there’s a risk—not a big one, but a risk—that growth 

could slow down or at least fail to gather momentum. 

So I think that something like the staff forecast, or even a little stronger, is likely to be 

accompanied by stable to falling inflation; core inflation continues to edge lower—by less than 

we expected some months ago, but it’s still edging lower.  Labor compensation is decelerating 

sharply to unusually low levels by many measures.  Some of this is adjustments in bonuses, and 

the bonuses are likely to rise again.  But I think that, looking through all of these measures, the 



September 22–23, 2009 112 of 212

underlying trend in compensation is clearly downward, and I take this as indicating that there is 

considerable excess supply in the labor market.  Combined with rapid productivity growth, unit 

labor costs are falling very, very fast. There are no labor cost pressures on businesses, and 

markups over unit labor costs have risen sharply. 

I’d like to associate myself with the comments of Presidents Evans and Yellen yesterday 

on the question of slack and inflation. Measures of slack cannot be estimated with a great deal of 

confidence, nor can the relationship between slack and inflation.  But the unemployment rate has 

risen so high so fast, and capacity utilization has dropped so low so fast, that there must be 

considerable labor and capital resources looking to, and able to, be put back to work.  In this kind 

of environment, competitive pressures on employees and employers will remain intense.  I don’t 

expect any sign of pricing power to emerge any time soon.  I agree that rising inflation 

expectations could overcome the effects of slack, but, to date, measures from surveys of 

households and economists from financial markets seem quite stable once you get beyond short-

term energy- and liquidity-induced fluctuations. 

President Plosser raised the question of the level of the household survey.  Household 

surveys historically tend to run high, I think, higher than economists and higher than reality.  I 

know this has been a source of continuing frustration for the ECB, where they can’t ever cite the 

household surveys as validating their inflation target, so they always cite the consensus forecasts 

of economists. 

In sum, I look for somewhat stronger growth, but a still-slow increase in resource 

utilization, and damped and probably declining inflation.  We’ll get to the policy implications in 

the next round. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 113 of 212

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For the first time in a long while, I have more 

conviction about what is going to happen in the next two or three quarters than I do over the next 

two or three years. For the past couple of years, and especially last year, we wondered what was 

at our doorstep. Now we can look to the medium-term forecast and say, “Well, this stuff will all 

work out.” I would say in some ways this is as it should be.  Near-term prospects and 

projections should be clearer to policymakers, and I think for the first time, at least for me, they 

are. 

In terms of the trajectory of the economy, though, I would say I also feel better about the 

next few quarters than I do the next few years.  The reason for that improvement in conviction 

and in its strength on the real side of the economy has a lot to do with the asset price 

improvements and has considerably to do in addition, as Dave Stockton said yesterday, with 

inventories, as well as with the mix of fiscal and monetary measures, which are certainly helping 

the arithmetic of near-term GDP.  I think the Greenbook is right in suggesting—and not being as 

dismissive as many of us, myself included, would have been six or nine months ago—the chance 

of a positive feedback loop that takes us out of where we are with greater strength and 

conviction. Economies have been underestimated in the post–war era, and maybe we’re 

underestimating the resiliency of this one.  

How durable is this improvement beyond the near term?  We’ve all heard stories.  I heard 

many of them from you yesterday about Fortune 500 CEOs.  If I go back to the 2001–2002 

recession and recovery, these CEOs were lousy indicators about the turns in the economy.  So I 

guess I’m not that troubled that they continue to have their heads in their hands.  I think the 

difference this time, and the reason why this time they could be right, is that you’ve got to look 

long and hard to find real anecdotes of small businesses that are seeing opportunities.  Given 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 114 of 212

what Don talked about in terms of the bank lending, and the ability of small businesses to access 

credit, to access capital, and to get their own animal spirits back, it may be that businesses large 

and small are still suffering from a bit of pessimism, while we need them to be much more on 

their front foot. 

Another question about the durability of the improvement and whether it will find 

medium-term forecasts as good as the Greenbook suggests is the state of private final demand in 

2010. It’s hard to know whether the handoffs from the public sector stimulus to the private 

sector improvements will happen as smoothly and in as linear a fashion as the Greenbook 

suggests. Also, it’s hard to know whether recent improvements in industrial production are 

sustainable.   

And on the consumer income issue that many people have talked about, the question is:  

Will incomes be sufficient to fund consumption amid this specter of large unemployment?  

Personally, I’m more worried about low income, excluding transfer payments, than I am low 

consumption per se.  And, if the unemployment levels stay as high as they are, will there be 

enough impetus in incomes, particularly if our asset prices smooth out over time, to fund the kind 

of consumption levels that are consistent with a reasonably positive Greenbook-type forecast? 

My medium-term forecast, as a result of all of that, is improved somewhat, but it’s not 

marked up as much as the Greenbook.  I think the risks are predominantly, but not exclusively, to 

the downside. The risk is that potential economic growth and employment may have faltered, 

making this recession in some sense more costly than the recent loss of jobs and output alone.  I 

think the continuing questions of the fiscal sustainability and markets’ acceptance of continuing 

Treasury issuance are real risk factors to the medium-term forecasts. 



 

  

September 22–23, 2009 115 of 212

Let me turn, then, to financial markets before talking about inflation.  On the financial 

market front, I’d describe my own views, at least in terms of near-term financial market prices 

and market functioning, as tactically long but strategically short.  What do I mean by that? 

There’s still a ton of momentum in these markets.  As I said when we met last, about six weeks 

ago, though I was a skeptic about the degree of improvements in the spring and the summer, this 

thing has so much going for it in terms of momentum, in terms of money coming off the 

sidelines, in terms of institutional and retail investors who don’t want to miss the next leg, that it 

strikes me as imprudent, at least in the very near term, to try to stand in front of this wave and 

not get blown over. Zero rates seem to be having some hand in driving this reflation in asset 

prices. 

But, why am I strategically short, or at least strategically nervous?  I worry about the 

sustainability of these improvements in markets, given the questions we’ve all talked about on 

the real side of the economy.  Many are saying, “Well, this time I will get out just in time,” and 

that reminds us of what we heard not too long ago.  Still, on net, consumer net worth has rallied 

with asset prices, and it is probably up another couple trillion dollars when we see the ultimate 

data from the third quarter, with the corresponding wealth and confidence effects. 

What are market price signals telling us?  Market prices might be as unclear as they’ve 

been in a very long time, even though on the real economy side we feel better.  It’s tougher to 

judge what these markets are telling us because of a few changes:  one, seeming changes in 

investor preferences and asset allocation; two, changes in the financial architecture, which I have 

talked about before; and, three, our extraordinary participation as the government in these 

markets.  How much of the difficulty in handling these market signals is driven by our 

participation, explicitly and implicitly, is hard to tell.  I think the Chairman mentioned yesterday 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 116 of 212

this odd constellation of market signals since we last met as a Committee—stock prices are up, 

bond yields are down, Treasury yields are down, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is 

down, commodity prices are up. That is hard for me to reconcile. I could tell a long and twisted 

story, but it’s not a terribly convincing one, and it would certainly be nothing more than a 

rationalization. 

But let me start on the simplest pieces of it, and those are stocks and bonds.  Why are 

they both performing as smartly?  I would say markets might be at a transitional point—some 

kind of barbell—and thinking about asset allocation.  They’ve seen equity markets move against 

them, they’re looking for alpha, they’re looking for returns, and so they’re going out and buying 

equities. But just in case they’re wrong, they want to make sure that they hold on to enough 

cash—which is near and dear to their hearts—so that if the world were to somehow end again, 

they would have that. Intermediate risks and intermediate credits seem to me to be looked upon 

somewhat more negatively by marginal investors. 

My last point on financial markets is on Treasury and Treasury market signals and what 

they’re telling us. They do seem to be incredibly supportive of massive issuance.  It reminds me 

in some ways of risk measures, where risk is highest when measures of risk are actually lowest.  

The Treasury markets seem to be telling us that the supply will have infinite demand, but that 

should make us nervous.  It does strike me that the Treasury market won’t get slowly but surely 

uncomfortable with these debt-to-GDP ratios, but rather that it might come in a hurry.  If it does, 

I think the consequences, both for the real economy and the challenges we face in monetary 

policy, will become quite remarkable. 

Now, when might that moment come?  I don’t know.  But I would say that the debt-limit 

issue that the Congress and the Administration will be debating, most likely over the course of 



September 22–23, 2009 117 of 212

November, might well be that catalyst.  This debt-limit discussion has had a partisan nature to it 

going back about 20 to 25 years, but I wonder whether or not there is just enough in the air about 

fiscal sustainability that we should pay particular attention to what the Treasury markets are 

telling us in the forthcoming period. 

Finally, on inflation, I have to agree with the emerging consensus among many folks in 

this room about the pressure on wages, given various measures of slack.  Going against that 

theme, though, it does strike me that if the dollar continues to weaken against foreign currencies, 

and, for whatever reason, whether because of global final demand or something else, 

commodities continue to strengthen, these crosscurrents will be hitting each other.  How they net 

out for measures of inflation and inflation expectations strikes me as a paramount challenge for 

policymaking.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I start, I’d like to go back to the question 

I missed yesterday, which was on the accounting.  I did find out that we actually take exception 

to GAAP with the evaluation of the SOMA portfolio on the rationale that our purchases and sales 

are driven by monetary policy considerations rather than valuation.  As we go forward with the 

MBS purchases, this rationale could get pretty stressed, especially if we choose the securities that 

we sell for their valuation rather than for some monetary policy reason.  I point that out just so 

that we’re aware that the accounting issues we face may ultimately have some political costs, at 

least when we start to exit, so we can’t entirely ignore the losses in those securities. 

Turning to observations from the banking sector, most of the banks report little change in 

their current or expected condition since the last meeting.  In terms of new lending, there’s very 

low demand across the board, but pricing is still significantly better.  I asked “Why is it with very 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 118 of 212

low demand that your pricing is still so strong?”  They said they’re only lending to the 

highest-quality credits with relationships, with profitability, and borrowers are actually happy to 

have the lending relationships intact.  There’s very little shopping and very little competition— 

banks aren’t chasing someone else’s customers and customers aren’t looking for a new bank.  

Line usage is at historic lows, even by the borrowers who already have approved credit at very 

favorable pricing, and borrowers whose banks have closed or been acquired are actually 

orphaned and unable to get the best terms. 

I’ve been trying to understand the difference between the credit availability in this cycle 

and the one that followed the last banking crisis. The staff used the flow of funds data to try to 

estimate the difference between forecast and actual levels of credit and found that at this point in 

the cycle about 46 percent of the difference can be explained by credit factors rather than 

economic factors, compared to 62 percent in the 1990–91 cycle. 

In terms of loan quality, interestingly, one member of the FAC noted that, when they met 

here a week or two ago, they had dinner with the Chairman and not one of the bankers had an 

outlook as positive as the Chairman expressed.  They were quite amazed at the Chairman’s 

cheerfulness. [Laughter] Most see the next six quarters as stable, at best.  In terms of consumer 

credit charge-offs, they think they’re at or close to the worst, at least in dollar terms, if not in 

percentages, on credit card and auto loans. But they don’t see any dramatic improvement from 

there, rather just a gradual pull back from current levels that are at historic highs. 

The same holds true for early-stage delinquencies on residential mortgages, which are 

now displaying their historic correlations with new claims rather than with overall 

unemployment, but the picture is a lot murkier for later-stage delinquencies.  Frankly, the 

systems were never designed to track modifications, foreclosure moratoriums, partial 



September 22–23, 2009 119 of 212

payments—all of the things that are going on in the already delinquent loans.  So nobody seems 

quite sure, but most expect that the picture will be clearer by mid- to late 2010 and no sooner, as 

the bankers and servicers improve their processes for modifications and short sales, while 

foreclosure and real estate liquidation backlogs clear. 

Commercial real estate is still the big wild card, and at this point the losses on residential 

construction and land development loans are beginning at least to track the carrying values, and 

the book value of the remaining assets is very low.  There was, interestingly, some reported 

interest from the large national builders in finished lots in selected geographies, particularly 

Southern California and Texas and even a little bit in Las Vegas, and stated interest in land for 

development in 2011, but all at very low prices.  The weakest areas for construction loans are 

Florida, Arizona, and Nevada, with Florida reported as having the longest probable time for 

recovery. Income-producing properties are showing signs of stress, with rising vacancies and 

rent renegotiations, but most still view this stress as primarily driven by economic fundamentals 

rather than widespread overbuilding.  Hospitality is faring the worst, followed by retail and then 

industrial. Office properties are holding up remarkably well, as are multifamily residences. 

Losses on owner-occupied properties are tracking at fractions of the loss levels that were 

assumed in the stress test, and every single banker asserts that credit decisions for new and 

troubled credit are being driven over concern on regulatory classifications, regulatory 

classifications to capital, and examiner pressure.  Bankers are reluctant to take any action that’s 

going to require them to raise additional capital, which is available to them in varying degrees, 

but uniformly expensive. 

In terms of forecasting, I have difficulty determining the degree to which the level of 

credit restraint that’s baked into the Greenbook forecast matches the current banker mindset.  But 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 120 of 212

I have a hard time constructing a scenario where consumer spending returns with any vigor, 

given the weak appetite for risk and the high level of credit impairment. 

Bankers are talking about their desire to lend only to prime borrowers, but the population 

of subprime borrowers continues to grow.  Households with credit scores considered to be 

subprime has increased from 28 percent of the population at the peak in 2006 to nearly 36 

percent.  In terms of absolute numbers, the number of subprime borrowers grew from 63 million 

to 80 million at the end of 2008, and this is before factoring in changes in income, wealth, or 

collateral values, which don’t necessarily track where the population of subprime is found.  

Banks report total unused commitments are down $1½ trillion from the peak, with $1 trillion of 

that in credit card availability.  New credit card solicitations are down from a peak of 800,000 

per month to 150,000 per month, with subprime down 85 percent.   

The same credit impairment factors are also likely to influence the housing rebound.  

Given the expectation that high losses in the construction portfolio are going to continue into 

next year, as will the intense regulatory scrutiny, banks’ willingness to lend for residential 

construction is especially low. Most of the sales in new construction are reportedly in low-end 

products, and banks forecast that they won’t work through their backlog until mid-2010. 

We’ve talked about improvement in financial markets, but nothing has been done to 

reconstruct the housing finance system or residential mortgage securitization outside of 

extraordinary government support.  As yet, there is not even the beginning of a consensus around 

the requirements for new private securitizations, while accounting changes seem to be creating 

new barriers. The first-time homebuyer credit is set to expire, and support for renewing it so far 

appears tepid. The Administration has announced that it will not have a proposal about the 

future of the GSEs until early next year, and it is apparently approaching this as a full discussion 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 121 of 212

of the proper role of government in housing finance.  The FHA is reportedly coming close to its 

minimum reserve level.  Its loan volume has spiked as private subprime retreated.  So it wouldn’t 

be unreasonable to expect higher losses with that increase in volume.  Finally, our purchase of 

agency MBS is likely going to come to an end at least by the end of the first quarter. 

With all of these headwinds coming into play, I can envision a good case for actually 

extending our purchases and even expanding the size to get into the second quarter, as all of 

these supports are removed from the housing market.  At the same time, I’m concerned that 

neither we nor the banks know yet how big an impact the addition of another $600 to $800 

billion in reserves is likely to have. The big run-up in reserves actually occurred last fall when 

banks were scrambling for liquidity, and they really viewed it as their own decision to take on 

additional liquidity, not our decision to put the liquidity there.  Since then, the aggregate reserves 

have fluctuated in a fairly narrow band as new asset purchases were offset with reduced 

borrowing. So discussions with smaller banks paint a picture similar to what was found by staff 

in consultation with the larger institutions—they haven’t focused on the reserves, but they report 

that they have more deposits than they can profitably invest and, therefore, are reducing their 

managed liabilities.  Rates paid on deposits are being reduced, and deposit competition appears 

benign. I would also point out that, at 25 basis points, reserves are the most attractive short-term 

risk-free asset for banks to hold. 

With the Treasury’s planned SFP drawdown, settlements of prior purchases as well as 

new purchases, banks are going to see substantial and unexpected increases in their reserve 

balances very soon, and most bankers are not focused on the aggregate reserves in the system.  

To bankers, this is just going to look like excess liquidity, and the only way to deal with excess 

liquidity is either to buy riskier assets or reduce liabilities.  Given the credit situation, I expect 



September 22–23, 2009 122 of 212

the bankers to shed liabilities, likely leading to shrinkage similar to that described by President 

Rosengren in the Japanese banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back in my accustomed spot at the end of 

the queue, I thought the one criterion for deciding what to say might be to offer only my insights 

that will add value to what has already been said.  Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement.  

[Laughter] 

Understanding, however, that another purpose of the go-round might be to explain each 

member’s views to the Committee as a whole, let me note a few points that most inform my 

outlook. First, the employment situation continues to be dismal.  Scan the monthly BLS release, 

and the only demographic group whose unemployment rate looks less than disheartening is that 

for college graduates at 4.7 percent. A look behind even that figure gives little reason for 

comfort, insofar as it stood at 2.7 percent just a year ago.  Most of the rest of the numbers are 

downright discouraging. Of greater relevance, perhaps, for present purposes is the near 

unanimity of forecasters that improvement in the labor market will be painfully slow.  The most 

optimistic alternative Greenbook scenario has the unemployment rate barely breaking 7 percent 

at the end of 2011. A review of the latest Blue Chip economic indicators reveals that all but one 

of the 50 forecasters believe the average unemployment rate in 2010 will come in above 

9 percent. To say that we are nowhere near achieving the maximum employment component of 

our dual mandate would be a major understatement.  The most that can fairly be said is that the 

bottoming of negative employment trends may at some point soon be coming into view. 

Second, in looking back at my statement at the last meeting, I would have to amend my 

view that GDP growth in the second half of 2009 will perhaps be quite positive to an expectation 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 123 of 212

that it will almost surely be quite positive with a good chance of being modestly above trend.  

But I see little to change my view of six weeks ago that 2010 is most likely to witness what I 

termed the “grind it out” scenario, with economic growth ultimately above trend but nowhere 

near the slope of recovery one might expect out of a deep recession.   

Indeed, there remains good reason to believe that one or more factors will keep the 

economic road sufficiently rocky that we will have difficulty sustaining a good head of steam.  

Continuing high unemployment will impose a constraint on PCE growth.  A higher personal 

saving rate than the 4 percent, expected by the Greenbook to remain unchanged for the next two 

years, would similarly drag down PCE growth.  The fading of the stimulus package by the 

middle of 2010 creates further uncertainty as to just how robust consumer demand will be and, 

thus, how much production will grow once inventory drawdowns are completed.  The prospect 

of ongoing high levels of home foreclosures suggests that downward pressure on the housing 

market may not fully abate for some time.  Finally, the ongoing steep decline in bank lending, 

like the continuing dysfunction in some other parts of credit markets, appears to reflect 

something more than just the tightened lending standards associated with recessions. 

In the interest of completeness, I should note that prospects for a stronger global recovery 

have brightened considerably, one of the factors I suggested that might support my rejuvenation 

scenario here at home.  Asia, in particular, seems to have generated enough momentum to outlast 

the withdrawal of extraordinary stimulus. Still, I would note that in China and most other East 

Asian countries, we haven’t yet seen the emergence of a real promise of self-sustaining final 

consumer demand. 

If some of the preceding sounds familiar, it should.  I lifted a good bit of it from my 

comments at the August FOMC. The intervening month and a half has reinforced the positive 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 124 of 212

signs for the remainder of this year and, I would say, slightly rebalanced in a more optimistic 

direction the respective probabilities of relapse, “grind it out,” or rejuvenation.  But all three 

remain plausible outcomes.  In sum, I find myself singing much the same tune as last time, but 

even as I reprise my coda, I want to alter it a bit, adding some lyrics suggested by President 

Bullard’s remarks yesterday afternoon.  And here I’m going to take advantage of my holding 

down the sixteenth spot in the batting order to slide a little bit into relevant policy considerations.  

I stand by my August recommendation of patience during this period where the probabilities of 

each of my three scenarios remain significant.  The additional thought, picking up on President 

Bullard’s comment, is that we should be prepared to undertake an appropriate policy response no 

matter which of the three emerges as reality. 

As the rest of you will have quickly concluded, my own concern is specifically that we 

not regard the possible conclusion of the current large-scale asset-purchase programs as in itself 

raising the hurdle rate on future policy initiatives in the event that relapse seems to be occurring.  

It’s important in my view that we be clear on this point among ourselves and that we 

communicate it to markets and the public.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, and thanks to everyone for useful 

discussion. I’m going to attempt here to summarize what I’ve heard and then make a few 

additional comments. 

In summary, the outlook improved during the intervening period, particularly with 

respect to economic growth over the remainder of the year, and most participants believe that 

recovery had begun. Although anecdotal information suggests that businesses and households 

remain quite cautious, a number of factors should support growth over the next few quarters, 

including reduced inventory accumulation, higher auto sales and production, modest increases in 



 

September 22–23, 2009 125 of 212

housing activity and prices, some stabilization in household spending, better financial conditions, 

and accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. 

The outlook for the medium term also seems better than at the last meeting, but there 

remains considerable uncertainty about whether final demand growth will be sustained once 

government policy supports, including special measures such as “cash-for-clunkers” and the 

first-time homebuyer’s credit, begin to wane.  The modal view was that the recovery in 2010 

could be relatively slow—maybe a checkmark [laughter]—perhaps around the long-run potential 

growth rate, a rate that would be too slow to reduce the unemployment rate significantly next 

year. Some suggested that downside risks to growth remained as well.  Inflation remains 

relatively low, but there was some disagreement about the factors that most influence inflation in 

the medium term and about the risks associated with our current mix of policies. 

Retail sales and consumer spending have picked up a bit, in part reflecting special factors, 

such as the “cash-for-clunkers” program.  Some consumer fundamentals are improved.  Notably, 

household wealth is rising again, and labor income may be stabilizing.  Sentiment, though still 

low, has improved, and there is possibly some pent-up demand.  However, especially weak labor 

markets, tight credit, and the slowing of the benefits of the stimulus package seem likely to 

restrain consumption growth.  Saving rates have been relatively stable, but the evolution of the 

saving rate remains an important uncertainty in the near term. 

In the housing sector, sales and starts have looked somewhat better, and house prices 

have actually risen a bit. Higher house prices not only increase household wealth, but they also 

improve the quality of mortgage-related assets and, by reducing the effective cost of capital, 

encourage home purchase.  However, foreclosures are likely to continue to put pressure on prices 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 126 of 212

by raising supply. Other risks to housing are the ending of the temporary tax credit for first-time 

homebuyers and the end of the Fed’s MBS purchase program. 

Activity in the nonresidential sector continues to decline sharply in most Districts, 

reflecting both worsening fundamentals and severe credit constraints.  In the business sector, 

managers are relieved that the worst scenarios have not come to pass, but, as already noted, 

many remain wary and uncertain about the recovery, and there is some disconnect between their 

perceptions and the relative strengths seen in the aggregate data. 

Business caution, together with low utilization rates and substantial excess capacity, 

suggest that many firms may be slow to add workers and make new capital investments.  Cost-

cutting has contributed to productivity gains.  The sustainability of those gains is unclear but is 

potentially an important issue, for example, in determining whether the recovery will be jobless 

and how slack will evolve. 

Manufacturing surveys show some improvement, probably reflecting in part rising 

volumes of global trade and activity.  Indexes show a moderate increase in manufacturers’ 

expectations of prices paid and received.  Reports on retailing and services remain somewhat 

mixed.  Health care has done well, transportation less so.  Agriculture and natural gas production 

have been affected by lower prices. 

The labor market remains very weak, but may be close to the bottom.  Layoffs have 

slowed somewhat. They’re still high, and UI claims are falling only gradually.  Gross hiring is 

weak. Wage growth is moderate, presumably reflecting the weakness of the market.  

Unemployment is expected to decline only slowly, given the expectation that economic growth 

will not be significantly above potential next year, and given the recent experience of jobless 

recoveries. 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 127 of 212

Improvements in financial markets over the intermeeting period were not dramatic, but 

the substantial gains in the past six months were largely sustained.  Risk-taking and momentum 

have returned to the markets.  The decline in longer-term Treasury yields is somewhat puzzling, 

but at least for now it is supportive of recovery.  However, credit risks in the banking system 

remain substantial, particularly in residential and commercial mortgages.  Bank credit remains 

tight. Bank loans to smaller businesses, households, and commercial real estate, in particular, 

have fallen dramatically.  Securitization markets still are limited in their activity.  Banks’ terms 

continue to tighten, perhaps in part due to regulatory pressures. 

Inflation has been relatively stable, with a modest downward trend in the core, and the 

risks around inflation seem more balanced.  Wages and unit labor costs are decelerating, but, on 

the other hand, the dollar is weakening and commodity prices are up.  Participants differed on the 

fundamental determinants of inflation and consequently on their forecasts, and emphasis on 

inflation expectations as a driver of inflation, together with the Greenbook assumption that 

policy will stay easy much longer than markets expect, led some to worry about higher inflation 

in the medium term.  Alternatively, even if slack is an unreliable determinant of inflation in 

normal times, the very high level of slack that probably exists today could create disinflationary 

pressures. Very possibly, the stability of inflation expectations as measured in financial markets 

or in surveys may be disguising a great deal of uncertainty about how policy and inflation will 

ultimately evolve. 

Given the long lags of policy and uncertainties about the effects of unconventional 

policies, continued clarity about and attention to the Fed’s policies and exit strategy are 

important for retaining confidence. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 128 of 212

Any comments?  (No response.) Okay. With that let me just add a few thoughts.  I come 

after Governor Tarullo, so it’s even more difficult for me. 

I think we’re all glad that the general view seems to be that the near-term outlook will be 

better; the data since the last meeting support that view.  Of course, the question that everyone 

has alluded to is whether this near-term pickup will be sustainable going into 2010.  I think that 

this is actually a very complicated question, and there are good arguments on both sides.  So at 

the risk of being a little bit pedantic, I’m going to do “point and counterpoint” and talk a bit 

about some of what I see as the main forces on the two sides. 

If you look at the case for sustainability, there are a lot of factors which suggest that final 

demand will be sustained next year.  I think the housing market developments are particularly 

important in this regard, and the staff has noted the improvements in house-price outlooks.  As 

President Yellen noted, this is not just a matter of wealth—it potentially affects asset quality.  In 

addition, because expected price changes are part of the cost of capital—or, put another way, 

people don’t want to buy houses when the prices are falling—some sense that prices are 

stabilizing may be very helpful in terms of residential construction.  I think it is literally the case 

that since I’ve been Chairman, there has not been a single quarter in which residential 

construction has added to the GDP. [Laughter] I won’t go down as the “housing Chairman,” but 

the third quarter, apparently, may be different. 

The labor market is very weak, but overall, as job losses have moderated and as hours 

have improved slightly and wages have improved slightly, labor income is beginning to stabilize, 

which is an important precondition for multiplier–accelerator developments next year. 

Financial markets are, of course, very positive, and I would note that not only are they a 

cause of improved conditions in terms of credit availability and in terms of the positive financial 



 

September 22–23, 2009 129 of 212

feedback loop, but they are also reflective of expectations.  In particular, developments in the 

stock market and the shape of the yield curve are suggestive that confidence about recovery is 

returning. 

On the consumer side, I mentioned last time that I felt comfortable with the Greenbook’s 

assumption that saving rates will be stable going forward, in which case we should begin to see 

growth in consumption that will support a more sustained recovery.  And supporting that is the 

fact that wealth is beginning to turn around and that the drag from the losses of wealth over the 

last couple of years will begin to fade over time. 

The global recovery is another positive, although the effects are different and work 

through different channels. But, certainly, I think one of the reasons that manufacturing looks to 

be leading this recovery must be at least in part because of the exposure of manufacturing to 

trade. 

Finally, on the sustainability side, as Ted Truman and others have been reminding us, the 

norm for a deep recession is a fairly strong recovery, and there certainly are factors like pent-up 

demand and inventory adjustments that tend to bring economies back faster than sometimes is 

anticipated. 

On the other hand [laughter], there are some things that go against some of these 

basically optimistic forces.  A number of people have talked about the temporary nature of many 

of the government programs that are supporting economic growth now—the housing market is a 

clear case of that.  People have mentioned the first-time homebuyer’s tax credit, which is now 

expiring. Presumably the Fed at some point will not be able to maintain the downward pressure 

on mortgage rates.  And there are other things going on as well, including developments in the 

GSEs, losses at the FHA that may force them to tighten their terms, and probably an increased 



September 22–23, 2009 130 of 212

pace of foreclosures as some of the moratoria and other delays end.  So the housing market is not 

out of the woods by any means, and the Greenbook does take into account a possible relapse in 

house prices. 

The labor market recovery looks much more like a jobless or very slow recovery than the 

alternative. For example, the UI claims, although falling, are doing so quite slowly, and we are 

all aware of the fact that the duration of unemployment is quite high, which is going to affect 

labor force attachment and skills and so on. 

The productivity issue really cuts both ways, as we discussed yesterday.  At least in the 

2001 recovery, there was a close relationship between productivity at the micro level and 

phenomena associated with a jobless recovery.  I would point out that the Greenbook is not 

really forecasting a jobless recovery.  They anticipate, as I count here, 2.2 million payroll jobs in 

2010 and 3.8 million in 2011 being added, which of course is possible, but it could be weaker 

than that if productivity and other forces are drags. 

The improvements in financial markets are very encouraging, but the banking system, I 

think, remains the most important exception, with credit being quite tight and potential losses 

being very, very important in that sector.  I was interested to hear Governor Duke’s comments 

about the banks’ views vis-à-vis my own views.  In general they are being very, very cautious, in 

any case, about lending. 

Consumer spending has not yet demonstrated that it will be sustainable.  “Cash-for­

clunkers” and other measures, like the tax credits and transfers of the fiscal program, are, of 

course, temporary, and more broadly, the fiscal stimulus will begin to decline next year, as will 

the inventory correction. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 131 of 212

And finally, although there is a presumption that a deep recession will be followed by a 

strong recovery, we have talked in this forum for a number of months about the many headwinds 

that we face, including leverage issues, credit issues, and various imbalances, for example, fiscal 

and trade imbalances, that need to be corrected. 

So I’ve gone through all of these things not only to show you what an open-minded 

person I am [laughter], but also to say that I think our views need to be fairly nuanced at this 

point. I think the general outlook has improved, and I think there’s a reasonable chance for the 

recovery to be sustained in 2010, but there are a lot of crosscurrents that we need to pay attention 

to. 

If I had to take a modal position, I would reiterate what I said at the last meeting, which 

is, again, I do anticipate the second half of this year to be pretty strong.  I said so last time, and I 

do think that the modal outlook for 2010 is for economic growth around potential, maybe a little 

bit above potential, with, of course, only modest effects on unemployment and job creation.  A 

number of factors support that, and the two most important factors since last time that influence 

my thinking are the improvements in the housing sector and house prices and the fact that global 

growth continues to be above expectations. 

So that would be my modal forecast.  I think we need to think about, if you will, the 

distribution of costs on both sides of that expectation.  And, putting aside the probabilities and 

risks, I think you can make the case at this point that, given how far we are from full 

employment, given the fact that banks are just going to skirt by in terms of their ability to 

maintain adequate capital given the expected losses, the social costs of an outcome that’s weaker 

than we currently anticipate are on the margin greater than those if the outcome is a bit stronger 

than we currently anticipate.  And independent of any considerations of insurance and risk 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 132 of 212

aversion, I think that asymmetry in the shape of the cost function ought to make us still be 

focused primarily on supporting recovery, although we obviously need to pay close attention to 

the medium-term risks that others have pointed to. 

As we will discuss in the next round, I think that high levels of policy stimulus are still 

warranted, but, again, absolutely in the spirit of demonstrating my open-mindedness, I do, in 

fact, quite seriously want to talk a bit about the downsides of policy stimulus which many people 

have already noted. Clearly, while inflation is not a concern now, we do have to pay some 

attention to it, because, as President Hoenig points out, the lags can be long and variable.  I think 

someone mentioned that before you, President Hoenig. 

I will make one observation, though, on this.  Let me talk a bit about the determinants of 

inflation for just a moment.  First, on the output gap side, I think I would like to associate myself 

with some things that President Yellen and President Evans said, which is that a lot of the 

ambiguities in the statistical and empirical work on the output gap and inflation come from the 

fact that, over most of the data sample, the output gap is sufficiently small that it is dominated by 

noise. It is very hard to know whether there is a gap, how big it is, and indeed, there may be 

nonlinear effects of the gap on inflation. Let me propose a very simple analysis.  Just look at 

NBER peak dates—beginnings of recessions—which are typically known within a year or 

16 months or so of the actual peak.  Since 1960, looking at the second and third years after the 

peak date from the NBER, in all cases, total inflation has fallen in the second and third year 

relative to the year before the peak, and in most cases quite substantially, and in all but one, 

1973, core inflation has also fallen, in most cases fairly substantially.  So there does seem to be a 

recession effect suggesting that large output gaps do affect inflation, even if the linkage is not 

visible for small gaps. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 133 of 212

That being said, I think inflation expectations are important, and one way that shows up 

is that the effects of output gaps are obviously much smaller now than in the past.  We saw about 

a 2 percentage point decline in total and core inflation after the 1990 recession and only about a 

1 percentage point decline after the 2001 recession.  Of course, this is a bigger recession than 

either of those two, and we’ve already seen about a 1 percentage point decline in core, but I think 

the direction there is correct. 

I think a few people talked about looking a bit at the components of inflation.  We’re 

seeing a substantial slowdown in services prices, including rents, which tend to be pretty inertial.  

So I think from that perspective we should see a slower rate of core inflation for a time, and from 

a cost perspective, unit labor costs are low as well.  At the same time, I recognize that, of course, 

commodity prices, the dollar, and so on can move pretty quickly and probably respond much 

more quickly to policy and policy expectations than these other factors do, and so we need to 

take a balanced view. 

I would also add that, on this issue of stimulus, there are other factors that I, at least, pay 

attention to in thinking about this over and above inflation per se—for example, the dollar.  The 

decline in the dollar we’ve been seeing has been relatively moderate.  It has basically only offset 

the gains that we saw late last year. Nevertheless, I think it would be very unfortunate if we had 

a more disorderly or more rapid decline in the dollar.  It would potentially have implications for 

domestic interest rates, it might lead to concerns about financial stability, and, more broadly, it 

may exacerbate some of the problems of international economic relations and our role in the 

international economic order that is a long-term consideration. 

Governor Warsh alluded to, I think, speculative activity in markets.  Frankly, I don’t 

really see any major bubbles at this point, but we haven’t been that good at identifying them in 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 134 of 212

the past, and we need to pay attention, I think, to any kind of excesses in financial markets that 

might be generated by our activities. 

Finally, I think we do have to pay attention to our balance sheet.  These issues are less 

important, of course, than our macro objectives, but there are political implications from large 

losses or difficulties in managing the balance sheet, and we have to think about that certainly as 

part of our exit strategy. 

So, as a bottom line, like most of you, I see a strong second half as short-term factors 

play out. My modal forecast is for moderate growth next year.  Again, like most of you, I do 

think that the downside risks are significant, and we need to be particularly attentive to that, and 

I think that core inflation, at least, should be well controlled in the short to medium term.  

Having said that, I fully understand and sympathize with the need for a balanced approach, 

which, even as we support this economy, keeps us alert to the problems of exit, which are clearly 

already beginning and will be an important part of our deliberations for some time. 

Any questions or comments?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to make a comment about 

slack, since that’s gotten a lot of commentary in past meetings from this end of the table.  I don’t 

think anyone disputes the correlations you can find in the data or the correlations you get from 

the mainstream models we have.  I think the question is:  What’s the structural link?  To talk 

about correlations between inflation and measures of slack without talking about monetary 

policy is like talking about Hamlet without the Prince. I think the point some of us would make 

is that you cannot rely on slack by itself. The correlation you see is sort of an endogenous 

interaction. I know you all understand this, but I’m just responding to the sense of puzzlement 



 

 

                                                 
  4 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

September 22–23, 2009 135 of 212

about what people who have talked about slack and potential output and inflation have in mind.  

I’m just speaking for myself here. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It’s a good point, but I guess my quick reaction would be 

that if you look at these recession episodes I just described, the role of monetary policy in those 

has varied quite a bit. Some of them earlier on were essentially caused by tight monetary policy, 

others much less so.  So I think the commonality would be an aggregate demand effect.  But, 

again, I’d be the first to agree that none of us has a really definitive, strong model of inflation, 

although for what it’s worth, I think the reviews of the Greenbook have shown better success in 

forecasting inflation and output. I think that’s the academic result.  But, and I say this with all 

due respect to our colleagues who are doing the very best that anyone can do, neither one is 

incredibly successful beyond a few quarters. 

Anything else?  (No response.) Okay. Brian, would you like to open the next round? 

MR. MADIGAN.4  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  This package 

includes alternatives A and C as they were presented in the Bluebook and the revised 

version of alternative B that was distributed on Monday. 


As was noted in the staff briefings and in your discussion so far, the economic 
outlook has improved further.  Data on business investment have been stronger than 
expected, and incoming information on home prices, home sales, and housing starts 
points to a recovery in this sector.  Also, financial market conditions have continued 
to become more supportive of growth.  Over the intermeeting period, interest rates 
have moved lower, stock prices have climbed, and the exchange value of the dollar 
has depreciated further, providing additional impetus to aggregate demand.  
Moreover, indicators of market functioning have either held steady or improved 
further. The stronger outlook for economic activity has been reflected in substantial 
upward revisions to all of the staff estimates of short-run r*, including a ¾ percentage 
point increase in the Greenbook-consistent measure derived from the FRB/US model.  

Still, these r* measures remain negative, and despite the positive economic 

developments, the forecasted trajectory of economic activity and employment 

remains quite weak.  In the staff forecast, which is conditioned on an unchanged 

federal funds target range through the projection period, the unemployment rate 




 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 136 of 212

declines only to 9¼ percent by the end of next year and to about 8 percent by the end 
of 2011. The output gap remains correspondingly wide, with real GDP still 
3½ percent below its potential in the fourth quarter of 2011.  Although fairly stable 
inflation expectations are expected to restrain movements in inflation, the substantial 
output gap is still projected to push PCE inflation down to 1 percent in 2011, below 
the inflation objectives implied by FOMC participants’ longer-run projections.  Given 
this outlook, the counterfactual optimal control simulation in the Bluebook that does 
not impose the zero lower bound constraint would call for a reduction in the federal 
funds rate to minus 4 percent, if that were possible.  With the funds rate constrained at 
zero, the optimal control simulations suggest that the funds rate should remain at zero 
until 2012. Similarly, simulations of the FRB/US model using the outcome-based 
policy rule prescribe holding the funds rate at zero for nearly two full years before 
policy firming begins.  

Of course, significant risks—both to the upside and the downside—attend the 
forecast, as your comments so far have underscored.  On the one hand, the Greenbook 
noted that the very low current levels of household and business investment suggest 
the risk of a greater-than-anticipated rebound in spending.  On the other hand, the 
Greenbook pointed to the possibility of a further increase in the personal saving rate 
as well as to the risk of greater financial headwinds.  Certainly, the incoming 
information from the banking sector, with exceedingly weak growth in bank credit 
and evidence that banks continue to tighten lending terms, suggests persistent 
restraint for the foreseeable future on spending by households and firms that are 
dependent on bank credit. 

Against this background, the Bluebook once again presented a set of alternatives 
that provided a wide range of choices for policymakers.  Under alternative A, the 
Committee would increase its large-scale asset purchases; under alternative B, the 
Committee would maintain the existing maximum sizes of its purchases; and under 
alternative C, the Committee would trim back its purchases.  The alternatives also 
differ somewhat in the language of the statement. 

The Committee might be inclined to adopt alternative A, page 2 in the package, if 
it judged that, despite the improved outlook, the expected outcomes for output and 
employment were not satisfactory or that the downside risks to that outlook were 
unacceptably large. The Committee’s statement would again indicate that economic 
activity is leveling out and would note that conditions in financial markets have 
improved somewhat further.  However, the language in the first paragraph would cite 
factors that could restrain economic growth and indicate that, absent further policy 
action, the recovery could be relatively weak, with slack in resource utilization 
diminishing quite slowly.  To promote a sustained economic recovery and higher 
resource utilization, the Committee would increase its planned purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed securities by $250 billion to $1.5 trillion and extend these purchases 
through the second quarter of 2010. Staff estimates suggest that this action might 
lower longer-term interest rates by 15 to 30 basis points and reduce the 
unemployment rate two years ahead by as much as ¼ percentage point below a 



 

 

 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 137 of 212

baseline outlook. The statement would continue to express the view that economic 
conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for 
an extended period. As shown by the red text toward the end of alternative A, this 
draft incorporates the suggestion that the more explicit phrase “low levels of resource 
utilization and subdued inflation” be substituted for the vaguer “economic conditions” 
in explaining the Committee’s expectation that the federal funds rate will remain very 
low for a protracted period. 

If the Committee instead judged that the current maximum amounts of its large-
scale asset purchases reasonably balanced the various risks confronting the economy, 
it might be inclined toward alternative B, page 3.  Under this alternative, the 
Committee would also maintain its forward guidance regarding the funds rate.  With 
these policy choices largely expected by the market, an announcement of alternative 
B seems unlikely to have much effect on market prices. 

The first paragraph of alternative B would present a somewhat more upbeat 
picture of economic developments than that of alternative A. It would note, for 
example, that economic activity has picked up, albeit from a severe downturn, and 
would attribute part of that improvement to the housing sector.  However, as in 
August, the Committee would also say that household spending remains constrained 
by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight 
credit. The statement would note that business investment and employment are still 
declining, but at a slower pace.  The statement would indicate that past policy actions 
and market forces will support a “strengthening,” rather than a “resumption,” of 
economic growth, thus suggesting that the Committee now sees a recovery as having 
begun, and would note that these factors would contribute to higher levels of resource 
utilization. 

Paragraph 2 of alternative B would state that substantial resource slack and stable 
inflation expectations should help keep inflation subdued for some time.  We 
suggested the revised language shown in blue in place of language included in the 
Bluebook, because, upon further reflection, it seemed best not to implicitly suggest 
uncertainty about whether or not inflation expectations are well anchored by using the 
word “apparently,” which was included in the Bluebook draft. 

Under alternative B, the Committee would maintain the existing maximum 
amounts for its large-scale asset purchases, but it would shift back the completion 
date for these transactions either to the end of the first quarter or to sometime in the 
second quarter. If the Committee wanted maximum optionality regarding its 
purchases, it might retain the current “up to” language shown in blue brackets and 
extend the period of purchases into the second quarter.  The longer time period for 
these purchases, along with the “up to” language, would provide the Committee more 
time to decide to scale back or end these purchases before the full $1.25 trillion were 
purchased. The Committee might find this flexibility valuable if it saw a significant 
chance that economic conditions ultimately would not warrant buying the full 
amounts.  Alternatively, members might see this flexibility as useful if they saw 



  

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

September 22–23, 2009 138 of 212

significant risks regarding the Committee’s capacity to eventually execute an exit 
strategy with very high reserve balances.  Arguably, extending the completion date 
into the second quarter would also allow the Committee more flexibility to increase 
purchases in the second quarter in order to provide more stimulus in the event that the 
economic recovery flags; that is, it might be easier to ramp up purchases in the second 
quarter from a low level rather than from a program that had come to an end. 

The cost of this flexibility would be less certainty in the markets about the 
ultimate size and duration of Committee’s asset purchases and so somewhat higher 
mortgage and other long-term interest rates than if you committed to the maximum 
purchase size. If instead you fully expect to purchase the current maximum amounts 
and want to give market participants confidence that your MBS purchases will not 
fall short of their expectations in order to maximize the effectiveness of your 
purchases, you could drop the two words in brackets.  As a memo from Brian Sack 
and his colleagues indicated, the Desk recommends tapering through the end of the 
first quarter, given the current maximum amount of MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion.  
I should note that, in the sentence on tapering and timing, we recommended changing 
“its purchases” to “these purchases” to make clear that the specified completion date 
of either the first quarter or the second quarter applies only to the current purchase 
programs, not to some possible future program. 

A relatively small issue:  The first sentence of paragraph 3 recognizes that various 
Federal Reserve liquidity programs have been closed or are being wound down by no 
longer referring to “all available tools.”  The Committee may wish to consider 
whether the adjective “wide” should be used to describe the range of tools being used 
to promote economic recovery and preserve price stability.  There is some chance that 
a change to just “a range of tools” might be read by observers as signaling that the 
Federal Reserve was pulling back more sharply from its support programs than the 
revision in language was intended to suggest. 

But the Committee might see the recent stronger-than-expected economic data as 
indicating that buying less than the full $1.25 trillion of MBS is desirable and thus see 
alternative C, page 4, as appropriate. Alternatively, members might be inclined 
toward alternative C if they were particularly concerned about the possible 
implications of very high reserve balances for inflation expectations or for actual 
monetary stimulus. In that vein, a decision to purchase less than the previously 
specified maximum amounts might also be motivated by concern that the Treasury 
will not rapidly rebuild balances in the SFP even after the debt ceiling is lifted, thus 
injecting more reserves into the banking system than the Committee had anticipated. 

In comparison with alternative B, the first paragraph of alternative C would give 
less emphasis to remaining economic weaknesses and downside risks.  The statement 
would also put less stress on resource utilization and suggest less of a role for slack in 
restraining inflation.  Under this alternative, the Committee would indicate its 
intention to purchase about $1 trillion of mortgage-backed securities and about 
$150 billion of agency debt, less than the current $1.25 trillion and $200 billion 



 
 

 

September 22–23, 2009 139 of 212

maximum amounts.  These purchases would be tapered and completed by the end of 

this year. The Committee would also revise its forward rate guidance to indicate that 

the funds rate would be kept at its current exceptionally low level only so long as 

inflation remains well contained and only until the Committee has greater assurance 

that the economic recovery will be sustained.  With investors apparently coming to 

the conclusion recently that exceptional policy accommodation will indeed be 

maintained for a protracted period, market participants would be quite surprised by a 

statement along the lines of alternative C, and, as discussed yesterday, interest rates 

would likely jump noticeably.
 

For your reference, the table on the next page summarizes the alternatives, and 
draft directives are provided on the final pages.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Brian. Are there questions for Brian?  (No 

response.) I understand coffee is ready. We could have coffee now so that we don’t break up 

the go-round. So we’ll take 20 minutes for coffee.  Thank you. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Why don’t we recommence and begin the policy go-

round with President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My preferred statement for this meeting is a 

slight variant of alternative C for basically most of the reasons that Brian Madigan alluded to.  I 

think that the Committee is not yet ready to begin exiting from the “extended period” language 

of the statement.  I happen to think it is time to do that, and I’m hoping that the Committee will 

get to that point relatively soon.  So, given my understanding of the Committee’s preferences, I’d 

like to address instead the language in alternative B.  I think it’s important to try to explain to the 

Committee my concerns and why. 

I think that this debate about slack is at the core of thinking about policy, and that means 

the Phillips curve is at the core of how we think about monetary policy.  In my view, it is true 

that the data and most of the empirical research suggest that the relationship between inflation 

and the output gap, at least the simple bivariate relationship, is not terribly stable—it tends to 



 

  

September 22–23, 2009 140 of 212

vary over time.  And it tends to vary over time in part because, as President Lacker said, the 

Phillips curve is usually estimated as a reduced-form statistical relationship.  It is not necessarily 

a structural one. One of the things that I think we know about the Phillips curve relationship, as 

it is usually thought of, is that a necessary, although not sufficient, condition for this relationship 

is stable expectations of inflation.  In order for us to have any predictable relationship between 

the output gap and inflation, we need stable inflation expectations.  And one of the things that is 

important for the stability of inflation expectations is that the public forms expectations about 

inflation, and the actions and language of monetary policymakers can shape those expectations. 

Therefore, my concerns are about the language we use to explain our current policy 

actions and how it may shape expectations going forward.  And I think we have to be careful 

about that language, so that it reflects the importance of expectations, and so that it reflects the 

fact that expectations don’t move independently of either our words or our actions.  We know 

that expectations matter from past episodes.  Marvin Goodfriend identifies inflations scares in 

1983 and 1987. They tended to occur when the Fed has tried to exploit the Phillips curve by 

delaying in raising rates (or in cutting rates after the economy has weakened).  The response to 

both of these inflation scares was that inflation expectations were cut off by the Fed’s reacting 

and raising rates to fight the inflation scare, thereby preserving its credibility to maintain price 

stability. 

I think one of the questions that the Committee has to ask itself and be prepared to act on 

is: How would it react if there were an episode where inflation expectations do begin to rise, or 

inflation begins to rise because of fears of the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, because of fears of 

monetizing the debt, or whatever? And if that happens when slack is high and large, as it is now, 

how will the Committee respond? 



September 22–23, 2009 141 of 212

I think that putting expectations of inflation in paragraph 2 of the statement was a very 

important step forward, although from a language standpoint I think it should be stronger than it 

is. I think the statement ought to read, “With longer-term inflation expectations stable, 

substantial resource slack is likely to dampen cost pressures and keep inflation low.”  I want it to 

be a conditioning statement, not a passive statement, as if expectations were kind of an 

afterthought.  If we can reverse those clauses, it would be a more accurate statement about, I 

think, what we actually know about the Phillips curve. 

I also think that the language in the statement has to be consistent with giving us the 

option to raise rates at some time in the future, when slack, however you choose to measure it— 

whether it be unemployment or output—is high.  What I fear about this language, and our 

persistent use of resource slack in the statement, is that we’re creating the impression that we 

will not act in response to inflationary concerns.  I think we need to be more balanced and 

nuanced about the nature of the language we are using to ensure that we will act, if required, to 

preserve both aspects of our dual mandate.  I also worry that, without both the conditioning 

aspects of inflationary expectations and more about preserving price stability, we’re potentially 

creating a problem where the public will come to perceive that we will not act until resource 

utilization is high or higher at some point. 

The measures of resource utilization, I think, are problematic.  I think we have a very 

difficult time measuring resource utilization, and I think we have a difficult time measuring 

inflation expectations. But I don’t think that absolves us of the responsibility of having to deal 

with both of them.  Choices among measures of resources utilization depend a lot not only on 

statistics and on measurement problems, but also on what kind of model one has and different 

models yield different measures.  At the Philadelphia Fed, we have a DSGE model, sort of a 



  

  

 

September 22–23, 2009 142 of 212

workhorse neo-Keynesian macro model.  There, our resource slack measures are about minus 

3 percent, as opposed to minus 6 or 7 percent as in the Greenbook.  Well, what does that say? 

They both contain measurement error, clearly, yet where do you start? 

The question is not what we do today, but what we do down the road when we reach the 

point where we are going to have to make a decision.  And I’m terribly worried that we might get 

ourselves into a position where we cannot make that decision.  As the resource gap narrows, 

obviously, we’ll get closer and closer to facing a very difficult choice. 

So I think this is really about language.  It’s about shaping the state-contingent nature of 

our policy actions, and those policy actions depend not just on resource slack, but also on the 

path of inflation and inflation expectations.  I think we need to make that clearer, and I think the 

language in alternative B is unnecessarily distorted towards saying that we don’t care about 

inflation—that policy is going to be flat for as far as the eye can see.  And I think that’s 

potentially misleading.  It is also problematic, because it sends a signal about how policy will 

react. I think we have to be very worried about that, and I’m very sensitive about that, which is 

why my focus and my comments yesterday were a lot about expectations—not that they’re easy 

to measure, but that they matter a lot in this context.  And I think we have to preserve our 

flexibility. 

I’d like to make three points about the language in alternative B.  First, in paragraph 1, 

we added new language about a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.  I’m not 

exactly sure where that language came from.  It’s new language.  I don’t know why we want to 

bring it back in. I’d prefer just to see us say, “Strengthening of economic growth,” and eliminate 

the phrase “and gradual return to higher resource utilization” and “in the context of price 

stability.” I have real problems with “in the context of price stability.”  I don’t know what that 



 

September 22–23, 2009 143 of 212

means.  It seems to convey that somehow we’re not responsible for that context or that we don’t 

have to be accountable for it—it’s sort of an environmental factor that we react to.  I think higher 

inflation and higher inflation expectations should not be treated as an environmental factor.  

They should be something we take responsibility for.  Second, in paragraph 2, I have already 

suggested that I would prefer to see “with longer-term expectations stable” as the opening clause, 

as a conditioning clause, that says that is what permits slack to keep inflation contained.  And, 

third, as to the “up to” phrases, I think it is terribly important that we keep “up to.”  Even if we’re 

not ready to cut, I think, given the nature of the recovery, if we stretch this out too far, we may 

find ourselves in this conundrum of buying MBS and maybe trying to raise rates at the same 

time, in which case undoubtedly we would stop buying MBS.  So I think we need that “up to” 

language. 

I think this debate is really about forming the language and the expectations of the path of 

monetary policy, not about what inflation is doing today, or maybe even what it is going to be 

doing next quarter or the quarter after that.  I have no fears of inflation in the near term, but it’s 

about shaping the longer term, about keeping our options open, so that we have the ability to act 

and do act when the time comes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B. The Greenbook 

forecasts disinflation and high unemployment rates over the next two years.  I agree with this 

forecast. These outcomes occur with an assumption that the federal funds rate will remain at 

exceptionally low levels for an extended period of time, so I am very comfortable continuing to 

say that in the statement. 



September 22–23, 2009 144 of 212

In terms of the LSAP program, we should purchase the entire $1¼ trillion in mortgage-

backed securities. We should also taper the program, though I would prefer to leave the 

completion date flexible depending on market conditions.  I have a strong preference not to end 

the program prematurely. 

I agree with Presidents Evans and Yeltsin—Yellen—[Laughter] 

MR. FISHER. I’ve gone drinking with Janet.  She’s no Yeltsin.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. The last two minutes will be struck.  [Laughter] 

MR. ROSENGREN. Continuing with my statement, that persistently high 

unemployment is likely to result in low and falling inflation.  This suggests that we will need to 

maintain an accommodative stance for some time to come.  We have only tentative signs of a 

recovery at this point, and we should not take actions that risk reversing these initial positive 

signs. 

I, too, have a couple of comments on the language.  I would remove “up to” for two 

reasons. Not completing the $1¼ trillion purchase will signal that we are content with the path 

where inflation is below my target and the unemployment rate is above my target through the 

forecast horizon.  I do not want to send such a signal.  Second, housing is improving.  However, 

the first-time homebuyer tax incentive is ending at the end of November, and I would not want 

our support for housing to end at the same time.  I would also change the sentence on tapering to 

remove the last clause and instead say, “The Committee will gradually slow the pace of its 

purchases in order to promote a smooth transition in markets.”  This would provide flexibility in 

tapering and highlight our goal of ensuring a smooth transition.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 145 of 212

MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now that the economy has stabilized and 

looks as if it’s beginning to recover, albeit perhaps tentatively, I think it’s time to start calibrating 

our policy stance a little more carefully. You argued, I think quite convincingly, for the array of 

factors affecting the outlook, and obviously the implication is the great uncertainty about just 

how that balance of forces is going to play out.  And you argued compellingly, I think, as well 

for nuance in our views. And I think that needs to be reflected in our policy stance as well. 

The maximum amounts for our purchase programs were set back in March, amidst the 

bleakest days of the recession. We made very rough estimates of what was needed, based on the 

best analysis we could muster coming into that meeting.  But, if you read the transcript, we 

changed those numbers on the fly.  Things looked potentially very grim, and we picked large 

numbers and raised them during the meeting, and I think it was out of a sense that we wanted to 

convey credibility to our commitment to do what it took.  But to some extent, looking back on 

that, and looking back at the deliberative process, the numbers were somewhat arbitrary at the 

time.  We deliberately set maximums rather than predetermined amounts, so that we could take 

advantage of incoming information and adjust our plans accordingly.  We explicitly have 

acknowledged in our statements that we would monitor programs and make adjustments as 

warranted. 

We’ve talked a lot at this meeting and previous meetings about the extent to which, until 

now, our asset purchases have just amounted to our displacing short-term borrowing, and about 

the fact that our short-term borrowing has had us basically accommodating an elevated demand 

for reserves, and about the fact that we haven’t perhaps done much by quantitative easing until 

maybe the last couple of months; perhaps we did so as well in the February to May time frame— 

I don’t know. But as I said yesterday, I think we’re at the point where, from here on out, every 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 146 of 212

additional purchase represents additional monetary stimulus in the quantitative easing sense, as if 

we were continuing to cut rates. 

I would point out again, over $300 billion is going to be added to reserve balances from 

MBS settlements and the runoff in the SFP, and new MBS purchases would provide additional 

reserves on top of that. If we continue with our asset purchases, my sense is that that’s going to 

give us further declines in rates, albeit from very low levels, and albeit of an uncertain amount, 

and I’ll acknowledge that it could be small, as Bill English’s analysis yesterday showed.  But my 

sense is that we’re going to get more stimulus than the Greenbook assumes.  Again, how much 

more is quite hard to know, obviously. 

A couple of other factors are relevant here, at least to my thinking.  First of all, it’s not 

clear what net stimulus the MBS purchases are providing, over and above their effect on 

reserves. If you look at the OIS spread, which has been, relative to its historic fluctuations, 

essentially near zero for a lot of this year, it suggests we have gotten to the point where maybe 

MBS, which are issued by an entity that is, after all, in government receivership, is a perfect 

substitute for Treasuries. And you would expect at that point that buying MBS is just like 

buying Treasuries. 

We talked earlier this year about the effect of different purchase program strategies, 

whether to buy Treasuries or MBS. The staff did the best job it could, with limited data and 

limited natural experiments to go on, to give us a sense of what yields would do.  But they didn’t 

give us any evidence that would refute the hypothesis that you would come to naturally, from 

just looking at a standard model, namely, that if we’re successful in driving down MBS rates, 

then that would come at the expense of raising rates elsewhere in the economy.  It has never been 

clear to me that lowering mortgage rates is, on net, stimulative to the economy.  And I’ll admit 



 

 

 

  

September 22–23, 2009 147 of 212

we don’t have much evidence one way or the other, but it’s hard for me to rule out the notion 

that we’re just shifting credit from one sector of the economy to the other. 

I’m happy to stipulate, as Vice Chairman Dudley requests, that we are not worried about 

an exit strategy. I’m sure we can find an exit.  The question is which exit we want to take. I’m 

fine with the idea that we can find an exit strategy that raises rates, but I think there’s an 

important question as to what we are going to exit to, what regime we’re going to be in 

afterwards. And I think the open question has to do with how big our balance sheet is and what’s 

in it when we finally exit.  I’m sure there’s going to be resistance to selling MBS down the 

road—I can just sense it. Our plans are to hold on to it, let it roll off. There would be political 

headwinds on that. So I’m reluctant to have us essentially be the housing lender of last resort.  

And it strikes me as odd that we would head towards a configuration of our balance sheet in 

which we’re issuing nonmonetary liabilities to fund housing debt—the political economy of that 

for a central bank just strikes me as odd.  And I think we ought to strive to avoid it. 

So all of these factors make me wary of increasing our MBS portfolio any more than we 

need to. I’m not ready to say now that we ought to scale back and cancel all the rest of the 

purchases, but I think we need to leave our options open.  Between now and the next meeting, I 

think we’ll learn a lot about this quantitative easing question, if the projections are correct.  So I 

would argue strongly for retaining the “up to” language. 

On other questions, I like the idea of tapering.  I like President Rosengren’s suggestion of 

language that is less committal about the timing.  In particular, if we do include the phrase 

“second quarter,” the preposition “in” implies that we’re going to get all the way there, so it 

might be better to say “by the second quarter” or “by the end of the second quarter.”  That way 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 148 of 212

we’re not committing to purchase enough to get us to the second quarter.  And I’m happy with 

dropping the word “wide.” Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I just wasn’t quite clear on your last point.  What was your 

preferred language for the end of that sentence? 

MR. LACKER. Well, if we’re going to do “second quarter,” it should be “by the second 

quarter” or “by the end of the second quarter,” rather than “in the second quarter,” which implies 

we get all the way there. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I see. Okay. Thank you. President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B today, but I do so 

reluctantly. I think our asset purchases, especially our MBS purchases, have been successful in 

lowering longer-term borrowing costs and supporting the housing sector and the broader 

economy.  In addition, I believe our toolkit to remove accommodation when the time comes is 

ample.  That said, I agree that further expansion of our MBS program entails some risks and 

possible costs along with the benefits. 

Given the improvement in the economic outlook and in financial conditions since our last 

meeting, I’m not prepared to argue for an expansion of the program today.  But I strongly agree 

with Vice Chairman Dudley and President Rosengren that we need to complete the full 

$1¼ trillion in MBS purchases that markets now anticipate, and I’d like to do so in a manner that 

is least disruptive to the mortgage market.  I, therefore, favor striking the words “up to” in 

alternative B. Curtailing our purchases at this late stage in the program would likely push up 

mortgage rates, and I believe it would be taken as a signal of an earlier exit from near-zero 

interest rates than markets now consider likely. 



    

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 149 of 212

In addition to removing the words “up to,” I would like to soften some of the language 

concerning the timing and completion of the program.  And, following President Rosengren’s 

suggestion, I think we don’t need to announce a definite end date for the program at all, and I 

would support his suggestion. This would give added flexibility, I think, to the Desk in gearing 

the timing of the phasedown to evolving marketing conditions.  If we do end up giving a time 

frame—Q1 or Q2—I would like to propose that we substitute the word “executed” for 

“completed” in paragraph 3 of alternative B, in other words, to say that we anticipate that they 

will be executed by, say, the end of the first quarter, or however that’s decided.  I think that 

substitution subtly distinguishes our characterization of the Treasury program, where we use the 

term “completed,” from our MBS purchases.  I believe that leaves the door slightly more open to 

ramping up the pace of our purchases again, if the recovery does end up suffering a significant 

setback and we face—Governor Tarullo, what was the name you gave the scenario?— 

MR. TARULLO. Relapse. 

MS. YELLEN. —a relapse scenario. In that event, the balance of costs and benefits of 

further MBS purchases could reverse. So I do not want further expansion of MBS purchases or 

other initiatives to be entirely off the table.   

Although I can agree to leave the size of our MBS program at $1¼ trillion today, I see a 

strong case on policy grounds for further monetary stimulus.  Core inflation is currently below 

my price stability goal of about 2 percent, and the unemployment rate is well above my full 

employment goal of about 5 percent.  I anticipate a tepid recovery, but even if the recovery is 

somewhat more robust, this situation will persist for many years. 

I am pretty sure that, if it were possible, we would at this point have taken the federal 

funds rate into negative territory. That would be consistent with our historical behavior, with 



 

September 22–23, 2009 150 of 212

optimal policy calculations, such as those reported in the Bluebook, and with the guidance of 

most policy rules. Unfortunately, so far this year, the nominal funds rate has been fixed near 

zero while core inflation has fallen. So the real funds rate has risen.  In this sense, monetary 

policy has actually tightened this year, although circumstances—namely, the increase in 

unemployment and decline in core inflation—seem to call for more monetary stimulus.  Even 

taking account of our large-scale asset purchases, I think the effective degree of easing, given the 

dislocation in financial markets, likely has been modest relative to past recessions. 

I agree with President Plosser that communications are a logical device to use, and I think 

the most obvious way to provide additional stimulus without further balance sheet expansion is 

to use language designed to bring market expectations of the funds rate path into closer 

alignment with the Greenbook path, thereby lowering medium-term rates.  Market expectations 

concerning the likely path of the funds rate have come down over the intermeeting period, but 

there is still a gap between market expectations and the Greenbook path, which coincides with 

my own preferred path. To help narrow that gap, I propose replacing the language in paragraph 

3 of alternative B with the language in paragraph 3 of alternative A.  Specifically, I would 

replace the vague phase “Economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of 

the federal funds rate for an extended period” with the alternative phrasing stating that “The 

Committee anticipates that low resource utilization and subdued inflation are likely to warrant 

exceptionally low levels….”  This language would indicate to markets that the FOMC will not 

raise rates merely on the basis of strong economic growth if, in fact, we are nowhere near 

maximum sustainable levels of employment and activity and if inflation is subdued.  It would 

provide a conditional statement that would usefully inform the expectations of financial market 

participants.  I know that this phrasing will not appeal to those members of the Committee who 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 151 of 212

reject the notion that slack influences inflation.  But it is consistent with the language of B that 

already embraces the logic of such a linkage. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, and I’ll discuss some of 

the different language choices in a second.  There are three premises to my policy 

recommendations.  The first is that the most likely outcome for the economy, even with rates 

very accommodative for an extended period, is still unsatisfactory.  It’s less unsatisfactory than it 

was at the last meeting, the meeting before that, and the meeting before that, but it’s still 

unsatisfactory. One of our legislative objectives is high employment, which I take to be 

somewhere in the neighborhood of the NAIRU.  Even if the NAIRU is higher than 5 or 

5¼ percent, we are going to be, in my view, above that for a long, long time.  Furthermore, 

inflation is more likely to be below the 2 percent that most members of this Committee favor for 

an objective than above it. So I think we’re going to be away from our legislative objectives for 

a while. I agree with President Hoenig and President Plosser that we’re going to have to raise 

rates before we get to full employment.  We’ve always done that, and we’re going to have to do 

it again, as well as anticipate getting there.  But I just think that the size of the output gap—even 

given a range of estimates—and the likelihood that the economic recovery is going to be gradual 

suggest that it will be at least an extended period—whatever that is—before we have to do that.  

So one implication is that I don’t think we need to tighten in any way, shape, or form in response 

to the better outlook. The better outlook just gets us to a less bad place. 

The second premise is that we’re in a liquidity trap.  Reserves and other short-term 

obligations, particularly riskless obligations, are pretty much perfect substitutes.  Banks will hold 

more reserves now without much, if any, effect on other interest rates.  So I don’t view additional 



September 22–23, 2009 152 of 212

reserve provision as an easing of policy, and it’s certainly not comparable with reducing interest 

rates. Now, these reserves could be stimulative in the future—I agree with that—if risk-adjusted 

returns on bank loans and securities begin to look favorable relative to the rate we’re paying on 

deposits. But they don’t look favorable now—we got that from the survey Bill English reported 

on. I think that when they begin to look favorable—when we begin to see the movement we 

were looking at before—I think we can begin to exit. 

That leads me to my third premise, which is that we do have the tools, or the staff is in 

the process of making us the tools, to neutralize or absorb reserves and raise rates when we need 

to do so. The efficacy of those tools is not materially affected by $200 billion or $300 billion 

more of reserves—they’ll work just as well.  Now, I agree, Mr. Chairman, this is something we 

need to continue to worry about and to work on.  But I am confident that we will be successful in 

designing the exit tools.  Using them is something else, but we will have the tools when we need 

them. 

That leads me to some comments on alternative B.  I think paragraph 1 strikes about the 

right balance. Things are looking better, but it’s not clear how much better.  The labor market 

remains very weak.  We’ve had all of one month of an increase in sales in the retail control 

group, so to say that consumption is really on a strong upward track I think is a very, very 

tenuous conclusion. So I think that paragraph is about right. 

With respect to the last sentence that President Plosser discussed, I view this sentence as 

a forecast rather than an objective—we’re forecasting that this is going to happen.  However, 

when we reference what we will do, it’s in the first sentence of paragraph 3.  Specifically, when 

we reference our tools, we say, “We will employ our tools to preserve price stability.”  That’s a 

key message, and I agree with you, President Plosser, that it’s critical to keep that message in 



 

September 22–23, 2009 153 of 212

there. But I don’t see it being contradicted by the last sentence of paragraph 1.  I like the 

addition of “the gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.”  Now that the economy 

has turned around and is improving, our actions aren’t keyed just to whether the economy is 

growing or not, but also to how fast it’s growing, so I thought this was a good addition. 

In paragraph 3, I’d like to focus on a couple of things.  I think the shift from “all available 

tools” to “a range” or “a wide range of tools” is a nontrivial shift in tone and will be noticed.  I 

think it’s fair to say that our intention is not to use all available tools, if the economy follows 

something like the baseline forecast, because there are costs to using these tools relative to the 

benefits. But I think, as Governor Tarullo said, if the economy is less robust, if inflation 

continues to decline, if inflation expectations start following inflation down—and I think there is 

a significant risk of that—the Committee should consider using longer-term LSAPs, and 

lowering the rate on excess reserves.  And, certainly, under those circumstances, I’ll be arguing 

for those actions. With inflation coming down, the adverse effects—that is, the costs in terms of 

potential inflation expectations—will be much less than they might have been before.  I do not 

interpret the change in language here as ruling out the possibility of using those tools if 

circumstances change and don’t turn out the way we want them to be, and I wanted to make that 

clear to the rest of the Committee.  I think it’s important to retain the extended period.  I don’t 

know whether that means 2011 or the second half of 2010, but even if it’s the second half of 

2010, that’s quite a ways from now, and it’s way too early to signal anything. 

I would taper the agencies down, and I don’t feel that we have to go to the full 

$200 billion—if we fall short of it, that’s fine.  So I would certainly keep the “up to” for the 

agencies. With respect to the MBS, I would taper that also, but in the context of announcing that 

we’ll complete the program.  I think completing it is what the market expects—it’s built into 



 

September 22–23, 2009 154 of 212

rates. Not doing so would raise interest rates.  I don’t know by how much—it could be 5 basis 

points, it could be 35 basis points—but I’m pretty sure the direction it would go in, and, given 

my outlook for the economy, that’s not the right thing to do.  To me, that would be a tightening 

of policy relative to market expectations.  And I do think markets also expect that the additional 

purchases will result in more reserves, and if they’re thinking in quantitative easing terms, 

they’ve probably also built that into market prices.  So I think not completing it would be 

contrary to expectations and would be a tightening of policy; and, as Vice Chairman Dudley 

noted yesterday, I think the effect to be concerned about—even more than the rise of a few basis 

points—would be the signaling that we’re getting ready to exit a lot of things very quickly.  So, 

although I don’t think keeping “up to” in there would be a major problem, I do think it would 

leave uncertainty. I think now is the logical time to announce the full programs consistent with 

what we did with the Treasury. Why leave markets uncertain?  So I would delete “up to” in front 

of the agency mortgage-backed securities phrase.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I see it, current FOMC policy has three 

parts. One part is our liquidity programs, one part is an asset purchase program, and the third 

part is a near-zero interest rate policy. 

The liquidity programs are running off, and, in my view, that seems to be going 

smoothly.  I would see that as the panic receding and as our having performed our lender-of-last­

resort function by developing liquidity programs to address the crisis. 

On the near-zero rate policy, if you look at the previous two recessions, it was about two 

and a half to three years before a rate move following the end of a recession.  So it could be that 

this FOMC is different from previous incarnations, and I do think that the “too low for too long” 



   

September 22–23, 2009 155 of 212

argument will weigh heavy on us in the coming quarters.  But just taking the staff forecast at face 

value, and taking the experience in the previous two recessions, we are looking at a rate move in 

the first half of 2012, if you believe that back of the envelope estimate.  During the interim, more 

shocks are going to hit the economy.  In my mind, the question is how to run an active monetary 

policy to be able to react to these shocks while your interest rate policy is going to remain on 

hold for some period. It seems to me, like any reaction, it would have to come through asset 

purchases. So the question is how to do this. 

The policy we’re contemplating, to me, looks like this.  We’re contemplating ending the 

asset-purchase program in the first half of 2010, and we’re contemplating letting the natural 

runoff draw down the purchased MBS over a period of several years, as long as six years.  A 

round number for that runoff is $200 billion a year, so let’s just tuck that away and keep that in 

mind.  We’re going to use other tools to control the flow of excess reserves into the money 

supply, if we should get into a situation where the excess reserves start to move in that direction.  

In my view, there’s nothing optimal about relying on this natural runoff.  This is just an 

unconditional decline, regardless of how news arrives about economic performance.  So in my 

view, the question would be: Can we do something that leaves the Committee in a better 

position to control this situation? 

Here’s my suggestion.  I think we could taper, as suggested by the staff, but not to a full 

exit from the MBS purchase program, or, more generally, asset purchase program, as suggested 

by President Rosengren, President Yellen, and many others in the discussion just now.  In my 

view, if we quit the program altogether, it will be harder to make adjustments.  Of course, you 

could always come back and say, “I’m going to restart the program,” but it’s going to be very 

difficult, and it would take a big event to get that going.  So one idea would be—and I talked 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 156 of 212

about this last time—to taper to a very low number; a number that makes sense to me, just to fix 

ideas in our head, would be something like $4 billion per week.  That would add up to roughly 

$200 billion a year, and I would leave it to the Desk as to the best way to transition to that. 

You could think of that, maybe, as a neutral policy, then—you’d be replacing the natural 

runoff. And you’d still have a program that was intact.  Then, you could take action from there 

depending on how conditions evolve and how the recovery evolves going forward.  So this is one 

way to go to a much lower growth rate of MBS purchases.  By keeping the program open, we 

can react as news arrives on the economy.  If the recovery is unexpectedly soft or we face 

renewed problems, we could increase the pace of purchases, though probably not up to numbers 

like $50 billion a week. If the recovery is unexpectedly robust, we could consider selling some 

amount per week, probably without too much market disruption.  Of course, we would do all of 

this in conjunction with other tools, such as interest on reserves and reverse repos. 

One idea about going in this direction is that it might help us avoid an early pullback 

from our quantitative easing program, like the one that doomed the Japanese quantitative easing 

program in the early part of this decade.  I don’t think we want to get into that boat.  I’m 

describing an alternative strategy for where to place the asset purchase program in 2010.  The 

discussion today is mostly about tapering and the size of the MBS program.  My proposal is to 

think less about the size of the program in an absolute sense and more about how we might want 

to adjust the program going forward based on incoming information.  I would agree with 

President Lacker that as long as we continue to purchase assets, we’re implementing a policy of 

further easing.  So I don’t really see how we’re pulling back in any sense on that.  The liquidity 

programs are running off, but I see those as related to the panic. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 157 of 212

For today I support alternative B with some caveats.  Like President Plosser, I think we 

should retain the “up to” language to retain flexibility.  I’m talking about transitioning to a slow 

pace of purchases, but not to zero, in a reasonable time frame.  We may end up at a level of 

anywhere between $1 trillion to $1.25 trillion, but it does not have to be $1.25 trillion.  For the 

agency debt, it may be reasonable to stop short of the $200 billion, given the market disruption 

and the difficulties there. So, like Governor Kohn, I would want to retain flexibility by keeping 

the “up to” language. 

I prefer the second quarter of 2010 for the transition.  I guess my idea was, at least for 

today, that would give us some room to continue to adjust our program at future meetings and 

maybe move to this small flow purchases model at some future date. 

And, lastly, I think it is entirely appropriate, as in alternatives B and C, to mention the 

stability of inflation expectations in paragraph 2 when talking about the inflation outlook.  In my 

view, this better reflects modern theories of inflation determination and, I think, views around 

the table. I think most everyone talks about slack in the context of stable inflation expectations.  

As I said yesterday, I’m actually suspicious of how anchored these expectations really are.  I 

think we’re seeing a lot of faith in the Fed, even in the face of our unprecedented policy actions.  

My sense is that informed opinion on inflation is as widely dispersed as it has been at any time 

since the 1970s in the United States.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So, President Bullard, you said that you wanted to retain 

“up to.” Did you have a thought on the next sentence about the tapering that would fit with your 

proposal? 

MR. BULLARD. Starting with the red part? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. “The Committee will gradually”— 



 

September 22–23, 2009 158 of 212

MR. BULLARD. “The Committee will gradually slow”— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It says it will be completed. 

MR. BULLARD. I would like to leave it more open.  I don’t have exact language. Was 

this what you were proposing, President Rosengren? 

MR. ROSENGREN. I was talking about putting a period after “markets” and taking out 

the last clause. 

MR. LACKER. Those seem consistent. 

MR. BULLARD. I wasn’t sure if what he was suggesting was consistent with what I 

said. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren and President Yellen suggested saying 

“gradually slow the pace of these purchases in order to promote a smooth transition in markets.”  

Let me just say now that I think that there’s an important interaction between that decision and 

the “up to” decision. If we’re going to be unclear about our time frame and unclear about the 

final amount, those two things together are somewhat concerning.  But that’s one possibility. 

MR. BULLARD. I guess my thought was just to take it to the second quarter and then, if 

you wanted to go this direction, you could do so at a future meeting. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Mr. Chairman, a two-hander. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think that I have some 

sympathy with taking out the “first quarter/second quarter,” but we have to recognize that the 

Desk has to have instructions on what it actually has to do, so there’s an issue of what their 

baseline is in terms of their action.  If we take out the language about “first quarter/second 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 159 of 212

quarter,” there still needs to be an understanding in terms of what is communicated to the Desk, 

so that at least they know the starting point of the taper trajectory. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I look at the circumstances that we’re in, 

I would prefer alternative C.  And I don’t say that lightly, and I don’t say it because I don’t 

happen to be voting. I don’t have to put it out there—that’s an issue sometimes. 

I think it’s important that we look at the stance of policy, and we’re in a very 

accommodative stance today.  And looking ahead to 2010, 2011, 2012, we’re still going to have 

a reasonably accommodative policy.  I recognize that the short-run costs are always right before 

us. And I don’t want to stanch this recovery any more than anyone else does, and that is a major 

concern. I remember, perhaps unfortunately, sitting around worrying about 1 percent inflation in 

2002 and 2003, worrying whether we would have deflation, and worrying about short-run issues 

as we kept rates low for an extended period of time—I think that was our language.  I just want 

to make sure that we’re thinking about the long-run costs of this much stimulus and of the 

difficulties we will face ahead in withdrawing it, because we’ve never before used these tools to 

neutralize this much stimulus.  We have enormous reserves in, and already some of the “chasing 

yield” has begun with this amount of funds out there and available.  We are taking on not only 

risk in the short term and on the downside, but, by delaying, we also are taking on longer-term 

risks, which may seem easier to take on precisely because they are longer term.  So I’m very 

sensitive to that. 

I also am very sensitive to the fact that this might surprise the market, and that is a very 

serious worry. But at some point I think we need to surprise the market, to some degree, and that 

is why I was so interested in what the basis-point effect on mortgage rates would be as well as 



 

September 22–23, 2009 160 of 212

the psychological effect. But I think it’s a risk that we need to take on at this point, because if 

we don’t announce this now, we will be very close to year-end at our next meeting, and I don’t 

think we can then say that we’re really pulling this stuff back.  At that point, I think we’d be even 

more reluctant to do it. So now we can shoot for year-end.  We could tell them we’re not getting 

out now, and we’re going to move this very carefully towards year-end.  In the long run, I 

suspect that we’d have—I can’t say better outcomes—reasonable outcomes. 

There are a couple of other things.  I would push for first quarter—if at all possible.  

Also, I’m uneasy with the phrase “extended period,” because it has been such an issue with me 

in the past. So I’ll end with that. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I infer that you want to keep the “up to,” though. 

MR. HOENIG. “Up to,” yes. [Laughter] Safe bet. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. That’s what I thought.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like so many others, I’m also going to 

support alternative B. To me, it’s the stay-the-course alternative at this stage.  So many have 

said that the recovery is under way but fragile or tentative, so I think it is still appropriate to be 

cautious about that. And the inflation outlook, in my mind, doesn’t warrant a policy response.  I 

think there’s a great deal of consensus around the table about the state of the economy and the 

outlook, so it strikes me that this is really more about the language in the statement and the way 

we communicate with markets and the public, which is, to some degree, more in the realm of 

psychology. 

As I think about that, I certainly believe that paragraph 1 is sufficient to convey an 

accurate depiction of the economy as it stands today, and I’m comfortable enough with it.  I do 

think it’s important to convey a commitment that we are going to stay the course, to follow 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 161 of 212

through. I think the removal of the “up to” language conveys this. I don’t have terribly strong 

feelings about it, so I’m certainly not going to argue strongly if the consensus is to keep it.  I do 

think it’s a small change, but it does help build confidence that we’ll follow through with the 

programs that we have in place.  At this point, I don’t think we want to suggest an itchy trigger 

finger regarding exit. 

I have a couple of other comments on the suggested language. Again, I’m a bit 

ambivalent about the inclusion of the word “wide.”  I think it could generate a lot of speculation 

about what we mean by it, and I think continuing with the language of simply “a range of tools,” 

which is a little more measured, is adequate.   

There are a lot of language revisions already on the table, and it’s going to be difficult to 

sort all of them out, so I won’t add to them.  But I would make the final comment that the 

difference of opinion around the table is more about language than it is about the conditions.   

And I agree with your comment, Mr. Chairman, on the need for a nuanced policy.  I’m a little 

concerned about a too nuanced statement that tries to capture all of those sentiments.  So I tend 

to prefer much of what’s on the page now and what’s been proposed along with the removal of 

“up to.” I think that will convey the necessary continuity and follow-through that we want.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I submitted comments on September 16.  Many of them 

were incorporated in the statement.  I don’t want to repeat myself.  I assume, Brian, they are 

somewhere in the record. 

Someone at the end of the table mentioned Hamlet and the Prince earlier, and it brought 

to mind the debate over the B-2 bomber, which was B-2 or not B-2, that is the question. 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 162 of 212

[Laughter] It seems to me that what this discussion is all about is “up to” or not “up to,” that is 

the question. By my count, we have had four in favor of keeping “up to” and four in favor of 

striking or deleting “up to.”  I’m in favor of keeping “up to,” because I think it gives us 

maximum flexibility.  I’m in favor of incorporating the phrase “these purchases,” and I would 

favor President Yellen’s “executed by the end of the first quarter.”  I would strike the word 

“wide,” because a range is a range.  I don’t think “wide” adds much.  It does probably raise some 

questions of what other ideas we might have up our sleeves, and it might raise questions that we 

are not able to answer.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  It seems that this is the 

most disparate set of commentary I’ve heard on policy alternatives.  It’s a very interesting 

meeting, and I hope I can add to that spirit.  [Laughter] The economy is beginning the recovery 

phase. I think the risk profile is better—it’s more balanced.  That doesn’t change the fact that it’s 

not a very desirable path, as many have pointed out; the unemployment rate is going to remain 

high for quite some time.  In terms of the inflation outlook, it seems to me that we’re going to be 

undershooting our implicit objective, in that we’re likely to stay below, I would say, a 

1½ percent inflation rate for some period of time.  There is a wide range of risk, as we have said, 

and, as President Yellen mentioned, by some estimates of the TIPS inflation compensation 

markets, compensation’s up, and that must mean that the variability in inflation is up, higher or 

lower. I find that quite interesting. 

Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that, viewing the balance of the social costs that we are 

facing, those costs seem a little towards the downside.  With that in mind, looking at 

paragraph 1, my reaction was different from President Plosser’s and more like Governor Kohn’s 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 163 of 212

regarding the phrase, “a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of 

price stability.” This seems to me the only place where we can possibly point out that the 

unemployment rate will remain high over some period of time.  The only other reference to job 

loss is with respect to its influence on consumption.  We could change “resource utilization” to 

something more like “the unemployment rate will gradually decline,” but I’m not anticipating 

many people would prefer that type of language.  And I view the phrase “in a context of price 

stability,” as consistent with the observation that inflation is going to remain below 2 percent for 

a couple of years. We can disagree on that, but that’s how I view that sentence, so I found it to 

be quite good. 

In terms of policy, I think we’re responding appropriately according to the circumstances.  

Monetary policy is accommodative:  The federal funds rate is about zero, we’ve got our large-

scale asset purchase programs, and there’s no real expectation that the funds rate is going to rise 

in the foreseeable future—nine to twelve months, maybe it will be longer.  I’m sympathetic to 

the arguments that the current path of the recovery is highly undesirable—we’d like a lower 

unemployment rate.  But I just think that there are limits to our policy effectiveness.  I think I am 

different from many of the views expressed here.  Given the limitations I see in our effectiveness 

at this point, I think we’re at a pretty good position, and I don’t think that we can really do that 

much more. 

So I favor alternative B. Having heard some of the comments that you made, Mr. 

Chairman, and that the Vice Chairman made on our exit tools, at the end of the day, I do trust 

that our exit tools are going to be sufficient to allow us to embark upon a more restrictive policy 

when we deem that appropriate.  If we can sell our assets, I think that will work if interest on 

reserves doesn’t work. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 164 of 212

In terms of MBS, here’s where I’ll be different.  I prefer a definitive choice today.  I just 

don’t see any benefit to postponing what strikes me as the inevitable purchase of $1¼ trillion 

after listening to everybody around the table.  I would be aghast if we found a way not to do 

$1¼ trillion. Why not recognize that now, inject a little more certainty into markets on that 

score?  I think that, if we leave it open, we are going to struggle with this issue later in terms of 

the rate effect. We don’t fully appreciate why MBS yields are lower.  Is it the stock effect, or is 

it the flow effect?  Well, there’s an unfortunate aspect to putting a lot of weight on the flow 

effect—as Brian at one point said, maybe it’s 50–50.  If it’s 50–50, then, when we are done, 

those rates will go back up, because the flow will no longer be there.  If we have to look higher 

rates in the eye in the first quarter of next year, I think we’re going to be wringing our hands over 

it. Now, maybe that’s the right thing.  I don’t have a problem with being definitive now and then 

saying that circumstances are such that we need to apply more accommodation.  We did that all 

the time with the funds rate, and I just don’t think that these policies ought to be that different.  

So I would prefer a more definitive choice.  Because of that, I guess I’ll make it five and five—I 

would take out the “up to.” We’ll see how that goes.  I would like to complete it as soon as 

possible—in the first quarter, and I wouldn’t mind the middle of the first quarter—but that’s a 

minority view, I’m sure.  I thought that President Plosser’s suggestion on moving the inflation 

expectations ahead of resource slack was perfectly acceptable, if there was any appetite for that.  

Thanks, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  It is good to see 

more data showing that the economy is on a path to recovery, but, as I noted earlier, the gains 

have been very limited, and the recovery remains quite fragile.  My view about the direction of 



 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 165 of 212

inflation is more balanced. Fortunately, inflation expectations have been a lot more stable than 

we might have anticipated even a few months ago, when we were concerned that inflation 

expectations would fall. I attribute this stability at least in part to our communications strategy.  

Given the minimal extent of the recovery so far and the very moderate levels of inflation, I 

believe the continuation of our current accommodative policy is appropriate. 

Regarding the language in paragraph 3, I support inserting the word “wide” in the first 

sentence. I also think that we will be purchasing and should be purchasing the entire $1¼ trillion 

in mortgage-backed securities.  In addition, I think it’s important to be as transparent as we can 

be, so I would delete the “up to” in front of the $1¼ trillion of agency mortgage-backed 

securities. I would obviously leave the “up to” in front of the $200 billion in agency debt.  

Regarding the language on tapering our purchases, Brian Sacks’s comments and analysis 

yesterday moved me to support using the “end of the first quarter” language in that section.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  First Vice President Lyon. 

MR. LYON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also favor alternative B.  Although the recent 

data have generally surprised on the upside, I’m hesitant to place too much emphasis on one or 

two months’ worth of data.  We have been unpleasantly surprised several times in the last two 

years, and in part, as a result, I’m disinclined to change policy quite yet. 

I think that market expectations are particularly important at times like these, and I place 

a fair amount of weight on the fact that alternative B is most closely aligned with existing market 

expectations. In this regard, while I prefer the retention of the “up to” language due to its 

consistency with prior statements, I would not object to the removal of this language. 



  

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 166 of 212

The tapering strategy for the purchases of agency MBS and agency debt specified in 

alternative B strikes me as prudent and appropriate.  I support ending these purchases in the first 

quarter of next year. Based on Brian’s presentation yesterday, I don’t see the need or the 

justification to extend them further. 

Given that neither inflation nor inflation expectations have increased, worries about the 

size of our balance sheet seem to me to be premature.  In my view, we have viable exit strategies 

available that we can implement as conditions warrant.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll support alternative B with some 

suggestions, but I’ll confine most of my remarks to the mortgage markets.  Let me begin by 

talking about this odd market dynamic, which, I think, is leading to much of the discussion 

around the table. The mortgage market strikes me as neither particularly sustainable in its 

current form nor two-sided, in the sense of matching private parties who meet at some market 

clearing price. And the blame for that is not even predominantly because of the Federal 

Reserve’s role in the market.   

When I think about the mortgage market ecosystem, I break it into three parts.  The 

mortgage origination market, even dominated by three or four banks with different degrees of 

implicit and explicit support, is by far and away the most competitive market in this ecosystem 

compared with what I’m going to talk about next.  In between the originators and the holders of 

these portfolios, we have this odd duopoly of government guarantors that are now competing 

with a new entity, the Federal Housing Administration, all of whom have confused and 

overlapping objective functions and confused exit regimes.  They can’t say what they’re solving 

for, whether it’s minimizing draws from Treasury, maximizing the support of Congress, or 



 

September 22–23, 2009 167 of 212

minimizing or changing the number of folks that go into foreclosure; the guarantors are in 

between this bizarre group of mortgage originators and buyers.  And who are the buyers?  Well, 

the buyers are us, that is, the Federal Reserve, the Treasury Department, and Fannie and Freddie, 

who have mixed views about whether they’re also going to be portfolio buyers of whole 

mortgages or mortgage-backed securities.  Taking all this together, I think we shouldn’t be 

surprised that we’re having a hard time figuring out what the incremental change in spreads 

would be based on whether we do “up to” or not “up to” at various sizes. 

All of these pieces are subject to debate.  Markets are trying to figure out who’s going to 

do what to whom and what the consequences of this bizarre ecosystem are, and noting that this 

market is not clearing in any effective way.  I would say again that we have participated in but 

are not predominant in that rather unfavorable diagnosis. 

In light of that dynamic and what’s in the realm of the possible, we can talk about losses 

on our portfolio, and we can talk about complications for the exit strategy.  But I think, as one of 

the prior speakers made clear, that, for the purposes of this discussion, we can stipulate that we 

can and will figure it out. I have great confidence in that. 

It strikes me that the central question is:  What can we do to provide whatever help is in 

the realm of the possible to this targeted mortgage market?  I think it’s likely that, given the 

uncertainties that we’ve all spoken about regarding the real economy and financial markets in 

2010, we’re going to have to provide support as best we can throughout much of the year.  This 

isn’t support such that we say, “Boy, once we’re done with the first quarter, all will be rosy 

thereafter.” As a way to frame what the operative choices are in front of us, I ask myself:  What 

is most conducive to bringing private buyers back into this confused market in as seamless a way 

as possible?  Now, we shouldn’t be surprised that markets want more.  Again, I said this with 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 168 of 212

Treasuries, and it’s equally true here because we’re doing more.  They want more purchases, 

more certainty, more commitment, and I think that that is as expected.  What should we want?  I 

think we should be solving for bringing real investors back into this market to give it any chance 

of pricing mortgages at rates that are conducive to recovery.  So I think that brings us to the 

operative questions mostly in paragraph 3. 

With respect to the “up to” language, I learned from one of you that, in the academy, they 

say the debates are so angry because the stakes are so small.  I think that’s true on the “up to” 

language here. Markets expect we’re going to do $1.25 trillion.  If we leave “up to” in there, 

they’re going to expect it, and if we take it out, they expect it, so I can’t get all that energized 

over where to cast my vote in this very close call.  Because they already expect we’re going to do 

the whole thing and because we are reasonably comfortable with the progress from the last 

FOMC meeting to this one, I would have a mild preference for leaving “up to” in there, and I 

think that the differences in market practicality here are really quite small. 

What about the timing?  When should we end this or complete this exercise?  I am 

generally in the category of flexibility, given these uncertainties, but taken to its extreme, I think 

the flexibility would give not only the Desk some concerns about what exactly they’re solving 

for, but also the markets.  Therefore, while I’m sympathetic to the idea of extending this out, in 

general I think if we want market investors to get back in and to prepare to get back in, we 

should tell them when we’re planning on exiting this thing, because I think we’re going to have 

cliff effects at any point that we complete these purchases.  I suspect that we should give them as 

much notice as possible.  My preference, as a result, would be to say that we are going to 

complete or execute this by the end of the second quarter of 2010, giving full warning to them 

and to all of us about how to proceed. 



 

September 22–23, 2009 169 of 212

As a final comment, Mr. Chairman, on the agency debt, I think the staff has been 

incredibly up front with us that we’re really making that market even harder to operate 

effectively.  I think the benefits that we are drawing from continuing to be in that market are 

particularly limited, if not zero.  So if I had the pen, I would actually end the increases in the 

agency debt side. I don’t think that’s the center of consensus around the table.  So just to be 

practical, you can leave that as “up to” as well.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Everybody around this table has more 

experience with these issues than I do—  

MR. TARULLO. No, that’s not true.  [Laughter] 

MS. DUKE.  —but I’m struck as I look at the statements and as I listen to the discussion 

that it sounds like we’re doing one smooth maneuver that has been the same over a period of 

time when the underlying dynamics are really very different.  I would agree with President 

Lacker that the purchases of the MBS and the support of the housing markets has been smooth, 

has acted as a substitute for the financial markets that haven’t yet restarted.  But, on the other 

hand, the waxing and waning of programs on the asset side of the balance sheet are going to 

result in bursts of quantitative easing in the form of reserves, and we’re just beginning to see 

that. Given my impression that reserves are currently at desired levels, I think that it will result 

in some lowering of interest rates.  I would disagree with Governor Kohn on that, and then 

disagree with President Lacker and agree with President Yellen that this is not necessarily a bad 

thing, that it’s probably warranted by the conditions that we are facing.  Also, I would point out 

that while the TALF is supporting lending, on the one hand, our regulatory policies are generally 

acting to restrict credit, on the other, so those two things are working at cross-purposes, perhaps. 



September 22–23, 2009 170 of 212

With all of these different things going on, I have difficulty weighing the relative impact 

of each one on the final outcomes, but I do remain concerned that on balance we’re going to see 

too little credit availability leading to too much saving and a slower recovery than we would like.  

So I do support alternative B. I think through tapering we actually are likely to learn a little bit 

more about the effects of stock versus flow, as well as about the bank response to this second big 

tranch of reserves coming in, so it certainly would be possible in the future to argue for an 

extension into the second quarter, but I’m not sure whether that would be through more gradual 

tapering or through an increase in the purchases. I think it just depends on how those develop. 

In keeping with my banker roots, I do find paragraph 1 awfully rosy compared with the 

reservations that were expressed in the policy round, but I don’t have any changes to offer. 

I would delete the “up to” language, but, again, I’m not sure I’m terribly strongly in favor 

of that; I would probably also use the first quarter, again, saying that in the future I may prefer 

the second quarter. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can support alternative B, although, like 

President Yellen, not without some reluctance.  I have two difficulties with the language of 

alternative B as drafted.  In paragraph 1, although I think it does reflect accurately our sense of 

the current trajectory of the economy, I don’t think it captures the level of uncertainty about what 

may happen next year, and thus I would be substantially more comfortable with an explicit 

indication of that uncertainty. 

With respect to paragraph 3, I think President Bullard captured the most important point 

from my point of view, which is that the world should understand that we’re prepared to respond 

as required by economic circumstances.  I worry that there is a sense of finality that is projected 



September 22–23, 2009 171 of 212

in the language as currently drafted, and I don’t think it turns on the “up to” language for the 

reasons that Governor Warsh suggested.  I think it turns more upon the way it’s stated and, to be 

perfectly honest, upon a lot of external commentary which has begun to impute a certain finality 

to us. So whether through the mechanism that President Bullard suggested, or President 

Rosengren suggested, or some other means, I would be substantially more comfortable with 

alternative B if it states in more or less—and I say “more or less” given that we are a central 

bank—explicit fashion that we are prepared to respond to changing economic conditions, so that 

people do understand this is not final in the sense that, even if things begin to deteriorate next 

year, we’re not going to think there’s a high hurdle rate because, after all, we ended that 

program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I guess I would note that we are proposing to 

retain the last sentence; I realize that if you repeat a sentence too many times it begins to lose 

meaning. 

MR. TARULLO. That is exactly my idea of it.  People look at the deltas, I think. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I just want to talk to 

some points that President Plosser raised about inflation expectations.  I completely agree that 

inflation expectations matter. I think we have to be careful, though, that our concern about 

inflation expectations does not imply to others that we’ll be forced to take back accommodation 

sooner. On the inflation expectations front, we can actually make considerable progress by 

explaining to people clearly why we can exit. I thought it was interesting that everyone here has 

stipulated that we can exit, but I don’t think that the market believes that everybody on this 

Committee believes that we can exit.  I think it would be helpful to the markets if we did explain 



 

September 22–23, 2009 172 of 212

that, and that would help keep inflation expectations more anchored.  I also think that we could 

help keep inflation expectations better anchored by explaining that we think inflation will be 

subdued given the large output gap. We can actually accomplish both goals—explain our policy 

a little better and work at keeping inflation expectations anchored.  So I think communication is 

something that we need to continue to work on.  We’ve made quite a bit of progress this 

summer—your speech and testimony, Mr. Chairman, on the exit strategy helped.  But I think the 

more people who are confident that we can manage our exit, the more helpful it will be on the 

inflation expectations front. 

Yesterday I was hoping to talk about large-scale asset purchases.  [Laughter] Now as 

next to the last speaker, I think I’m going to be very repetitive, but I do think it’s important to 

commit to do the entire $1¼ trillion, and a lot of people already touched on the reasons.  

Governor Kohn talked about the fact that the trajectory of the unemployment rate is still 

unsatisfactory, and I completely agree. It’s less unsatisfactory than it was before, but it’s still 

very unsatisfactory, so taking back any sort of accommodation that is discretionary to us at this 

meeting seems inappropriate.  In terms of the specific reasons that I was going to give yesterday, 

the first is that this is what’s expected.  If we don’t do what the market expects in this case, it 

would lead to an inadvertent tightening of financial conditions, and not just directly in terms of 

the effects on agency MBS yields because of the potential lack of additional purchases, but also 

because it would be a new signal that we’re closer to exit in a broader sense.  Remember, if you 

compare where the market is in terms of the timing of raising the federal funds rate and where 

the Greenbook is, there’s a pretty big gap. So, for the market to be surprised, we’re going to 

have to move faster than the market expects.  It seems to be a pretty strong presumption that 

we’re probably going to go slower than the market expects. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 173 of 212

Second, we are pretty far along in this program, so this idea of not completing it gets 

difficult if you also want to do tapering that lasts through the end of the first quarter.  By the end 

of this week we will have purchased, what, $895 billion roughly?  That leaves $355 billion, with 

twenty-seven weeks until the end of the first quarter.  That means we’ve been purchasing at 

$25 billion a week, roughly, up to now.  If we decided to do the whole amount, we’re still cutting 

the rate of purchases roughly in half over the next six months.  If you imagine that we cut the 

purchases to $20 billion a week between now and the next meeting, we’d only have about 

$235 billion left at the next meeting, and then we’d have to say:  Well, do we really want to have 

the taper be so dramatic that we cannot actually do the whole program?  I just think that we have 

to recognize that we’re so far along in this program that it’s extraordinarily likely that we’re 

going to want to complete it.  In that case, I don’t really see the benefit of retaining this very 

small degree of optionality relative to the high probability that we’re actually going to go 

through with this program. 

Last, this is a new point, surprisingly, although Brian did raise it in his comments 

yesterday. When we did implement the tapering language for the Treasury purchase program,, 

we also committed to do the entire $300 billion at the same time.  So there is a risk, and I don’t 

know how big a risk it is—probably a slight risk—that if we don’t take the “up to” language out, 

the market may note the difference:  We committed to the entire amount when we did tapering 

with the Treasury purchase program, and in this case, we’d be committed to tapering but we’d 

keep the “up to” language in. I think that will create unnecessary ambiguity that will create some 

risk. So obviously I’m in favor of taking the “up to” language out.  In terms of the other 

language, I have some sympathy with this idea of being a little bit more vague, but my problem 

with that is, how does the Desk then know what to do.  I think there’s a bit of a tension there.  I 



 

September 22–23, 2009 174 of 212

don’t think there’s that big a problem bringing back the purchase programs.  If the economy 

behaves in a really bad way, I think the market would probably expect it.  I think if we say “by 

the end of the first quarter” that doesn’t really rule out bringing it back if things go adversely. 

On the question of “wide range,” I agree with Governor Kohn.  I think “all available 

tools” is the broadest phrase. “Wide” is less broad.  “Range” is less broad than that.  I think it 

makes sense for us to err on that intermediate step, and maybe we can go to “a range of tools” 

two or three meetings from now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you. President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. Mr. Chairman, before you do your summary, I’d like to put something 

back on the table that really hasn’t been addressed as much as I think it needs to be.  I raised it 

yesterday, and President Lacker raised it today, and that’s this issue of the SFP program and the 

importance it plays; in fact, it will be adding more stimulus to our balance sheet and more 

reserves to the economy.  The Treasury has the authority to make this decision at the end of the 

day, and if this Committee is consciously choosing not to sterilize that and, therefore, increase 

stimulus, then we need to acknowledge that we are choosing to do that rather than accepting it 

passively. It’s not clear whether the discussion about the increase in stimulus around this table 

and the options for providing it have been under the premise that the SFP is going to be there.  

As you suggested yesterday, when you alluded to this and talked about it briefly, it is important 

that this Committee make an active decision to accept that additional stimulus, if that’s what the 

Committee so chooses, or to reject it and sterilize it.  But I would not like that to be just sort of 

skipped over and accepted without a conscious discussion about how we think that fits into our 

broader strategy. That’s my issue, Mr. Chairman. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 175 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Well, let me try to summarize.  First on the 

substance, we’ve all agreed that the intermeeting data were more favorable—that’s a great relief, 

and I think to some extent it validates the approach we took back in March.  If we had known in 

March where we’d be today, I think we would be reasonably relieved about it.  So I think that’s 

all encouraging. That being said, as I mentioned in my go-round comments on the outlook, the 

economy does remain quite weak, certainly quite far from meeting our maximum employment 

objective. And there are costs on the downside—and I’m not talking about an insurance 

argument here; I’m talking about the neutral-risk size of the costs.  I think the downside risks are 

still dangerous, because on the downside lies the possibility of renewed financial crisis, and, of 

course, the marginal cost of higher unemployment—or less employment—is greater when you’re 

starting from such an adverse position. So I don’t think that scaling back stimulus significantly 

at this meeting is warranted.

  Having said that, I see it as a nuanced situation.  I think it’s not right to say that we are 

going full bore and not in the process of exiting.  We have both actively and passively allowed 

the rundown of substantial amounts of our liquidity programs, and my own assumption is that, as 

the early 2010 deadline comes around, we will, in fact, close many, if not most, of those 

programs.  Second, we have ended the Treasury program.  So I think it’s clear—we’ve talked a 

good bit about exit—to the markets and the public that we are in a mode now of thinking about 

the exit and have taken some concrete steps in that direction. 

A second point that’s come up, which I think is an interesting one, is, to put it most 

bluntly, the question of whether completing the $1¼ billion of MBS purchases is a further easing 

or a staying in place.  Because I’ve been focused on the asset side and on the effects on interest 

rates, I guess I would conclude that it’s closer to staying in place than it is to a further easing. 



September 22–23, 2009 176 of 212

First, mortgage rates have been fairly constant throughout this entire program, and I think that 

what we’ll be seeing when we stop the program is probably some backup in mortgage rates, so 

that measure of ease has been constant over the period of the program.  In fact, whether you 

believe in a stock effect or a flow effect, either one would suggest that, if you were to cut back 

your planned purchases, it would cause rates to rise, and it would be a tightening relative to 

expectations. 

Now, the quantitative easing theory is a little bit more ambiguous.  If we’re putting more 

reserves into the system, then arguably that is a further easing.  But I have two observations.  

One is that those effects may be small, and the other is, as Governor Duke mentioned, that it’s 

uncertain to what extent the effects of that are anticipated in the markets already.  So it’s a 

complicated question.  My own feeling is that if we were to adopt something like alternative C 

and actively cut back on our plan today, not only would it be tightening in the sense of pulling 

back on the asset-purchase program, but it also would send a very strong signal that we were 

very close to exit, and I still don’t think we’re there yet.  So I do think that our options really are 

to continue with the program, and one of the key decisions that we have is exactly how to 

describe how we’re going to go forward with the program at this point. 

Now, there’s the other side of the question that President Yellen and Governor Tarullo 

and others mentioned.  If we’re unsatisfied with the situation and we think the federal funds rate 

ought to be minus 4 percent, why aren’t we doing even more?  Here again, I don’t think we 

should rule that out, but I feel some sympathy to what President Evans said, which is that, given 

all the uncertainties we have and the issues about our balance sheet and exit and our uncertainties 

about the effects of these programs, it’s not obvious that we do have a lot of ammunition left 

even on this unconventional dimension.  Having said that, I think we should obviously keep this 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 177 of 212

possibility alive if the situation warrants it, but it’s not clear to me at this point we should be 

doing more either.  So I do support the language in alternative B, but there are a couple of 

decisions that we need to make. 

To get to the most substantive one first, I’m not sure, Governor Tarullo, if I got your vote 

on the “up to” language, but, excluding your vote, I think I have five for keeping “up to,” six for 

dropping it, and four who were split evenly between slightly favored one or the other. Did you 

have a preference? 

MR. TARULLO. Yes. I think it depends for me, ultimately, Mr. Chairman, on what 

other language might change.  Were you to tell me that no other language was going to change 

and I get to do “up to” or not, I would want it out. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. I’m happy to take another straw vote, but personally 

I lean slightly towards taking it out on the grounds of market certainty and on the argument that 

the Vice Chairman made, namely, that by November we will in any case be already up to $1 

trillion, and we won’t have a lot of flexibility to fall short.  But frankly, I’m with President 

Lockhart—I think it’s a pretty close call, and I don’t think it necessarily is a first-order issue, but 

we do need to resolve it. So if it’s okay, I think I’d like to take a straw vote of the full 

Committee including all participants.  President Plosser, is that okay with you? 

MR. PLOSSER. That’s okay, but there are two elements to this. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 

MR. PLOSSER. One is the “up to” and the other is how long we extend it for.  So I’m 

trying to figure out whether we want to treat those separately. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. 

MR. PLOSSER. For some of us that might be dependent. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 178 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So I think if we keep “up to,” again, and we taper, I 

think we ought to have an end date at a minimum.  If we take away the end date, then there’s just 

too much uncertainty involved.  So let’s talk for a moment about the end date.  Brian, how strong 

is the preference of the Desk for the first quarter?  What arguments can you make about first 

quarter versus what I think are the two other options we’ve heard:  One is end of second quarter 

and the other is in the second quarter, the difference being, I guess, that the end of second quarter 

theoretically could encompass a much earlier decline. 

MR. SACK. I think even using the end of first quarter provides a six-month tapering 

period, which is actually pretty long.  The concerns I raised in the briefing were that a longer 

tapering period certainly will require a much steeper drop-off in the pace of purchases in the near 

term.  As policymakers, the risk to be taken into consideration is whether that will actually 

prompt a quicker backup in mortgage rates. 

My main point was that, from a market functioning perspective, I thought Q1 is a 

sufficient tapering period. So I wouldn’t use market functioning as an argument for going all the 

way to Q2. I think that decision would have to be based instead on market effects and policy 

flexibility and things that fall in your domain, not mine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have the following proposed compromise on that.  

President Yellen correctly made an interesting suggestion of replacing “completed” with 

“executed,” and the reason that matters is that unlike Treasuries, MBS take weeks to clear, so if 

we execute by the end of the first quarter, that means the balance sheet effects will probably go 

into the second quarter.  Is that going to be okay?  All right, so let’s take that as given, if we will, 

that we’re going to execute these things by the end of the first quarter.  Then conditional on that, 

can I have a straw vote on whether to keep “up to.”  Those in favor of keeping “up to,” please 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 179 of 212

raise your hand. I see one, two, three, four, five. Those in favor of dropping “up to”? One, two, 

three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.  The preference is to drop “up to.”  That has the 

advantage of being parallel to the Treasury language and creating some more certainty. 

That all being said, I think it’s always clear that we have flexibility.  We have a last 

sentence here that says we’ll be reviewing the timing and purchase of securities, so I don’t think 

we have abandoned flexibility. I for one certainly would be open to adjusting the program if we 

do see significant changes in the outlook in the next few weeks. 

Yes, President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER. Taking out “up to” is a firm commitment to the program.  If we were to 

see some problems in banking markets caused by the expansion of reserves, would we consider 

running off Treasuries, or selling Treasuries, in order to drain reserves?  Is that an element of 

flexibility that remains on the table? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Actually, that’s a good question, and I was going to respond 

to President Plosser’s point. 

MR. LACKER. It’s related to this question as well. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. So I think there are a couple of things going on there.  

First, it’s my expectation that the SFP program will come back after the debt ceiling issue is 

resolved, although, of course, as I said, we shouldn’t count on that definitively.  Second, these 

programs—the reverse repos, the term deposits, these tools that we want to have in place—I 

think we ought to put them into operation on some small scale early, that is, if possible, by the 

end of the year or early next year, just so that we can be assured that they work and the market 

can see that they work. So I would encourage staff to keep that goal in mind.  I think that would 

give us certainly an additional way—and this actually corresponds to about the time that the SFP 



 

September 22–23, 2009 180 of 212

is going to run down around the end of the year—to fine-tune if reserves were becoming a 

concern; of course, we could always sell Treasuries.  

MR. PLOSSER. Excuse me. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. I’m just trying to make sure I understand.  Does that mean that your 

view would be that, in the absence of the return of the SFP program, we would actually use these 

tools to offset, in effect, that increase in stimulus or increase in reserves that’s happening?  Is that 

what I’m hearing you say, or is it something different? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What I’m saying is that, in any event, we ought to start 

these programs on a small scale to assure ourselves that they work.  If the SFP program doesn’t 

come back, then I agree that, as you said, we ought to actively decide about how much reserves 

we want in the system. 

I think President Lacker raised the possibility that the high level of reserves was actually 

causing some kind of dysfunction or problem.  I’ll tell you my bias:  $185 billion in reserves 

from a macro stimulus point of view is not that big a deal.  It might be a bigger deal in terms of 

market function or banking function.  In that case, there would be a good reason to explain to the 

markets why we’re doing this operation without necessarily changing the overall intent or the 

thrust of our policy. So, yes, we then could use one of several methods if the Committee decided 

to offset some of that. 

MR. PLOSSER. I guess I’m being difficult, but I’m worried about the perception of the 

marketplace, namely, that we are passively accepting an increase of $185 billion of reserves 

without an active decision by this Committee to do so.  If we do anticipate that SFP comes back, 

in some ways that eases our exit strategies, and I understand why that may, in fact, be desirable.  



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 181 of 212

But given the political interaction between debt ceilings and other things, do we want it to go 

away or do we want it to come back?  Those are knotty, little questions about how then we 

manage these extra reserves in terms of this Committee’s view of policy going forward. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’ll have the tools to manage it.  As for market 

expectations, because of our communication, for better or worse, I think expectations are mostly 

formed around the size of the purchase programs and not the size of the reserves in the banking 

system.  Because there’s no way to keep the purchase programs and reduce the reserves, we’re 

effectively locked into that. 

There were a couple of other things that I might as well ask about.  There was the 

question of “wide range” versus not having “wide range,” and I guess the argument is it’s 

somewhat less jarring to go to a “wide range,” but again, I don’t think this is a first-order issue. 

Would anyone like to comment on that before I ask for a straw vote?  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. I thought Vice Chairman Dudley laid it out well, and I hadn’t 

thought of it so cleanly, but there are essentially three degrees of emphasis here.  One is the old 

language, I gather, which would have been “all available tools,” then “wide range” is sort of the 

middle ground, and “range” is the weakest.  Is that the way you thought of it?  So we’re actually 

moving from “all available tools” to something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You raised it. I mean, is that how you thought of it? 

MR. KOHN. Yes. I thought that backing away from “all available tools” would be seen 

as a consequential step in that the Committee, as the Chairman said, was at least putting the exit 

strategy into place, even though it wasn’t executing it, so I guess I have a mild preference for 

including “wide.” 



 

 

 

 

September 22–23, 2009 182 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Any other comments on “wide”? 

MR. LACKER. Well, there’s “narrow range,” and “wide” is in between “narrow” and— 

[laughter] 

MR. PLOSSER. Or we could say “broad range,” which is in between— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right.  [Laughter]  I’m putting an end to this.  Let me 

ask how many are in favor of putting in “wide.” One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, 

nine, ten. Just for the record, how many are against it?  One, two, three. Okay. So let’s include 

“wide.” I think those are the major decisions. 

I will comment on the first paragraph.  We had some views on both sides, that is, whether 

it was too cheery or not cheery enough, whether it was certain enough or uncertain enough.  I’m 

at a little bit of a loss as to where to go with it.  I felt the comments were pretty balanced around 

where we were, but if anyone else would like to address that.  Would you like to address that, 

Governor Tarullo? 

MR. TARULLO. Yes, but I don’t get the sense that anybody else has any appetite for it, 

so I don’t want to take people’s time up.  After “Although economic activity is likely to remain 

weak for a time,” I would have inserted, “and there remains considerable uncertainty as to future 

economic performance, the Committee anticipates that…” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, I understand. I think the “likely to remain weak” 

probably conveys a lot of your uncertainty. 

MR. TARULLO. It’s the same point, I think, that you made before, which is that there is 

language which has been in there for a while, but now we have cheered up the rest of the 

paragraph. Just as in paragraph 3, the language in the last sentence has been in there for a while, 



 

September 22–23, 2009 183 of 212

but we’ve firmed up the rest of the paragraph.  That’s why I was hoping for at least mildly 

offsetting phraseology changes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER. I would just comment that we do have this phrase that household 

spending will be “constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower housing 

wealth, and tight credit.” So we have some caveats in there about weaknesses that are inherent 

in the economy already in this paragraph. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. If we wanted to fine-tune, one other suggestion—and I 

promise this is the last thing—in the sentence beginning “businesses are still cutting back,” there 

is the part about “slower pace.”  We could go back to the August language, which says, 

“Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment and staffing, but they are continuing to 

make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales.”  So it would be the 

same sentence as last time, and we would eliminate one element of cheeriness from the 

description. Is there any interest in that? 

MR. TARULLO: Even I’m not interested in that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. I think we, I hope, have executed effective 

directive wording. 

MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I have some suggested wording for that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. 

MR. MADIGAN. But before we get to that, could I ask about paragraph 2? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Sure. 

MR. MADIGAN. Are we taking that as it is here or not? 



 

September 22–23, 2009 184 of 212

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We could reverse the order.  The way it’s written, President 

Plosser, it’s intended to say that these are both necessary conditions, that they’re both part of the 

model. One version we had earlier started off by saying “longer-term inflation expectations are 

stable, and substantial resource slack is likely to continue dampening cost pressures.  Therefore, 

the Committee. . . .”  I don’t think that’s any better from your perspective. 

MR. PLOSSER. No, for my purposes, I was trying to get some more conditionality into 

it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 

MR. PLOSSER. The degree to which slack will damp pressures is conditional on these 

anchored expectations, and that’s the message I was trying to instill by reversing the order. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What we’ve done, of course, is added inflationary 

expectations to the description. 

MR. PLOSSER. I acknowledged that was a step forward.  I thought that was great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Anything else?   All right, Brian, would you like to read the 

statement? 

MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could refer everybody to page 3 of my 

briefing materials and make sure that everybody agrees on what’s being changed.  No change to 

paragraph 1. No change to paragraph 2. In paragraph 3:  inclusion of the word “wide;” several 

lines down, deletion of the phrase “up to;” a few more lines down, substitution of the word 

“executed” for “completed” just before the bracket, and inclusion of the phrase “by the end of 

the first quarter.” No other changes, I believe, to the statement. 

MR. EVANS. Can I ask just one question? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 185 of 212

MR. EVANS. By using the word “execute” in the same sentence, we’re going to refer to 

“executed” for the MBS but “completed” for Treasuries.  Any— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think the market people will figure out the difference, 

right? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Because it’s settlement issues. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We’re using the language that’s technically correct.  Brian, 

is that right? Do you have any problem with this? 

MR. SACK. No, I don’t have a problem.  I don’t think it’s a massive source of confusion 

if it says “completed,” but I have no problem with “executed” either. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. 

MR. MADIGAN. Mr. Chairman, on the directive. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. 

MR. MADIGAN. I’m on page 8 of my handout, directive 4, alternative B.  To reflect the 

use of the word “execute” in the statement, in the middle of the paragraph I’d suggest that we 

break the sentence beginning “the Desk is expected” into two sentences so that the first sentence 

would end at “after the end of October.”  That is, “The Desk is expected to complete purchases 

of about $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of October,” period.  “It is 

also expected to execute purchases of up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt and 

about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter.”  That applies “execute” to 

both debt and MBS, but I don’t think that’s a problem. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay, and let me just remind everybody that we’re 

retaining “up to” for the agency debt. I think the sense of the Committee, Brian, is that we’ll 

continue to slow that down. We may well not want to go to the full amount of that category. 



 

 

September 22–23, 2009 186 of 212

All right. Any other comments?  Matt, can you call the roll? 

MR. LUECKE. Yes. This vote will encompass alternative B with the changes described 

by Brian Madigan, as well as directive B, also with the changes described by Brian Madigan. 

Chairman Bernanke  Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 
Governor Duke Yes 
President Evans Yes 
Governor Kohn Yes 
President Lacker Yes 
President Lockhart Yes 
Governor Tarullo Yes 
Governor Warsh Yes 
President Yellen  Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much.  Matt, do you know if the lunch is 

ready at 12:30? 

MR. LUECKE. The lunch is ready now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will be heading up to lunch for our colleague Gary 

Stern. As I said yesterday, in December we’ll have a presentation on inflation dynamics.  Our 

next meeting is November 3 and 4.  With nothing else, the meeting is adjourned. 

END OF MEETING 




