











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, November 2-3, 2010


 

 

 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

November 2–3, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 

Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 2, 2010, 

at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, November 3, 2010, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were 

the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Sandra Pianalto 

Sarah Bloom Raskin 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo  

Kevin Warsh 

Janet L. Yellen 

Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and 

Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Richmond and Atlanta, respectively 

John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 

Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist  

David J. Stockton, Economist 

James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, 

Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 

November 2–3, 2010 1 of 238



 

 

 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of 

Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter and Andrew T. Levin, Senior Associate Directors, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael Leahy, Senior Associate Director, 

Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David Reifschneider, Senior 

Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Daniel M. Covitz and David E. Lebow, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, 

Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 

Mark A. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 

Sarah G. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John C. Williams, 

Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, Chicago, and 

San Francisco, respectively 

David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, 

respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

November 2–3, 2010 2 of 238



 

 

 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

November 2–3, 2010 

November 2—Afternoon Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Governor Raskin attended the 

videoconference, but this is her first in-person, live, face-to-face FOMC meeting, so I’d like to 

welcome her.  Also, Janet has been to a few meetings [laughter] but not in her current capacity as 

Vice Chair of the Board.  Congratulations, Janet.  And thanks, also, to First Vice President John 

Moore, who will be representing San Francisco today. 

We have no new information on the nomination of Peter Diamond to be a member of the 

Board of Governors.  As you’ll recall, his qualifications to serve had been questioned.  He has 

since taken steps to remedy that.  [Laughter]  It’s good work, but whether it will be sufficient I 

don’t know.  Still, we’re hopeful that he will be reviewed and confirmed.  I have spoken to him, 

and he remains as committed to joining the Board as he was prior to the announcement of his 

Nobel Prize. 

The first item today is an unusual one.  I hope to talk a bit about our external 

communications, and I would like to limit this discussion to 45 minutes or so.  I mentioned at the 

videoconference three issues that had been of concern, not just to me but also to a number of 

people around the table who had spoken to me about it.  The first was leaks to the press, and 

particularly some leaks that involved characterizations of other people’s views at the meeting, 

confidential materials, and the like.  We circulated the Program for Security of FOMC 

Information to remind folks about the rules.  The second issue, which arose a bit later, was 

prompted by a wire story that raised concerns about inappropriate access to information by 

outsiders other than the media, including consultants, market people, and so on.  We obviously 

have important reasons to talk to people like that, and, certainly, there’s some basis for 

November 2–3, 2010 3 of 238



 

 

 

exchanging ideas.  But, clearly, there’s also the possibility that some of these folks could profit 

from information gained in talking to Federal Reserve principals or staff, and I think there’s 

considerable risk to us if it turns out that someone improperly used that information.  I think we 

would all agree that it’s important to manage these two matters appropriately, and I’d like to 

propose that we create a small subcommittee, consisting of Presidents and Governors, to look at 

these issues, to talk to people, and to try to come up with some guidelines to help us address 

them.  Janet Yellen has agreed to chair the subcommittee. 

The third issue I mentioned at the videoconference is a little more squishy—it may be 

more a matter of preference and operating procedure than security per se.  It’s the tendency for 

people to take very strong, very inflexible positions on policy matters prior to the meetings at 

which those decisions will be made.  It’s a longstanding tradition at the FOMC to try to maintain 

at least some plausible deniability in order to have a reason for a meeting—otherwise, we could 

just do notation votes and save all the travel expenses.  Now, this may or may not be a fixable 

issue.  It may be a function of the difficult circumstances that we are currently involved in.  But I 

wanted to put that on the table as well.  We circulated Michelle’s memo describing the protocol 

for public statements, which is given to all new members of the FOMC.  I’d be interested in your 

views on the substance as well as on whether it would make sense to have Janet’s subcommittee 

look at this issue as well, perhaps as a project that’s separate from the first two.  Again, it’s 

possible that nothing much can be done about it, but maybe we could come together and find 

some basis for a more cooperative solution than what we currently have. 

As I said, I don’t want to spend too much of the Committee’s time on these issues—no 

more than 45 minutes or so—and I don’t want to do a full go-round, as there’s no need for that.  

But I certainly would be happy to have some comments on the issues, on the subcommittee, on 

November 2–3, 2010 4 of 238



 

 

 

the charge of the subcommittee, or anything else people would like to talk about.  Janet, did you 

want to introduce that? 

MS. YELLEN.  Yes.  Thanks, Ben.  Let me just say that I share your concerns.  I think 

we’ve come in for a lot of criticism of our external communications—we’re getting low grades, 

and they’re not entirely undeserved.  I personally see them as damaging our credibility and our 

reputation at a time when the institution is under enormous scrutiny, and we can ill afford it. 

I think the first issue that you raised on communication should be a no-brainer.  We’re 

obliged to maintain the confidentiality of FOMC information—period, full stop.  And that 

includes documents that we look at in the FOMC and information on who said what.  It’s 

obvious that these guidelines have been breached.  I also know from personal experience over 

the years that it’s easy for this to happen—it can happen pretty innocently when an experienced 

reporter lures one into revealing things that end up crossing the line.  But I’m assuming it should 

be completely noncontroversial that we all need to be more careful and to abide by the Program 

for Security of FOMC Information.  So I think it’s not going to take long for our subcommittee 

to look at that—at least I hope not. 

The second issue you raised is more subtle, and it is an important one for the 

subcommittee to take up:  How do we ensure that our conversations with market participants and 

outside consultants don’t create the impression, and even the reality, that well-connected 

outsiders have access to inside information?  I myself sometimes talk to market participants, and 

I do value those discussions, but I think we are placing ourselves at risk.  I think the guidelines 

that Michelle prepared and circulated are a terrific starting point, but maybe we need to go 

further, and I look forward to hearing your ideas on this. 

November 2–3, 2010 5 of 238



 

 

 

Regarding the third issue—voicing policy views prior to meetings—I believe it’s a 

long-standing tradition of the Committee to refrain from publicly articulating firm positions on 

the stance that a member is going to take on future monetary policy moves.  In some ways, I 

think following this tradition was easier and more straightforward when we were doing 

conventional policy.  We just had to be aware that we should refrain from speculating about 

future moves on the federal funds rate or indicating any firm view of our own.  I recognize that, 

now that we’ve hit the zero bound, the options are a lot more complicated, so it seems natural to 

weigh in on what kinds of tactics we could or couldn’t support.  But, frankly, I think many of the 

comments we’ve made are destructive of collegiality and of the Committee process—they do 

come close to feeling like a situation where we walk into the room having said, in effect, that it 

doesn’t matter what arguments or evidence one of us around the table musters, because our 

minds are made up. 

I think it does more than undermine collegiality.  I think we’ve been generating a great 

deal of noise and market volatility.  That’s something we’ve consciously tried to avoid in the 

past.  It’s not that we’re not entitled to independent views—I think we absolutely are, and we 

have a right to express them.  I’ve always been a firm believer in the notion that it’s important 

for us to walk in here with independent views, because it helps us avoid groupthink, which is a 

huge danger, and because it enriches the debate.  But when the Committee actually makes a 

policy decision, I feel that, when we make public remarks, we all have an obligation to state 

clearly what the policy is and what the rationale for it is, even if we might think or want to say 

individually that we have some qualms about it or some disagreement with it. 

One way to strengthen the voice of the Committee that we’ve discussed a bit would be 

for the Chairman to speak about policy more frequently and, perhaps, at critical moments, such 

November 2–3, 2010 6 of 238



 

 

 

as when we’ve made key policy decisions.  This could occur through background press briefings, 

as happened several times during the crisis, or at periodic on-the-record press conferences.  

During our videoconference, I noted that a number of you supported approaches along those 

lines, and such approaches are getting some thought around here.  At any rate, I look forward to 

talking to all of you as we move forward, and I hope we can develop some guidelines we can 

agree to live by. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, may I make a comment? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  As you know, I feel very strongly about this issue.  In 1977 and 1978, 

President Carter had a group of three that wrote all of his decision memoranda—Jeff Garten, a 

supervisor, and I.  By the time we wrote them and got them to him, which was a day after the 

economic policy group meetings, everything had been leaked to the press.  It was leaked by 

either principals or staff.  The reason for the leaks was either that they opposed the view or, 

frankly, that they just wanted attention—they wanted to be big deals.  Now, there were a lot of 

problems with the Carter Administration, but this problem, in particular, was incredibly 

corrosive and divisive.  What I saw firsthand as the Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury 

was that it led to principals literally hating each other at the end of the process. 

That is not what this institution is all about.  I just want to underscore how divisive and 

dangerous it can be in undermining the mission of a great institution like this.  I hope that 

everybody in this room, whether sitting in the back rows or as principals at the table, is most 

mindful that this is a precious institution.  It is unique in Washington.  We can’t undermine it by 

this kind of behavior. 

November 2–3, 2010 7 of 238



 

 

 

On the second issue of people that have close relationships with market participants, I 

think of it as akin to insider trading.  There are people who do profit.  There is one former 

Governor who recently visited my Bank when I was gone and who told the staff that the Reserve 

Bank Presidents are of no consequence at all to monetary policy, that their views are not 

considered, and that this individual—I’ll let you guess who it is—was, in essence, the 18th or 

19th member, depending on how many we have, of the FOMC, and the equivalent of a voting 

member.  He makes money off of us when he talks and sells.  If we can’t solve this, then I think 

we should seriously look at some kind of firm legal strictures that are equivalent to the 

prosecution of insider trading.  If people make money off inside knowledge about our decisions, 

it’s no different from people who make money off inside information trading securities.  In fact, I 

think it’s a more grievous abuse. 

On the issue of speaking for others, here’s exhibit A:  In Fed We Trust.  This was a 

disaster.  Whoever spoke to this writer, David Wessel, was duped by the trick that Michelle 

carefully warns against and that you refer to in your excellent memo.  I got a call from him a 

couple of months later saying, “I understand that you changed your vote, that you walked down 

the hall, that you came back and talked to the Chairman, and that the Chairman announced the 

decision.”  You’ll remember that was when I dissented and then decided that I just didn’t feel 

that was an appropriate thing to do and that it would undermine the cohesion of the group.  He 

knew more about what I had said than I did, and I had said it.  So somebody who was in this 

room reported, and maybe that person isn’t in this room any longer.  This goes back to the point I 

was trying to make with the Carter experience:  “Pride goeth before a fall.”  You may get 

attention at the time by talking to these people, but all you do is create divisive forces within the 

Committee. 

November 2–3, 2010 8 of 238



 

 

 

On the third matter, I think Janet made a very, very good point.  I think we have to be 

careful to get the right balance—not to muzzle people, and, at the same time, because we’re no 

longer dealing with the fed funds rate, to be very careful not to signal specific levels of, say, 

asset purchases or sales.  We create market expectations that way.  It gets discounted in the 

market.  We begin to become fearful of disappointing markets, even though I don’t believe this 

Committee should ever be fearful of disappointing markets.  And we certainly shouldn’t think in 

short-term consequences.  We are paid to think long-term about the health of our economy.  But 

I think it could be a worthwhile exercise. 

I feel most strongly about the first two.  And, Mr. Chairman, I ask you to be very firm on 

these issues.  There’s no excuse for insider trading—it’s a criminal offense, and it should not 

occur.  In terms of speaking to others, or leaking materials from this room, it will do nothing but 

wreak havoc with this institution.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One of the difficult things behind all three of 

these, I think, is that when we speak with individuals off the record, no one knows exactly what 

was said.  We also get into this issue of signaling with what is done off the record, and that binds 

us and puts us all in an awkward position going forward. 

I think that if we don’t address that issue, the other issues will still stay confusing.  For 

example, by asking different people questions off the record, they get what they think is a signal.  

And that puts others in the position of having to speak on the record to modify things and say, 

“Well, that may not actually be the case,” and so forth.  So I think that’s a major issue to 

consider.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody else? 

November 2–3, 2010 9 of 238



 

 

 

MR. HOENIG.  Oh, I have one other thing I was going to say.  On the second issue you 

raised, I think President Fisher was referring to the idea that some people advertise themselves as 

in a consultancy role to the Fed, and that’s an issue that’s becoming more predominant.  I had 

correspondence with, I think, the same individual that President Fisher did, and he also asserted 

that he was the 19th or 18th member of the FOMC, very important, and so on and so forth.  So 

how we put strictures on those from whom we get information that we need is a very important 

consideration as well. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I completely support what’s 

been expressed here.  I talked about it a little bit at the last meeting, in fact.  I think there’s one 

other issue that could be explored in a bit more detail.  That issue is not what happened before 

the meeting, but what happens after the meeting in terms of pulling together behind what the 

FOMC’s decision is, so that, if someone doesn’t agree with the FOMC decision, it’s not re-

litigated endlessly in the press afterwards.  Also, if there are disagreements—and I believe that 

it’s completely legitimate to have disagreements—they are discussed in a way that doesn’t 

impugn the motives or intelligence of the people who made the decision in an affirmative way.  I 

think that’s extremely important.  I think people need to be able to express their views, but, at the 

end of the day, it’s about the Committee and about the Federal Reserve System, it’s not about 

any individual.  So, once decisions are made, I think people should pull together and support 

them to the degree that they can. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, can I ask a question?  We talked about the blackout period 

being before the meeting.  I always assumed the blackout period also ran after the meeting.  Can 

we have some clarity on that? 

November 2–3, 2010 10 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, it runs till Friday of the same week. 

MR. FISHER.  Okay.  I don’t know if it’s in your memo, Michelle, but it runs afterwards, 

and I think that’s worth observing. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  President Kocherlakota, I saw you first. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m new, so I hesitate to speak on 

this, but I think one thing we want to be careful about regarding the third issue is that the press 

does tend to exaggerate statements.  They’re always trying to read who’s on what side, and they 

play that game.  Nonetheless, especially when we face such difficult issues as we face now, I 

think it is useful to hear reasonable dialogue and discussion about the matters confronting the 

Committee.  In your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, you laid out certain sets of tools that 

are available, and, in my view, it has been good to have various members of the Committee 

speak on it.  President Dudley spoke on it; I’ve spoken on it; President Rosengren and President 

Evans have spoken on it.  I actually learned from reading these speeches, and I assume that the 

general public also learns something.  So I think there is a value to that, and we don’t want to kill 

all of that just because some blog in the Wall Street Journal is counting out who’s on what side. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we all agree that diversity of opinion is very 

important and that the public needs to know what arguments are being made.  I think the issue 

really is a question of style and tone and those sorts of things.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  First, I just wanted to echo the comment about speaking about specific 

levels or amounts and creating expectations that we then feel compelled to meet; I think 

whatever policy agreement we make ought to cover that. 

On the third issue, I think it’s hard to put into a guideline, but it’s thinking about what it 

is we’re really trying to do.  I’ve been one of the most vocal over the last two meetings on the 

November 2–3, 2010 11 of 238



 

 

 

importance of communicating what our framework is and how we’re thinking about it.  During 

this intermeeting period, I think it has been explained in probably 16 different ways.  If we come 

to an agreement that you, Mr. Chairman, are going to go out and answer the questions and fill in 

the holes, then we should respect that in the same way that we respect some of our other official 

communications.  I think having one explanation out there would be helpful.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Anyone else?  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question?  Vice Chairman Yellen— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s Governor Yellen. 

MR. EVANS.  Governor Yellen.  Oh, in this Committee— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Your Highness” will be fine.  [Laughter] 

MS. YELLEN.  Good suggestion. 

MR. EVANS.  Regarding your subcommittee, I think it would be useful to refresh our 

understanding of the blackout period.  I understand that it goes until Friday—it might have even 

gone through the weekend originally—but I think that many of us have run afoul of Friday 

because of things like conferences.  For example, I have the greatest respect for former Governor 

Kohn, but even he could run afoul of this because of some speech that he was asked to give in 

Europe.  So that would be one topic for your committee—just refreshing that understanding and 

maybe having a light tap on the wrist for certain types of things like that. 

Here’s another issue.  To the extent that we’re clearer on what our objectives are and on 

the framework that we’re using, a lot of these discussions become less important or newsworthy, 

so that’s something to consider. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  What I’d like to propose, Janet, is that you choose 

some people for your subcommittee—and those who are interested in serving should let Janet 

November 2–3, 2010 12 of 238



 

 

 

know.  Then I’d like to propose that your subcommittee look at the first two items for sure and 

think about what additional steps or guidelines we might want so that we make sure that we are 

not inappropriately releasing information to anybody who is not entitled to it. 

On the third matter, I’ll be happy to listen if anyone has further thoughts.  Janet, perhaps 

you and the subcommittee could have some conversations with people around the table on the 

general issue of our collective communication—whether there should be guidelines of some sort, 

for example.  Again, I want to be very careful to say that this is not about content—this is about 

timing and style and those sorts of things.  If there seems to be some kind of consensus, then 

maybe we can formalize that into a memo.  If there clearly is not, then perhaps you could just 

report that, and we will just leave it at that.  Thank you. 

On the matter of communication, let me just say a word about the issue that Governor 

Yellen raised about my communication.  At the videoconference, some interest was expressed in 

my giving more on-the-record interviews, press conferences, and so on, and I have been 

interested in doing that for some time.  I think I mentioned to a few of you that we entertained 

very seriously the possibility of doing a briefing for attribution tomorrow afternoon after the 

meeting.  We’ve had some qualms about that.  Michelle Smith has been advising me on this.  

We’re a bit concerned that what will amount to an unannounced press conference on a day that is 

already somewhat fraught would contribute to market volatility.  At worst, I could end up 

unintentionally distorting the message of the Committee, which, of course, is summarized by the 

statement.  So, if I may, for tomorrow I’m going to stay in the mode of staying off the record.  I 

do have tentative plans to put out an op-ed in a day or two that will describe in very general 

terms what we are doing and what our strategy is, and I’ll be attending President Lockhart’s 

meeting at Jekyll Island this weekend, which will be also an opportunity to comment. 

November 2–3, 2010 13 of 238



 

 

 

But more substantively, I do think that I need to give press conferences that are on the 

record, on camera, periodically, and I propose to start doing that with the release of the 

projections from this meeting, which will be in three weeks.  Many other central banks do 

something similar.  It would provide an opportunity to describe a piece of news—the outlook of 

the Committee—and relate that to our policy actions and other issues. 

So that’s our current thinking.  If everyone’s okay with that strategy, there’s one other 

matter that relates to it.  We already have to release the minutes a day early because of the 

Thanksgiving holiday, and I think I would like to do this press conference before the minutes 

come out so that I wouldn’t have to be interpreting the minutes.  That means that the Survey of 

Economic Projections would have to be released two days before the normal time.  I don’t know 

if this would require any formalities, but what I’d like to do is break up those two components 

and approve them separately, so that the SEP can go out, say, on Monday, and then the minutes 

can go out as planned on Tuesday, and on Monday or on Tuesday morning I could have this 

press conference.  That would be my proposal.  I see people nodding.  Is there any concern? 

MR. LACKER.  Summary first, press conference, then minutes? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  SEP on the 22nd, press conference with its release. 

MR. LACKER.  With the release. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With the release of the SEP, and then minutes the next day.  

Okay? 

MR. LACKER.  Sounds good. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So the only thing that requires from the Committee is that 

we approve the SEP a day earlier, but the schedule for the minutes would be the same as usual. 

November 2–3, 2010 14 of 238



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  As you think about starting to do this, have you thought about what the 

regular interval might be?  Do you envision doing this at about that length of time between the 

meeting and the minutes?  Is it going to be a regular thing, or what were you thinking? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, at the moment I think we’re committing only to twice a 

year.  In other words, it’s only twice a year that the projections come out and I don’t have a 

Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.  So then, maybe based on what happens in three weeks, we 

might want to have a further discussion around the table about whether additional press 

conferences would be appropriate. 

MR. PLOSSER.  So basically what you’re saying is that right now you’re thinking about 

doing it the four times a year when the SEPs come out? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, maybe only twice a year on those times when I don’t 

have congressional testimony associated with it. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’ve got it.  I see what you’re saying, right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One thing I will not do without further consultation with the 

Committee is hold a press conference right after an FOMC meeting.  I think that will require 

some discussion, because we would have to figure out how comfortable we are and how we 

would structure it and so on. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I was just asking how you were thinking about the regularity of this, 

and you answered my question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, would you like to say something? 

MS. SMITH.  Right.  I just wanted to remind people that you pull these projections 

together four times a year.  In the winter and in the summer, the Chairman goes and presents the 

November 2–3, 2010 15 of 238



 

 

 

Monetary Policy Report to the Congress with these projections.  So the press conferences would 

be in the fall and the spring. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s all we have planned so far, but I think the first time 

will be a big step, and we’ll see where it goes from there.  Thank you very much for this 

conversation.  I’m glad we can have a frank discussion of what are somewhat delicate matters. 

Let’s now turn to the business of the meeting and go to the briefing on financial 

developments, and I’ll call on Brian Sack. 

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial market developments over 

the past several months have been dominated by mounting expectations that the 

Federal Reserve would launch a new asset-purchase program.  Those expectations 

have prompted a set of asset price changes that have made financial conditions more 

supportive of economic growth. 

 

 

 

Nominal Treasury yields generally moved lower since the last FOMC meeting, 

but the trends over this period are much more pronounced if one focuses on the 

components of those yields.  In particular, as shown in the upper left panel, TIPS 

yields declined sharply since the last FOMC meeting, bringing the five-year measure 

well into negative territory.  In contrast, break-even inflation rates, shown in the 

upper right panel, moved significantly higher, reversing much of the decline that had 

taken place since the spring.  On balance, as summarized in the middle left panel, the 

real yield fell about 50 basis points at the five-year maturity, while the break-even 

inflation rate rose nearly 30 basis points.  A similar pattern was evident at the 10-year 

maturity point.  

These changes appeared to be driven primarily by expectations that the Federal 

Reserve will initiate an asset-purchase program to expand its balance sheet further.  

As can be seen in the middle right panel, the Desk’s survey of primary dealers places 

the probability of balance sheet expansion at this meeting at around 90 percent.  The 

probability of such an action by year-end has been increasing since June, but it 

ramped up notably over this intermeeting period in response to the September FOMC 

statement and the active discussion of this issue in communications by individual 

FOMC members.  The effects of those expectations on Treasury yields and broader 

financial conditions appeared consistent with a portfolio-balance channel. 

At the same time that expectations of asset purchases were building, the expected 

timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate was being pushed further into the 

future.  As shown in the bottom left panel, market participants now see the first rate 

hike as most likely occurring around mid-2012—a dramatic shift from the 

                                                 
1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

November 2–3, 2010 16 of 238



 

 

 

expectations in place earlier this year.  Moreover, market participants appear to have 

become increasingly confident in this assessment.  As shown in the bottom right 

panel, the implied volatility of outcomes for short-term interest rates over the next 

12 months has collapsed to very low levels. 

 

 

 

 

 

The val

 

Other asset prices have been influenced by the policy-induced low-rate 

environment.  Corporate bond yields moved down by more than the decline in 

Treasury yields, causing corporate yield spreads to narrow further over the 

intermeeting period, as shown in the upper left panel of the second exhibit.  

Moreover, corporate bond issuance has surged for both investment-grade and high- 

yield securities, indicating that corporations continue to take advantage of the low-

rate environment. 

Equity prices, shown to the right, advanced briskly, with the S&P index up about 

4 percent over the intermeeting period and up about 13 percent from its trough in late 

August.  These gains were driven to a large degree by the downward shift in the risk-

free returns available to investors, which may have encouraged some investors to 

move into riskier assets.  In addition, both equity and corporate bond markets 

benefited from stronger-than-expected corporate earnings for the third quarter. 

The increase in equity prices was even more pronounced in emerging-market 

economies.  Capital poured into the financial markets in those economies, given the 

more robust recovery that they are experiencing and the low yields in the United 

States and other advanced economies.  In response, equity prices in those markets 

gained sharply, with the MSCI Emerging Markets Index up about 6 percent since the 

last FOMC meeting. 

The shift in prospective asset returns in the United States relative to those in the 

rest of the world also put downward pressure on the value of the dollar.  As shown in 

the middle left panel, the DXY dollar index fell about 5 percent over the intermeeting 

period, continuing the general trend observed since the second quarter. 

ue of the dollar has been a topic of intense focus in the international 

community, with some observers arguing that an asset-purchase program by the 

Federal Reserve may have a disproportionately large effect on the currency and hence 

be detrimental to growth abroad.  However, the decline in the dollar has been 

consistent with the shift in relative yields and inflation expectations observed in 

recent months.  Moreover, conditions in foreign exchange markets remain liquid and 

orderly, and the market is not pricing in an unusual risk of a sharp dollar decline 

going forward, as shown by the risk reversal pricing to the right. 

The bottom left panel focuses on the recent behavior of financial institutions.  

Equity prices for the financial sector as a whole were little changed over the 

intermeeting period.  However, investors became increasingly concerned in recent 

weeks about problems in the securitization process for residential mortgages.  These 

problems could allow holders of mortgage-backed securities to force financial 

November 2–3, 2010 17 of 238



 

 

 

institutions that originated mortgages or sponsored the securities to buy back 

nonperforming mortgages.  In addition, issues surfaced surrounding the processing of 

mortgage foreclosures by financial institutions, potentially causing delays in 

foreclosure efforts.  These concerns weighed on the equity prices of some large 

financial institutions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The market for mortgage-backed securities has not been significantly affected by 

these developments.  In the agency MBS market, investors are insulated from such 

issues by the guarantee provided by the GSEs.  In the private-label MBS market, 

there has not been a significant impact on prices, as suggested by the indexes shown 

in the bottom right panel, although trading activity has reportedly diminished some in 

light of the greater uncertainty associated with these developments. 

Your final exhibit reviews recent changes to the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 

and discusses the views of market participants on prospective changes going forward.  

The upper left panel shows the distribution of our purchases of Treasury securities to 

date under the policy of reinvesting the principal payments from our holdings of 

agency debt and agency MBS.  As planned, the purchases have been concentrated in 

Treasury securities with remaining maturities between 2 and 10 years, and the 

average duration of purchases so far has been about 5½ years.  To date, we have 

purchased $65 billion of securities, and the operations have been met with strong 

participation by primary dealers. 

The duration of these purchases roughly matches the average duration of our 

existing Treasury holdings, shown by the dark blue line to the right.  Thus, our 

reinvestment policy has left this measure about unchanged.  Note, however, that the 

duration of our Treasury holdings exceeds that of our agency debt and MBS holdings.  

Thus, as the allocation of the portfolio swings towards Treasuries, the average 

duration of the SOMA portfolio as a whole will rise. 

Of course, the focus of market participants has not been just on the reinvestment 

policy, but on the possibility of an expansion of the SOMA portfolio.  As noted 

earlier, the market is placing high odds on an expansion being announced at this 

meeting.  Our recent survey of primary dealers and buy-side investors attempted to 

measure the expected size and structure of a purchase program should the FOMC 

decide to announce one. 

As reported in the middle left panel, about two-thirds of the respondents expected 

the FOMC to announce a program of about $500 billion of purchases of Treasury 

securities over the next six months, with the FOMC retaining the flexibility to change 

the total size of purchases as needed.  About one-third of the respondents instead 

expected a more incremental approach, in which the FOMC would announce only the 

purchases to be conducted over the next intermeeting period or so, with a size of 

around $100 billion.  No respondents expected an announcement of even larger 

purchase sizes than these two options. 

November 2–3, 2010 18 of 238



 

 

 

The median response from the survey indicated that purchases were expected to 

cumulate eventually to levels around $1 trillion.  The expected total size of purchases 

did not vary much with the expected structure of the program. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The survey also asked about how the 10-year yield would react to various 

announcements about the size of asset purchases over the next six months.  As shown 

to the right, respondents saw considerable market effects from asset purchases.  An 

announcement of a $500 billion program was expected to push down the 10-year 

Treasury yield by 5 to 10 basis points.  This response is modest because expectations 

for a sizable program have already been established.  Indeed, the survey results 

suggest that the Treasury yield has already fallen sharply in anticipation of the asset 

purchases.  This can be seen by the 30 basis point increase in the yield that would be 

expected if the FOMC announced no purchases. 

Together, these readings suggest that respondents attributed 35 to 40 basis points 

of movement in the 10-year Treasury yield to a $500 billion shift in the balance sheet.  

The effect on the real interest rate was seen as even more pronounced. 

This view on the effectiveness of purchases was widespread across primary 

dealers and buy-side investors.  Thus, there seems to be little disagreement among 

investors with the notion that changes in the balance sheet affect financial conditions.  

However, there is considerable debate among market participants on the extent to 

which such changes ultimately affect economic activity—an issue that was not 

addressed in our survey. 

Your last two panels present indicators related to some of the perceived risks 

around an asset-purchase program. 

Some market participants have questioned whether additional balance sheet 

expansion could present difficulties for a future exit from policy accommodation.  

One relevant measure in that regard is the expected volatility of long-term interest 

rates.  If market participants have considerable concerns about our ability to exit from 

an expanded balance sheet, then one might expect to see the market price in greater 

volatility of long-term interest rates beginning several years ahead.  As shown in the 

bottom left panel, the volatility of the 10-year rate beginning three years ahead 

implied by swaption prices has instead moved lower in recent months and is close to 

the middle of its historical range. 

Another concern might be that the balance sheet expansion could dislodge 

inflation expectations, perhaps because of concerns about the ability to exit.  As noted 

earlier, break-even inflation rates have moved up sharply over the intermeeting 

period.  This increase showed through strongly to the five-year, five-year forward rate 

that is often used to gauge the Federal Reserve’s credibility for keeping inflation low 

and stable over the longer run.  As shown in the bottom right panel, this measure has 

moved into the upper half of its historical range.  However, we interpret the repricing 

November 2–3, 2010 19 of 238



 

 

 

to date as consistent with the view that the FOMC will credibly return inflation to 

levels consistent with its dual mandate. 

 

 

 

 

 

Clearly, it will be important to monitor these two measures and other indicators of 

associated risks as part of the ongoing assessment of the Federal Reserve’s balance 

sheet actions. 

I will close with a brief update on the development of our two reserve-draining 

tools.  Overall, the staff continues to make good progress towards ensuring the 

readiness of these tools and expanding their capacity to drain reserves. 

Consistent with the Board announcement in September, the Federal Reserve 

began conducting regular, small-scale auctions for its Term Deposit Facility.  The 

staff’s current intention is to conduct a $5 billion auction for a one-month deposit 

every other month.  The first such operation, which took place on October 4, was met 

with strong demand, and the second operation will occur near the end of this month.  

The Term Deposit Facility currently has 542 registered depository institutions, with 

more trickling in over time. 

Similarly, for reverse repurchase agreements, the Desk conducted five small-scale 

operations over the intermeeting period.  These operations were notable in that they 

included money market funds as counterparties for the first time.  At this point, our 

counterparty list includes the 18 primary dealers and the 26 money market funds that 

were approved in August.  In addition, an additional 32 money market funds have 

begun the application process to become eligible counterparties.  Thank you.  That 

concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Are there questions for Brian?  

Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Brian, given the understandable preference for Treasury purchases in 

roughly the 3- to 10-year range, what’s your view on the widening gap between 10- and 30-year 

rates, which flows out of that preference?  Is this a source of concern?  What do we think are the 

implications for corporate finance more broadly?  That is, given that we’re driving down rates 

for 5- and 10-year Treasuries, are we changing issuers’ own thinking about where they want to 

fund and for what sort of term and duration? 

MR. SACK.  In the first asset-purchase program and in the reinvestment program, we’ve 

concentrated purchases in the 2- to 10-year sector of the curve.  That decision was based on 

November 2–3, 2010 20 of 238



 

 

 

several considerations.  One was that that’s the duration range where most private issuance takes 

place.  Another was that it’s a big, liquid part of the curve.  Nevertheless, we’ve spread 

purchases out beyond that sector, and the purpose of doing so was to avoid creating significant 

kinks or odd patterns in the shape of the yield curve.  So I think that has been largely successful. 

Now, the 10s/30s slope has gotten a lot of attention in financial markets recently because 

it has steepened a good amount, and there’s a lot of discussion about whether, if another asset-

purchase program were launched, we would consider moving more strongly into bonds in order 

to offset that.  We don’t feel strongly that we have to do that.  The 10s/30s curve is primarily 

steepening because the 10-year yield is falling, and the forward rates between 10 and 30 years 

have risen some, but they’re not unusually high by historical standards.  Having said that, in the 

proposal the Desk has put together for alternative B, which we’ll discuss in detail tomorrow, we 

are proposing feathering a small amount of additional purchases into the long end just to make 

sure that we don’t exacerbate that distortion to the shape of the curve.  So the bottom line is that 

we’d like to operate in the 2- to 10-year sector, but we’re also cautious about not creating too 

much distortion in the shape of the curve even out to the bond. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, how confident are you that, if 

circumstances arose and we had to start to drain, we could get a significant amount of draining 

accomplished over some kind of reasonable time frame, say, six months?  I’m looking for just a 

really broad-brush sense here. 

MR. SACK.  We do have significant draining capacity today, as the development of the 

draining tools has progressed largely as we had expected.  At an earlier meeting we had 

estimated the draining capacity to be something like $900 billion.  I believe that we had 

November 2–3, 2010 21 of 238



 

 

 

something like $500 billion in the Term Deposit Facility and then another $400 billion on the 

reverse repo side.  On the reverse repo side, I think we’re approaching those capacity numbers, 

or, at least, we will be approaching them once we get this next wave of money funds on line.  We 

still think we have $150 to $200 billion of capacity through the dealers, and then the rest is 

through the money funds.  On the Term Deposit Facility side, as far as I understand it, that is 

progressing as expected, so I would expect those capacity numbers still to hold. 

I should emphasize, though, that it’s very hard to judge capacity ahead of time, so those 

are estimates with wide confidence bands.  One difficult issue is trying to figure out how much 

the capacity will automatically rise as additional reserves reach the market, as would be the case 

if the FOMC decided on an asset-purchase program.  Obviously, those reserves will be at banks, 

so, just by having those additional reserves, one would expect the capacity to be rising, and, even 

if it doesn’t rise at a rate that’s one for one with the reserves, it would still be at a rate that’s 

significant.  But, again, it’s difficult to judge. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that’s right.  What Brian just described is consistent with the 

work that’s been done here.  The big question is the extent to which reserve additions could be 

drained more or less one for one, and I think the answer is something less than one for one.  

Some of those reserves would end up being held by institutions that are not participating in the 

term deposit program, and there would be some process whereby they could get those reserves to 

institutions that are participating, but probably there’d be some leakage.  Our sense is that, at an 

appropriate rate, we could drain very considerable reserves through the Term Deposit Facility. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Kocherlakota. 

November 2–3, 2010 22 of 238



 

 

 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, as I think about QE, I can 

understand how it’s affecting spreads, so I can see why the break-even spread might go up as a 

result of anticipated QE.  I’ve been puzzling about why real yields have shifted down so 

dramatically in response—we see this 50 basis point decline in the 5-year real yield and a 

40 basis point decline in the 10-year real yield.  This is actually going maybe the opposite of 

what I would have thought.  What is the staff thinking about that, that is, about why real yields 

responded so dramatically? 

MR. SACK.  Well, the view that we’ve been describing is that the asset purchases 

worked by taking that duration out of the market and, therefore, essentially repricing the term 

premium.  One view is that it is a portfolio-balance channel—just having less duration risk in the 

market means that those investors left holding the remaining duration risk are willing to do so 

with a lower expected return.  Another way to say it is that it’s harder and harder to force people 

out of holding Treasury securities, so, as we purchase, those most willing to hold them with a 

lower expected return are the ones that remain. 

I know that different theoretical models will give very different assessments of how big 

that effect should be.  Some would point out that, since there are all sorts of asset classes with 

duration risk, it’s not obvious why this one should have such a large effect.  But, from a practical 

perspective, the empirical evidence seems to show that the prospect of asset purchases did have a 

significant effect on the yield curve and on financial conditions. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It sounds to me that that’s more about the slope of the yield 

curve, but it seemed like the whole level is falling, although I may be misinterpreting what’s in 

the data.  It seemed like the levels of real returns themselves are falling, and it’s not just that the 

November 2–3, 2010 23 of 238



 

 

 

slope is getting shallower.  In fact, I think you could argue that the slope has not gotten 

shallower. 

MR. SACK.  Right, but when we look at how longer-term rates have fallen, we do see 

two components.  One is that policy expectations have repriced, which could be pulling down the 

short- and intermediate-term yields.  And we believe that the term premium also has been falling; 

one reason we believe that is that you see these effects on real yields very far out the curve in 

terms of forward rates, and the other reason is that models that do try to separate those two 

pieces all suggest that the term premium is coming down. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian?  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Brian, do you think there’d be any difference between the duration 

effects of our purchases that you’re talking about, and those if the Treasury announced a program 

to quit issuing long-term bonds and issued short-term bonds instead to fund the deficit? 

MR. SACK.  Conceptually, under the portfolio-balance view, those two do have similar 

effects.  The effects we’re talking about arise from the amount of duration that’s left for the 

private sector to hold, and that could be changed through debt management decisions just as 

easily as it could be changed through our portfolio decisions.  But there are two differences to 

highlight.  First, we can move a lot more quickly than debt managers—obviously, as they change 

their issuance calendars, that changes duration, but only slowly, as the auctions occur, and we 

can move faster than that.  Second, debt managers do not have an economic mandate.  They 

operate under a mandate of being regular and predictable and minimizing their borrowing costs 

over time, so they don’t really have a clear structure through which they should make debt 

management changes like that in order to affect economic outcomes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

November 2–3, 2010 24 of 238



 

 

 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to refer to exhibit 3, panel 17, the 

implied volatility of longer-term rates, and, in particular, I guess the implied volatility of a 

10-year rate three years ahead.  You argued that this volatility has been declining.  Just in 

looking at this picture, I wonder whether this really does predict volatility three years out very 

well.  For example, the picture says that in 2006 and 2007 this market would not have expected 

very much volatility, which has turned out to be completely wrong. 

MR. SACK.  That’s a fair observation.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  So what’s the forecasting record of this? 

MR. SACK.  I wasn’t trying to make the point that this is a perfect forecaster of future 

volatility.  I would argue that, if market participants today saw considerable complications with 

the Federal Reserve’s exit, then they would likely price in greater volatility of long-term interest 

rates at those horizons at which we would be exiting.  So, even if it’s difficult to predict what the 

volatility will be, these data still represent investors’ views today about policy challenges the 

FOMC can face.  That was the only point I wanted to make—I didn’t want to make any claim 

about how good a predictor this measure is. 

MR. BULLARD.  Okay—if this measure doesn’t have that good a track record, then we 

can’t really rely on it to give us any indication. 

MR. SACK.  Well, no.  A bad track record as a predictor doesn’t mean this is not an 

indicator of investors’ views.  It just means that those views don’t turn out to be correct.  It’s fine 

to say we can’t be reassured because investors are sanguine—that it is no reason we should be 

sanguine as well.  That’s an absolutely fine point to make. 

MR. BULLARD.  Fair enough. 

November 2–3, 2010 25 of 238



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  Can I just follow up?  It’s not just volatility that matters for our exit, but 

it’s also the level of the rates that’s going to matter, and this doesn’t really address that. 

MR. SACK.  That’s right. 

MR. PLOSSER.  You can imagine that the markets may expect rates will be a lot higher, 

but they may or may not be more volatile.  So there are both the level and volatility issues, and 

this only addresses the volatility. 

MR. SACK.  The forward rates suggest that the markets expect long-term interest rates to 

remain relatively low and that they will gradually rise, but not sharply.  This is a measure of 

whether the markets see a lot of risk around that forecast, and it suggests not an unusual amount 

of risk. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  [No response.]  If not, I need a motion to 

ratify domestic open market operations. 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  They are ratified without objection. 

Let me just note again that you received memoranda on financial stability.  We’re 

continuing to ramp up our activities in keeping the FOMC well apprised of developments in 

financial stability.  In particular, an important step is that the Board has now set up its new Office 

of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which will help to coordinate financial stability 

research and monitoring around the System.  I’ve spoken to President Rosengren and others 

about coordination among Reserve Banks and the Board in developing our monitoring capacity.  

I think we all agree that this is very important and that we want to have a very broad-based 

ability to see what’s going on in the financial sector, not only in those areas where we have direct 

responsibility, but even beyond that.  I’d also like to note that Nellie Liang has agreed to be the 

November 2–3, 2010 26 of 238



 

 

 

first Director of this office.  I’m sure she’ll do a great job, and we have a great deal of confidence 

in her in that position. 

Let me turn next to the economic situation and call on David Wilcox. 

MR. WILCOX.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the whole, the incoming 

economic data during the intermeeting period were remarkably kind to our projection 

in the September Tealbook, so I will discuss them with relative dispatch. 

 

 

 

 

With respect to real activity, two of the key components of private domestic 

demand—consumption and business spending for equipment and software—appear to 

be running a little stronger than we expected in the second half of this year.  But thus 

far, the pickup in those sources of demand relative to our earlier expectation has been 

met out of imports rather than domestic production.  Consistent with that view, 

industrial production decelerated in the third quarter and looks poised to slow further 

in the fourth quarter.  Soft patches in IP during a recovery phase are quite typical, 

though an outright decline, should one occur, would be more uncommon. 

The BEA’s first estimate for real GDP in the third quarter, published on Friday 

after we closed the Tealbook, came in a few tenths stronger than we had expected.  

However, some of the upside third-quarter surprise was in federal spending—a 

category that’s constrained over time by appropriations.  For this reason and some 

others, we trimmed our expectation for the current quarter by a few tenths, leaving 

our forecast for real GDP growth over the second half as a whole unrevised from the 

September Tealbook at a tepid 2 percent. 

The one labor market report that we received during the intermeeting period—the 

one for September—also came in very close to our expectations.  Private payroll 

employment increased a lackluster 64,000 in September, and the unemployment rate 

was unchanged at 9.6 percent.  Initial claims for unemployment insurance have 

retraced their run-up earlier this year, and the four-week moving average is now back 

down into the neighborhood of 450,000.  However, that level is still high enough to 

suggest that the pace of layoffs has not diminished much this year.  Meanwhile, the 

available indicators of hiring remain weak, so, for the fourth quarter, we expect 

private payroll gains to average only about 90,000 per month, unrevised from the 

September Tealbook and about equal to the average gain over the past few months.  

And we expect the unemployment rate to edge back up to 9.7 percent, again 

unrevised from September.  This coming Friday, we will receive the first of two 

employment reports that will be published during the upcoming intermeeting period. 

Turning to inflation, the most recent data on core PCE inflation have been a little 

softer than we expected.  Taking on board the information included in the GDP 

releases published last Friday and yesterday, we now have core inflation running at a 

0.9 percent annual rate over the second half of the year, a couple of tenths below our 

forecast in the September Tealbook.  On the other hand, the bump in oil prices last 

November 2–3, 2010 27 of 238



 

 

 

month caused us to nudge up our expectation for top-line PCE inflation over the 

second half by a tenth to 1.4 percent. 

 

 

 

 

 

Stepping back for a moment from the latest monthly price readings to focus on 

longer-run trends, underlying inflation by a variety of measures has declined 

noticeably since the beginning of the recession.  As Deb Lindner showed yesterday in 

her briefing for the Board, the pattern differs somewhat across measures, but the 

broad contours are very much the same.  For example, the most recent 12-month 

change in core PCE prices is down 1.3 percentage points from its level at the business 

cycle peak in December 2007.  Similarly, inflation measured by the Dallas Fed 

trimmed mean PCE index is down 1.7 percentage points, by the market-based core 

PCE index is down 1.4 percentage points, and by the Cleveland Fed median CPI is 

down 2.6 percentage points.  In other words, all these measures, including the core 

PCE price index, show a noticeable decline in inflation over the past three years. 

On the whole, therefore, the economic situation appears very much as it did at the 

time of the September meeting.  Real GDP continues to trend upward, though at only 

a sluggish pace thus far.  Job creation continues at an anemic pace, and the 

unemployment rate still seems poised to continue roughly at its current level for the 

next few months.  Meanwhile, consumer price inflation remains subdued, and survey 

measures of inflation continue to move sideways. 

While there was relatively little news with respect to either real activity or 

inflation, financial conditions, as Brian noted, became noticeably more supportive of 

economic growth during the intermeeting period:  The foreign exchange value of the 

dollar moved lower, and stock prices moved higher.  The nominal yield on the 

10-year Treasury note traversed a wide range during the intermeeting period, but as of 

last night, was down about half a dozen basis points, on net, from the time of the 

September Tealbook. 

As best as we could tell, the improvement in financial conditions reflected, in 

substantial part, a strengthening conviction on the part of market participants that you 

will announce some further policy accommodation at the conclusion of this meeting.  

In putting together the baseline forecast, we had to specify an assumption about your 

policy decisions, not only at the conclusion of this meeting but also in the future.  One 

obvious possibility would have been to assume no further increases in the size of the 

SOMA.  Another possibility would have been to assume that you would ratify market 

expectations.  Those expectations vary widely but seem to center, as best we can tell, 

on an increment to the SOMA cumulating to roughly $1 trillion.  A third possibility 

was to condition the staff forecast on a policy similar to alternative B in the Tealbook, 

which lies roughly in between the other two options.  A good case could have been 

made for any of these three alternatives. 

To facilitate the Committee’s discussion, we took the approach of showing what 

our forecast would look like under all three policies.  To do this, we conditioned our 

baseline projection on the middle option, and included a box on pages 4 and 5 of 

November 2–3, 2010 28 of 238



 

 

 

Book A, in which we sketched the implications of deviating from the baseline policy 

in either direction.  As described in the box, if you choose not to announce any 

expansion of your asset purchases and you convince the market you will not 

reconsider that decision, we would trim about 0.7 percentage point from our baseline 

forecast for the level of real GDP at the end of 2012, add around a quarter of a 

percentage point to the level of the unemployment rate, and shave about a tenth from 

our forecast of both core and top-line PCE inflation.  To a very close approximation, 

in other words, if you were to decide to undertake no further expansion of the SOMA, 

we would respond, based on the information available to us today, to a very close 

approximation by handing you back the forecast that we published in the September 

Tealbook. 

 

 

 

 

On the other hand, if you announce an incremental purchase of $1 trillion, and 

likewise convince the market not to extrapolate even further beyond that, we would 

add about 0.4 percentage point to our baseline forecast for the level of real GDP at the 

end of 2012, slice about a tenth and a half from the level of the unemployment rate, 

and add about half a tenth to our forecast of core and top-line PCE inflation. 

Finally, I thought I might end by briefly touching on the arithmetic of the supply 

side of our projection.  At first glance, you might be surprised to see that we raised 

the level of real GDP by 0.6 percentage point at the end of 2012, and yet we have the 

GDP gap nearly a percentage point smaller by then.  And despite having a noticeably 

smaller GDP gap at that point, we revised down the unemployment rate by only a 

tenth of a percentage point.  To paraphrase my pre-teen daughters, “What’s up with 

that?” 

The key to understanding how it all hangs together is to remember that we nudged 

up our assumption for the NAIRU in this round.  In particular, based on some recent 

modeling work by my colleagues Charles Fleischman and John Roberts, we think we 

can better account for inflation dynamics before the business cycle peak in December 

2007 with a slightly higher NAIRU than we had previously assumed.  Accordingly, 

we now assume that the NAIRU held steady at 5 percent before the recession rather 

than edging down to 4¾ percent.  We have maintained our earlier assumption that the 

NAIRU increased by 1 percentage point during 2008 and 2009 as a result of the 

increase in permanent job loss during the recession and the consequent increase in 

mismatch between available jobs and unemployed workers.  Moreover, as before, we 

continue to assume that extended and emergency unemployment benefits have been 

affecting the unemployment rate and will continue to do so, though to a steadily 

diminishing extent, until the end of 2012. 

Putting all these effects together, therefore, we now have a NAIRU that, by the 

end of 2012, is about a quarter of a percentage point higher than we assumed in the 

September Tealbook.  Applying an Okun’s law coefficient of about 2, the adjustment 

to the NAIRU therefore explains why the output gap at the end of the projection is 

nearly a percentage point smaller than in the previous projection, even though the 

level of real GDP is only 0.6 percentage point higher.  And the changes to our supply-

November 2–3, 2010 29 of 238



 

 

 

side assumptions also explain why the actual unemployment rate is projected to be 

only 0.1 percentage point lower at the end of 2012, even though the output gap is so 

much narrower. 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Nathan will now continue our presentation. 

MR. SHEETS.  Friday’s advance NIPA data indicate that the U.S. economy is 

clinging tenaciously to its role as the world’s importer of first resort.  [Laughter]  Net 

exports now subtract a hefty 2 percentage points from U.S. real GDP growth in the 

third quarter, compared with a roughly neutral contribution in the September 

Tealbook.  Exports were softer than we had anticipated, expanding at only a 5 percent 

pace.  And imports continued to show remarkable strength, climbing 17½ percent, 

after an expansion of more than 30 percent in the previous quarter. 

Given that U.S. consumption, E&S investment, and inventories during the third 

quarter also came in stronger than was expected in the last Tealbook, the surge in 

imports may reflect a post-recession rebound of domestic spending in categories that 

are particularly import-intensive.  As such, we are sticking to our story that the recent 

pace of import growth represents a robust but essentially one-off bounceback from 

the recession-induced trough.  Our forecast for the current quarter thus has imports 

falling back some—and export growth picking up—causing net exports to add nearly 

1¾ percentage points to U.S. growth.  But this story can be stretched only so far.  

Following the third-quarter surge, real imports are now very close to their pre-crisis 

peak and, in fact, are somewhat above the level predicted by our trade models.  

Further upside surprises would send us back to our desks to rethink our views. 

Going forward, the external sector features prominently in the upward revision to 

the U.S. outlook, as David has noted.  We expect import growth over the next two 

years to settle at roughly a 6 percent rate and to broadly mirror the contours of the 

projected U.S. recovery.  We see exports expanding at a pace of around 8½ percent 

through the forecast period, up nearly 1 percentage point from the previous forecast. 

This stronger projection for exports is largely the result of our lower path for the 

dollar.  The broad nominal dollar is down about 3 percent since the September 

Tealbook, with market commentary attributing much of this decline to anticipated 

large-scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve.  As we outlined in a Tealbook 

box, our analysis of the response of the dollar to previous LSAP announcements—as 

well as simulations using our large-scale models—suggests that an LSAP that 

reduced yields on 10-year Treasuries by 25 basis points would trigger a depreciation 

of the dollar somewhere in the neighborhood of 1 to 3 percent.  In light of these 

estimates, our best judgment is that an LSAP of moderate size has now been priced 

into foreign exchange markets.  Of course, any such estimates are highly uncertain.  

Looking ahead, we see the dollar depreciating at about a 2½ percent pace in each of 

the next two years, with this depreciation coming disproportionately against the 

emerging market currencies. 

November 2–3, 2010 30 of 238



 

 

 

In line with the recent decline in the dollar, as well as stronger readings on global 

oil consumption, the spot price of WTI has risen to $83 per barrel, up more than 

$6 since the last Tealbook.  Prices of nonfuel commodities have also risen, with 

factors in addition to the dollar playing a central role.  For example, recent news from 

the USDA of a weaker-than-expected harvest has pushed up corn prices, and supply 

concerns have caused cotton prices to rise sharply.  Given these upward moves in 

nonfuel commodity prices, coupled with the direct effects of the lower dollar, prices 

of imported core goods are likely to rise at an annual rate of 4½ percent this quarter 

and next, before moderating to increases of 1¾ percent in the middle of next year. 

 

 

 

 

Growth in the advanced foreign economies appears to have slowed to around 

2 percent in the second half of this year.  Consumption and trade data are coming in 

soft in Canada and Japan, and activity in Europe is moderating but continues to be 

resilient in the face of ongoing concerns about the peripheral countries.  We expect 

growth in the AFEs to remain lackluster in 2011, at around 2 percent, and then to 

edge up to 2½ percent in 2012.  Although further normalization of financial 

conditions and progress in repairing balance sheets will help raise private spending, 

growth will increasingly be weighed down by fiscal consolidation, especially in 

Europe. 

In recent weeks, several advanced-economy central banks have leaned toward an 

easier path of monetary policy.  The Bank of Japan did so explicitly by cutting its 

policy rate a bit further, committing to hold the target rate near zero until inflation in 

a 0 to 2 percent range is “in sight,” and announcing an asset-purchase program worth 

about $60 billion.  In addition, markets pushed back expectations for when policy 

rates would be tightened by both the Bank of Canada and the Bank of England, the 

latter of which is actively debating the possibility of further asset purchases.  Notably, 

additional action by the FOMC could very well be the tipping point that would lead 

the Bank of England, and perhaps the Bank of Japan as well, to implement significant 

further easing measures.  In contrast, our friends at the ECB—although unlikely to 

raise their benchmark policy rate any time soon—seem intent on winding up their 

unconventional operations, despite persisting vulnerabilities in Greece, Portugal, and 

Ireland. 

In the emerging market economies, the prospect of further quantitative easing in 

advanced economies has been a source of considerable angst.  Our counterparts at 

EME central banks have openly complained that surging capital inflows are driving 

up domestic asset prices, causing their economies to overheat and putting unwelcome 

upward pressure on their exchange rates.  Data for EME-specific mutual funds and 

U.S. portfolio investment abroad show that inflows to the EMEs have risen over the 

past couple of months to relatively high levels.  The situation at present does not seem 

to pose any first-order risks either to these economies or more generally, but sustained 

inflows of this magnitude could eventually become a cause for concern. 

Largely in line with our expectations, real GDP growth in the EMEs appears to 

have cooled from its robust 8 percent pace in the first half of the year to just over 

November 2–3, 2010 31 of 238



 

 

 

3 percent in the second half, as the inventory and trade cycle has matured and policy 

has begun to tighten.  We project that EME growth over the next two years will rise 

back to around 5 percent, supported by continued growth in China—where recent 

data have pointed to strength—and the projected recovery in the United States.  This 

path of EME activity rises only a bit above our rough estimates of potential output, 

but increased inflation pressures or imbalances in certain countries or sectors are 

clearly a risk, especially given the recent rise in capital inflows. 

 

 

 

 

 

To date, EME central banks have responded to these developments by some 

combination of tightening monetary policy, stepping up intervention in currency 

markets, imposing additional capital controls, and allowing some appreciation of their 

currencies.  The People’s Bank of China unexpectedly raised its lending and deposit 

rates for the first time in three years; and the central banks of Chile, Singapore, and 

Taiwan also tightened.  Both Brazil and Thailand announced new measures to 

discourage portfolio capital inflows in an attempt to ease pressures on their 

currencies. 

However, the drivers of increased capital inflows are more fundamental than just 

divergent stances of monetary policy.  These flows reflect market expectations that 

the cyclical rebound in the EMEs will be more robust than in the advanced economies 

and that the long-term prospects for the EMEs are likely brighter as well.  But if such 

views prove correct, at least some EMEs should be capable of absorbing greater 

exchange rate appreciation.  This, in turn would bring a rebalancing of global demand 

away from economies that are running relatively hot and toward the rest of the world.  

The result would be a more balanced and sustainable global recovery.  In contrast, 

EME policies geared at continued reliance on external demand—and repression of 

domestic spending—are likely to result in subpar global outcomes, as private demand 

in the United States and other advanced economies is unlikely to be as robust as it 

was before the crisis. 

Gretchen Weinbach will now continue our presentation. 

MS. WEINBACH.2  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for 

Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  On balance, the projections 

you submitted for this meeting embody appreciably weaker real activity this year and 

trace a somewhat more gradual economic recovery than you anticipated in June.  

Exhibit 1 shows the broad contours of your projections for 2010 through 2013 and 

over the longer run.  Nearly all of you see GDP growth, the top panel, picking up over 

the next couple of years, while the unemployment rate, the second panel, moves down 

slowly, and both headline and core inflation, shown in the bottom two panels, edge up 

but remain subdued.  Somewhat more than half of you indicated that these variables 

would likely converge to their longer-run rates within about five or six years, but the 

rest of you noted that unemployment may still be above or inflation below their 

longer-run rates at the end of that period. 

                                                 
2 The materials used by Ms. Weinbach are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

November 2–3, 2010 32 of 238



 

 

 

Exhibit 2 reports summary statistics regarding your projections for 2010.  As 

usual, your previous projections, collected in June, are shown in italics, and the memo 

items note the staff’s Tealbook forecasts.  The central tendency of your current 

projections for real GDP growth this year, shown in the first column of the top panel, 

is a narrow band from 2.4 to 2.5 percent, down from 3 to 3½ percent in June.  

Looking at the middle column, the BEA’s annual benchmark revisions and second-

quarter data that were published after you submitted your June projections showed 

less rapid real GDP growth in the first half of 2010 than you or the staff had expected.  

As shown in the third column, you have lowered your implicit projections for growth 

in the second half of this year quite a bit; they now exhibit a narrow central tendency 

centered on 2¼ percent, down from about 3 to 3½ percent in June.  And, as shown in 

the second panel, the central tendency of your projections for the unemployment rate 

in the current quarter moved up about ¼ percentage point. 

 

 

 

 

 

Your expectations for overall and core inflation are shown in the bottom two 

panels.  The central tendency of your projections of overall inflation in the second 

half of this year, given in the right-hand column of the third panel, are now somewhat 

higher than in June, but your projections of core inflation, shown in the bottom panel, 

have changed little. 

Exhibit 3 displays the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for 2011 

to 2013 and over the longer run.  Most of you see at least a modest pickup in the pace 

of the recovery next year with real GDP expanding about 3 to 3½ percent, followed 

by increases of 3½ to 4½ percent in 2012 and 2013.  Nearly all of you retained your 

assessments of the longer-run rate of GDP growth, leaving the central tendency 

unchanged at 2½ to 2¾ percent. 

Regarding the unemployment rate, the second panel, you generally revised up 

your projections.  Most of you now expect the unemployment rate to be near 

9 percent at the end of next year and to decline to about 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 

2013.  A number of you appear to attribute some of the increase in unemployment 

over the projection period to long-lived structural factors.  Indeed, more than one-

third of you raised your projection of the rate of unemployment in the longer run, and 

the upper end of the central tendency of these projections rose from 5.3 percent to 

6.0 percent.  The bottom of the central tendency remained at 5 percent. 

Even though your outlook for both overall and core inflation, depicted in the 

bottom two panels, has edged up since the June SEP, you generally continue to expect 

inflation to stay subdued over the next several years.  The central tendency of your 

projections for total PCE inflation is about 1 to 1¾ percent in 2011 and 2012; it 

moves up to 1¼ to 2 percent in 2013.  However, most of you see a path for inflation 

through 2013 that does not exceed your longer-run inflation projections, which now 

exhibit a central tendency of 1.6 to 2.0 percent, a bit wider than in June. 

The staff’s outlook as presented in the Tealbook embodies rates of real GDP 

growth that are at, or a bit above, the top end of the central tendencies of your 

November 2–3, 2010 33 of 238



 

 

 

projections for the next few years, and rates of inflation that are at the low end of your 

central tendencies.  The staff’s projections of the unemployment rate are within the 

central tendencies of your projections.  Regarding your less optimistic outlook for 

growth, some of you noted reasons that reflected:  the view that further expansion of 

the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would provide relatively little stimulus to the 

economy; anticipation of a substantial ongoing drag on growth from the housing 

sector, perhaps stemming from mortgage documentation problems; and expectations 

that lingering pessimism and risk aversion would continue to weigh on household 

spending and business investment and hiring. 

 

 

 

 

Regarding your monetary policy assumptions, about a third of you—a somewhat 

smaller fraction than in June—indicated that your assessment of appropriate monetary 

policy involved less accommodation than assumed by staff, in the form of less 

expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet going forward, a faster decline in 

the size of the balance sheet in the future, or a federal funds rate that lifts off sooner 

than in the staff’s baseline forecast.  Only a couple of you thought that it would be 

appropriate to implement a more accommodative policy stance than the staff assumes, 

by expanding the balance sheet by more or by keeping the funds rate near zero for 

longer. 

Turning to your final exhibit, the two left-hand panels show that most of you 

continue to attach a relatively high degree of uncertainty to your projections of both 

real GDP growth, the top set of bars, and PCE inflation, the bottom set.  The two 

right-hand panels summarize your characterization of the balance of risks around 

these projections.  A majority of you now judge the risks to your current forecast of 

GDP growth to be balanced, although a significant number of you continue to view 

the risks as weighted to the downside.  Those seeing downside risks cited the fact that 

monetary policy is constrained by the zero bound, the limited potential for further 

fiscal stimulus to help address any future negative shocks to the economy, and 

concerns that the anticipated recovery of the housing market may take much longer 

than expected. 

The bottom right panel shows that most of you continue to judge the risks to your 

projection of PCE inflation as being broadly balanced, although some of you think 

that upside or downside risks predominate.  On the downside, some of you were 

concerned about the degree to which lingering resource slack could weigh on 

inflation, or continued low readings on actual inflation might show through to 

inflation expectations.  Those of you who cited upside risks to inflation generally 

noted uncertainty about the timing and efficacy of the Fed’s withdrawal of policy 

accommodation, or a concern that the expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet could 

undermine the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.  Thank you.  That 

concludes our prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  The floor is open for questions.  

President Fisher. 

November 2–3, 2010 34 of 238



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  I’ll ask a question of Nathan, and then I’d like to ask a question of 

Gretchen.  Nathan, you report on your surprise at the import numbers.  What was the 

composition, to the best of our knowledge, or do we know yet?  What does it tell us?  Was it oil 

or something else? 

MR. SHEETS.  Let me back up.  In the second quarter, the 33 percent surge was broad- 

based across all classes of imports, and it was particularly skewed towards automotives and 

capital goods.  But the third-quarter numbers that we’re getting are somewhat less about 

automotives, though they continue to be about capital goods.  We’re also seeing some strength in 

consumer goods, which is a very important piece of information.  But in general, both quarters 

have been fairly broad-based. 

MR. FISHER.  Gretchen, I have a question about what we sent out yesterday with the 

SEP.  I thought there was an interesting result to the question about whether one’s view of the 

appropriate policy differed materially from that assumed by the staff in the Tealbook.  The result 

was 8 to 10.  Is that unusual, or is that common? 

MS. WEINBACH.  I believe in the June set of projections, 12 had a different view.  So it 

has been a higher count at times, if I’m not mistaken. 

MR. FISHER.  So there were 8 yes, 10 no.  Of course, this is a fairly new process, but 

there’s nothing unusual about that balance, or is there? 

MS. WEINBACH.  I see.  I haven’t looked back at the history of those responses to see if 

these are unusual. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right from the start, I think, a majority of the Committee has 

always disagreed with the staff outlook.  [Laughter] 

MR. EVANS.  There’s a more trivial explanation than that. 

November 2–3, 2010 35 of 238



 

 

 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Until recently, I think the general pattern was that most 

participants expected monetary policy, the funds rate, to be lifting off noticeably earlier than 

staff.  That’s been shifting, and some of the disagreement this time is that a couple of you expect 

policy to be easier.  So now it’s on either side. 

MR. ENGLISH.  So the disagreement was certainly less this time than last time. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  That’s all I wanted to know. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  When you fill this out, it says if you disagree, please explain why.  The 

only way you can explain or provide any color is to disagree.  [Laughter]  So it’s biased towards 

saying that you disagree. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Actually you probably could write something even if you 

didn’t disagree. 

MR. EVANS.  Yes, you could.  I think I encouraged my staff to do that this time. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It looks to me as if one could say that the 

main effect of the asset-purchase program on real growth for the U.S. acts through the value of 

the dollar.  I say that because the effect of the program on, for example, 2011 economic growth 

is 0.3 percent.  That’s about the amount by which the forecast changed from the last Tealbook to 

this, and you sort of invited us to equate those two; the change in the contribution of net exports 

to real growth is 0.3 percent, and, for all the other components of GDP, the contribution changes 

by a tenth of a percent or less and they all net out. 

November 2–3, 2010 36 of 238



 

 

 

MR. WILCOX.  In our judgmental forecast, we decompose the effect as due about 

two-thirds to the dollar effect, with the remaining one-third being split roughly equally between 

the lower bond yields and the higher stock values. 

MR. LACKER.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is for Nathan Sheets.  I just wanted to 

see if I could clarify something.  You said that, regarding the emerging market economies, you 

saw no first-order risks.  Is that correct? 

MR. SHEETS.  Yes. 

MR. BULLARD.  So, even though we’re hearing a lot about dollar depreciation and the 

consternation that is causing in the rest of the world, you’re not really seeing too much danger 

there?  Is that correct? 

MR. SHEETS.  I would say that we’re certainly hearing a lot of hue and cry, and that 

over the last couple of months we’ve seen a significant pickup in capital flows to EMEs.  But, at 

this point, we don’t see widespread problems with currencies being overvalued, we don’t see 

widespread problems with asset bubbles, and we don’t see widespread problems with inflation 

and economic overheating.  If flows were to continue at this significant pace for an extended 

period of time—and I don’t know how long that is; I don’t know if that’s 6 months or 12 months 

or 24 months—certain problems might emerge. 

That being said, it’s also important to put all of this in a broader context.  As I 

emphasized in my remarks, I see a lot of this happening independent of any decision that this 

Committee makes.  It’s true that these flows are partially in response to interest rate differentials 

and policy differentials, but also, independent of what we’re doing, the emerging markets are 

November 2–3, 2010 37 of 238



 

 

 

enjoying a very strong cyclical rebound, and the data over the intermeeting period were, if 

anything, a bit on the stronger side for them.  Beyond the near term, these countries structurally 

are very attractive targets for investment.  So, given the cyclical and structural challenges, I think 

there is an increased burden on the emerging markets to put in place robust policy responses to 

capital flows, and I think they’re moving in that direction—they’re responding in a variety of 

different ways with a variety of different policy tools.  There’s no simple answer, but I feel that 

they’re making progress.  At this stage I’m not pushing any panic buttons, but we’ll continue to 

watch very closely. 

MR. BULLARD.  Would you extend that analysis to Japan, where the yen has been a lot 

stronger in the last few weeks and months? 

MR. SHEETS.  I would put Japan in a much different category and a much different 

situation from these robust, dynamic emerging-market economies.  My feeling about the present 

valuation of the yen is that it is high if looked at from a two- or three-year perspective.  When 

you look at the real effective yen relative to where it has been over the last 10 or 15 years, it’s 

very close to the middle of the range, and Japanese exports this year have been reasonably 

strong.  I think that the dynamism in Asia is a much more important issue for Japan and its 

external competitiveness than whether the yen is at 85 or 90 or 82 or whatever. 

MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Nathan, you mentioned two countries that are sort of leaning towards an 

accommodative mode besides us:  Japan and the U.K.  Are there others?  Canada? 

MR. SHEETS.  Well, Canada tightened during the intermeeting period, but our best 

guess now is that Canada is going to stay put for a year or so—that’s what’s incorporated in our 

November 2–3, 2010 38 of 238



 

 

 

forecast and that’s what we’re hearing from the Bank of Canada.  I would be surprised, as I said 

in my remarks, if the ECB moved.  Regarding the Bank of England, I personally put more than 

50–50 odds on it implementing further accommodative measures over the next six weeks or two 

months.  And I think that, once the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England moved, there 

would be intense pressure on the Bank of Japan to do something more.  It comes out every few 

months with incremental measures that are slightly more accommodative, but I think there would 

be pressure on it to do something in a significant fashion.  I can’t think of changes at any other 

major central banks.  The Sveriges Riksbank also tightened over the intermeeting period but 

emphasized uncertain global conditions, so it seems that it may be in a “stay put” mode; and the 

Reserve Bank of Australia actually just tightened, which I take as a very positive signal about 

conditions in Asia. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, this was useful information about the effect of LSAPs on 

the outlook.  I’d just note the contrast between the two-page box we got and the wealth of detail 

we get about alternative scenarios that vary by things we can’t control, and I would appreciate 

fuller information at future decisionmaking meetings. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question that I hope will 

prove helpful in preparing for our discussion in January about structural unemployment.  One 

piece of information that crossed my desk recently was that the percent of the labor force that 

had been unemployed for more than 52 weeks was about 0.4 percent in 2007, and now that 

number is 2.9 percent.  So, when we’re talking about the modeling of the NAIRU, how do you 

November 2–3, 2010 39 of 238



 

 

 

think about that group in terms of the kind of downward pressure they’d be putting on wages?  Is 

there some special attention paid to them?  Well, I guess I’ll just throw that out as a general 

question. 

MR. WILCOX.  The part-time or unemployed? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m referring to the people who have been unemployed for 

greater than 52 weeks.  The reason to include them one for one in the NAIRU would be that 

you’re thinking they’re the same as somebody who’s been unemployed for four weeks in terms 

of what kind of downward pressure they’d be putting on wages.  Presumably you don’t think 

about them in the same way, but then how do you distinguish across these groups when you’re 

thinking about modeling the NAIRU? 

MR. WILCOX.  I think it’s pretty hard to distinguish these various categories of 

underemployment and detachment from the labor force.  They have a lot of coherence across 

groups.  Permanent job losers is one category that I mentioned in my prepared remarks.  There’s 

presumably a high degree of overlap between the permanent job losers and those unemployed 

27 weeks and longer; part-time for economic reasons is another group.  We attempt to discern 

differences in the amount of pressure that these various groups are putting on the evolution of 

inflation.  It’s really hard to get even a first-order effect, and to go to the kind of second-order 

distinctions that you’re pointing to is yet another level more difficult. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m not as convinced as you are that this is second order.  It is 

a very novel experience for the United States, fortunately, to have so many people unemployed 

for so long.  It just seems to me intuitively that that group would exert different kinds of 

downward pressures on wages, because when employers make hiring decisions, they will view 

those candidates very differently from those who have been unemployed for only 10 weeks. 

November 2–3, 2010 40 of 238



 

 

 

MR. WILCOX.  To be clear, I am not disagreeing with you—I am expressing frustration 

because, in our experience, it has been difficult to get the data to speak clearly to the issue. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  This is, in part, why we raised the NAIRU.  We assumed that, 

during the crisis, the fairly persistent component of the NAIRU went up a full percentage point, 

and we think that the extended duration of unemployment is one of the factors behind that.  

Implicitly, in our longer-run forecast, we’re not telling a European hysteresis-type story—one in 

which these people will never be employed again.  We are implicitly saying, though, that 

reemployment is going to take a number of years—some of these people will have a hard time 

getting back to work, but they do get back to work.  So we’re assuming that they have not given 

up, that they’re actively looking for jobs, so, in that sense, they will be putting downward 

pressure on wages.  As David said, it’s very hard to say whether it’s the same amount of 

downward pressure as someone who has been out of work only for 12 weeks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s difficult because the disinflation effects are the 

strongest in deep recessions, which, of course, are the situations when you have the most 

long-term unemployed, so there are a lot of corollary things going on—discouraged workers, 

part-time employment, and so on. 

MR. WILCOX.  But, again, it is precisely with the kind of rationale that you articulated 

that led us to move up the NAIRU by a percentage point from 2007 to 2009. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Can I just make a brief point on that?  I think we’ve seen that one of the 

reasons that the duration of unemployment has become so long for so many people is that the 

quit rate is unusually low at this point.  That means that people who are employed and have jobs 

aren’t getting out of their seats looking for new jobs—if they did, they’d be creating vacancies 

November 2–3, 2010 41 of 238



 

 

 

for people who are unemployed.  So, one reason that it’s so hard to get a job if you don’t have 

one is that nobody who has a job seems willing to move.  That could be interpreted as a measure 

of great fear in the labor market that people not only are not getting outside offers, but they also 

don’t want to take the risk of moving to another city, looking for a job when they get there, and 

so on.  So existing employees who are unusually fearful could be putting more than the normal 

amount of downward pressure on wages; that would counteract what you’re saying. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s true. 

MR. PLOSSER.  It seems to be working for bank examiners, though.  They’re getting 

lots of outside offers.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions? 

MR. TARULLO.  See, now that you don’t come to these other meetings, you miss these 

jokes.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, I think we are hitting diminishing marginal 

returns.  [Laughter]  Are we ready for the economic go-round?  Seeing no objection, let’s start 

with President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will start with the national outlook and 

speak the obvious, because it has been talked about here already.  The recovery continues to 

improve steadily, even though we are undergoing some pretty major rebalancing—and those 

have to see their way through, as I have said before.  But over time I do expect the expansion to 

pick up, with GDP rising slowly but steadily from its current level as the recovery gains some 

momentum. 

Since the end of last year, consumer spending on durable goods has risen nearly 

6 percent, and industrial production is up nearly 5½ percent.  Since December, the economy has 

November 2–3, 2010 42 of 238



 

 

 

added 860,000 private-sector jobs.  That is not a level that anyone is satisfied with, but it is 

positive, and it is moving forward.  More to the point, temporary jobs are growing fairly 

robustly. 

The inflation outlook, obviously, remains low in the near term, but I suspect over time 

that it will increase as demand picks up and as our monetary policy has its effect.  We see that in 

commodity prices today, and I think we can anticipate it somewhat in the declining value of the 

dollar.  We did talk with some of those who do the Blue Chip survey, and, for the first time, they 

do have a 100 percent positive response that the FOMC will engage in quantitative easing at this 

meeting, which is fairly significant from that survey’s point of view. 

Let me turn just briefly to the District economy and say that conditions in our region are 

certainly consistent with developments at the national level.  The District economy is growing at 

a moderate pace, with a little bit of variance among the states, because those states with 

relatively large energy or agriculture sectors are doing the best and remain the strongest.  District 

energy firms have extended the expansion in hiring and capital spending that started this year.  

They’re shifting employment from natural gas to higher-priced crude oil, and that shift is going 

fairly rapidly right now.  In some areas in energy, in that sense, there’s a real boom going on in 

our region. 

In agriculture, obviously, we’re seeing a big crop, and high crop prices have spurred a lot 

of further increases in capital spending and gains in farmland values.  Again, we’re seeing 

farmland auctions move up to where fairly good land in parts of our region and in parts of Iowa 

are being auctioned off at better than $8,000 an acre, which is a pretty dramatic increase over the 

last year.  One of our contacts, who is in a widely diversified multinational company, has 

observed that the company’s businesses are seeing strong growth in a number of places around 

November 2–3, 2010 43 of 238



 

 

 

the world, especially Asia, and also noted that conditions in Europe are stronger than expected 

last spring.  One interesting indicator of economic activity the contact mentioned is the usage of 

diesel and jet fuel, especially in their Alaska operations, which is fairly large because of the 

traffic between here and Asia:  It’s up in the last quarter about 30 percent in terms of the traffic 

that is going back and forth. 

Contacts noted that companies with access to capital markets have all the money they can 

use.  The cash-accumulating firms were seeking places to deploy it, with many choosing to 

invest abroad rather than in the United States, and we heard something similar today from 

Nathan.  They noted that today’s market provides a solid spread for borrowing at low rates in the 

United States and investing elsewhere, and they’re doing it at a fairly significant pace and level.  

One contact acknowledged that access to capital was not an issue for his firm, its 20,000 

customers, or its competitors.  And, to avoid bad business decisions otherwise encouraged by 

ready access to cheap money, his company has implemented an interest rate floor for internal use 

of capital, well above the firm’s unusually low cost of funds, and that is global. 

Finally, I will just say that business contacts that we have talked to around our region 

generally agree that an exceptionally uncertain business climate—particularly around health-care 

costs, tax policy, and environmental issues—is a major concern for them and has caused them to 

hold back.  Otherwise, they are kind of waiting in the wings to see how things go, and they 

certainly do have the capital and wherewithal to move forward when they choose to do so.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

November 2–3, 2010 44 of 238



 

 

 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My forecast for the economy in the 

near term is much like the Tealbook’s.  I, too, have the unemployment rate ending the year where 

it began, at 9.7 percent, and falling only to roughly 9 percent by the end of 2011. 

Over the past two years, we have been experiencing gradual disinflation, and, with the 

likelihood of continued weakness in labor markets, my forecast expects this disinflationary trend 

to continue.  I would highlight that the disinflation we have experienced, and are likely to 

continue to experience, is most unwelcome, in part because it increases the short-term real 

interest rate.  In December of 2009, the year-over-year core CPI was 1.8 percent.  In the most 

recent release, the year-over-year CPI was 0.8 percent.  The decline in core PCE has been 

smaller, but still the most recent PCE release shows a continued deceleration.  With the short-

term interest rate pinned at zero, falling inflation has increased the real fed funds rate, creating an 

unintentional tightening of monetary policy.  Thus, even if one assumes that the risk of deflation 

is low, preventing any further disinflation is important.  In fact, I believe that we should be 

working harder to return inflation to 2 percent over a reasonable horizon. 

In terms of labor markets, I recently had a meeting with my Academic Advisory Council, 

which includes a variety of economists from Harvard, Yale, and MIT.  They are generally a 

rather unruly bunch—[laughter]—but they were unanimous in their view that most of our current 

unemployment is the result of inadequate demand.  In fact, their biggest concern was that 

remaining at this elevated rate of unemployment would create a structural unemployment 

problem, which only further emphasized the need, in their view, for more aggressive fiscal or 

monetary policy actions.  Two members of my Research Department, Chris Foote and Richard 

Ryan, have further investigated one possible source of structural unemployment.  Some have 

posited that the fall in housing prices has made homeowners much less willing or able to move.  

November 2–3, 2010 45 of 238



 

 

 

If this were true, one would expect the duration of unemployment would diverge between 

homeowners and renters, with renters more willing to relocate to obtain employment.  Using the 

Current Population Survey, they examined whether unemployment duration varies between 

homeowners and renters after controlling for worker demographics, workplace skills, and the 

strength of the home-state housing markets.  They find no statistical difference between 

homeowners and renters.  Instead, they find that long-duration unemployment spells are 

ubiquitous and are not confined to construction, to lower-educated, to lower-skilled, or to 

housebound workers.  These findings seem consistent with inadequate aggregate demand being 

the main source of unemployment duration. 

I’ve also met with a variety of asset managers over the past month.  Those discussions 

indicate that even the possibility of quantitative easing is having a significant impact on their 

expectations of interest rate and exchange rate movements.  They do not seem to have any doubt 

that our actions could alter financial market conditions materially.  However, there is a wide 

range of views on the likely impact on the economy of easier financial market conditions. 

My own view of the ability of quantitative easing to affect financial market conditions is 

not unlike that of the Tealbook.  However, I would say that the effect of quantitative easing, 

through the exchange rate channel, may be of a larger magnitude than I had previously thought.  

I would also highlight that movements in interest and exchange rates over the past month 

associated with the perceived changes in the probability and magnitude of quantitative easing 

seem to confirm what I am hearing from market participants, namely, that adjustments to a 

quantitative easing program can have a meaningful impact on financial market conditions.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

November 2–3, 2010 46 of 238



 

 

 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic activity across the Sixth 

District appears to be steadily trending positive but is still quite lackluster.  Expectations, while 

somewhat uneven by sector, are more positive than negative.  Among our directors and business 

contacts, there has been a small but discernible improvement in sentiment about the future.  

However, nothing in the regional reports during this cycle would cause us to alter our slow-

growth outlook.  Business leaders in the Southeast pretty uniformly report that their investment 

spending relates to share capture, continued productivity gains, necessary equipment replacement 

and maintenance, and meeting regulatory imperatives.  There is still little spending premised on 

domestic demand growth. 

Turning to the national economy, the glide path of the overall national economy also 

seems to be upward, but at a moderate pace and still from a low base.  The third-quarter GDP 

report last week provided some encouragement in the private demand components of personal 

consumption expenditures, business investment inventories, and nonresidential structures.  These 

modest improvements are consistent with the outlook that my staff and I have projected for quite 

some time.  My submitted forecasts for economic growth have been on the low side of the 

spectrum over the last year and outside the central tendency of the Committee.  In the context of 

this rolling outlook, the softening experienced in the middle months of this year hasn’t so much 

constituted a falloff from expectations and a worsening of the outlook as much as it has the 

playing out of substantial quarterly variability along a path of slow, gradual recovery. 

We’ve been testing our basic narrative in a variety of ways and have come up with little 

reason to change it.  My view of the economy and the one represented in the alternative scenario 

entitled “Lower Potential” are nearly identical.  A key attribute of this outlook is the existence of 

constraining elements that can be described as headwinds or structural factors or simply 

November 2–3, 2010 47 of 238



 

 

 

processes that are slow to work themselves out.  The Committee is familiar with the litany of 

headwinds.  These include a cautious and restrained credit environment; ongoing deleveraging, 

especially in the household sector; a housing sector that has not yet achieved stable and growing 

prices, and, therefore, uncertainty regarding house-related wealth; a commercial real estate sector 

with much painful restructuring and debt resolution ahead; productivity gains by firms that have 

been “banked,” so to speak, and thereby give these firms a new standard for “normal” long-term 

operations; and, finally, persistent uncertainty connected to the country’s fiscal, tax, health-care, 

and regulatory considerations.  Because of this convergence of factors tending to retard the pace 

of growth, my forecast remains subdued even with the assumption of appropriate monetary 

policy that implies further stimulus. 

I admit to some ambivalence on the question of how effective more quantitative easing 

can be, given my view of the world we’re in.  To my way of thinking, there are two prominent 

considerations relevant to the questions we’ll deal with in the policy round.  First is the structural 

character of current and prospective unemployment.  I’m finding it increasingly difficult to 

achieve much clarity by using the terms “structural” and “cyclical.”  It’s easier for me to think in 

terms of those features of the employment picture that are likely to abate with further stimulus or 

not.  Both analysis of the trend of new business formation, to cite one important driver of job 

creation, and anecdotes from business contacts and various industries suggest to me that there are 

material structural impediments at work. 

Second is the direction of inflation expectations, particularly since this is a time to be 

watchful for moves in either direction.  The other side of the inflation expectations coin is, of 

course, deflation probabilities.  There has been some action in this arena recently.  Break-even 

rates in the TIPS market declined from May through August and have since retraced much of 

November 2–3, 2010 48 of 238



 

 

 

that decline.  The recent run-up of TIPS break-evens rates coincides with speculation about a 

second round of quantitative easing.  Factoring in survey measures as well as conversations with 

business contacts about price pressures, I conclude overall that expectations are relatively stable 

and appear not to be moving outside historical bounds.  That said, my staff has recently done 

work to derive deflation probabilities from TIPS yields.  Our estimate of the probability of 

deflation rose from about 14 percent in April to a peak of just over 30 percent at midsummer.  

We place the market’s current assessment of the probability of deflation over the next five years 

at about 20 percent—elevated, but a clear improvement since last summer. 

Connecting all of this to my outlook narrative, I come to the view that the slow-growth 

trajectory implies persistent slack that will put pressure on wages and prices for at least the 

medium term.  In weighting my balance of risks, I have to treat the prospect of unwanted 

disinflation that possibly leads to deflation as a tail risk to be sure, but not one that can be 

prudently dismissed.  So I see the balance of inflation risk currently to the downside.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My view of the economy and its trajectory 

has changed little since our last meeting.  Incoming data for the Third District suggest that a 

modest recovery continues, with little change in trends among the sectors since September.  

Looking out to mid-2011, most of our business contacts expect us to emerge from this soft patch 

and for conditions to gradually improve.  Consistent with that, we saw a significant rebound in 

the indexes of future activity and future employment in our business outlook survey in 

manufacturing in October.  Currently, regional labor markets remain weak.  This is an 

undesirable state of affairs, to be sure, but I am not convinced as yet that further monetary policy 

November 2–3, 2010 49 of 238



 

 

 

accommodation can speed up the recovery in labor markets, even though we would very much 

like for it to do so. 

Our regional data give little indication that sustained deflation is a risk.  Our October 

survey showed a sharp rise in the number of manufacturers reporting higher input costs, and they 

expect higher costs to continue over the next six months.  The index of future prices paid more 

than doubled last month.  So far, regional manufacturers have not been raising the prices of their 

own outputs, but the October survey did show that many of them are now anticipating that they 

will raise prices over the next six months; that is, future prices will go up.  One of our directors, 

the CEO of a national baking company, says that food companies are facing rising prices and 

will have no choice but to raise prices in the near term.  Retail sector firms also anticipate rising 

costs.  Some have already been notified by their foreign suppliers that they plan to raise prices 

next year. 

The national recovery did hit a soft spot this summer, and I have revised down my 

forecast for the second half of the year relative to June.  I now expect economic growth for this 

year to come in around 2½ percent.  My medium- to longer-term forecast is little changed.  I 

believe the fundamentals are in place for growth to accelerate to 3 to 3½ percent in 2011, similar 

to the Tealbook forecast.  I do see a somewhat faster decline in the unemployment rate and a 

faster acceleration in inflation than in the Tealbook. 

The economy is growing.  Nominal GDP growth has averaged 4¼ percent so far this 

year.  As I have discussed in earlier meetings, monetary policy is already exceptionally 

accommodative and has been so for more than two years.  Some might argue it isn’t 

accommodative enough, based on a Taylor rule formulation of output gaps or employment gaps, 

but, as we have highlighted, there is a significant measurement problem with these issues, as the 

November 2–3, 2010 50 of 238



 

 

 

staff even discussed today.  Moreover, a Taylor rule formulation based on the growth rate, which 

has fewer measurement problems, suggests that monetary policy is about right.  In the Tealbook, 

for example, the actual real funds rate, based on lagged core inflation, has remained relatively 

stable over the course of this year. 

It is far from clear to me what the transmission mechanism from further asset purchases 

to the real economy will be in this environment.  The millions of families facing foreclosure, for 

example, are unlikely to be motivated to increase spending because longer-term Treasuries, or 

any other interest rate they face, falls by a few basis points.  Business leaders and bankers I speak 

with see little to change their behavior either.  Thus, I’m far from convinced that more monetary 

accommodation can do much, if anything, to speed up the pace of this recovery at this point.  

Indeed, the Tealbook comparison of the baseline with a policy of “no asset purchase” seems to 

bear this out.  The presentation suggests that $600 billion of asset purchases would reduce the 

unemployment rate by 0.1 percentage point, and have no effect on the inflation rate by the end of 

2011. 

Should we be undertaking policies whose outcomes have such negligible and uncertain 

economic significance?  Some might argue this may mean we need to do more asset purchases to 

get larger effects.  But it isn’t at all clear that a linear extrapolation of this framework is a good 

way to measure potential impacts.  Even the Tealbook estimates that a $1 trillion asset purchase 

would have a very modest impact.  Moreover, what I worry about is that, with a policy of 

running such large asset purchases, the costs could rise, and perhaps rise exponentially, as our 

balance sheet increases. 

In my forecast, I see inflation rates that are roughly symmetric in the short run but tilted 

to the upside in the medium to longer term.  Inflation is now running between 1 and 1½ percent 

November 2–3, 2010 51 of 238



 

 

 

measured year over year, which is very near my inflation objective.  We have experienced 

inflation rates of this level before without dire consequences.  In addition, most forecasts of 

inflation, as summarized by both Blue Chip and the SPF, show a gradual rise in inflation over the 

next year, not a decline.  Important to all of these forecasts, of course, is that inflation 

expectations remain well anchored.  And I think the data broadly support that assessment at this 

point, but I acknowledge that that bears watching very closely. 

Some might like to raise inflation expectations in the short run to try to forestall some 

deflationary risk, but I am dubious that our credibility is so well entrenched at this time that we 

can manage a policy of manipulating expectations with any precision or with any confidence that 

our credibility will survive such efforts.  Someone pointed out that the current deceleration of 

inflation is broad-based in nature and indicative of elevated deflation risk.  However, 

Philadelphia Fed staff analysis of the 178 PCE components shows that the amount of disinflation 

we have witnessed and the dispersion of low or negative inflation across categories are not 

atypical of past recessions.  It’s also important to remember that the revisions to PCE inflation 

are somewhat predictable.  PCE inflation is usually revised up.  Our last deflationary scare of the 

early 2000s was entirely revised away.  Thus, I think some caution is called for.  Putting all of 

this together, I continue to believe that the risks of sustained deflation are low and do not require 

a policy response at this point.  

In summary, we are experiencing a modest recovery, which I expect to continue and to 

accelerate somewhat next year.  Would I prefer it to be faster?  Of course.  But I don’t think that 

is achievable by adding more monetary accommodation to the financial markets at this point.  

And I’ll discuss that more in the policy go-round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

November 2–3, 2010 52 of 238



 

 

 

MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, could I just ask a question? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  President Plosser, I didn’t hear—what was the inflation objective you 

stated? 

MR. PLOSSER.  I didn’t state one. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, I thought you did. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I said the current rate of 1 to 1½ percent was near my inflation 

objective. 

MR. EVANS.  Yes, okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a number of opportunities to hear 

from business contacts throughout my District since our last meeting.  In general, business 

leaders have become more positive about their own situations, but they remain wary about the 

overall outlook. 

My projections for output are broadly in line with their sentiment that the recovery in 

business activity will be slow and unemployment will remain elevated.  Specifically, my GDP 

forecast is similar to the Tealbook’s in 2011, although it is somewhat lower in 2012 and 2013.  

What’s really striking about both my outlook and the Tealbook is how weak the second half of 

2010 looks compared with our forecast in June.  I’m still expecting to see economic growth, but 

I’m concerned that the slow growth rate in my outlook leaves the economy susceptible to another 

slump. 

My business contacts continue to tell me that lending to small and medium-sized 

enterprises remains constrained, and the very slow return to a more normal lending environment 

November 2–3, 2010 53 of 238



 

 

 

is holding back economic growth.  Last week I spoke with an industrial builder who owns and 

leases out a large number of his own industrial facilities.  As his loans come due, he’s finding 

that the properties are being appraised at lower values and that the banks will only finance 

65 percent of those lower valuations.  Consequently, even though the cash flows from these 

properties are still intact, his company will have to put up more equity to refinance the loans.  

His company has been building cash balances as a precaution against just this kind of event, but 

that limits his ability to put his capital to work for his own use.  Several CEOs from large 

companies in my District have also expressed concerns about the ability of some of their 

suppliers to obtain bank financing.  The CEO of a major steel company, whose orders are 

growing rapidly, told me that his company is financing one of its suppliers who couldn’t obtain 

bank financing to meet his orders.  I think these stories illustrate that banking conditions still 

have a way to go before we can say that they have normalized. 

On unemployment, I project only a moderate decline in the unemployment rate over the 

next few years, moving down to just under 8½ percent by the end of 2012.  This result is 

consistent with research being done at the Cleveland Fed that uses labor market flows to estimate 

the longer-term unemployment rate.  Estimates generated by this method predict a higher longer-

term unemployment rate than is contained in most of the projections submitted for this meeting.  

An interesting implication of this research is the conclusion that labor markets have been less 

dynamic over the last 10 years than they were over the rest of the postwar period, particularly in 

terms of job-finding rates.  My business contacts corroborate these findings, citing many reasons 

for their slow hiring.  Nonetheless, they generally tend to expect that this slowness will be an 

ongoing feature of their hiring process, rather than just a cyclical response.  This result tends to 

support our recent research indicating that progress on the unemployment rate will be slower 

November 2–3, 2010 54 of 238



 

 

 

than in past recoveries.  However, this does not imply that nothing can be done about 

unemployment, as the job-finding rate would still improve with stronger growth in demand. 

Turning to inflation, my projection continues to agree with the Tealbook that the 

disinflation process is most likely not yet finished.  My staff has been looking into the growing 

distinction between the CPI and the PCE price index, and the results are not very reassuring.  

The core CPI has run 0.4 percentage point below the PCE over the last year.  A little more than 

half of this difference is due to the prices of the nonmarket components included in the core 

PCE.  It’s interesting to note that the PCE median that the Dallas Fed reports looks much more 

like Cleveland’s median CPI, because it deemphasizes the nonmarket components in the PCE 

that are running higher than most of the market components.  This leaves me concerned that the 

ongoing disinflation process may be materially understated in the PCE inflation rates.  On a more 

positive note, as Brian mentioned in his report, market measures of expected inflation have 

moved up during the intermeeting period, and break-even rates from TIPS show a similar 

pattern.  The acceleration was particularly pronounced after the release of the FOMC minutes on 

October 12, which, I think, underscores the importance of our policy decision at this meeting. 

In sum, the risks to my outlook for inflation and output remain to the downside.  My 

projection for only moderate economic growth and very low levels of inflation leaves the 

economy susceptible to shocks.  And I continue to be concerned that our options for responding 

to falling inflation are more limited than our options for responding to rising inflation.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Reports on economic activity in the Fifth 

Federal Reserve District remained mixed in October, suggesting not much of a change in the 

November 2–3, 2010 55 of 238



 

 

 

outlook on net from the previous report.  The manufacturing index moved back into positive 

territory last month, with shipments, new orders, and employment all ticking up.  Several 

individual manufacturers tell us that they are operating at or near capacity after having sharply 

reduced capacity in 2008 and 2009.  And a few of these are indicating that they are nearing the 

point at which they will need to add workers.  Our service sector survey remains a bit more 

downbeat; although the indexes have not deteriorated further, they remain in negative territory.  

We did see some improvement in shopper traffic in big-ticket items, however, and the responses 

to our expectations questions improved significantly last month as well.  We continued to hear 

complaints about policy uncertainty, but uncertain demand prospects are also clearly a factor.  

We actually did hear a couple of contacts say they are hanging on until after the election, so, 

perhaps, some economically relevant uncertainty is dissipating as we speak.  [Laughter] 

The data on the national economy since the last meeting also suggest little change in the 

outlook.  Consumer spending keeps advancing, perhaps as rapidly as can be expected, given the 

balance sheet repair that many households have undertaken.  On the softer side, the rebound in 

manufacturing has clearly slowed, which could lead to questions about the sustainability of 

business investment.  But I still think the fundamentals for business investment outside of 

structures look reasonably promising, particularly in the information processing category.  On 

balance, I think the erosion in the outlook that occurred over the summer appears to have come 

to a halt, so my outlook hasn’t changed much since September.  I continue to expect slow 

economic growth, about 2 percent in the second half of this year, gradually rising to about 

3½ percent by late next year, bringing the unemployment rate down to about 9 percent then. 

The most striking macroeconomic development since the last meeting was that the 

general public has become fairly firmly convinced that we are going to initiate another program 

November 2–3, 2010 56 of 238



 

 

 

of sizable asset purchases at this meeting.  This has resulted in a dramatic fall in Treasury yields, 

as Brian Sack noted, and that has brought inflation compensation back up to a range that might 

be characterized as more towards the center of the range it has been in over the last five or six 

years. 

Other news on the nominal front includes a pickup in nominal GDP growth to 4.4 percent 

year over year for the third quarter, from 3.9 percent the previous quarter.  You cited nominal 

GDP growth at the last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  And there has been a pickup in M2 growth to 

8.3 percent over the last two months.  So I think the overall inflation picture provides even less 

reason to ramp up stimulus right now than it did a month or two ago. 

On the real side, the Tealbook estimates that a $600 billion asset-purchase program will 

only make the unemployment rate 0.3 percentage point lower at the end of 2012.  This is a 

strikingly small number, in my mind, and it makes the benefits of such a program look really 

small relative to the risks.  But I’ll wait until the policy round to talk about risks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  When Bill English stands up, it’s noticeable, because he’s so tall.  

[Laughter] 

MR. ENGLISH.  I’m sorry.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Even though you’re kneeling now, you’re taller than the rest of us.  

[Laughter]  Mr. Chairman, last Wednesday’s Wall Street Journal quoted you describing the 

calibration of monetary policy as akin to putting.  As a golfer—although, I must say, not as good 

as Governor Warsh or President Lockhart or President Plosser, but much better than President 

Evans [laughter]— 

MR. EVANS.  I’m very glad that’s on the record.  [Laughter] 

November 2–3, 2010 57 of 238



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  —I rather like that analogy.  The master putters, like Ben Crenshaw and 

Tiger Woods, are surely familiar with the equipment that they use.  You talked about tapping.  

But as they prepare for a high-stakes tournament, they use their and their advisors’ knowledge of 

the slope and the shape of the greens, whether it’s Bermuda grass or Bentgrass or other varieties, 

even whether the cell structure of the grass is loose or tight, and how it changes and affects the 

roll of the ball as the weather changes during the day.  And, incidentally, data are maintained on 

the putting surfaces of 16,000 golf courses in America by the Golf Superintendents Association.  

[Laughter]  What these teams do, as we do, is model how these greens perform under different 

circumstances.  But, in the end, the roll and the speed that the pros employ when they’re actually 

approaching a putt depends on the real conditions at the time of play.  And any of them will tell 

you that the key to successful putting is the ability to feel or read the green according to the 

conditions that prevail as they approach their putt. 

In the first go-round of our meetings, I try to give you and the Committee a reading on 

the prevailing conditions as we approach a decision.  All of us have forecasts based on FRB/US 

or some other model—I don’t think I can add much there.  Nor do I detect much tolerance for 

Texas bragging at this table—we created 41 percent of all the goods-producing jobs this year 

[laughter] and 26 percent of all nonagricultural jobs in America year to date.  Therefore, I’ll 

endeavor to give you a reading on the conditions on the greens, according to the experience of 

the CEOs and CFOs and market operators who are playing the course—you have the list of my 

31 interlocutors for this meeting.  For our new Governor, these are not just in my District; these 

are worldwide, though mostly in the United States.  Here’s a summary of what they report. 

In general, my contacts report that more things are moving in the right direction than in 

the wrong direction.  None speak of the double-dip risk in the United States, and none are 

November 2–3, 2010 58 of 238



 

 

 

budgeting to deflation.  Bottom lines are healthy, but top-line sales and demands are not moving 

enough to give satisfaction.  Conditions are improving slightly, but continually, and are expected 

to continue to do so. 

Based on data from the rails, shippers, express shippers, retailers, and the spending pulse 

data assembled by MasterCard through yesterday morning, none of which has been reported 

publicly yet, that activity picked up year over year in October and was slightly better than the 

year-over-year pace of September.  They report October’s year-over-year gain to be 2½ percent 

versus September’s year-over-year gain of 1.3 percent.  Looking forward, one who doesn’t mind 

his name being quoted, Fred Smith of Federal Express, expects domestic Christmas season sales 

to record a year-over-year improvement of between 2½ to 3 percent.  And, by the way, parents 

among you will be pleased that the nation’s largest candy retailer, Walmart, reported an 

8 percent pickup year over year in sales for the holiday season, so we can expect at least the 

dental profession will have a jump in fillings. 

Our contacts report price pressures for a range of commodities—from corn and higher-

grade food oils to cotton to pulp and, of course, metals and gold used in manufacturing, 

including semiconductors—nothing that we don’t already know from reading the financial press.  

But I did find it of interest that one of my CEO contacts, who had just come back from meeting 

with all 450 of his Chinese suppliers, reported that the Chinese government was encouraging 

wage increases of 15 to 20 percent to boost domestic spending and putting that into their five-

year plan.  Combining wage imperatives with commodity price increases, the manufacturers of 

low-tech Chinese products—from wicker to clothing to the lower end of the entertainment 

machines that this particular customer buys—have started their bids for supplying the fall of 

2011 with requests for 30 percent increases from the current level.  Alternative production sites, 

November 2–3, 2010 59 of 238



 

 

 

like Vietnam and India, according to the source, were only slightly underbidding those numbers, 

which may mean a shift to sourcing low-value-added goods back to Mexico or a squeeze on 

profit margins from those sourcing from China, Vietnam, and India.  No one I talked to feels that 

currently they have pricing wherewithal to pass on these cost increases of more than, say 

2 percent, and yet none of my interlocutors feel that inflation is likely to drift downward. 

This is in keeping, incidentally, with our trimmed mean calculation at the Dallas Fed.  

Several of you have been nice enough to mention it; let me just correct the misimpression.  The 

trimmed mean PCE inflation rate actually tells a different story from that told by the core PCE.  

The trimmed mean came in at a 1.0 annualized rate in September, compared with an annualized 

rate of 1.3 percent in August.  The numbers for those two months are both above the rates we 

saw early in 2010, and the 12-month trimmed mean rate has been steady over the last six months, 

within 0.1 percentage point of 1 percent, and actually precisely 1 percent for the past three 

months.  If the trimmed mean is a better gauge of the underlying trend in PCE inflation—of 

course, believing in Texas exceptionalism, we believe it is—then it’s not too surprising that the 

core PCE should be moving down towards the lower and steadier trimmed mean rate.  The 

message the trimmed mean is sending is consistent with the bottom line we’ve drawn in the past 

couple of inflation updates.  The underlying trend in inflation appears for the time being to be 

holding steady, albeit at a rate typical of the 1950s rather than at the rate we’ve become 

accustomed to since then. 

Without pricing power and in the face of anemic demand, all of my nonfinancial business 

contacts, large and small, public and private, continue to protect their margins through 

productivity enhancement and to take advantage of ready access to cheap money to refinance 

their balance sheets, pay dividends, or buy their stock if they are public.  Some of the larger ones 

November 2–3, 2010 60 of 238



 

 

 

report borrowing domestically in size and warehousing those funds so as to avoid having to 

repatriate funds building up abroad.  A few—and this is good news—are using cheap money to 

refinance their remaining pension obligations in light of unsustainable discount factors used for 

accounting purposes. 

Almost all the businesses I talked to are expanding investment in productivity 

enhancement.  Even Wal-Mart plans to open more stores in the U.S., but at the same time plans 

to reduce, for the second year in a row, its number of U.S. employees.  As I’ve reported before, 

almost all the large companies I talked to report little interest in hiring American workers or 

committing to large-scale cap-ex here.  They believe that their potential for ROI is greater 

elsewhere.  The smaller companies that do not have global options are not hiring until the coast 

is clear on the tax and regulatory fronts, as we’ve heard for some time at this table.  This 

hesitancy intensified during the final innings of the election season, and your guess is as good as 

mine as to whether this will be relieved by the new Congress or compounded by it. 

Nonfinancial and financial companies alike report that they are flush with liquidity.  

Bankers are aggressively courting the larger corporate credits.  Several reported to me that, in the 

last few weeks, the Big Four have “literally been begging us to lend money for 10 years at less 

than 3 percent.”  Corporate debt markets are robust, including junk markets.  Smaller companies 

are not complaining about a lack of access to capital.  As a special part of our monthly Texas 

manufacturing survey, I had our staff ask questions of 240 companies about credit availability.  

Only 10.9 percent of the 60 percent who were seeking credit responded that they were having 

substantial or extreme difficulty obtaining financing for long-term expenditures, and only 

6.3 percent of the 55 percent that were seeking short-term credit—let me repeat that only 

55 percent were seeking short-term credit—responded that they were having substantial or 

November 2–3, 2010 61 of 238



 

 

 

extreme difficulty.  To be sure, this is specific to the 11th District, but you may have noted in the 

ISI Group report of October 26 on the various Federal Reserve Bank surveys that the Dallas 

Fed’s business activity index has the highest correlation of all to the PMI, so our survey may 

have some credence. 

It concerns me, Mr. Chairman, that liquidity is so omnipresent on bank and corporate 

balance sheets, and yet is not being put to work to hire American workers.  Last week’s Lipper 

data show year-to-date portfolio flows into virtually all asset classes except money market funds.  

The flow is strong into every category from high-risk to low-risk bond vehicles, taxable, 

nontaxable, domestic, and external, fixed and floating rate, and, of course, commodities.  Junk 

yields are at their lowest level since October of 2007.  Margin debt remains shy of the 2007 

highs, but is fast approaching levels that prevailed before the Nasdaq implosion in 2001.  And 

margin account debit balances, as a percentage of market capitalization, now exceed the pre-

crash levels of 1987 and 2001.  And the LBO market is back to paying 2006 multiples of 

EBITDA, between 6 and 8½ times.  The recent announcement of Carlyle’s purchase of 

Syniverse, at 10 times, echoes the peak of the pre-crash craze.  As you know, buyout people do 

not typically buy companies with a plan to expand their workforce, but rather they plan to tighten 

operations, drive productivity, rejigger balance sheets, and provide an attractive payback in a 

shorter term than normal corporate horizons.  And those corporations I have talked to that are 

eyeing possible acquisitions with their surplus cash and ready access to credit markets, are not 

given to thinking of strategic acquisitions as a way to expand payrolls.  In sum, Mr. Chairman, 

and to kill the golf analogy, the greens are playing very fast.  We need to be very careful in how 

we calibrate our next putt, lest we overdo it and roll right off the green into a trap.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

November 2–3, 2010 62 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I notice you’re discussing golf and not baseball.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  On that subject— 

MR. MOORE.  Be patient, Mr. Chairman.  Be patient.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Our Vice Chairman owes me a beer, and I owe several cases of beer to 

the First Vice President of the San Francisco Fed.  [Laughter] 

MR. MOORE.  We’ll defer that until later, then. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy appears to be 

expanding at a slow pace.  Business contacts tend to be mildly optimistic concerning prospects 

for the holiday season and for 2011.  The District unemployment rate, calculated based on 

18 metropolitan statistical areas, is 9.1 percent according to the most recent data, somewhat 

below the national rate.  The foreclosure rate is about 1 percentage point lower in the Eighth 

District compared with the nation as a whole, according to data from lender processing services.  

The delinquency rate, however, is about the same as the national rate.  District employment 

growth has lagged a bit behind the national employment growth rate according to the most recent 

readings.  Larger District businesses continue to report strong sales revenue and profitability.  

They remain reluctant to add to payrolls.  Expansion plans are often centered in Asia, which, 

according to these contacts, continues to boom.  A large District car rental company reports brisk 

sales and the clear return of the business traveler.  For smaller businesses, however, the outlook 

is more mixed.  District agribusiness income is expected to be very strong this year. 

For the U.S. as a whole, it appears that prospects for a return to recession, never all that 

high, have diminished in recent weeks.  I envision the pace of expansion increasing through the 

remainder of 2010 and through 2011.  Any macroeconomic forecast, however, is clouded by 

November 2–3, 2010 63 of 238



 

 

 

uncertainty, and we policymakers have to be prepared to respond should actual events deviate 

from the expected path. 

I expect labor markets will continue to lag, as they did following the 1990–1991 

recession and again following the 2001 recession.  It seems likely that there was a structural 

break in U.S. labor market dynamics sometime in the 1980s.  Before the break, labor markets 

recovered relatively rapidly following recessions.  But since that time, labor market recovery has 

been much slower and more tenuous following recessions.  Understanding the nature of this 

structural break is an important area for research in the Federal Reserve System. 

Globally, booming Asia continues to be the most important factor.  A slowdown or 

mismanagement there could have significant implications for the U.S. and for Europe.  A 

possibly weaker Japanese economy is also a risk.  In Europe, I see the sovereign debt crisis 

continuing to play out during the next two years, as countries try to establish credibility in 

international markets for their fiscal retrenchment programs.  I see the ECB as unlikely to match 

a U.S. quantitative easing program. 

I think the likely return of asset purchases here in the U.S. has largely been priced into 

markets already.  During the fall, 5- and 10-year TIPS break-even inflation expectations moved 

up fairly sharply.  As Brian Sack pointed out, as a result, real yields at the 5-year horizon 

declined by as much as 50 basis points.  Under most conventional macroeconomic theory, this is 

an appropriate stabilization policy.  Other effects of the policy have been entirely conventional as 

well, with equity market valuations rising and the dollar depreciating during the intermeeting 

period.  Because these price movements have already occurred, I do not expect significant 

movements in response to any announcement we may make tomorrow. 

November 2–3, 2010 64 of 238



 

 

 

I have argued that the FOMC’s near-zero interest rate policy, by itself, is insufficient to 

keep the U.S. economy out of trouble.  This is because zero rates are also consistent with 

expectations of a permanent, mild deflation, such as the one experienced in Japan over the last 

decade.  Movement toward a regime like that would exacerbate problems in the U.S. housing 

sector, where nominal contracting based on expectations of approximately 2 percent inflation is 

the norm.  One way to avoid such an outcome is to supplement the near-zero interest rate policy 

with another program, a quantitative easing program.  Such a program needs to be managed 

carefully, as it would possibly run out of control.  However, I think that program can be very 

effective with the appropriate risk management.  I see this as a better alternative than simply 

remaining at the near-zero federal funds rate target for several years, possibly allowing inflation 

and inflation expectations to drift lower and lower, as they have during much of 2010, according 

to many 12-month inflation measures and according to the TIPS measures of inflation 

expectations. 

I remain opposed to “shock and awe” approaches to monetary policy.  I see little purpose 

in naming large numbers in order to impact financial markets on a particular day.  One can 

always surprise markets by taking an unexpected action, but this has very little to do with the 

effectiveness or the degree of optimality of the policy.  The policy is the entire expected 

sequence of actions that the Committee intends to take in response to the state of the economy 

and to the shocks encountered by the economy.  An action on a particular day is not a policy in 

this sense.  Unusual, large, unexpected actions tend to confuse the issue, because they set up 

expectations of similar unusual, large, unexpected actions in the future.  This dynamic is 

destabilizing and counterproductive.  This is why I have tried to advocate something much closer 

to the way we have successfully implemented interest rate targeting policy over the last 

November 2–3, 2010 65 of 238



 

 

 

25 years—small moves, which then set up expectations of future moves contingent on the 

behavior of the economy.  I hope we can make progress towards this type of policy at this 

meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It is 3:30.  Coffee’s ready.  Debbie, is that 

right? 

MS. DANKER.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s take 20 minutes for a break. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I guess we’ll get going.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I should forgo trying to defend my golf game, 

because it shares the same property as Warren Buffett’s jet—it’s indefensible.  [Laughter] 

My economic outlook has not changed appreciably.  I see the U.S. economy as mired in a 

liquidity trap of immense proportions.  Nothing from my business and community reports 

contradicts this view.  There were two virtually unanimous themes I heard from businesspeople.  

First, earnings are good, but they are driven almost entirely by bottom-line cost-cutting, not top-

line growth.  Second, I am viewed almost as impertinent when I ask about future hiring plans—

no business, large or small, reported any meaningful hiring plans at any relevant horizon.  

Although the recovery continues, it is weak, and there are currently no clear indicators of 

building forward momentum.  The single most important factor in my projections for firmer 

growth in 2011 and beyond is the sheer inevitability of such a recovery.  After all, how much 

longer can the economy run with pent-up demands going unfulfilled and only replacement 

demands being met? 

November 2–3, 2010 66 of 238



 

 

 

But to achieve stronger growth, we need to see more from the consumer.  One 

manufacturer articulated the mood perfectly when he asked, “How much longer can my business 

and industrial segment continue to grow three times faster than consumer demand?”  As I sort 

through the impediments facing the economy, this type of real-world business observation seems 

exactly right in putting more weight on inadequate aggregate demand than on regulation, unusual 

labor market frictions, or other such factors. 

In the balance of my remarks I’d like to focus on the inflation situation, and I want to do 

this in the spirit of a policy viewpoint that puts primary weight on our price stability mandate; 

that is, I want to try to channel the views of what Mervyn King has called a quasi-inflation 

nutter.  Such a person would say that the Fed has a dual mandate to promote maximum 

sustainable growth and price stability but sees achieving price stability—reasonably low and 

stable inflation—as the best way of ensuring maximum sustainable growth.  This rhetoric has 

often seemed quite reasonable during a variety of periods when I’ve been observing the FOMC 

in action. 

Within this context, I want to make three points.  First, I take it as given that monetary 

policy is fully responsible for the trajectory of inflation—inflation is a monetary phenomenon.  

We are accountable for whether inflation is too high or too low or just right.  Most of us have 

indicated that “just right” is somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 percent.  So inflation of 3 or 

4 percent would be a monetary policy failure that monetary policy would have to respond to.  

And inflation of 1 percent, even if it’s stable, also would be a failure that monetary policy would 

have to respond to. 

Second, my outlook is for continued low inflation, low enough that monetary policy has 

an obligation to address it.  The Tealbook forecast of core PCE inflation of 1 percent for 2012 is 

November 2–3, 2010 67 of 238



 

 

 

highly credible, in my opinion.  I know this is a controversial statement for some, but indicators 

of future inflationary pressures must put a heavy weight on resource slack.  I just don’t see any 

alternative credible explanations for our recent experience.  Consider that, back in October 2007, 

the central tendency of our projections for core PCE inflation in 2010—that is, this year—was 

1.6 to 1.9 percent.  Today we expect 2010 inflation to come in substantially lower, at about 

1 percent.  What has happened since those 2007 projections were constructed?  The federal funds 

rate has been slashed from over 4 percent to 0.  Everything else equal, doesn’t that lead to greater 

inflationary pressures, not lower?  Our monetary base and our balance sheet have exploded in an 

unprecedented and unexpected way.  Doesn’t that, too, lead to greater inflationary pressures, not 

lower?  To me, it seems inescapable that the real reason we have experienced lower inflation is 

that we have suffered through a financial crisis, and a great recession, with an unemployment 

rate that is still 9.6 percent.  With substantial resource slack persisting into the future, inflation is 

very likely to be too low for too long.  And, remember, that inflation projection must be a result 

of our monetary policy—inflation is a monetary phenomenon, as I said in my first point. 

Third, even in the role of a quasi-inflation nutter, I can argue that the current low-

inflation outlook is detrimental to supporting sustainable economic growth.  This is an argument 

that President Rosengren made earlier.  I take this view in part because I take our inflation 

objective to be 2 percent—that’s what most of us have said, and that’s, at least, what the public 

has expected, judging by most measures of inflation expectations.  When inflation is lower than 

households and businesses previously expected, ex post real interest rates are higher.  This 

contributes to restrictive financial conditions that impede growth.  For example, there is a large 

and wide spectrum of fixed-rate consumer debt that was undertaken with an expectation of 

inflation rates higher than 1 percent.  Those payments have a higher real burden now, implying a 

November 2–3, 2010 68 of 238



 

 

 

higher probability of default, and default and bankruptcy have real costs.  Of course, there are 

other channels by which having an inflation path closer to our perceived objective would be 

beneficial for economic growth.  So, again, 2012 core PCE inflation of 1 to 1¼ percent, no 

matter how stable, ranks as monetary policy falling down on the job. 

Finally, I’d like to make a couple of points on the problems caused by our lack of a 

shared understanding of our goals.  It is our job to argue over inflation projections.  I have my 

perspective, and others have their views.  We argue to get better policy decisions, and that’s a 

virtue.  But we likely also disagree over the objectives for inflation—that’s one reason that, when 

President Plosser was talking, I thought I heard something, and I wanted to make sure if I did.  If 

some of us say 2 percent but others say 1 percent, or 1½ percent, we have a consistency problem; 

it’s not wrong, it’s just confusing.  Here’s an example.  If we’re on a road trip from here to the 

West Coast, it’s one thing to question what the last several exit signs actually said about whether 

we’re on course or not.  But if some on the bus think we’re headed for L.A. and others think 

Seattle, we sound incompetent and lose a great deal of credibility.  I don’t get on a bus if I think 

the driver doesn’t know where we’re going. 

Unless we can anchor the Committee’s understanding of what monetary policy is seeking 

to accomplish, I don’t understand how we can do our jobs, when we are surely not being 

transparent.  Now, apparently, almost all foreign central banks think like this.  I asked my staff to 

review the attendee list at this year’s Jackson Hole conference—Tom has expanded the number 

of central banks that attend by quite a lot this past year.  My staff says that, of the ones we could 

track down—and we couldn’t find Malawi and a couple of others—only two banks failed to have 

an explicit numerical guideline for their nominal responsibilities, either for inflation or an 

November 2–3, 2010 69 of 238



 

 

 

exchange rate peg.  Those central banks are the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan—and I’m 

troubled by that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the staff was briefing me late last week 

for this meeting, they mentioned to me that it might be appropriate to say something about the 

World Series, or, if not, to do something related to Halloween.  Thank goodness the Giants gave 

me some good results to work with, because I’m not sure how well my Lady Gaga costume 

would have gone over with this particular crowd.  [Laughter]  I’ll say something about the Giants 

in a while.  By the way, I asked our research director if everything goes into the transcript, and 

he told me that certain things could be redacted, if necessary.  [Laughter] 

The evidence from our contacts in the Twelfth District is consistent with a weak 

recovery.  The District has been struggling to climb out of a very deep hole, and the pace of 

expansion has been disappointingly slow.  Following modest gains during the first half of the 

year, private payrolls contracted in the third quarter.  Our retail sector contacts report 

disappointing back-to-school numbers.  Households in the Twelfth District are burdened with 

poor balance sheets, caused in part by the decline in home values, which have fallen as much as 

40 to 60 percent in the hardest-hit areas.  The technology sector has been one of the few bright 

spots.  District IT manufacturing and service firms have been creating jobs at a healthy clip in 

response to sustained demand growth.  But even this sector has shown signs of slowing recently.  

Our contacts in this sector expect further slowing over the balance of the year, as the hardware 

industry’s inventory replacement phase comes to an end. 

My views on the national outlook are generally similar to those of the Tealbook.  I expect 

a gradual recovery held back by households working to repair balance sheets badly weakened by 

November 2–3, 2010 70 of 238



 

 

 

equity and housing losses and the slow normalization of financial intermediation.  Still, monetary 

stimulus and improvements in banking and financial market conditions should push economic 

growth somewhat above its potential rate in the next few years and slowly bring unemployment 

down.  Nonetheless, I am struck by the fact that, in the Tealbook forecast, even with an 

additional $600 billion of Treasury purchases, we won’t get back to full employment until 2015. 

Although my point forecast is for steady improvement in the economy, I admit that the 

subpar economic growth during the past two quarters has shaken my confidence.  One source of 

greater uncertainty going forward is the degree to which the banking sector will suffer further 

damage from past mortgage securitization activities.  While lax processes around foreclosures 

pose some risk, even more concerning is the growing trend of put-backs of poorly performing 

portfolios from investors to banks.  Although recent declines in the stock market value of some 

of the large banks most affected by these problems suggest that the market sees the risks as 

manageable, some worst-case estimates present substantial problems for these institutions, which 

could damage financial conditions and set back the recovery. 

Turning to inflation, I expect significant slack in labor and goods markets to keep PCE 

price inflation around 1 percent for the next few years, but well-anchored inflation expectations 

should help avoid significant further disinflation.  Of course, if the economy can’t shift into a 

little higher gear than the 2 percent growth we’ve been seeing, I worry that further disinflation 

could lie ahead. 

I close with one reason to be optimistic.  The San Francisco research team has studied 

what happens to the U.S. economy based on which franchise wins the World Series.  The results 

are rather startling.  The average growth in real GDP has been 10.2 percent in the year following 

each World Series won by the Giants.  [Laughter]  The staff tells me that the relationship is 

November 2–3, 2010 71 of 238



 

 

 

statistically significant, and they point out that the slowest growth in the year following a Giants 

win was still a robust 6 percent.  Now, not knowing for certain how the Series would turn out 

when presented with these data last week, I asked the staff what the effects of a Rangers win 

would be.  I was told there was—how do I put this?—insufficient data—[laughter]—to conduct 

such an analysis.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Uncertainty remains a dominant 

problem, if not the dominant problem, in the recovery.  Uncertainty was a key factor in our 

conversations with local business contacts about hiring, for example.  It is true that both large 

and small businesses in the Ninth District report doing significantly better in 2010 relative to 

2009.  As one contact put it, “as long as you’re not in construction, you’re doing great.”  One 

consistent theme was that sales are up some relative to 2009, but profits are up by considerably 

more, and this local story is borne out in the national data.  Basically, firms have experienced 

sharp declines in unit labor costs.  Nonetheless, relatively few firms in the Ninth District are 

looking to expand their workforces greatly. 

This then raises the question:  Why aren’t firms willing to hire more workers, given that 

they are making so much more money per worker than they did a year ago?  They are uncertain 

about the sustainability of their current high profits.  Their uncertainty stems from at least two 

sources.  First, they see a significant risk that demand for their product might fall.  Second, they 

believe that the large federal deficit in the United States could well lead to higher taxes on labor 

and capital.  If they did make new hires, and a sufficiently large fall in profits materialized, they 

would then have to fire the newly hired workers, and they found that process to be a painful one 

November 2–3, 2010 72 of 238



 

 

 

in 2009.  Basically, they see the possibility of firing costly enough to offset the current profits 

from hiring. 

At the national level, asset prices reveal that uncertainty seems to be retarding investment 

and consumption.  Over the intermeeting period, the spread between 5-year TIPS and 5-year 

nominal Treasuries widened, and this increase in the spread is a welcome indication that inflation 

expectations, or at least inflation risk, shifted upward in the wake of the last FOMC meeting.  

But the levels of both nominal and real yields seem shockingly low to me.  The real yield on 

5-year TIPS bonds has basically fallen to around minus 50 basis points.  The real yield on 

10-year TIPS bonds is below positive 50 basis points.  These low yields strike me as being 

indicative of risk aversion, and large amounts of it.  On the margin, banks perceive these low real 

yields to be better than risk-adjusted returns on new loans of similar horizons.  Firms perceive 

these low real yields to be better than the risk-adjusted return on new investments of similar 

horizons, and hiring would be one such investment.  Consumers are willing to save at these 

lower yields, because they foresee the possibility of adverse income shocks affecting them at 

some point in the future, combined, probably, with an inability to borrow to insulate themselves 

against those shocks. 

Others have been willing to talk about policy in this round, so I’ll talk a little bit about 

policy myself.  What can monetary policy do to alleviate these uncertainties?  At a minimum, it 

seems that monetary policy should do its best not to add to the high degree of policy uncertainty 

that exists already.  And I worry that the options that have been presented to us by the staff don’t 

really fulfill that objective.  It is, as President Bullard has emphasized to us, desirable to have 

conditionality in policy, but it is also critical to convey more about the policy reaction function 

than is currently being done in the alternatives. 

November 2–3, 2010 73 of 238



 

 

 

I’ll mention two scenarios we could face in six months’ time, or maybe a little later, say, 

in June of next year.  In one scenario, the good scenario, employment has grown by 1 to 

1½ percent by next June, so something like between 1.3 million and 2 million jobs have been 

created.  And inflation has risen—maybe it’s running about 1.3 percent over the first half of next 

year.  In that good scenario, inflation will still be low relative to desired levels, at least the 

desired levels of some around the table.  And unemployment will still be well above our 

mandate-consistent levels, again, in the view of some around the table.  The bad scenario is that 

unemployment next June is at 10½ percent, and inflation has softened further to around 

0.8 percent. 

I think we should achieve clarity among ourselves as best we can about what we would 

do in these two kinds of scenarios.  Would we want to have further accommodation in the good 

scenario, or not?  Would we want to have further accommodation in the bad scenario, or not?  I 

think we have to talk through those things, and I think it would be good if the minutes were able 

to reflect something about what our conditionality is, even if we can’t reflect it in the statement 

itself. 

I’ll close with one final dangerous comment—because it’s somewhat ad hoc—on 

President Evans’s quasi-inflation nutter perorations.  Let’s suppose we all agree that 2 percent is 

the inflation target.  The question for us is:  How can we even go about achieving that?  

Quantitative easing, according the Tealbook, Book A, provides about a 10 basis point increase in 

the inflation rate over a two-year period.  This isn’t getting us to 2 percent.  So I think the 

question for us is not just whether we all agree on 1½ percent, or 2 percent, or whatever the 

number is.  The question is:  What are the tools we have available right now to get to that level?  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

November 2–3, 2010 74 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Normally, I don’t comment 

much about prospects in the New York region, but I did spend three days in upstate New York 

last week, so a few observations might be in order.  First, there’s no meaningful change in the 

debate between smaller businesses and bankers.  Small businesses see the banks as continuing to 

constrain credit sharply.  In contrast, the bankers view themselves as awash in liquidity, with 

large deposit inflows, plenty of funds to lend, and a willingness to do so.  I’m not surprised by 

this.  Given the current uncertain economic outlook, I’d expect us to be in a situation in which 

borrowers who are creditworthy don’t want or need credit, but those who are less creditworthy 

do need funds but are unable to get them easily. 

Second, the mood in upstate New York can be summed up in two words, and I think this 

probably applies more broadly:  “hunker down.”  In other words, most businesspeople are 

waiting for others to move first.  I take this as evidence that even a modest amount of additional 

stimulus could have outsized effects over the longer run by changing the dynamic from the 

current stasis to one in which additional demand growth led to employment gains that improve 

confidence.  I think an improvement in confidence might cause businesses to loosen up a bit, and 

all of a sudden we’d be in a virtuous cycle.  I also think that, in this respect, the models that we 

use don’t really capture that kind of “tipping point” concept. 

Third, we were received quite warmly, despite many questions about what we do and 

why we do it.  The questions ranged from our unusual interventions during the crisis to 

understanding why some of us might think that another round of large-scale asset purchases 

might be in order.  People generally do want to understand what we’re trying to accomplish and 

the tools that we have available to do this.  Therefore, to the extent that we can explain our goals 

November 2–3, 2010 75 of 238



 

 

 

and actions clearly, I see this as helpful in boosting confidence and in supporting our own 

credibility. 

Fourth, among the community bankers, there was considerable angst about profitability, 

both from the forthcoming regulatory burden of the Dodd-Frank Act and from the effect of an 

extended period of low short-term rates on net interest margins.  My view is that we need to be 

smart about how the Dodd-Frank Act is implemented; in particular, we don’t want to 

inadvertently create a competitive advantage for larger banks that might have scale economies in 

dealing with that increased regulation.  On the issue of the low level of short-term rates and the 

effect on bank profitability, I think the answer here is to do all we can to get the economy 

moving, so that the low level of short-term rates does not extend beyond the next year or two. 

In terms of the national outlook, I don’t see much change from the last meeting.  The 

economy is currently on a growth trajectory of about 2 percent, which is not sufficient to 

generate enough employment growth to push down the unemployment rate, and I think that’s 

really the key to boosting consumer and business confidence and generally a more favorable 

dynamic for the overall economy.  Some data were a bit stronger—in particular, the consumption 

data and the durable goods orders data.  But against that were more disappointing things, like the 

trade performance and the renewed weakness in home prices and uncertainty about how the 

foreclosure problems will be resolved.  A double dip still seems unlikely to me, and the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York forecast continues to anticipate that the economy will gradually 

strengthen in 2011 and 2012.  But, to my mind, the economy remains vulnerable to negative 

shocks at a time that we’re not that far from outright deflation.  So, despite an okay baseline 

view—in the sense that the economy is going to grow faster—I think the case for further 

November 2–3, 2010 76 of 238



 

 

 

monetary policy stimulus, implemented with care, especially on the communications side, seems 

compelling. 

Finally, I have a few thoughts on financial stability.  There really do remain a number of 

important issues outstanding for some major U.S. financial institutions.  For several, there are 

significant housing-related issues—the poor documentation standards accompanying foreclosure 

filings and the potential for private-label security holders to put back to the issuers mortgages 

that do not comply with the warranties of the original securitizations.  At this juncture, the put-

back issue appears to be potentially more serious because of uncertainty about how the state 

courts will rule on these matters—in other words, how significant must the error be to allow the 

mortgage or security to be put back to the original mortgage issuer—and because there’s a 

potentially large magnitude of dollars involved.  Although the put-back issue will undoubtedly 

take many years to resolve, there’s a risk that an adverse judicial decision for the mortgage 

originator could pull the time frame forward and lead to renewed safety-and-soundness concerns 

for those institutions that securitized a large amount of private-label mortgages. 

A second issue is the risk that the combination of bank holding companies with poor 

earnings and the diminution of government support as a result of the Dodd-Frank Act could lead 

to downgrades in credit ratings—I’ve talked about this in the past.  If this occurred, there could 

even be funding issues for certain institutions.  For now, the rating agencies appear to be patient, 

but this situation could change during the first half of next year, especially if lackluster earnings 

persist, which then leads to questions about the sustainability of individual firms’ business 

models. 

Third, I think market participants may be a bit too sanguine about the effects of the 

Volcker rule implementation on bank profitability.  The major banks are trying to define the 

November 2–3, 2010 77 of 238



 

 

 

Volcker rule very narrowly as only pure proprietary trading.  But the intent of the legislation 

suggests a wider application, and that could have more far-reaching effects for banks’ trading 

businesses, and I’m not sure this is fully incorporated in market prices or market expectations.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data we’ve received during the 

intermeeting period reinforced my view that the path to recovery will involve a long, slow slog.  

I expect unemployment to remain elevated for years to come, and inflation, as far as my eye can 

see, to run below the 2 percent level I consider most consistent with the Committee’s dual 

mandate.  The reports from our business contacts strike me as consistent with such a forecast.  

Outside of housing, where conditions are dismal, they describe an economy that is growing, but 

only at a snail’s pace.  Businesses remain focused on productivity.  They are reluctant to hire and 

invest.  They have little pricing power. 

The heartening news during the intermeeting period is that financial conditions have 

eased meaningfully, as markets have become increasingly convinced we intend to resume our 

LSAP program.  Market views on the odds and magnitude of such a program have shifted back 

and forth over the past several weeks, and that has provided us with real-time readings pertaining 

to its likely impacts on longer-term yields, equity prices, and the dollar.  And, thankfully, the 

implied policy multipliers look to be nontrivial and in line with earlier staff estimates. 

The forecast I prepared for this meeting assumes that the FOMC will ultimately ratify the 

expectations concerning LSAPs that are currently embedded in markets.  In contrast to the 

Tealbook baseline, I assume that we will ultimately add about $1 trillion of Treasuries to our 

balance sheet, although any purchases beyond the $600 billion initial tranche would be 

November 2–3, 2010 78 of 238



 

 

 

contingent on future economic developments.  My assumption about monetary policy involves a 

bit more accommodation than the Tealbook, but I still anticipate a path for GDP, unemployment, 

and inflation that is broadly similar to the Tealbook baseline.  By the end of 2013, I foresee an 

unemployment rate around 7 percent, still meaningfully above my longer-run NAIRU estimate 

of around 5¼ percent, and core inflation that is still in the vicinity of 1 percent. 

With respect to risks to the forecast, I continue to judge the uncertainty attached to my 

projections as unusually high.  An especially large source of uncertainty pertains to consumer 

spending.  The Tealbook assumes that the personal saving rate will stabilize around 5¼ percent, 

and a forecast along these lines appears roughly consistent with the life-cycle consumption 

equations relating spending and income and wealth.  But I remain concerned that the process of 

balance sheet repair in the aftermath of the financial crisis could involve more significant 

deleveraging by households and a rise in the personal saving rate above the Tealbook baseline, 

resulting in outcomes like the weaker recovery alternative in the Tealbook.  Household debt and 

ratios of debt service to income were exceptionally high at the outset of the financial crisis.  They 

have declined over the last two years, thanks in part to defaults.  But the household debt–income 

ratio is still well above historical norms.  Many households now face borrowing constraints that 

are likely to impede their spending.  And, along the lines that President Evans mentioned, debt is 

eroding less rapidly in real terms in the current low-inflation environment than it would if 

inflation were running closer to our target and to the inflation expectations that households had 

when they borrowed.  Stated differently, many households that borrowed during the boom are 

now experiencing wage increases that are notably lower than they must have anticipated.  The 

bottom line is that further deleveraging poses a real risk to the expansion, and this risk is 

exacerbated by very low inflation.  In fairness, though, I think the risks relating to consumer 

November 2–3, 2010 79 of 238



 

 

 

spending are two- and not one-sided.  By now, there appears to be considerable pent-up demand 

for autos and other consumer durables, which could trigger more rapid growth in spending if the 

job market improves and uncertainty about future income abates, similar to the stronger recovery 

scenario. 

The second factor that creates abnormally high risk to the outlook pertains to the financial 

system.  It appears to be healing but remains highly vulnerable to shocks.  We saw last spring 

how rapidly credit conditions could tighten when European sovereign debt concerns mounted, 

and renewed turmoil in connection with sovereign debt cannot be ruled out.  As several of you 

noted, there remain risks associated with the large-scale put-back of mortgages to the banking 

sector, and the excellent financial stability memos prepared by the staff for this meeting highlight 

evidence of asset price bubbles in some markets.  Abrupt shifts in global capital flows could 

trigger asset price movements posing risk to the financial system. 

On the issue of risk skew, I see the risks pertaining to GDP growth as weighted 

asymmetrically to the downside and for an important reason.  Monetary and fiscal policies in the 

United States and other advanced countries have ample latitude to respond if aggregate demand 

proves too robust, but little or no scope to respond to downside shocks. 

Turning to inflation, my forecast is that it will remain in the vicinity of 1 percent for the 

duration of the forecast period.  The data we have received during the intermeeting period 

confirm that core inflation remains extremely low, and disinflation has been broad-based.  

Incoming data reveal that wage trends are extremely subdued, and, even with some slowdown in 

productivity growth, unit labor costs are barely rising.  My concern about the possibility of 

deflation is tempered by my belief, bolstered by survey evidence, that inflation expectations 

continue to be well anchored, creating an offset to the downward pressure on inflation resulting 

November 2–3, 2010 80 of 238



 

 

 

from enormous slack in the labor market.  But we cannot completely dismiss the risk that 

inflation expectations could follow actual inflation down in the years to come. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like many of you, I will start narrowly and 

then go broader.  The report on economic activity in my neighborhood in Georgetown is strong.  

[Laughter]  Also, President Dudley mentioned that he visited upstate New York, where I’m 

from, and he noted that the economy there appeared to be “hunkered down.”  That’s not a near-

term phenomenon—it’s been going on for about 40 years.  [Laughter]  He also noted that the 

economy there was at a tipping point, and that is true, but the only way it ever tips is over.  So, 

Governor Raskin, I did that just so you could see a contrast between Governor Yellen’s formal, 

proper, prepared remarks and my more ad hoc remarks, and you can decide which one is your 

model. 

I’ll comment on three subjects:  first, financial markets, which I think have changed most 

since we met in a meeting here last time; second, inflation; and third, the economy. 

Since our last scheduled FOMC meeting, financial market prices have moved up, in large 

part, because of their expectations about all of us.  I take that kind of move differently from one 

in which the market seemed to be responding to real data on either the global economy or the 

U.S. economy.  Let me offer five takeaways from that.  First, we should not be either surprised 

or particularly comforted that we can move asset prices around.  Our communications have 

proved that we have the power to do that.  That doesn’t mean that the direction in which they’re 

moving is good or bad, but I don’t take a three- or four- or five-week summary and take 

immediate comfort. 

November 2–3, 2010 81 of 238



 

 

 

Second, the Tealbook indicates significant benefits—over and above prior Tealbook 

versions—to the real economy from these policy-induced, intermeeting, “improvements” in 

foreign exchange, equity, and credit markets.  Purportedly, these benefits come through wealth 

effects and, maybe most importantly, through export channels to the real economy.  And the 

Tealbook expects these trends to continue with some force.  I must admit to being uneasy about 

these trend lines going forward—I’m less certain of the resulting benefits, leery of the potential 

costs, and far less inclined to believe that these moves are necessarily persistent and durable.  

And with respect to the foreign exchange markets, it’s still not obvious to me whether these 

moves are, in fact, more dangerous than desirable over the medium term. 

Third, the Tealbook does not extrapolate the recent increases in market prices for 

commodities into the future—instead, it follows the typical convention of tracking down quotes 

from futures markets and, as a result, has nonfuel commodity prices moving broadly down from 

these levels next year.  This is a key assumption in the model.  I’m skeptical that these recent 

increases in commodity prices are all to the good, that is, that they’re all helping nominal growth 

or helping the state of the U.S. economy, and I’m far less sure that the prices of these 

commodities will fall accordingly to the Tealbook estimates. 

Fourth—the credit markets.  The credit markets are flying.  Brian accurately reported in 

his discussion at the beginning that spreads are compressing, new issuers who did not have 

access now do, the all-in cost of funding is falling fast, and the queues are lining up outside of 

Wall Street firms to access these markets.  If you look at the high-yield market, you see new 

volumes, you see improved prices and improved terms.  As a result, many businesses that, 6 or 

12 months ago, I would have described as having broken capital structures and facing a 

bankruptcy process are now seeing those deals being delayed, deferred, or renegotiated; and 

November 2–3, 2010 82 of 238



 

 

 

there are many sponsors of these in the corporate world and in the real estate world who could 

not be happier at the prospects of easier monetary policy.  I haven’t heard such positive reports 

about the credit market since early 2007, and that didn’t seem to go so well. 

Fifth—the stock market.  It is, of course, good news that equity prices have moved up, 

but I’m less convinced of their durability if this achievement is mostly because of what we’re 

doing here in the FOMC rather than because of what’s going on in the real economy.  To sum 

up, I take a less positive signal than the Tealbook does that what we’ve seen in the intermeeting 

period is as durable as we would need it to be to produce all the benefits to the real economy that 

the Tealbook suggests. 

Let me turn to inflation.  Recent measures of inflation look low and stable to me, and the 

recent trends for non-U.S. growth, oil, commodities, and the dollar, suggest to me pressures that 

will push prices higher in 2011 than the Tealbook suggests.  The Tealbook has prices of core 

imports up 5 percent this quarter and projects that nonfuel commodity prices will increase at an 

annual rate of 30 percent this quarter—that is a move up of 20 percentage points above the prior 

Tealbook, a very notable change—and the Tealbook assumes that movements in the prices of 

energy and imports will only have minor implications for domestic inflation.  That may be, but 

I’m less certain. 

Let me make a second point on inflation, consistent with what some of you have already 

said.  My dialogues with business leaders have turned markedly—that is, even with large pools 

of unemployed that are ostensibly keeping wage pressures low, nonwage costs are finally 

working their way through the system.  The pass-through of commodity prices into final goods in 

consumer and industrial sectors is real, and it does impact my view of the inflation pressures in 

2011.  Moreover, anecdotes of increases in commercial and residential rents, increases in prices 

November 2–3, 2010 83 of 238



 

 

 

for rental cars, increases in prices for airline fares, and increases in room rates across hotels is a 

more significant change from the providers and leaders in this industry than any that I’ve seen in 

my time at the Federal Reserve.  It’s true that those are just finding their way into the system 

now, and they could well be overwhelmed by what’s happening on the wage side, but, again, I 

must admit to not being so sure.  What’s the driver of this change in rents?  What’s the driver of 

the change in airline prices?  I would say it’s mostly restricted supply.  It’s mostly no new 

buildings and shopping centers coming on line for reasons we’ve all discussed—very few new 

market entrants, considerably less competition in some of these businesses.  So I believe that 

many of these costs will find their way into sales prices—but time will tell. 

The third and final point on inflation, Mr. Chairman, is about inflation expectations.  

They’ve moved up, and they’ve moved around quite a bit, and I wouldn’t be surprised if they 

moved up a bit more.  Policy seems to be encouraging that, and, while some take comfort in that, 

I must say I measure that comfort with a little bit of concern as well. 

Now let me turn to the economy.  The U.S. economy continues to be mired in a sluggish 

recovery.  The adjectives that many of you used are adjectives that I would use, but I would 

suggest that the ability of us around the table to have a material effect on that contour is 

overstated.  Changes in fiscal, regulatory, and trade policies, which are long in the making and 

which have been unfriendly to economic growth for several years, are, I think, the most 

responsible party.  And I do not expect the economy to turn durably in a more constructive 

direction until these other macroeconomic policies stop being so growth-defeating. 

My own projections for economic growth and employment continue, for about the tenth 

meeting, to put me among the most pessimistic about near-term economic growth.  Harm is 

being done to the supply side of the economy, and I share the staff’s view that the NAIRU has 

November 2–3, 2010 84 of 238



 

 

 

moved up.  I don’t know how permanent that will be—I think that’s a function of what happens 

with these other policies, and I fear that potential GDP has really slipped. 

The Fed is capable of a lot of things, but it’s not capable, in my view, of moving the dial 

tremendously on economic growth from here.  In that sense, it makes our current situation quite 

different from the situation when we were deeply involved in addressing the crisis, and the risk-

reward tradeoff using nonstandard tools is different from when we use conventional policy.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Banking conditions continue along a path of 

improving credit quality and weak demand for new loans.  In the face of credit healing and 

expectations for us to purchase additional long-term assets, the focus of bank management has 

moved from the credit committee to the asset/liability management committee.  Under the 

watchful eye of stern supervision and suffering from their own post-traumatic shock, bankers say 

they’re unwilling to move further down the credit spectrum to generate loan volume or take on 

interest rate risk by loading up on longer-term assets.  So their plans to improve interest margins 

center on repricing and reducing liabilities to make their balance sheet fit the available 

acceptable assets.  I’m still trying to puzzle out how additional reserves are going to feed through 

the economy while bank balance sheet management is working in the opposite direction from 

their normal patterns and while loans and balance sheets are shrinking.  I wonder if it’s possible 

for money creation to work in reverse, and I wonder how depositors will react as deposit rates go 

to zero. 

A banker pointed out to me recently that the credit metrics are improving faster than the 

overall economy and, specifically, than unemployment.  The reasons given for this phenomenon, 

November 2–3, 2010 85 of 238



 

 

 

I think, highlight changes beneath the surface in bank credit.  The first reason involves the 

portfolio-replacement effect.  Banks have now been underwriting new loans under tighter 

standards and with an eye toward negative economic conditions for nearly three years.  Natural 

turnover rates in bank portfolios are actually fairly high, so, with the exception of construction 

and commercial real estate portfolios, newly underwritten loans are now a significant fraction of 

the total portfolio. 

Next, bank customers are much more careful about debt.  Customers and businesses are 

deleveraging, reducing their debt, and building precautionary balances.  They’re refinancing to 

restructure existing debt and to lock in low-rate financing, but they’re not yet willing to use the 

available low-rate financing for new purchases or investment.  However, the low rates are 

making existing debt burdens less onerous.  Lower debt service is giving consumers more cash 

for spending, helping fragile small businesses hang on, and enabling property owners to cover 

debt service with reduced rents.  But I would note the other side:  Reduced interest income for 

others is now beginning to contribute to lower personal income.  On balance, low rates may keep 

things from deteriorating again even if they don’t give anyone incentives to add debt.  Low rates 

are also helping to stabilize real estate prices, and stable prices reduce loss severities when loans 

are charged off.  They change the incentives for homeowners to walk away or for commercial 

real estate sponsors to stop feeding their deals. 

Finally, consumer loan defaults are driven by the newly unemployed.  Once charged off, 

they don’t reappear.  So charge-offs track initial claims more than unemployment.  Given the 

high level of long-term unemployed, a reduction in the unemployment rate caused by those 

people finding work would not necessarily improve existing credit, but it would be helpful to 

new loan demand. 

November 2–3, 2010 86 of 238



 

 

 

My conclusion is that lowering longer-term rates will help banks repair credit portfolios 

and will help nonfinancial businesses and consumers repair their balance sheets, but, unless it 

makes a big difference getting people into jobs, it won’t support new borrowing. 

One last topic that I want to touch on is the foreclosure documentation issue.  I talked 

pretty extensively at our last meeting about my belief that the enormous extended foreclosure 

pipeline would stifle the housing market recovery for years.  The problems in individual 

foreclosure documentation and the issues raised about establishing the chain of title for 

securitized mortgages will only delay recovery further.  I believe it’s absolutely critical to 

investigate fully and understand all the different documentation problems and to find ways to 

solve them in a timely manner.  We must move forward in clearing the market without allowing 

homeowners to be foreclosed upon improperly.  “Improperly,” in my mind, means not 

foreclosing on those who are still making their payments.  One large servicer reported that loans 

going to final foreclosure have, on average, not had a payment for 560 days.  In nonjudicial 

foreclosure states, 80 percent have not made a payment in more than one year; 30 percent have 

not paid in two years.  The number is even worse in judicial foreclosure states, where 95 percent 

have not made a payment in more than one year and 45 percent have not made a payment in 

more than two years.  Vacant properties create real problems for neighborhoods, and different 

servicers estimated that between 30 and 40 percent of the properties currently in the foreclosure 

pipeline are vacant. 

To the extent that the problems involve state-established legal processes, they’ll need to 

be resolved under state law.  To the extent that the issues go to the problem of ignoring 

differences in state law when establishing a national credit market, it will be important to address 

November 2–3, 2010 87 of 238



 

 

 

the resolution of the specific problems, but even more important to consider those differences in 

state laws regarding mortgage finance and securitization in the future. 

Finally, these problems have highlighted the operational risk and realistic staffing 

requirements for the mortgage business.  Elevated spreads between retail mortgage rates and 

MBS yields demonstrate how reduced origination capacity keeps the lowest rates on MBS from 

feeding through to actual mortgage rates.  Origination of full-documentation mortgages takes 

about twice the time of low-documentation mortgages, and, as more quality control problems 

surface, processing is likely to take even longer.  The crisis has shown servicers to be woefully 

understaffed and behind the curve throughout the cycle, so servicing costs will likely change 

dramatically. 

I bring this up to highlight that, in addition to solving for the role of government in 

housing finance, the proper alignment of risks in the securitization process, the appropriate form 

and content of disclosure to consumers, the data necessary to track mortgage performance, and 

the rights and priorities of lien holders, we need to be sure that the process is adequately and 

appropriately staffed through the mortgage life cycle.  All of these requirements will put a floor 

on mortgage rates, a floor that I suspect we’re already approaching.  We continue to talk about 

financial markets being healed, but I do not view the mortgage or the MBS market to be 

anywhere close to healed.  The mortgage market represents a substantial fraction of the long-

term debt market, but dysfunctions in this market go well beyond those that can be addressed 

through monetary policy. 

Finally, because of my concern about the foreclosure impact, I’ve taken any recovery of 

residential investment for 2011 and 2012 out of my forecast, which results in a reduction of 

November 2–3, 2010 88 of 238



 

 

 

about ½ percentage point in the economic growth rates in the Tealbook for each year.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There’s been no significant change in my 

outlook since the September meeting, and, actually, there was no significant change between the 

August meeting and the September meeting.  That’s not really good news for the economy 

insofar as my outlook is, I think, at the very bottom of everybody’s projections, but you might 

have thought it was good news for you, at least, because I wouldn’t have anything more to say.  

[Laughter]  No such luck. 

What I’ve been thinking about the last few weeks was actually prompted by some 

discussions that I had with some of my counterparts from foreign central banks during the 

Bank/Fund meetings a few weeks ago.  The discussions started on the topics of a double-dip 

recession and deflation, but they gravitated fairly quickly to considering the potential outcomes 

in industrial economies, such as the continental European economies and the U.S., if they face an 

extended period of very tepid growth, that is, growth at or slightly below trend.  In particular, the 

discussion focused on the degree to which such a period of growth could have some self-

replicating characteristics, thereby producing some losses that would not necessarily be apparent 

just from extrapolation of a growth rate like that over time. 

So I asked myself:  Well, what are the prospects for growth?  And every single one of 

you is somewhat more optimistic than I am, though not a whole lot more.  There may well be 

some momentum building up over time simply because things will get better after a period of 

time when they stop getting worse, and it’s for that reason that I actually have a little bit of 

upside risk on my own otherwise gloomy forecast. 

November 2–3, 2010 89 of 238



 

 

 

I also did try to look systematically at what are arguably leading economic indicators.  

And I looked not just at those formally noted by the Conference Board, but also at other 

indicators drawn from the data that people here aggregate for us—both objective ones, like 

housing permits and capital goods orders, and subjective ones, like consumer confidence and 

business sentiment.  Most, although not all, of those pieces of information are positive; most, 

although not all, are only mildly so, particularly considering the low baseline against which even 

positive data are being measured.  And I certainly didn’t see a case for a pattern suggesting an 

acceleration of growth.  So it seemed to me not unreasonable to hypothesize that a relatively 

tepid pace of growth continues for some period of time.  Clearly, the handoff from one stage of 

recovery to another hasn’t been smooth.  The period late last year and early this year of stimulus, 

inventory replenishing, and relief that the cataclysm had been avoided, has not led smoothly to a 

more self-sustaining growth supported by consumer demand.  That fact, too, seemed to me to 

reinforce the prospects for quite contained levels of economic growth going forward. 

What do I worry about under those circumstances?  Well, first, we’re clearly in a 

liquidity bog, if not a liquidity trap.  And in the absence of an increase in aggregate demand, 

there doesn’t seem to be any real prospect of pulling ourselves out of that mire.  Second—and 

Eric alluded to this—at some point we’re likely to see some hysteresis effects taking hold in the 

labor market.  While I think that, to date, the evidence is fairly limited on whether skills 

mismatches have led to increasing structural unemployment, a high enough level of long-term 

unemployment will almost surely produce just such a result over time.  Third, while we know 

that firms are adding very little additional productive capacity in the face of weak demand, they 

may also be taking capacity off line or allowing their ability to increase production quickly to 

atrophy.  This phenomenon is probably the hardest of the three to document, in large part 

November 2–3, 2010 90 of 238



 

 

 

because we simply don’t have data on capacity in the 80 percent or so of our economy that’s not 

industrial.  But one suspects, or at least I suspect, that some of the firms that have been able to 

maintain rising profits in the face of sluggish sales have done so not just through increased 

efficiencies, but also through cost reductions effected by de facto capacity reductions. 

Now, each of these three factors would surely be reduced by sustained increases in 

aggregate demand, but, again, in the absence of prospects for increased employment, it’s hard for 

me to see where that aggregate demand comes from.  So I think it’s not inconceivable that we’re 

facing a recovery even slower than the modest pace expected in the aftermath of a recession 

induced by a financial crisis, even slower than that reflected in the Tealbook, and even slower 

than the central tendency of our own forecast for this quarter.  But worse still, the economy could 

see a greater increase in the NAIRU and a lower level of potential growth because of the kinds of 

effects I mentioned a moment ago.  In that case, there would be a longer lasting impact of the 

slower period of growth, one that would stretch out for years even beyond those that we now 

anticipate.  So, in short, my concern is that a reluctance to provide further stimulus on the 

grounds that structural constraints limit growth at present could itself become a self-fulfilling 

prophecy. That kind of thought is overhanging my forecast, and it’s also the way that I’ll be 

thinking about policy tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My projections are roughly consistent with 

those described in the Tealbook.  The economic recovery remains quite gradual.  Aggregate 

demand remains inadequate, and I’ll underscore two ways in which I believe this is manifest.  

First, weakness of aggregate demand is reflected in the fading effects of the federal stimulus 

spending and the fact that local and state governments are shedding tens of thousands of 

November 2–3, 2010 91 of 238



 

 

 

employees.  In particular, in the state and local sector, budget pressures are projected to ease only 

slowly, as any expected rise in tax collections from the recovering economy are partially offset 

by the unwinding of the federal stimulus grants.  So real spending in this sector is anticipated to 

increase only about ½ percent next year and 1¼ percent in 2012.  Further weakness is evident in 

the housing sector.  The level of housing prices is down by roughly 1 percent since August.  

Housing demand remains weak, and foreclosure volumes are sizable.  Anecdotally, the 

slowdown in home sales now exacerbated by foreclosure documentation issues impinges on 

labor mobility; in other words, people’s ability to move to new cities to look for jobs is being 

hampered, exacerbating unemployment issues. 

In sum, the latest growth numbers for GDP of 2 percent cannot produce the demand 

needed to reduce our 9.6 percent unemployment rate.  Indeed, the unemployment rate is not 

expected to fall below 9 percent until 2012, and inflation remains below levels that are consistent 

with the FOMC’s objectives for quite a bit longer.  Being this far from the dual mandate goals 

presents problems.  If high unemployment continues, our country risks losing human capital, as 

the skills of the unemployed erode, and this very low inflation could heighten the risk that 

adverse shocks could lead to deflation and a protracted period of extremely poor economic 

performance.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thank you all, as always, for interesting 

comments.  Let me try to summarize very briefly, with the caveat that views seem somewhat 

more dispersed this time, and, therefore, I may not be able to capture everybody’s nuances. 

Generally speaking, the contours of the outlook look pretty similar to what people were 

seeing in September, although obviously the views represent a downgrade from the June 

projections.  The recovery is continuing, but it was characterized by a variety of unappetizing 

November 2–3, 2010 92 of 238



 

 

 

adjectives, including “lackluster,” “disappointing,” “slow,” and “moderate.”  An increased rate 

of economic growth in 2011 is generally expected, but there are significant headwinds, including 

credit restrictions, especially to SMEs; the need for deleveraging by households; continued 

severe weakness in housing and commercial real estate; the end of the inventory cycle; fiscal 

drag; and the drain of some demand growth overseas, among others.  There were hints of 

optimism, but some also cited downside risk with respect to the economic growth outlook.  

Uncertainty is high, and it seems to be a pervasive issue for both the economy and for the 

Committee. 

An important consequence of slow economic growth is that unemployment is likely to 

decline, at best, very slowly—it may even increase in the near term.  There may have been a 

structural break in terms of the pace of the recovery of employment following recessions, and 

there is disagreement about the extent to which unemployment is amenable to countercyclical 

policies—some thought not very amenable, but others cited the lack of aggregate demand as a 

key source of slow employment gains and worried about hysteresis.  Ongoing declines in house 

prices, tight credit, the need for deleveraging, and weakness in the labor market have contributed 

to the weak tone of consumer confidence and spending. 

Financial conditions have improved somewhat in the past few months in anticipation of 

further easing of monetary policy.  Stock prices are up.  Credit spreads have tightened, and the 

dollar is down.  Banks see better credit quality but are being hampered by new concerns about 

foreclosure documentation and possible put-backs of defective mortgages, as well as by new 

financial regulations.  Small banks also cite the regulatory burden.  The problems with 

foreclosure documentation could, in turn, delay foreclosures and necessary adjustments in the 

housing and mortgage markets.  Large firms continue to be liquid, with good access to credit—

November 2–3, 2010 93 of 238



 

 

 

banks are actively seeking their business—but they are disinclined to hire U.S. workers.  Many 

small and medium-sized enterprises still see credit as a problem, if not the principal one.  Some 

capital investment is taking place to improve productivity or increase market share, but top-line 

demand is not growing much.  Some industries are doing relatively well, including energy, 

agriculture, IT, and some parts of manufacturing. 

Internationally, Asia is growing quickly and is an attractive place for investment.  

Conditions in Japan and Europe are more mixed, and sovereign debt risks remain an issue in 

Europe. 

Inflation has drifted down some this year, especially as reflected in core measures.  Wage 

growth has also fallen, perhaps reflecting the extent of resource slack.  Near-term headline 

inflation may be lifted by energy and import prices.  Inflation breakevens are up but are within 

recent ranges.  Private-sector forecasts and surveys suggest reasonable underlying stability in 

inflation expectations.  Inflation forecasts around the table are diverse, with some seeing further 

disinflation arising from resource slack, and others seeing the rate of price increases picking up 

over the next few years.  Pricing power still seems very limited, but some firms expect to 

increase prices somewhat in the future.  Some nominal variables like M2 and nominal GDP are 

growing more quickly. 

Participants see both upside and downside risks to inflation in the medium term.  

Disinflation raises real interest rates and thus serves to tighten monetary policy implicitly, a 

particular problem in a liquidity trap.  However, real yields are very low on an absolute basis and 

may be indicative of risk aversion. 

It’s a bit of a potted summary.  Are there any comments?  Anything important?  [No 

response] 

November 2–3, 2010 94 of 238



 

 

 

I won’t give a close reading of the economy, because that’s already been done.  Rather, 

because I know everyone is going to want to be talking about LSAPs and the policy options in 

the next go-round, which we’ll leave until tomorrow, I think the most useful thing for me to do is 

to try to lay out the issues and the concerns, and I hope that will focus tomorrow’s discussion 

somewhat. 

My very first important comment is that you should use the term LSAP and not QE.  

[Laughter]  This is not quantitative easing—this is not about the monetary base.  That’s the most 

important thing I’m going to say. 

Let’s look at the issues.  The first question I want to address is whether there is a need 

now for additional monetary stimulus.  I think there is.  There has been considerable markdown 

in the outlook.  I’ve looked at this for the last few meetings, and I’ve cited the numbers, but I’ll 

look at them one more time.  In April, the staff was predicting real GDP growth of about 

3.6 percent in 2010 and 4.4 percent in 2011.  Now that’s down to something closer to a little over 

2 percent in 2010 and 3.3 percent in 2011, excluding the financial market effects.  Meanwhile, 

unemployment is now projected next year to be about a percentage point higher than it was in 

April.  Roughly speaking, since April the predicted level of GDP at the end of 2011 has been 

marked down by about 2½ percentage points.  So, roughly speaking again, we’ve lost a year of 

economic growth just in the markdown since April, and, by Okun’s law, that’s about a 

percentage point in unemployment.  Thus, the recovery has been pushed out about a year, and 

the outlook, therefore, as many people have noted, remains fairly drab. 

Now, in April and May, we were initially thinking that this was potentially a soft patch 

associated with the European sovereign debt crisis, and it may be that the debt crisis created 

some additional risk aversion in financial markets.  But I think at this point we would agree that 

November 2–3, 2010 95 of 238



 

 

 

those factors are behind us and that we’re now facing a recovery that has slowed and does not 

seem to have the momentum that we were hoping for earlier in the year. 

Given this very slow growth outlook, I think there are several grounds on which we 

might consider additional stimulus at this juncture.  I would call the first argument the “optimal 

policy” argument.  We are at the zero lower bound, we are in a liquidity trap, and, therefore, 

analyzing policy is more difficult than usual.  However, with the staff’s help, we have got some 

useful linkages between the conventional interest rate policies we’re used to and the 

nonconventional LSAPs that we are currently contemplating.  In particular, Michael Kiley and 

some of his colleagues have done calculations showing the correspondences between cuts in the 

federal funds rate and changes in the amount of assets that we hold. 

One way to think about our policy options, then, is to begin with thinking about what we 

would be doing with the federal funds rate if we weren’t at the zero bound.  I must say, right up 

front, the answer differs considerably according to the rule or model that you’re using.  For 

example, the Taylor 1993 rule suggests that we should be at about minus 75 basis points, and, 

translating LSAPs into funds rate cuts, we’re already there, so the Taylor 1993 rule would not 

suggest we do much more.  The Taylor 1999 rule, by contrast would have us at minus 400 basis 

points at this point in order to be at the appropriate spot. 

One useful intermediate case is the optimal control analysis, which is done in the 

Tealbook, Book B.  It starts from the current level and requires rates to adjust only gradually.  It 

implies that, taking into account all of the factors that the staff considers for the forecast, we 

should be somewhere around minus 360 basis points by the middle of 2011.  If you assume a 

correspondence between LSAPs and the federal funds rate, as given by the staff’s analysis, 

where $150 to $200 billion of LSAPs equals a 25 basis point move in the funds rate, the optimal 

November 2–3, 2010 96 of 238



 

 

 

control analysis suggests we need about $1.5 trillion more of securities purchases to meet the 

requirements of the rule.  Of course, that would not restore the economy in any short period of 

time, but it would put us on the right path.  This is, admittedly, a difficult and rough calculation, 

but clearly we have to think beyond the fact that we’re at the zero lower bound and consider 

what kind of metrics we can use to think about additional policy action.  So, one baseline 

consideration, the optimal control analysis, would suggest that we need to do about $1.5 trillion 

more. 

Having said that, one point that I’ve made consistently and that all of you have made is 

that, in fact, we are not in a federal funds rate world—we’re using nonconventional instruments, 

which are uncertain in their use and have potential side effects.  Therefore, going back to the golf 

analogy that President Fisher reminded me of, the usual principles would suggest that one would 

be more conservative than otherwise.  I’m obviously not going to be proposing $1.5 trillion 

either now or necessarily at any time in the future.  So, argument number one is that we’re still 

too tight, given some standard metrics. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sorry to interrupt, but in terms of the equivalency you’re 

describing, my understanding is it’s about the expected stock of purchases. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right, the expected stock.  I’m talking about the size of the 

balance sheet that we would ultimately want to have, and that doesn’t preclude any kind of 

adjustment process or whatever that might be. 

The second argument is also in some sense an implication of the zero lower bound, and it 

is that we face asymmetric risks.  I’ll cite two in particular that I think are important.  The first 

November 2–3, 2010 97 of 238



 

 

 

has to do with the behavior of unemployment and the possibility that the recovery will stall.  

We’re currently at a rate of economic growth of about 2 percent, which, as you know, would 

actually result in unemployment tending to rise, according to Okun’s law.  So we’re not 

expecting any improvement in unemployment in the next quarter or two.  In fact, I think there’s a 

reasonable risk that we’ll see unemployment go up somewhat.  And that raises the risk—which 

could be somewhat greater than some might think—that the recovery could actually stall.  There 

is this concept of a two-state model of expansions and recessions.  It has also been expressed 

more informally in terms of escape velocity, and there’s something called the 0.3 percentage 

point rule, which says that if the unemployment rate rises by 0.3, you’ll have a recession, which 

always seems to work.  The point here is only that, if the economy slows considerably more, the 

possibility that we’ll get into a bad spiral of declining confidence, spending, and income is 

something to be worried about; and, given the lack of tools that we do have, our ability to 

address that situation would be limited.  The second and related asymmetric downside risk is a 

deflationary trap, which Presidents Bullard and Kocherlakota, for example, have talked about.  In 

a deflationary trap, you get a vicious circle of declining prices, higher real interest rates because 

of the zero lower bound, and then a weaker economy.  The point I want to make is that, although 

I think actual deflation is not that likely, this adverse spiral can happen even if you have just 

disinflation, because disinflation, of course, raises real interest rates.  So, again, the risks are 

somewhat asymmetric in that it’s difficult to address those downside risks, whereas the upside 

risks of too rapid growth or too high inflation within limits can be addressed by raising interest 

rates.  That being said, I want to acknowledge and state very clearly that I think we ought to be 

extremely sensitive to inflation expectations.  It’s possible that they could move discontinuously, 

and that would be a counterargument to this point of view. 

November 2–3, 2010 98 of 238



 

 

 

A third argument for additional support is what I would call the “long-run effects” 

argument.  There’s a classic paper by Lucas where he essentially argues that business cycles are 

not all that important in the end, because they’re only temporary fluctuations in consumption and 

income.  Therefore, the case for addressing a business cycle more aggressively depends at least 

in part on the extent to which the recession has permanent effects on the economy.  Governor 

Tarullo raised this point.  One way that the current slow economic growth or a double-dip 

recession could have permanent effects would be, of course, if it led to a permanently higher 

NAIRU or created hysteresis in the labor market.  That would transform what we hope is a 

relatively short-term business cycle into a long-term loss of growth and employment.  A 

deflationary trap also could be very long-term, as Japan’s “lost decade” suggests. 

Summing up, there are a number of reasons to think that the economy is too weak and 

needs additional help.  I think the bottom line for me is something I’ve said at a number of 

meetings before:  It strikes me that it’s very hard to rationalize the fact that we are going to be 

missing on both sides of our mandate in the same direction for the foreseeable future.  Even if 

you were satisfied with 1 percent or 1½ percent inflation, you might want to consider whether a 

somewhat higher rate of inflation—still a reasonable one, say, 2 percent—might be the right 

thing to do if it were possible to use that to improve economic growth and employment. 

That’s a very long disquisition on the question of whether we need to provide additional 

help.  I think we do, and I think we’re missing the mandate in the same direction on both sides, 

and that’s really very hard to defend. 

Now, all of that is very interesting, but it doesn’t do much for us if we don’t have tools 

that will work.  If LSAPs are not going to affect the economy, then there’s not much benefit to 

worrying about it.  I think they will work, and let me talk about the two stages of the operation.  

November 2–3, 2010 99 of 238



 

 

 

The first stage has to do with easing financial conditions.  And, again, this is part of my reaction 

to the term QE—you hear people say sometimes, “Well, the economy is flooded with liquidity, 

so putting in more liquidity is not going to help.”  That’s not how this is supposed to work.  The 

way this is supposed to work is by affecting asset prices—changing relative rates of return—and 

through the changes in asset prices affecting financial conditions and, therefore, affecting the 

economy.  While you could argue in theory about whether asset purchases are neutral or not, the 

practical experience of the last month or two shows pretty definitively that our discussion of 

potential asset purchases has, without the possibility of denial, I think, affected asset prices 

relatively significantly.  You also can question how much movement has occurred in response to 

our discussions of potential asset purchases.  The staff has actually been quite conservative in its 

analysis of how much of the movement to attribute to that, and I’ll discuss that in more detail 

shortly.  In any case, in just the last couple of months, we’ve seen, for example, a 13 percent 

increase in the S&P 500, we’ve seen real 10-year yields down 45 basis points, as President 

Kocherlakota pointed out, we’ve seen spreads narrowing in credit markets, and we’ve even seen 

declines in nominal Treasury yields.  If all of these effects are coming from good news about the 

economy, then the movements in the equity prices and the real interest rates seem somewhat 

inconsistent with each other.  As I said, the staff is fairly conservative in how much of this they 

attribute to the potential policy action, but I think there’s pretty strong evidence that we are 

affecting financial prices and financial conditions. 

But that’s not enough, and President Fisher and others have been eloquent in arguing that 

we can change asset prices and we can provide liquidity, but, like the proverbial horse that we’ve 

brought to water, we can’t “make the economy drink.”  What about the transmission mechanism?  

Is the transmission mechanism broken? 

November 2–3, 2010 100 of 238



 

 

 

A very useful way to approach this might be to start with the staff analysis on page 4 of 

the Tealbook, Book A, which is the box comparing the policies.  In particular, it compares the 

announcement of zero LSAPs with an announcement tomorrow of $600 billion, which was the 

baseline, and no further purchases beyond that.  I think it will be useful to discuss that 

comparison as well as areas where we think the analysis is either too optimistic or insufficiently 

optimistic. 

Again, the staff’s analysis of the effects of the changes in asset prices on the economy is 

pretty careful and conservative.  First, as I mentioned, they’ve been pretty careful not to over-

attribute the recent asset price movements to policy expectations; for example, they attribute only 

about a 2½ percent decline in the dollar to these policy expectations, which seems like a fairly 

modest effect.  They’re also conservative in some other ways.  For example, they’re very 

careful—and I think this is admirable—to assume that the markets are anticipating $1 trillion, so 

that, when we do only $600 billion, the disappointment will set in, and that will lead to less 

stimulus than you might think based on recent asset price movements.  They also are careful to 

take into account terminal conditions; that is, they require that the purchases be reversed over a 

time period similar to what we are currently planning, so the effects of the LSAPs are limited by 

the fact that our holdings of them are time-limited. 

I would also argue that the staff analysis ignores some potential transmission 

mechanisms.  For example, it assumes that longer-term inflation expectations are simply given, 

which, then, ignores changes in inflation expectations as a possible mechanism for this policy.  

Yet, as I mentioned, 10-year yields have fallen 45 basis points in real terms, and almost all of 

that is the change in the break-even rate, not in the level of the nominal rate.  I think it’s an open 

question as to whether the real interest rate is better measured using the real rate in the TIPS 

November 2–3, 2010 101 of 238



 

 

 

market or better measured using a constant inflation expectation.  So, to the extent that there’s 

any change in inflation expectations, the analysis in the Tealbook is understating the potential 

effects.  The Tealbook also ignores what I believe you would call balance sheet effects.  Higher 

collateral values, such as higher prices of commercial real estate and the like, can reduce 

borrowing constraints and can reduce financial stress.  It’s not clear how big an effect that is, but 

it is certainly one effect that could occur because of lower interest rates and, perhaps, slightly 

higher inflation expectations.  A third factor that the analysis ignores is any nonlinearities or any 

tipping point phenomena.  Everything in the analysis is linear—you can figure out the effects of 

a $1trillion purchase just by extrapolating from $600 billion.  But if you have tail risks, like 

deflation risks or a double-dip recession risk, then the potential benefits of avoiding a tipping 

point are understated by this kind of analysis. 

Now, it’s certainly possible that there are ways in which the staff analysis is overstating 

the effects.  For example, it has been argued that firms have so much cash that they’re essentially 

going to be indifferent to changes in interest rates.  I’m not so sure about that.  Remember that 

the opportunity cost of cash does not depend on whether you’re holding cash or not.  If interest 

rates go down and you have a lot of cash, another way of thinking about it is that you need to 

find some way to invest it, some way to use it.  Lower rates ought to have some effect on 

spending decisions, and, indeed, around the table we heard discussion about how firms are using 

investment to increase productivity and increase share, even if they’re not seeing much aggregate 

demand.  Of course, this would increase aggregate demand through, for example, consumption, 

wealth effects, and the dollar.  So the combination of a lower cost of funding and more final 

demand, I think, would have some effect on investment.  That being said, as was pointed out in 

November 2–3, 2010 102 of 238



 

 

 

the earlier discussion, the real interest rate effects are only about 15 or 20 percent of the total 

effect that the staff is assuming in its transmission mechanism. 

There are also some other negatives to take into account.  One that Governor Warsh 

pointed out was higher commodity prices.  It’s theoretically possible that commodity prices 

could rise so much in response to a purchase program that the effects on disposable income 

would negate the benefits of the program.  Of course, the staff’s analysis takes into account the 

implications of the dollar and lower interest rates on commodity prices.  I’ve discussed this with 

the staff, and, while I won’t go into detail, the bottom line is that you need to see an 

extraordinary increase in commodity prices—I don’t mean $30 or $40 on a barrel of oil, I mean 

much, much more than that—to offset the beneficial effects on real output of the weaker dollar 

and the other changes in financial conditions. 

The last point I want to make is to turn to the question of whether this is worth the candle.  

President Lacker raised this issue of why bother if the effect is going to be so small.  According 

to the staff analysis, the $600 billion purchase with no follow-up leads to an increase of real GDP 

at the end of 2012 of 0.7 percent, and $1 trillion would raise output by 1.1 percent.  Is this 

significant or not significant?  Well, another way to look at this is to consider that the 

$600 billion program, according to the staff, would reduce the unemployment rate by 

0.3 percentage point by the end of 2012.  In addition, remember that Okun’s law means that there 

are a lot of employment effects other than just the unemployment rate, so a 0.3 percentage point 

improvement in the unemployment rate translates into a 0.7 percent gain in private hours, or 

about 750,000 jobs.  That’s the implication of the analysis, and of course, it would be more than 

a million jobs if you did the bigger program.  Meanwhile, the staff’s estimates of the effects on 

November 2–3, 2010 103 of 238



 

 

 

inflation are very small, and, starting from where we are today, that’s actually a benefit, not a 

cost. 

To summarize, we’re missing both parts of the mandate on the same side.  The asset 

purchases appear to be stimulative, and, therefore, they move us in the appropriate direction. 

Relative to standard policy, though, there are a number of risks and costs, and, at the risk 

of testing your patience, let me just discuss a few of those, and then I’ll bring this to a close.  

What are the risks that we might face if we undertake this program?  I’m going to focus on the 

dollar, but I’ll mention a few of the others as I go along.  The decline in the dollar is part of the 

LSAP transmission mechanism, and, certainly, it would be a very serious concern if we thought 

that this was going to create a disorderly or an excessive decline in the dollar.  Nobody knows 

exactly how this will work, of course, but based on what we’ve already seen, I think the odds of 

anything extraordinary happening are pretty low. 

First of all, the absolute effects don’t seem to be that large—the staff estimates the effect 

of even $1 trillion of purchases on the dollar to be about 2½ percent, which is much smaller than 

the movement in the dollar over the summer, when we saw the reversal of the safe-haven flows 

associated with the European debt crisis.  The dollar is not particularly weak—it is about where 

it was in the mid-1990s in real terms.  Indeed, arguably, a depreciation would be stabilizing in 

terms of our trade balance.  According to the IMF, the dollar is now overvalued from between 

zero to 15 percent.  So the dollar is not excessively weak, and it doesn’t seem likely that it would 

be driven down very much by LSAPs. 

In addition, as Brian pointed out, even though markets are fully aware of these possible 

actions, there are absolutely no indications in markets that there is stress in terms of the dollar.  

Implied volatility on the dollar is way off earlier peaks and is comparable to the decade before 

November 2–3, 2010 104 of 238



 

 

 

the crisis.  Risk reversals show that markets anticipate dollar appreciation, not dollar 

depreciation.  Market functioning is normal.  Bid-asked spreads are very low.  So there just 

really isn’t much evidence at this point that the dollar is under any particular stress, even though 

markets anticipate this action. 

A related point, which was part of the discussion that Nathan had earlier on, is the 

potential for a so-called spillover effect of a weaker dollar on emerging markets.  Of course, I 

understand those issues, and I am sympathetic to them as well, but there are two responses to the 

concern that LSAPs amount to an aggressive or adverse act with respect to emerging markets.  

The first is that, of course, emerging markets need a strong U.S. economy.  I had substantial 

discussions about this with a number of my counterparts at the G-20 in Korea, as well as in the 

open meeting, and certainly everyone agrees that a strong and recovering U.S. economy is very 

important to all of these countries and to the global economy.  The second is that these so-called 

spillover effects are more a function of deficiencies in the international monetary system than 

they are a function of U.S. policy.  In particular, there is a group of emerging market economies 

that are trying to play by the rules, trying to let their currencies appreciate appropriately, and they 

are caught between easy policies in the advanced economies and the propensity of some other 

emerging market economies to undervalue their currencies or to peg their currencies.  That puts 

those countries in a terrible bind—on the one hand, they have to deal with the capital inflows, 

but, on the other hand, if they let their currencies appreciate, then they’re not competitive with 

the countries that are undervaluing their currencies.  The answer there, really, is that we need to 

continue to work with China and with other emerging market economies to get a better system 

and, in particular, to allow more flexibility in the renminbi.  The question then arises whether we 

should allow these deficiencies in the international monetary system to prevent us from doing 

November 2–3, 2010 105 of 238



 

 

 

what we need to do for the U.S. economy, and I would argue that the answer is “no,” and that, 

indeed, putting some pressure on the system might actually be useful in getting better solutions 

in the international monetary system. 

There are a number of other risks with which you’re all familiar—inflation expectations, 

financial instability, and the like.  I won’t go into them in any detail at all, but I would point out 

that, in terms of effects on inflation expectations, for example, policy using LSAPs is not 

discontinuously different from policies using short-term interest rates.  What we’re trying to do 

is to make financial conditions more accommodative, and that essentially means lowering 

interest rates in the economy.  We’re using a different tool, but it’s a continuous process from 

ease via the standard method to ease through the use of LSAPs.  In other words, there’s nothing 

discontinuous happening when we switch from one policy to another in terms of the effects, for 

example, on financial instability.  And let me just repeat now what I’ve said many times before, 

namely, that I think we have to be very aggressive in monitoring financial stability and inflation 

expectations.  I don’t anticipate problems, but those issues are relevant to our policy of a low fed 

funds rate as well, so, as I say, we need to monitor them carefully. 

Another issue is risks of capital losses and gains in our portfolio, and I’ll just say a few 

words on that.  The staff has analyzed this alternative relative to our status quo, and, essentially, 

the capital loss risks are not much different.  One reason for that is the analysis assumes that we 

will sell the MBS first.  So, if we buy additional Treasuries, we’ll be holding them for a 

substantial period and, therefore, the income is essentially predictable, and we will very likely 

not be subject to significant capital losses.  On that topic, we already have quite a cushion, of 

course, in terms of the unrealized gains on our balance sheet and the income that we’ve already 

remitted to the Treasury.  So I think that we’re fairly well hedged against that risk.  My final 

November 2–3, 2010 106 of 238



 

 

 

point, and it’s one that the Vice Chairman has made, is that the one scenario in which we might 

have some capital losses would be one in which the economy does very well and rates rise; in 

that case, I think that from a political perspective our position will be pretty good. 

As I said, I’ve taken a lot of your time—there are a lot of issues here.  Let me end by 

trying to reassure those who are nervous about this, and I think we’re all nervous about it to 

some extent.  I agree with President Bullard that we need to be very careful.  I think there are 

theoretical advantages to “shock and awe,” such as regime change and that kind of thing, but, for 

the purposes of trying to regularize policy and trying to improve understanding of what we’re 

doing and trying to make sure that we take appropriate safeguards, I believe we ought to 

undertake this in a very careful way.  We need to have regular reviews—that means we need a 

discussion at every meeting on what our program is and what the implications are for the 

outlook.  We need to have ongoing discussions regarding any developing costs or risks that we 

see arising, as well as any potential benefits, including assessments of those costs and benefits.  I 

think that we ought to be very modest in our claims.  Clearly, this is not going to solve the 

problem—at best, it’s going to be supportive.  However, by under-promising and over-

delivering, I hope we would be better off than otherwise.  I would note that the proposed 

program has an eight-month horizon, which gives us quite a bit of time to learn more about 

what’s happening and what’s going on in the economy, and to make adjustments, if necessary. 

The last point I would make refers to some theoretical arguments you’re all familiar with, 

namely, that, in order to beat a liquidity trap, you have to raise inflation expectations above your 

normal level.  In Jackson Hole, I explicitly rejected any steps of that sort, at least for the 

foreseeable future.  I am very committed to not raising inflation above the level that we all 

consider consistent with price stability, and if we begin to see that happening, I would be entirely 

November 2–3, 2010 107 of 238



 

 

 

open to reining the program in.  I do make that assurance that this is not about driving inflation 

high.  This is about driving inflation up to where it’s consistent with price stability and consistent 

with economic growth.   

Again, I apologize for the length of this.  I’m sure we’ll have a lot more discussion 

tomorrow.  So let’s just bring today’s session to an end at this point.  At 5:30, there’s a reception 

upstairs.  We’ll begin tomorrow morning at 9:00 with a presentation from Bill on the policy 

options, and then we’ll have a much more in-depth discussion of these issues.  Thank you. 

[Meeting recessed] 

November 2–3, 2010 108 of 238



 

 

 

November 3—Morning Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We made an awful lot of 

progress yesterday—FOMC productivity is up.  [Laughter]  We’re ready to begin the policy 

round.  Bill English will lead it off. 

MR. ENGLISH.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The 

package includes the four draft policy statements and the associated draft directives.  

You will note that we made some modest changes to alternatives A and B relative to 

the versions that were distributed in the Tealbook; those changes, which were 

distributed to the Committee on Monday, are shown in blue. 

 

 

 

 

 

In putting together the alternatives that were included in the Tealbook, the staff 

read the Committee’s discussion at the October 15 videoconference as indicating no 

consensus for a significant change at this time in the description of the Committee’s 

objectives, such as the adoption of an explicit numerical inflation goal or 

establishment of a price level target.  Accordingly, alternatives A and B retain a 

qualitative description of the Committee’s objectives, while aiming to provide 

somewhat greater clarity about those objectives, as well as the link between them and 

the Committee’s policy decision. 

Turning first to alternative B, page 3, the Committee may think that it is 

appropriate to provide additional policy accommodation at this meeting in order to 

strengthen the recovery and move inflation back toward levels that it sees as 

consistent with its dual mandate.  Such a decision could reflect three judgments: First, 

that the economic situation is not likely to improve sufficiently without further policy 

action; second, that additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities will help 

support the recovery; and third, that the benefits of additional purchases outweigh the 

possible costs. 

The first paragraph of alternative B summarizes current economic conditions.  

The incoming economic data have been about in line with expectations, as a number 

of you noted yesterday, so this paragraph is not greatly changed from September. 

The second paragraph starts by pointing to the Committee’s statutory mandate to 

promote maximum employment and stable prices, and then goes on to note that 

unemployment is elevated and inflation somewhat low relative to levels consistent 

with the Committee’s dual mandate.  The statement then observes that progress 

toward the Committee’s objectives has been unacceptably slow. 

Against this backdrop, the third paragraph indicates that the Committee will 

maintain its current reinvestment strategy and will increase the size of the SOMA 

                                                 
3 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

November 2–3, 2010 109 of 238



 

 

 

portfolio by $600 billion by purchasing additional longer-term Treasury securities at a 

rate of about $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The fourth 

paragraph reiterates the “extended period” language that the Committee has used for 

some time. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The final paragraph retains some of the tilt that was in the September statement, 

but also suggests a more incremental approach to future asset-purchase decisions by 

stating that the Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities purchases 

and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information 

and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price 

stability.  

A statement along the lines of alternative B would be roughly in line with market 

expectations, as Brian described them in his briefing yesterday, and so would 

probably have little impact on asset prices beyond those that have already occurred.  

However, I would note that market expectations appear to be more diffuse than usual, 

so some market reaction, either positive or negative, is certainly possible. 

If members were inclined to take more aggressive action at today’s meeting, the 

Committee could announce the purchase of another $1 trillion of longer-term 

Treasury securities, as in alternative A, page 2.  Such an approach might seem 

attractive if policymakers were not confident that the headwinds holding back the 

recovery would ease as quickly as assumed in the staff forecast.  Alternatively, 

members may be concerned that the current low level of inflation heightens the risk 

that adverse shocks could lead to deflation and a protracted period of extremely poor 

economic performance.  And some members may simply see the economy as likely to 

fall short of the Committee’s dual objectives for too long to be acceptable, even with 

the purchase of an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities. 

Other than the description of the size and length of the purchase program, the first 

three paragraphs of the statement under alternative A are identical to those under 

alternative B.     

The fourth paragraph changes the forward guidance about the federal funds rate to 

be more explicit about the likely duration of the current period of very low interest 

rates, indicating that the target range for the federal funds rate will be maintained at 

least until mid-2012, so long as:  The unemployment rate remains elevated; the 

Committee continues to anticipate that, with such a policy stance, inflation in the 

intermediate term will not exceed levels consistent with its mandate; and longer-term 

inflation expectations remain well anchored. 

The final paragraph of alternative A is similar to that in the September statement, 

indicating that the Committee will monitor the outlook and is prepared to provide 

additional accommodation as needed. 

November 2–3, 2010 110 of 238



 

 

 

A decision to announce a purchase of $1 trillion of additional Treasury securities 

at this meeting and to provide more explicit forward guidance regarding the federal 

funds rate would come as a surprise to market participants.  Combined with the 

language at the end of the statement, these announcements could lead investors to 

mark down their expected policy path and would likely lead them to anticipate 

additional securities purchases before the program comes to an end.  As a result, 

interest rates would presumably fall, stock prices rise, and the foreign exchange value 

of the dollar decline. 

 

  

 

 

 

Alternatively, the Committee may have read the incoming data over the 

intermeeting period as generally mixed, and so members may remain uncertain about 

whether additional policy accommodation is appropriate at this time and want to 

leave policy on hold and await additional information on economic developments 

before making a decision on the need for further securities purchases.  If so, the 

Committee might want to issue a statement very similar to that issued in September, 

as in alternative C, page 4.  Such a decision would seem particularly attractive if the 

Committee was not confident that the possible benefits of additional policy 

accommodation outweighed the risks that additional securities purchases could entail.  

For example, some members may be worried that a further increase in the size of the 

Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could undermine public confidence in the 

Committee’s ability to exit smoothly from the current very accommodative policy 

stance, and so contribute to an undesirable increase in inflation expectations and 

actual inflation. 

A decision to take no additional policy easing steps at this meeting would come as 

a considerable surprise to market participants, and much of the improvement in 

financial conditions that has occurred over the past couple of months would likely be 

unwound, with longer-term interest rates rising, stock prices falling, and the foreign 

exchange value of the dollar increasing. 

Finally, if the Committee feels that the economic recovery is continuing and sees 

a gradual recovery as the best trajectory that can be expected in current 

circumstances, then it might be inclined to leave policy unchanged at this meeting and 

signal that it will likely be appropriate to begin removing policy accommodation 

before long, as in alternative D, page 5.  Members may believe that much of the 

current elevated level of unemployment reflects unavoidable lags in the reallocation 

of labor across sectors and regions and so cannot be effectively addressed by 

additional monetary stimulus.  Some members may also be concerned that keeping 

policy rates at very low levels for a long time and providing additional stimulus 

through asset purchases could lead to the development of macroeconomic or financial 

imbalances that could prove costly in the future.   

The statement for alternative D revises the forward guidance for the federal funds 

rate to suggest an earlier increase in short-term interest rates and implies that the 

reinvestment policy could be reversed soon.  

November 2–3, 2010 111 of 238



 

 

 

An announcement along the lines of alternative D would come as a great surprise 

to market participants.  Interest rates would rise significantly across the yield curve, 

equity prices would decline, and the dollar would appreciate.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Draft directives for the four alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 10 of 

your handout.  Brian Sack will continue our briefing. 

MR. SACK.4  I’ll be referring to the handout labeled “Operational Implications of 

Policy Alternatives.” 

If the FOMC were to decide to expand its securities holdings as described in 

alternatives A or B, the Desk would have to determine a number of details for 

conducting the asset purchases.  This briefing describes a proposed structure for an 

asset-purchase program, in order to allow you to better assess the desirability of such 

a program and to give you a chance to provide feedback on its structure. 

As Bill just described, alternative B involves purchasing longer-term Treasury 

securities in order to achieve a $600 billion expansion in the domestic asset holdings 

of the SOMA by the end of the second quarter of 2011.  Those purchases would be in 

addition to the purchases of longer-term Treasury securities being conducted to 

reinvest principal payments on agency debt and agency MBS held in the SOMA.  

Based on current market conditions, we expect those reinvestments to total $250 to 

$300 billion by the end of the second quarter.  Accordingly, our total purchases of 

Treasury securities over that period would be $850 to $900 billion—or an average 

pace of roughly $110 billion per month.  The projected path of purchases is shown in 

the upper left panel of the first page of the handout. 

Such a program would have us running at a pace close to what we judge to be the 

capacity for Treasury purchases, in terms of our ability to complete operations and 

avoid disruptions to market functioning.  The Desk would be operating in the market 

on almost every available business day.  In particular, the schedule we propose would 

involve about 18 operations per month, with the average size of those operations at 

around $6 billion.  By comparison, the reinvestment program has involved 9 

operations per month, with an average size of around $2½ billion.  

We would propose distributing the purchases across maturities in the manner 

shown by the red bars in the upper right panel.  This distribution continues to focus 

our purchases in securities with remaining maturities of between 2 and 10 years.  

However, compared to the reinvestment strategy that has been employed to date, we 

would increase our purchases at both ends of this range, and we would modestly step 

up our purchases of very long-term securities and TIPS.  Spreading out our purchases 

in this manner should increase our overall capacity for purchases.  

These changes in the distribution were designed to have little effect on the 

average duration of the securities that we purchase.  Indeed, under this distribution, 

                                                 
4 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

November 2–3, 2010 112 of 238



 

 

 

purchased securities are expected to have an average duration of about 5½ years, 

which is very close to the average duration of our reinvestments to date.  However, 

the actual duration realized would depend on what offers we are shown in our 

operations.  The distribution of purchases could be adjusted as warranted by market 

conditions, but any such changes would be designed not to alter significantly the 

average duration of the assets purchased. 

 

 

 

 

 

To enhance our operational flexibility and to ensure that we are able to purchase 

the most attractive securities on a relative-value basis, the Desk intends to suspend the 

35 percent per-issue limit on SOMA holdings under which we currently operate.  This 

is a self-imposed limit that was established during a period of declining issue sizes in 

order to ensure that SOMA holdings would not impair market liquidity.  We are 

comfortable with temporarily suspending the limit, because our auction-based 

approach should guard against purchasing securities that have considerable scarcity.  

Additionally, SOMA holdings of an individual security will only be allowed to rise 

above the 35 percent threshold in modest increments.  

Purchases associated with balance sheet expansion and those associated with 

reinvestments would be combined into one set of operations to be announced under 

the current monthly cycle.  The timing of that schedule would continue to be based on 

the release of MBS prepayment factors early in the month.  Thus, on or around the 

eighth business day of each month, the Desk would publish a tentative schedule of 

purchase operations expected to take place through the middle of the following 

month.  The schedule would include a list of operation dates, settlement dates, 

security types to be purchased, the range of eligible issues, and, for the first time, an 

indication of the expected size of each operation.  

The Desk also would like to increase the transparency of its purchase process.  

Under current practice, some broad summary statistics from each purchase operation 

are published shortly after the operation has concluded, but no pricing information is 

provided.  In order to ensure the transparency of our purchase operations, the Desk 

intends to begin publishing information on the prices paid in individual operations at 

the end of each monthly calendar period, coinciding with the release of the next 

period’s schedule.  This information should encourage additional participation by 

customers operating through dealers and, hence, should result in more submissions 

and better pricing. 

If the FOMC were in fact to adopt the asset purchases described in alternative B, 

the Desk would release a statement concurrent with the FOMC statement, a draft of 

which is attached to your handout.  This statement would provide details on the 

operational plan for purchasing securities, including the expected distribution of our 

purchases, in order to limit any uncertainty in the market.  An accompanying set of 

FAQs on the asset purchases would also be released. 

These details have been developed for the case of alternative B.  If the Committee 

were to choose alternative A instead, most aspects of the proposed program structure 

November 2–3, 2010 113 of 238



 

 

 

would be the same.  As Bill described, alternative A involves increasing SOMA asset 

holdings by $1 trillion by the end of 2011.  This approach would involve about the 

same monthly pace of purchases as in alternative B, only with the operations carried 

out for a longer period.  Given the larger cumulative amount of purchases, the Desk 

would likely modify the proposed distribution of purchases to some extent, in order to 

avoid excessive concentration of SOMA holdings in some maturity sectors. 

 

 

 

 

 

Under either alternative for asset purchases, the SOMA portfolio of domestic 

securities would be considerably larger than it would be if the current portfolio 

strategy were maintained.  This difference has implications for the expected income 

and risk exposure from the portfolio, as explored in the remaining panels of the 

exhibit.  I will focus the results on the $600 billion purchase strategy described in 

alternative B. 

As shown in the middle left panel, the additional asset purchases under alternative 

B lift the size of the SOMA domestic portfolio to $2.6 trillion in 2011, where it 

remains into 2012.  After that point, asset holdings begin to decline, as the FOMC is 

assumed to stop reinvesting proceeds from its asset holdings in the second half of 

2012 and then to commence gradual sales of agency MBS in early 2013.  This path 

can be compared to the portfolio outcome realized under alternative C, which 

maintains the current strategy of reinvesting principal payments in the near term but 

does not involve purchases of additional assets.  This strategy leaves SOMA asset 

holdings unchanged at around $2 trillion over the near term, before the same 

approach of redemptions and asset sales causes those holdings to begin declining in 

2013. 

The expected net income path from the SOMA portfolio under these two 

strategies is highlighted in the middle right panel.  For this and the other remaining 

panels, the FOMC is assumed to begin raising the federal funds rate target in the 

fourth quarter of 2012, and the path of longer-term interest rates moves up notably 

over the forecast horizon, as assumed in the Tealbook. 

As can be seen in this chart, in both cases the expected income from the SOMA 

portfolio remains sizable.  Under the current reinvestment strategy in alternative C, 

net income realized over the next several years is unusually large, reflecting the size 

of the SOMA portfolio and the low interest rate paid on reserve balances.  Net income 

then declines through 2015 as short-term interest rates increase and asset sales lead to 

modest capital losses.  However, net income remains above $25 billion, implying that 

remittances to Treasury never fall significantly below the levels that were typical 

before the financial crisis. 

The additional assets purchased under alternative B increase the expected stream 

of net income for the next several years, as the coupon income on the purchased 

securities exceeds the expense of the interest paid on the reserves created by those 

purchases.  Eventually, however, this difference diminishes as the portfolios converge 

November 2–3, 2010 114 of 238



 

 

 

under the two alternatives.  Over the 10-year period shown, alternative B provides 

about $27 billion of additional expected income relative to alternative C. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The additional expected income in part represents compensation for the greater 

amount of risk that the Federal Reserve takes on under alternative B.  This risk comes 

from two sources. 

One source of risk is the path of short-term interest rates.  The bottom left panel 

shows the effects on SOMA net income if monetary policy tightening ends up being 

earlier and more aggressive than assumed in the Tealbook.  In particular, the interest 

rate on reserves is assumed to begin increasing in late 2011 instead of late 2012, and 

the rate then follows a path that is 100 basis points higher than the Tealbook 

assumption through the end of the forecast period.  Under this scenario, the higher 

cost of the additional reserves created by the elevated balance sheet weighs on net 

income under both of the policy alternatives.  However, this effect is larger under 

alternative B, given the greater size of the reserves created.  Over the 10-year period 

as a whole, the cumulative loss of income from this risk scenario is about $15 billion 

larger under alternative B than it is under alternative C. 

The second source of risk comes from potential capital losses on securities that 

are sold.  Any capital losses realized under the assumed path of asset sales were 

included in the expected income projections shown in the middle right panel.  

However, it might also be worth considering the path of unrealized capital losses, as 

those losses could end up being realized if the FOMC decided to sell more assets than 

assumed in the projections. 

As shown in the bottom right panel, even under the current reinvestment strategy 

in alternative C, the portfolio is projected to swing from a position of considerable 

unrealized capital gains today to a position of sizable unrealized capital losses, 

reflecting the increase in longer-term interest rates assumed in the Tealbook.  This 

swing would be even larger under the additional asset purchases in alternative B, 

given the greater amount of duration risk taken.  The peak difference in the 

projections involves about $20 billion of additional unrealized losses under 

alternative B. 

In addition, alternative B increases the sensitivity of capital losses to any 

unexpected increase in long-term interest rates beyond that assumed in the Tealbook.  

For example, a 100 basis point parallel increase in the yield curve would produce 

approximately $85 billion in mark-to-market losses on the portfolio in 2012 under 

alternative C.  With the larger balance sheet in alternative B, the mark-to-market 

losses would be approximately $110 billion, or an increase of about $25 billion.  

However, most of those losses would not be realized under the sales strategy assumed 

in our projections.  Moreover, yields could also come in lower than assumed in the 

Tealbook, thereby reducing the portfolio losses shown in the bottom right panel.  

November 2–3, 2010 115 of 238



 

 

 

Overall, these calculations are intended to provide some benchmarks for the 

amount of additional risk that the FOMC is assuming by engaging in further asset 

purchases.  In closing, it is worth noting that, even if unexpected developments 

pushed the net income from SOMA into negative territory, it would not affect our 

ability to conduct monetary policy, although it would affect the remittances that we 

make to the Treasury.  Thank you.  That concludes my prepared remarks. 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any questions for either Bill or Brian?  

Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thanks, Brian.  I have a couple of questions.  First, the way you describe 

the 35 percent cap seems a little different from what’s in the statement you distributed.  As I 

understand it, you don’t anticipate going above the cap, but you’re saying it might happen on 

occasion, in which case you just want to make sure you have the flexibility to deal with that.  

The statement says that we’re suspending the per-issue limit and that some holdings will be 

allowed to move up “only incrementally,” and I’m not sure that conveys the same thought.  Can 

you help me understand how you and the Desk will act on these Treasuries so that you’re not 

restrained, yet you also don’t signal to markets that there is no longer a cap?  That is, can this 

language be toughened?  For example, could you say in this statement, “We are going to suspend 

the 35 percent limit.  We still expect, by and large, to comply with it, but we have asked for and 

received flexibility as needed to move above it for the following reasons?”  I worry a bit that this 

could get misperceived and the Desk might be seen as entering these markets and in some ways 

threatening to be more of a price-maker than a price-taker.  Maybe you can help me understand 

what you think your practice will be and whether this language can be made less open-ended and 

still let you do your job. 

MR. SACK.  Let me start with the practice that we intend to implement, and that practice 

will be described in more detail in the FAQs that would accompany the statement, if you agree to 

it.  What we intend to do is only to allow SOMA holdings to move above 35 percent in 5 percent 

November 2–3, 2010 116 of 238



 

 

 

increments per operation—we would restrict accepted offers at any individual operation to that 

limit.  The reason for doing that is to avoid unexpectedly and suddenly taking a large amount of 

outstanding supply.  We do believe the auction mechanism will guard against the Fed owning too 

much of any individual CUSIP as long as the market understands where our holdings are and 

how they’re increasing.  We just want to avoid running into a situation where, for example, four 

dealers happen to show us a lot of the same CUSIP and we end up buying them and increasing 

our holdings of them too quickly. 

In terms of the more flexible approach that you describe, we find it difficult to figure out 

how to implement that.  If we said we’re going to honor 35 percent but may go above it in some 

cases, that would require us to have some criteria for deciding when to breach that limit, and we 

couldn’t settle on a clear, explicit set of criteria.  So we prefer this approach, which will allow us 

to go above it based on the offers that we’re shown from the market, and we would do so 

cautiously. 

MR. WARSH.  This is all about operations, and I honestly don’t mean to be litigating the 

policy question now, which we’re going to come to later.  Is there a way to describe this that still 

seems to put bounds as well as to communicate your expectations to the market?  That is, 

suppose you said something like, “our expectations are to be consistent generally with the 

35 percent limit,” which markets have long understood, and then put a semicolon or comma and 

then describe ways in which you have been given license from the FOMC to go above it in 

certain cases.  I think that would give the notion that this is not a grand change in practice, so that 

markets wouldn’t feel as though New York is unconstrained.  I just worry that, as written, it 

looks as though the Desk will, frankly, use more liberties than you anticipate necessarily needing 

to and wanting to use. 

November 2–3, 2010 117 of 238



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  Well, I think the question is whether you’re comfortable with the practice 

that I described.  That information will be available to the markets in the FAQs.  We can work on 

the language of the statement so it doesn’t sound so extreme—perhaps the language on 

suspending the limit reads too strongly—but the content will be available to the market.  May I 

say two other things? 

MR. WARSH.  Yes. 

MR. SACK.  One concern was that suspending the limit would lead to a lot of inference 

about where on the curve we’re buying, because this limit is more binding in certain sectors, 

including bonds with outstanding maturities between 10 and 20 years.  That’s one of the reasons 

we felt it was important to publish the distribution of our holdings in the statement also, because 

it avoids any confusion about what the suspension of the 35 percent limit meant for the 

distribution of our purchases.  The other issue is that we did contemplate setting a higher limit, 

but the problem we faced there is that, no matter what number we chose, it would lead market 

participants to calculate how much capacity that was giving us, and we worried that that would 

be seen as a signal about the potential ultimate size of asset purchases.  So we felt the best 

approach was simply to suspend it, but to do so in this cautious way. 

MR. WARSH.  Again, I just encourage you to think about the language in the statement.  

Think about the FAQs, and see if you can’t constrain yourself with the language in a way that 

gives you the flexibility you need to take whatever judgments the Committee comes to.  Just as 

an open point, and I’m happy to be helpful. 

Second, on the listing of the purchases as $110 billion per month and a total size of $850 

to $900 billion in the statement, I have one cosmetic suggestion.  I understand that that is a 

function of two things:  your expectation of what the Committee will authorize today, along with 

November 2–3, 2010 118 of 238



 

 

 

the reinvestments.  But the numbers that are in the FOMC statement and the numbers here are 

different, that is, the FOMC statement just talks about the additions.  So in your statement I 

encourage you to disaggregate it into the two pieces.  My suggestion would be simply to break 

down the $110 billion per month into its two constituent components and to break down the $850 

to $900 billion into its two constituent components, just so that people see the connection 

between what we are authorizing and what you’re doing and so that it doesn’t look as though the 

FOMC is giving one message and the Desk is giving a separate message to dealers who have 

expectations closer $1 trillion than to $500 billion. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think that’s in the statement. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The first paragraph says $600 billion. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It says $600 billion in the first paragraph and $250 to 

$300 billion in the second paragraph. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  They’re taken together, the two parts. 

MR. WARSH.  Yeah, but I think the $75 billion doesn’t show up. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wish to weigh in with Governor Warsh regarding the 35 percent.  I 

think you can handle this, by the way, by saying “up to” when we talk about the amounts we’re 

going to invest; for example, “up to an additional $600 billion,” “up to $850 to $900 billion,” “up 

to $110 billion,” and then you can also say that, on occasion, the Desk might move above 

35 percent.  There’s a way to word this other than by waving a red flag in front of people.  

Echoing Kevin’s last point, it doesn’t take an agile mind to take $110 billion, multiply it by 12 to 

annualize it, and, voilà, it comes out to $1.3 trillion, which is the amount of the deficit.  So it 

looks as if we’re monetizing the deficit, and I think you have to be mindful of that.  Sophisticated 

November 2–3, 2010 119 of 238



 

 

 

people may be able to sort this out, but it’s not only sophisticated people who are going to read 

it. 

Second—and you were very conscious of this; you and I talked about this off line—you 

have to be extremely careful that people don’t “front run” our intentions.  Even though we may 

not give a specific number, by saying we’ll move above 35 percent, the game is going to be 

trying to figure out where we’re going to move above 35 percent when you do.  I think there’s a 

way to editorialize this, and we can talk about that a little bit later. 

I have a question, Mr. Chairman, and I have a statement disguised as a question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not anymore.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  I just want to understand this in plain English—I’m referring to panels 4, 

5, and 6 in Brian’s handout.  Let’s say the Chairman is called before the Senate Banking 

Committee at the end of 2012 and is asked, “Do you have a loss or do you have a gain on this 

portfolio?”  What’s the answer?  Under the assumptions given here, did you make money or did 

you lose money with the strategy that your Committee has adopted? 

MR. SACK.  Do you want me to answer? 

MR. FISHER.  Go right ahead.  You’ve laid out the sensitivities.  Let’s assume that rates 

are up 100 basis points under alternative B.  What’s the answer? 

MR. SACK.  I think the answer is that we made money, because the additional coupon 

income is outstripping the increased cost of the reserves under that scenario. 

MR. FISHER.  So rates have gone up 100 basis points.  We have an unrealized loss, but 

the income outstrips the loss—is that correct? 

MR. SACK.  Right, under that scenario. 

MR. FISHER.  By how much? 

November 2–3, 2010 120 of 238



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  The additional net income stream over the 10 years was $27 billion, and the 

additional loss coming from the 100 basis point shock to short rates was $15 billion, so it’s the 

net of those, which is around $10 or $12 billion. 

MR. FISHER.  And, of course, if rates go up higher than 100 basis points, it’s less. 

MR. SACK.  Correct. 

MR. FISHER.  Got it. 

MR. SACK.  Clearly, additional asset purchases put more risk onto our balance sheet. 

MR. FISHER.  Sure, particularly where we’re further out on the curve. 

MR. SACK.  And we are compensated for that because we’re buying at market prices, 

but that compensation is reduced to the extent that we’ve collapsed the term premium.  

Conceptually, the term premium is that expected excess return that market participants get for 

that risk.  So there’s some compensation, but clearly there are risk scenarios where it will be 

negative for net income. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have three questions—two for our 

Manager, and one for the staff.  Brian, when you were discussing panel 2 and the proposed 

distribution of the purchases under alternative B, I think you said that you wouldn’t necessarily 

exactly hit these, depending on what offers were shown.  I wanted to find out a little more about 

what you meant.  The base case would be that we’d go to the market with a certain amount of 

buys in each CUSIP, and that’s what we’d buy, and we’d let the market determine the price.  

You obviously have something else in mind. 

November 2–3, 2010 121 of 238



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  Sure.  We specify a maturity range, which is actually shown in that panel.  

We do an operation across all CUSIPs in that range, and we choose the securities based on two 

criteria:  how the prices come in relative to the market, and how cheap or expensive they look 

relative to a smoothed yield curve.  Therefore, there is a relative value judgment that could 

determine where within each maturity bucket we purchase.  The point is that, depending on the 

offers we’re shown, say, for the bond, we could end up buying at the shorter end of the 18- to 

30-year sector or at the longer end—it depends on the offers.  That’s what introduces some 

variation in the average duration of the securities that we purchase.  The question is:  If, at some 

point, there’s enough variation, how do we compensate for that?   I think the way to compensate 

for it is to start to shift how much we’re buying in each bucket.  The point I was trying to make is 

that we’ll seek to keep the average duration around 5½ years, and if we get enough variation 

from that, we’d probably make changes to the distribution. 

MR. LACKER.  I know how you do it with triparty RP operations across the three 

tranches, so you’re going to have some similar mathematical construct about the yield curve to 

tell you how to judge prices and offers across the yield curve, right? 

MR. SACK.  Correct.  We think it’s prudent to look at the offers we receive and make a 

judgment about which of those securities offers the best value to the taxpayer. 

MR. LACKER.  The great achievement of the 1951 Accord was to free prices in the 

government market from our fixing them.  Do you feel like you might be in danger of kind of 

pegging the yield curve spreads? 

MR. SACK.  We’re not pegging the overall shape of the curve, but it is true that, within 

each maturity sector, our operations will tend to compress variation around our spline.  The 

bigger the Treasury purchase program is, the more relevant our spline becomes, because we’re a 

November 2–3, 2010 122 of 238



 

 

 

big participant in the market, and we’re buying based on evaluations around our spline.  But this 

is an issue about small differences in relative value across CUSIPs as opposed to the bigger 

question about the overall shape of the yield curve. 

MR. LACKER.  But the two are intertwined in your methodology, right?  I assumed that, 

in some sense, the idea of alternative B was:  here’s an amount and here’s how we’re going to 

buy it across the curve, and we don’t know how the yield curve is going to react.  There are a lot 

of empirics about that, and for a couple of years we’ve been wrestling with the question of what 

effect these things have on 10-year securities versus 2-year securities.  You’re supplementing the 

Committee’s choice with some judgment, and you’re saying that the broad program is going to 

have its effect, but you’re just going to tweak it around the margin.  How do you draw the line 

there? 

MR. SACK.  Regarding the 2-year versus the 10-year, our actions are completely 

represented in the red bars in the upper right.  That’s the decision about what sectors we’re 

purchasing, and that’s why this is presented to you to make sure you’re comfortable with it. 

If we used our spline or some theoretical measure of fair value and then bought across the 

whole yield curve based on that, then I would agree with you—we would be making a judgment 

that the 2-year sector is too cheap and the 10-year is too rich, and we’d have bigger effects across 

the whole curve.  But that’s not what we do.  We divide these up into relatively limited maturity 

buckets so that that assessment of relative value occurs only, say, within the 5½-  to 7-year 

bucket, so we’re just slicing the yield curve up into these buckets where we’re making a relative 

value judgment but only within that maturity range. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So across the boundaries there’s no linkage? 

MR. SACK.  No.  Across the boundaries you’ll get the red bars shown. 

November 2–3, 2010 123 of 238



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  So 5.4 year maturity versus 5.5, you’re not going to make a relative 

value judgment across that? 

MR. SACK.  We do if they’re in the same bucket, but — 

MR. LACKER.  Yeah, I know, but they aren’t, see? 

MR. SACK.  That’s right.  We’ll do one operation that will include the 5.4 and we’ll do 

another operation that will include the 5.5. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay, so you’re not going to make that judgment. 

MR. SACK.  That’s correct. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay, and how much of this is going to be transparent to the market? 

MR. SACK.  This is going to be more transparent than Desk operations have ever been.  

[Laughter]  We’ve never explicitly announced the distribution of our purchases.  In the past we 

haven’t even announced the size of individual operations when we do them. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes, but what about the spline?  The bidders are going to understand 

after a while that you’re not taking it pro rata, that you’re making judgments, right?  What are 

you going to explain about how you do this?  The triparty market knows how you do this. 

MR. SACK.  They already understand that we have a spline to make this relative value 

calculation.  And almost every shop on the street has an estimate of what our spline is. 

MR. LACKER.  Why don’t you give it to them? 

MR. SACK.  I think we could entertain that idea—I’m not opposed to that.  I don’t really 

feel like making that decision today, given everything else we’re trying to implement, but I think 

that, compared with the past, we are being very transparent in terms of how we’re distributing 

our purchases across the curve, and, as I said in the briefing, in terms of giving them the prices at 

which we actually accepted offers, which is something that we’ve never done in the past. 

November 2–3, 2010 124 of 238



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  That’s useful.  Here’s my second question for you, Brian.  You said that 

you thought that the pace in the forecast under alternative B was—I think I heard this right—

about at our capacity to make purchases while avoiding disrupting market functioning.  I 

wondered if you could help the Committee understand what the nature of market dysfunction 

would constitute if we were to exceed that limit.  If we were to stray accidentally and do too 

much and it created market dysfunction, what would that market dysfunction look like?  What 

would it consist of? 

MR. SACK.  Let me start by saying that I think the capacity has to do, first, with our 

ability to conduct the operations and get them done and then, second, with market functioning.  

The market functioning side is very difficult to judge.  I think what we mean by that is:  Could 

we be buying so much that we would be causing a deterioration of liquidity in the markets?   We 

want to separate having a price impact, which, of course, is part of the objective of the program, 

from liquidity conditions.  So the market dysfunction we would worry about is creating too much 

of a one-sided market, resulting in lower trading volumes between other parties, higher bid-asked 

spreads, and so on.  It’s very hard to judge where that point is.  At this pace of purchases, 

essentially we are taking up all of the new net issuance from Treasury for a month, because that 

will average about $100 billion a month; and if we go further, we have to do more pushing of 

investors out of the market.  Nevertheless, on the other side, our purchases are actually still quite 

small relative to the gross trading flows in the market. 

To sum up, I think it’s a very hard judgment to make.  Looking at our own operations, we 

feel that, at this pace, we’re pushing quite hard—as I said, we’re operating every day with pretty 

sizable operations.  The  purpose was just to say that if the Committee wanted to move more 

rapidly—suppose you wanted to do $1 trillion over that window—we would have to rethink how 

November 2–3, 2010 125 of 238



 

 

 

we operate and consider whether it can all get done in Treasuries or whether other asset classes, 

such as MBS, would have to be introduced. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. LACKER.  I’m sorry, I had a third question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER.  Because we’re talking about policy options, even though the effect of 

the policy was discussed yesterday by Dave Wilcox, I just want to ask another question about 

that, and, in fact, this question is inspired by something you said yesterday.  I really appreciated 

your very extensive remarks at the end of the day yesterday.  It was very beneficial to hear from 

you in that amount of detail your thinking about a wide variety of issues related to this. 

I’ve never seen the Committee presented with any analyses of asset-purchase programs 

that were not accompanied by an equal-sized expansion of the monetary base.  It’s easy to 

imagine something like that—we did it in the 1960s with Operation Twist where we sterilized 

purchases of long securities by selling short securities—picking some point at the short end of 

the term structure, where yields aren’t equal to the interest rate on reserves, and selling there an 

amount equal to what we buy at the long end of the curve.  You’ve never presented us with an 

analysis of that.  Moreover, in all of the empirics aimed at assessing the effect of the LSAP, all of 

them have announcements where it was widely understood that those purchases were going to be 

accompanied by an increase in the monetary base of equal size.  So I’m wondering what 

information you could give us to disentangle or differentiate between the effects of asset 

purchases and the effects of expanding the monetary base and what the staff’s view is about the 

difference. 

November 2–3, 2010 126 of 238



 

 

 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One main thing, and Nathan may want to talk about this, too, is 

going back not to the U.S. experience.  One key thing is looking at the Japanese experience 

where they, in essence, ran the experiment you’re talking about, which was to increase greatly 

the monetary base.  Our assessment is that it did very little.  The Japanese, I think, are a little bit 

more optimistic about what they did, in that they think that did help hold up inflation 

expectations.  People have debated that one, but the general feeling is that just expanding 

reserves did very little to bolster the Japanese stock market or that sort of thing. 

For the United States, we haven’t actually run the experiment you’re talking about, so 

there’s no way to look at any evidence to judge whether we’d get a different result.  The logic of 

what we’re doing is that, yes, there would be a difference, and if we just expanded reserves, the 

assumption we’re making is that we would get very little for that. 

MR. SACK.  We did write a MarketSOURCE piece a few rounds ago that addressed at 

least part of your question.  We’ve looked at a lot of event-study evidence in evaluating LSAPs, 

and, as you pointed out at one meeting, those experiments involved not just the change in the 

asset holdings, but also the concurrent change in reserves.  So can we really disentangle which of 

those is affecting financial conditions?  The MarketSOURCE piece compared those event studies 

with event studies around the SFP.  When there have been unexpected changes in the Treasury’s 

SFP, it amounts to a surprise change in the level of reserves without any corresponding change in 

the amount of duration risk that we’re taking out.  The analysis made the point that those 

surprises didn’t seem to have much effect on financial conditions.  So that may be one small 

piece of evidence that the effects of the LSAPs come more from the assets taken out of the 

markets than from the change in reserves.  To your broader question, it’s true—we could achieve 

a sizable change in the duration of our holdings through a portfolio reallocation if you were 

November 2–3, 2010 127 of 238



 

 

 

willing to sell shorter-term assets and buy longer-term assets, and you could do that without 

reserve implications. 

MR. ENGLISH.  We did some work, if you remember—a little more than a year ago, I 

think—where we talked to the banks that were holding large stocks of reserves and asked them 

about their demand for reserves and what they intended to do as their demand for reserves 

declined.  At that time, the staff’s feeling was that the large stock of reserves didn’t seem to be 

having the sorts of effects that you would expect to see from a pure QE approach, in the sense 

that the money stock wasn’t growing rapidly and bank credit wasn’t growing rapidly.  At least 

some of the banks were telling us that, when it came time to reduce their demand for reserves, 

they were going to move first into holdings of short- and intermediate-term securities and only 

later into increasing their lending.  We said at that time that we’d want to focus on looking at the 

bank credit numbers to see if, in some sense, that seemed to be getting some traction, that is, if 

you seemed to be seeing a pickup in growth in bank credit, a pickup in growth in loans.  Today 

loan growth is still negative—it has slowed some—and it does not appear that there is the sort of 

transmission mechanism that I associate with QE operating through bank balance sheets; it just 

doesn’t seem to be there at this stage. 

MR. LACKER.  I recall those discussions, and I had some discussions with bankers as 

did other folks at the Richmond Fed.  Did you do this in August or September of last year? 

MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Could I make one other point?  It’s related to this discussion, 

and I think it’s implicit in what everyone is saying.  You could say, “Wow, we’re swapping 

T-bills for money,” but one could argue that, at a zero fed funds rate, there really isn’t a 

distinction between T-bills and money.  Actually, maybe the better way of saying it is that the 

November 2–3, 2010 128 of 238



 

 

 

distinction between reserves and T-bills is not really existent at that point.  But if you’re buying 

longer-term assets instead, now you actually are changing something—you’re engaging in an 

operation that is a swap that is materially different. 

MR. LACKER.  The discussions with the banks that I’m familiar with indicated that in 

their liquidity management operations they did view the margin of substitution between reserve 

balances and short-term Treasury and agency securities.  At the yields during the summer, they 

viewed it as an attractive option to reduce their holdings of reserve balances and move into 

Treasuries and agencies.  In the event, we kept increasing reserves.  Lo and behold, yields on 

Treasuries and agencies fell in the fall, which is what you’d predict would have to happen to 

make them willing to hold the reserves involved. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Those are short-term. 

MR. LACKER.  Right, but obviously there’s a whole chain of unsegmented markets in 

those types of securities that would transmit that out the yield curve, so it’s not inconceivable 

that that could be having an effect.  Governor Duke raised the question of what banks are going 

to do with all these reserves, so I think it’s legitimate to consider whether the monetary base 

could be as much of a factor in the effect of this program as the longer-term yield, which is just 

the point I wanted to explore. 

MR. ENGLISH.  One piece of thinking that we’ve done over the intermeeting period was 

related to work that you may remember from a year or so ago.  We were interested in the extent 

to which the increase in reserves could potentially put pressure on banks’ leverage ratios, 

because it’s making their balance sheets larger.  We had concluded a little more than a year ago 

that that effect wasn’t that important because banks had enough capital that it didn’t seem to be 

eating into that cushion very much.  That same calculation today holds true even more, in the 

November 2–3, 2010 129 of 238



 

 

 

sense that bank balance sheets have shrunk, bank capital has gone up, so there’s even less of an 

effect. 

MR. LACKER.  I’d mention another thing.  You wouldn’t expect the QE channel to be 

limited to bank lending, right?   The decrease in corporate yields could just as well occur because 

you’re pushing people out through a series of markets—you’re making yields such that they 

want to move out, and that pushes yields down in other markets.  So it might not be bank lending 

where rates are pushed down.  It could be working in markets where the borrowers are more 

creditworthy, which tend not to be intermediated in our economy.  And bank security holdings 

have been going up lately as bank lending has been going down. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the general theory of the liquidity trap is that, once 

you get to a certain point, essentially the demand is interest-inelastic, and there’s no further 

effect on short-term rates by increasing the supply of money.  That’s what liquidity traps are 

about, that’s what the zero lower bound is about. 

MR. LACKER.  I just take my anecdotal evidence from the large institution whose 

liquidity management operation we’ve had a fair amount of interaction with.  There is a 

meaningful margin of imperfect substitution between bank reserves and other short-term liquid 

securities that they hold as part of their liquidity management operations. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Not to continue this, but I think implicit in this is the idea that 

buying a 5-year or 10-year Treasury note is what you would substitute for a corporate bond, 

rather than say, buying a T-bill.  So, again, it’s the duration. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me go on to President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a question about the wording in 

alternative A and the intention there.  In paragraph 4, you have some forward guidance, and in 

November 2–3, 2010 130 of 238



 

 

 

particular the phrase, “the Committee continues to anticipate that, with such a policy stance, 

inflation in the intermediate term will not exceed levels consistent with its mandate.”  What is 

the intention of this type of phrase?  What’s your expectation?  What are we trying to convey 

there?  Does this mean that, as inflation begins to rise to the mandate level, there would be a 

presumption that it would never go over by a tenth, or what?  That’s the issue that I have—the 

public’s and our interpretation of this.   

MR. ENGLISH.  We were trying to convey that the Committee wants inflation to move 

back to the mandate-consistent level.  We are not aiming to put inflation above the mandate-

consistent level.  That’s a possible policy approach, as we know, but this would say that’s not 

what we are trying to do—what we’re aiming to do is just move it back, in some sense smoothly, 

to the mandate-consistent level.  Therefore, the Committee would begin to think about tightening 

policy if its projections of inflation over the intermediate term were above that. 

MR. EVANS.  So are you supposed to rise smoothly and not overshoot at all, or would it 

allow some overshooting? 

MR. ENGLISH.  There’s noise here, but this would be a forecast. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The word “levels” actually creates some ambiguity. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I also was going to say that the word “levels” has the 

ambiguity that Bill is suggesting.  The word “levels” is supposed to connote an interval, I think, 

of some kind. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Well, it connotes that not all of your views are the same.   

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s true. 

MR. FISHER.  We’re trying to reassure people we are not going to go hog wild. 

MR. ENGLISH.  That was the intent, yes. 

November 2–3, 2010 131 of 238



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  We could just say we haven’t adopted price level targeting. 

MR. EVANS.  That’s not today’s push. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I would rather use “hog wild” somewhere.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  Brian, just two questions to make sure I understand the 

capacity constraints.  Are they related to the purchase of Treasuries at the Desk or related to the 

maturity distribution that you’re looking to purchase? 

MR. SACK.  We were thinking of it as related to the overall pace of purchases.  It is true 

that if we shifted the maturity distribution, it would give us more or less capacity—generally, if 

we shorten the maturity distribution, we can probably buy more quickly.  But that shortening of 

duration may offset the perceived benefits of the portfolio-balance channel.  So it is somewhat 

dependent.  I was saying that, under this type of distribution, generally, that’s a pace that we’re 

comfortable running at. 

MS. DUKE.  Second, I thought I understood you to say that the maturity distribution 

might be different if you were ultimately aiming to purchase $1 trillion rather than the 

$600 billion.  So my question is:  If we got to the point where we purchased the $600 billion and 

wanted to purchase another $400 billion, would the latter purchase look different from the 

former?  

MR. SACK.  The approach we’ve taken here is to set out a distribution that we’ll 

basically stick to over the entire period of the program.  If you decided to do $1 trillion through 

the end of 2011, I think the best approach would be just to tweak the distribution as we see fit 

and get it in place today, and then carry it out.  But it wouldn’t be the end of the world, either, if 

we did this for six months and then reevaluated.  So we could do it either way.  For some sectors, 

November 2–3, 2010 132 of 238



 

 

 

like the 10- to 18-year sector, the farther we go with this, the more of the available supply we 

take out of the market—we’ll end up with more issues crossing the 35 percent limit, and so on.  

So we would want to make some modest modifications, but not dramatic ones.  I don’t want to 

turn that into a larger issue than it is. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Back to Brian, at the risk of asking you 

to cover ground you’ve already covered, I’d like to understand a little more your thought process 

in striking the degree of transparency that you’re proposing in this statement.  Are there 

arguments that you weighed against this degree of transparency?  And then, to echo what I think 

President Lacker referred to, what more could you do if you wanted to be more transparent? 

MR. SACK.  We discussed the pros and cons of this pretty extensively.  I think we’re 

comfortable conveying to the market our intentions with this amount of specificity.  It does allow 

markets to anticipate what we’re going to do.  It allows market prices to move in advance of our 

purchases even, and we see that as productive—it just pushes markets more quickly to the 

outcome that will be realized from the purchases. 

The current procedure doesn’t give the distribution and doesn’t announce the size of our 

operations, so market participants have to infer that and then infer whether that will be 

maintained going forward.  As a result, after a month or two of the program, under LSAP1 or 

under the reinvestment program, the primary dealers have been able to figure out generally what 

we intend to do, but it took two months of watching and uncertainty until they got to that point.  

Here we’re just going to accelerate that and let them know up front what we intend to do.  The 

only potential cost, in our thinking, is that it might be confusing if we have to change the 

November 2–3, 2010 133 of 238



 

 

 

distribution, but we think we’ve guarded against that by having language in here indicating that 

we retain the option to change the distribution. 

A potential risk relates to the individual operations.  If we are announcing sizes, and if 

something is going on in the market, it raises the risk of not being able to complete an operation 

of that size.  Right now we don’t have that issue, because we don’t tell the sizes of individual 

operations, so that risk would be introduced by announcing the sizes.  But we view that as a very 

minimal risk—the operations have tremendous coverage to date, and if there were some unusual 

strain in markets that made us worry about completing an operation, we probably would 

reschedule the operation anyway. 

MR. LOCKHART.  I take it you don’t see any concern about stepping up the 

transparency of your guidance, while, at the same time, alternative B’s statement, to some 

degree, steps up the conditionality and stresses that we’re going to review this periodically and it 

could change.  You don’t see that as creating any confusion in the market? 

MR. SACK.  In the FAQs, we explicitly address this point and say that we will publish 

schedules based only on announced policy actions and directives from the FOMC, so that, if the 

directive were to change, then we would publish a new schedule.  We had to be explicit about 

that, obviously, to avoid signaling.  There may be situations in which an FOMC meeting is 

approaching and an action is widely expected, but we’ll be publishing a schedule that is out of 

step with that, and we address that explicitly in the FAQs.  We would just adjust our 

communications accordingly as the FOMC adjusts its policy action. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

November 2–3, 2010 134 of 238



 

 

 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I just want to follow up on the schedule.  If the Treasury were to 

change its debt management dramatically, or if foreign purchases were to change dramatically, 

you wouldn’t be bound to keep the same distribution.  You feel that you have the flexibility to 

make the adjustment without waiting until an FOMC meeting.  Is that correct? 

MR. SACK.  That’s right.  The statement says, “The distribution of purchases could 

change if market conditions warrant,” and we see that as general enough to encompass all of the 

possibilities you discussed.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks.  I was worried about the same point that President 

Rosengren is addressing, because I think the clause right after that undercuts that ability to 

adjust, right? 

MR. SACK.  That second clause, of course, tries to draw a line between Desk discretion 

and FOMC discretion.  If the FOMC is content taking it out, the Desk doesn’t have an issue with 

that.  [Laughter]  Again, it introduces just some flexibility by saying that changes will “not 

significantly alter the average duration”—that gives us some room. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you have another question? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, that’s fine.   

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  This is a livelier Q&A than usual in this round.  

We’re about ready for the policy round.  Before we start, let me make one observation.  As 

President Lacker mentioned, yesterday I spoke quite a bit about the asset purchases, and this, 

obviously, is an issue that most people are focused on.  There is an alternative or complementary 

measure on the table, which is the language in alternative A, paragraph 4, giving additional 

commitments about our policy rate.  Personally, I am open-minded about that and about whether 

November 2–3, 2010 135 of 238



 

 

 

to do something soon or in the future.  I just wanted to say that, if anyone wants to add comments 

on that issue or that approach as an alternative or a complement to other approaches, that is, of 

course, welcome in this round.  Let me start with President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I suggested yesterday, my forecast 

is that unemployment will remain at 9 percent or higher throughout 2011, resulting in continued 

disinflationary pressure.  Further disinflation is not only inconsistent with my target, but it also 

would imply a tightening of short-term real rates at a time when I believe we should be easing.  

The continuation of large misses on both elements of our mandate through the forecast horizon 

provides ample reason for further monetary policy accommodation. 

I am in favor of alternative B.  However, under alternative B, my expectation is that we 

would complete the entire purchase of $600 billion in securities, unless incoming data indicated 

that we would achieve both elements of our mandate within the forecast horizon—an event I 

view as, unfortunately, quite remote.  I also view alternative B as providing an easing bias.  

Unless we make significant progress on both elements of the mandate, that is, if the outlook 

continues to imply slow and meager progress towards both elements of the mandate, I would 

favor serious consideration of additional asset purchases following the round that I hope we will 

approve today. 

A serious mistake made by the Japanese was that they moved slowly and methodically to 

address, first, the disinflation, and then the deflation once they hit the zero bound.  I do not want 

our monetary policy to make the same mistake.  We should make clear in both our language and 

our actions that we are resolute in achieving both elements of our mandate. 

In terms of alternative A, paragraph 4, I would just say that I wouldn’t want it to be a 

substitution for the policy; if anything, I would want it in addition. 

November 2–3, 2010 136 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I said, I appreciated your remarks 

yesterday afternoon.  During those remarks, you noted that many of us, if not all of us, are 

nervous about this policy, so please count me in the nervous camp.  In fact, count me in the too- 

nervous-to-support-alternatives-B-or-A camp.  I will explain why I’m nervous and then comment 

briefly on the language that we might use if we elect to move today. 

First, as I mentioned yesterday, I don’t believe the benefits of further monetary stimulus 

would be terribly large.  In a nutshell, I think inflation is not too low, the risk of deflation is quite 

small, and very little additional real growth would result.  I don’t need to elaborate, because 

these notions are consistent with points that several others around this table and I have been 

making for some time, namely, that it looks as if economic growth is slow now for reasons that 

monetary policy can and should do little to ameliorate.  In addition, I find it disconcerting that, 

according to the Tealbook, something like two-thirds of the improvement in the growth outlook 

seems to be attributable to the net export effect of the reduced value of the dollar.  Given the 

climate of international discourse regarding currency valuations—and I recognize that some 

around the table are more expert in this area than I—my sense is that it wouldn’t be helpful for 

us to be seen as stimulating economic growth primarily through currency depreciation.  

Moreover, the growth effects in that channel could be dampened to the extent that other central 

banks adjust their policy in response—a factor that I understand isn’t taken into account in the 

box on pages 4 and 5. 

Second, I think the risks of providing further stimulus at this time are substantial.  The 

fact that the effects are likely to be so small adds to those risks.  While inflation has downshifted 

over the last two years, to be sure, I seriously doubt whether we would be considering more 

November 2–3, 2010 137 of 238



 

 

 

quantitative easing if it weren’t for the elevated level of the unemployment rate.  So, in that 

sense, I think it’s fair to say this is mostly about unemployment, and I think that’s how markets 

are going to read this.  More quantitative easing right now would imply more influence over the 

unemployment rate than we actually have, and would promise more improvement in 

unemployment than we are capable of delivering.  The precedent this sets would bias our 

reaction function toward unemployment, both in our actual reaction function and in the public’s 

perception of it.  As a result, people are likely to expect increasing monetary stimulus as long as 

the level of the unemployment rate is disappointing, and that’s likely to be true for a long, long 

time. 

This asset-purchase program is predicated on the notion that inflation expectations are 

stable enough that we have the leeway to provide additional stimulus.  This may look like a 

pretty safe bet right now, with inflation low and expectations near the center of recent ranges.  

But if economic growth doesn’t seem to respond rapidly enough to our efforts, as I suspect will 

be the case, we inevitably will be tempted to risk an inflation uptick by doubling down on the 

program size.  Moreover, the path we are taking today could put us in a difficult quandary in the 

not unlikely scenario that inflationary pressures build up before unemployment is judged to be 

acceptably low.  Inflation expectations could be much more difficult to restrain then, if we are 

seen as having tilted towards unemployment. 

For me, this poses unacceptable risks to price stability and to our credibility.  Those risks 

might not materialize this quarter, they might not materialize next quarter, or next year, given 

where inflation is right now, but we know that there will come a time in this recovery when the 

amount of reserves we are supplying right now would be too much and would set off an 

acceleration of inflation.  When that time approaches, unemployment could well be higher than 

November 2–3, 2010 138 of 238



 

 

 

we and many others would like to see it, and, at that point, I fear today’s decision and the 

expectations it encourages will come back to haunt us. 

I have a comment on the language in alternatives A and B, paragraph 2, which I offer up 

in the spirit of how to provide stimulus, if you must.  It has to do with the second sentence in 

paragraph 2, which describes unemployment as elevated and inflation as somewhat low relative 

to levels consistent with the dual mandate.  I think we all agree with the obvious point made by 

President Bullard at our last meeting, namely, if we’re conducting monetary policy in a way that 

is ideal, evaluated against our statutory mandates, then it will be the case that unemployment and 

inflation are at times different from their target values—that is, their long-run average values or 

the value to which they would converge over time in the absence of further economic shocks.  

And that seems like a pretty clear and generally accepted point about how we do policy.  The 

second sentence in A2 and B2 seems to imply that the current levels of the unemployment rate 

are inconsistent with our mandates.  I don’t think it’s true that the current levels of 

unemployment are inconsistent with us conducting a policy in a way that’s optimal vis-à-vis our 

mandates.  We’re obviously debating what to do to continue to be optimal relative to our 

mandates, but this isn’t just a semantic point.  This language encourages people to view us as 

failures or as having fallen short whenever unemployment is even moderately high, and that’s 

essentially a view of policy as a series of static, one-time problems.  We disposed of that 

viewpoint several decades ago, as you know.  Instead, the viewpoint that President Bullard was 

sketching, the modern one, is that economies are hit by shocks.  There are important 

intertemporal interdependencies, which means that you set policy over time such that the 

economy responds in a way that is optimal against our goals.  In other words, with no shocks, the 

convergence back to steady state would be at an optimal pace.  You can debate what an optimal 

November 2–3, 2010 139 of 238



 

 

 

pace is, and that is something that is at the heart of the judgment of what monetary policy is 

about.  But it’s about the pace of return to those average long-run values or ideal values, it’s not 

about the level against those ideal values. 

We should find a way, I believe, in minutes or testimony, to convey the sense of—and 

here I will use some geeky language—what optimal policy means in a stochastic equilibrium, 

which is what President Bullard was talking about.  Until then, though, I suggest we end the 

second sentences after the word “low,” so that it reads, “Currently, the unemployment rate is 

elevated, and measures of inflation are somewhat low.”  That does the job.  It deletes the clause 

pulling in our mandate, but the first sentence of the paragraph prominently mentions our 

mandate.  Moreover, the third sentence is the one that characterizes our assessment of policy in 

terms of the pace at which we’re getting back to where we want to be, namely, that progress is 

too slow.  With that suggestion, I thank you and conclude my remarks, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a comment and a question.  Obviously, we’re not 

saying that, if at any point in time, we’re not at the mandate, then the policy is wrong—clearly, 

we don’t want to say that.  The last sentence in the paragraph is intended to capture that point.  It 

says that we anticipate a gradual return to appropriate levels of unemployment and inflation, but 

we judge that progress has been unacceptably slow. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  It does the job. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  That tries to capture the notion you have.  Let me 

raise another point, and maybe others would want to comment.  One additional way also to 

address your concern would be to revise the second sentence.  In that sentence, we struck out the 

phrase “over the longer run.”  We could instead say, “The unemployment rate is elevated, and 

measures of underlying inflation are somewhat low relative to levels that the Committee judges 

November 2–3, 2010 140 of 238



 

 

 

to be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual mandate.”  In other words, this is the long-run 

target in some sense, but not the instantaneous.  Does that help at all? 

MR. LACKER.  It just doesn’t seem to me that, given the third sentence, we need to be 

judgmental in the sentence that talks about levels of unemployment.  “Over the longer run” with 

the unemployment rate, as I said last time, is kind of problematic. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s why we struck all this language we had in the 

videoconference, because we couldn’t come to agreement on how to characterize it. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  Is this the long-run average?  I don’t think so, right?  In 

the absence of shocks, it would converge to something that’s at the lower end of its range, so it’s 

a concept that needs more explanation.  And I’m not sure why you need to talk about the 

mandate a second time in the second sentence. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a question? 

MR. EVANS.  Well, I just wanted to ask a question and offer a reaction to something that 

has come up at the last several meetings.  I second the proposal of characterizing what optimal 

policy is in some way that we could better appreciate.  President Bullard was absolutely correct 

when he pointed out that, after a big shock, optimal policy could well lead to fairly substantial 

gaps, or however you want to describe this outcome.  But it’s also the case that bad policy would 

lead to gaps like that, too, and we need to understand why the current situation should be 

characterized as optimal and not simply bad.  [Laughter]  I mean, there is just a presumption 

here. 

MR. BULLARD.  Can I just clarify? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

November 2–3, 2010 141 of 238



 

 

 

MR. BULLARD.  I just said that merely saying that unemployment is high and inflation 

is very low doesn’t tell you anything one way or the other about the quality of the policy, so 

that’s consistent with what you’re saying.  It could be that we are following completely horrible 

policy, but we can argue that. 

MR. LACKER.  My point was that we don’t want to lead people to believe that, if 

unemployment is ever high, it’s because we have failed and are doing bad policy.  You’d agree 

with that, wouldn’t you? 

MR. EVANS.  I second the proposal for clarity on all of these objectives. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like President Lacker, I do not support 

another round of asset purchases at this time.  The economy has been through a soft patch this 

summer, but it appears to be emerging from it.  Economic growth over the next three years is 

expected to be modestly above trend in the Tealbook.  Employment is expected to pick up, 

although at a painfully slow pace.  And inflation is expected to accelerate gradually. 

In my view, the LSAP program is an unconventional policy tool that is likely to be most 

helpful when inflation and the forecast of inflation are falling, when there is serious risk of 

inflation expectations becoming unhinged and falling, and when we’re operating at the zero 

bound.  I might well support it if all of these conditions were met, but they aren’t, in my forecast.  

It seems to me that if we were in that position, our communication would be much different from 

what we are currently considering.  In particular, I would focus explicitly on our inflation 

objective, on what we think inflation expectations were, and our goal would be to support those, 

because that would support the real economy.  But even in this case, there may be better, more 

effective, and less distortionary tools at our disposal, and I will return to that in a moment. 

November 2–3, 2010 142 of 238



 

 

 

In terms of our current approach to LSAPs, I have some deep misgivings.  Some of the 

memos and discussions seem to view LSAPs as a conventional policy instrument that can easily 

be translated into short-term interest rates and, thus, rationalized in terms of a more normal 

policy rule.  I’m strongly in favor of rule-based policies.  My assessment is that we have little 

theory or evidence to guide us in constructing such a rule for these unconventional policies.  And 

what we do have seems to me to be subject to skepticism.  Certainly, in the Eggertsson-

Woodford model, for example, asset purchases would be irrelevant in escaping from such a 

liquidity trap. 

I think it would be a mistake to convey to the public that we know how to fine-tune an 

asset-purchase program to achieve our objectives when, in fact, we don’t.  We need to be humble 

about what we know about the effects of an LSAP program on the economy and on inflation 

expectations.  Moreover, we risk undermining both business and consumer confidence if a 

renewed and particularly large LSAP program is viewed as a signal that the recovery is 

unsustainable or that the economy is worse off than they already think it is. 

I’m also concerned about the economic and political costs associated with unwinding all 

of the LSAPs that we have already done to date, much less adding more.  These uncertainties 

suggest to me that, in the current environment, the potential costs of such a program outweigh 

the meager benefits outlined in the Tealbook.  Again, given these very small anticipated benefits, 

we should be even more focused on the downside risks of this program.  I’m concerned that we 

have too quickly presumed that the cost and risk are close to zero.  What if we’re wrong?  Doing 

something because we can is not a good way to conduct policy, even when the state of the 

economy seems unsatisfactory, nor is doing so because the fiscal authorities won’t act.  It’s akin 

November 2–3, 2010 143 of 238



 

 

 

to asking your dentist to do your heart surgery, because your heart surgeon is on the golf course.  

[Laughter] 

These policies can set dangerous precedents in their own right, create their own form of 

moral hazard, and create potentially outsized political risk for us.  Trying to use highly uncertain 

monetary policy tools to conduct policies that are better addressed with fiscal policy is, to use an 

expression that President Hoenig has used recently, perhaps a bargain with the devil. 

In my mind, the costs outweigh the benefits.  So I’m supportive of alternative C, of the 

choices we’ve been given.  But I acknowledge that this is not the prevailing view of this 

Committee at this point, and others may very well disagree with my assessment.  But if we are to 

proceed, I think we need to improve our communication and ask ourselves a number of 

important questions. 

First, I think we need to be clear about what we expect the transmission mechanism to be.  

If the effect we seek is on inflation and inflation expectations, then we need to say that very 

explicitly, yet we continue to talk about lowering longer-term nominal interest rates.  However, 

if we were effective, perhaps longer-term interest rates would actually go up.  We traditionally 

do a very poor job in this Committee of distinguishing between real and nominal interest rates in 

our communication, and I think this is a case where that may be particularly important.  If we 

focus too much on the unemployment rate and the unemployment path, and if it fails to improve 

noticeably, we could do appreciable harm to our credibility and/or be led, as President Lacker 

was suggesting, to ever-increasing balance sheets as we chase a goal that we can’t achieve. 

Second, we need to be clear about what we are conditioning the LSAP policy on.  It’s all 

well and good to say we will regularly review the policy in light of incoming information and 

adjust policy appropriately.  But I think our communications would be more effective if we 

November 2–3, 2010 144 of 238



 

 

 

provided a better sense of what information we’re looking at.  For example, suppose the 

Tealbook forecast plays out just as written in the second quarter of next year, with a growth rate 

of 3.4 percent, unemployment rate at 9.5 percent, and PCE inflation at 1 percent.  Would the 

Committee members who favor asset purchases today take this as evidence that the program is 

working, as the Tealbook would suggest, or would they be inclined to do more purchases if they 

saw those outcomes?  Perhaps it would depend on some factors other than those key 

instruments—maybe it would depend on the level of longer-term nominal rates, maybe it would 

depend on inflation expectations.  In any case, we need to be explicit about what we think those 

factors might be and how they would guide us in our policymaking.  If the economy looks 

appreciably better in the first half of next year than forecasted with the policy effects, would the 

program be interpreted as being more successful than we thought it was?  Or would we interpret 

the economic improvement as a sign that the policy is no longer needed?  Would we then be 

inclined to shrink the balance sheet, if output turned out better than expected? 

Given that we have so little basis for a rule under these circumstances, I think we need at 

least a better sense amongst ourselves of how we’ll adjust policy over time, what indicators will 

guide us, and what the scale and the pace of such asset-purchase programs will be.  What do we 

need to see happening to stop purchases early or to increase purchases?  Once we have a better 

understanding of our own thought processes, we can convey a better sense to the public and the 

markets and be more disciplined in our approach to policy.  That’s why these considerations, at a 

minimum, suggest that the language we need says that we’ll engage in policies of “up to” 

$600 billion, if we really think we’re going to be reevaluating it along the way. 

Third, before embarking on a new round of asset purchases, it also seems prudent to have 

further serious discussions about our exit strategy.  In particular, how will portfolio-balance 

November 2–3, 2010 145 of 238



 

 

 

effects play out during our exit?  Presumably, if we aren’t selling assets, the size of our balance 

sheet will sustain such portfolio-balance accommodation.  That might suggest that we would 

have to raise the fed funds rate faster than otherwise in order to offset the effects of this built-in 

large balance sheet and the portfolio-balance effects.  This also plays on the other side of how we 

pick the size of this program.  It seems to me that many of us have talked about setting the size of 

the program in terms of its effects on the Taylor rule, for example, in lowering the funds rate 

when we’re at the zero bound.  Yet I don’t see that those calculations account for the fact that 

we’ve already done nearly $1.8 trillion of asset purchases. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, those are included. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Pick a number for asset purchases, say, $600 billion.  If we believe that 

that amounts to a move of 100 basis points for the funds rate, then we’ve already done the 

equivalent of 300 basis points in terms of the funds rate going into this, and this would be 

lowering it yet another 100 basis points.  The calculations of the Taylor rule don’t make that 

adjustment.  When you calculate the Taylor rule, it doesn’t tell you that you’ve already done 

300 basis points worth of easing.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, it does.  The calculations that were done in that memo 

already take into account the purchases we have made in making that assessment.  In the Leahy 

memo that was circulated at the videoconference. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  The October 15 Kiley et al. memo. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry, the Kiley memo. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sorry.  I was thinking about the numbers in the Tealbook from the 

Taylor rule. 

MR. WILCOX.  It was in the framework memo. 

November 2–3, 2010 146 of 238



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  I stand corrected, then, if that’s true.  I lost my place here.  In any event, 

I think we need to think clearly about both the scale that we have already done and how it will 

affect the economy as we unwind—if we don’t sell assets, then the portfolio-balance effect of 

that stock of assets is negative. 

Finally, let me note that I largely agree with President Nutter—I’m sorry, it was President 

Evans who was talking saying that.  [Laughter]  Excuse me—that just slipped out.  I agree with 

him wholeheartedly on the importance of an inflation target.  But, like President Kocherlakota, 

I’m unclear exactly how further asset purchases, which simply increase the amount of excess 

reserves we have in the banking system, would work.  I have no idea how they would help raise 

inflation expectations in the short run.  We already have sufficient excess reserves, and if those 

excess reserves flowed out into the economy as M2 or some other measure of liquidity, we have 

the kindling that has the potential to create a great amount of inflation.  If we wish to affect 

inflation expectations, we might be more effective in emphasizing this actuality and the 

prospects for higher inflation in our communications. 

Better still, we might think of using other tools to increase the money multiplier and 

encourage banks to put their excess reserves to different uses—this is related perhaps to 

President Lacker’s discussion earlier.  For example, we might consider enhancing the 

transmission mechanism by raising the interest on required reserves to 50 basis points and 

lowering the interest on excess reserves to zero.  We’ve paid zero interest rates on excess 

reserves for most of our history.  By creating a wedge between required reserves and excess 

reserves, we might encourage some of those huge amounts of excess reserves that are in the 

system to move out into assets of various classes, and let the markets take care of it rather than 

November 2–3, 2010 147 of 238



 

 

 

forcing us to do something along those lines.  So I think we need to consider other ways of 

enhancing what we’ve already done. 

In closing, I agree it would be a surprise if the Fed did not do LSAPs today, given the 

recent speeches.  But that isn’t a reason, in my mind, to implement an inappropriate policy 

whose costs may outweigh its benefits.  The Committee should be setting appropriate policy, and 

the markets will adjust, not the other way around.  Moreover, our focus should be on the 

intermediate to longer run.  Short-term interests of traders, marketmakers, and the dealers we’re 

so fond of surveying about our policy choices may well be at odds with the longer-run policy 

objectives of the broad economy.  After all, isn’t that one of the reasons for our independence, 

namely, to keep that longer-term focus?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I apologize for interrupting you.  Next is 

President Pianalto. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I was confused. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I see the 

additional asset purchases as appropriate insurance during a challenging phase of the recovery.  

My baseline forecast hasn’t changed meaningfully since our last meeting.  I still expect output 

growth to remain weak to moderate and inflation rates to remain well below the levels that I 

would consider consistent with our price stability objective. 

On several occasions in the past, after a long sequence of federal funds rate reductions, 

with a gradually improving outlook, the FOMC still chose to lower the fed funds rate as an 

insurance policy to reduce the likelihood of worst outcomes.  Although the alternative scenarios 

for further asset purchases described in the Tealbook suggest limited impacts on the real 

economy, a decision at this meeting to go ahead with some additional policy accommodation 

November 2–3, 2010 148 of 238



 

 

 

should help to limit further disinflation.  I think there is some insurance value to be derived from 

solidifying recent progress and moving inflation expectations higher and closer to our long-run 

inflation objective.  I was concerned when financial market estimates of inflation expectations 

appeared to be dipping following the September meeting.  Inflation expectations have since 

recovered.  I view this as evidence that additional accommodation will help to lock in some of 

the progress that we’ve made to date in moving inflation expectations up toward our price 

stability objective. 

Also, with inflation already so low, particularly for CPI-based measures, I think some 

insurance against further declines in inflation and inflation expectations is appropriate.  It’s true 

that not all of the insurance moves exercised by past Committees were viewed as necessary after 

the fact.  However, it’s also true that some insurance moves taken by past Committees when the 

economy seemed to be doing better sometimes turned out to have been insufficient.  Determining 

when to do a little more, or when to stop, is never easy.  But I can support additional 

accommodation to help stabilize inflation expectations.  Following such a strategy also enables 

us to do what we can to support an improved employment picture. 

On the statement language, I am concerned that in the minutes of our September meeting 

we indicated that we discussed providing a policy framework for further accommodation.  But it 

was evident during our videoconference call that finding a compromise for a framework is 

proving to be challenging.  In its current state, I see the language in alternative B as providing 

only the most general feedback mechanism for guiding policy adjustments. 

One way to provide a feedback mechanism would be to modify paragraph 4 from 

alternative A and insert it into alternative B.  I would simplify the language around the inflation 

outlook and make unemployment the last item in the list.  My proposed language for paragraph 4 

November 2–3, 2010 149 of 238



 

 

 

would read, “The Committee expects to maintain the target rate for the fed funds rate at 0 to 

¼ percent at least until mid-2012, so long as the Committee’s outlook for inflation in the 

intermediate term remains consistent with its mandate, longer-term inflation expectations remain 

well anchored, and the unemployment rate remains elevated.”  Language along these lines helps 

to link potential policy changes to inflation and inflation expectations, in addition to 

unemployment, which we all expect will remain elevated beyond 2012.  By providing this 

feedback mechanism, we can help to stabilize inflation expectations around our price stability 

mandate while also acknowledging our mandate for full employment in the long run.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, let me say that I was pleased with the comments made yesterday by 

Board Vice Chairperson Yellen, especially those regarding the importance of listening during 

these conversations and not making prejudgments.  At the same time, I listened very carefully to 

what you were saying yesterday, Mr. Chairman.  I understand the direction that we are headed in.  

I would ask that we do listen to each other very carefully here, and I would like to say that I am 

deeply concerned about proceeding with further quantitative easing.  I understand the logic.  The 

goal is to drive down longer-term interest rates in hopes of stimulating loan demand, offsetting 

the propensity I reported on earlier for economic actors to hoard rather than invest.  Another 

desired benefit, as you outlined it yesterday, Mr. Chairman, is to devalue the dollar to stimulate 

demand for our exports—and I don’t think we should ever say that publicly  And to one of you 

that I discussed this matter with, and whom I hold in the highest regard, it implies that we would 

also help ward off protectionism.  The ultimate objective, of course, is to advance final demand 

and general employment for American workers, and to promote output growth. 

November 2–3, 2010 150 of 238



 

 

 

We are indeed in a liquidity trap or a bog, as Governor Tarullo says.  We already have 

low interest rates, and spreads against risk-free instruments are historically narrow.  Variations in 

interest rate levels are clearly not driving loan demand.  Loans are desirable and businesses 

borrow when they see an opportunity for a return on investment.  Even at the low rates that 

already prevail, businesses lack confidence in the prospect of earning a superior ROI by 

investing so as to expand their domestic workforce, in comparison to what they might earn from 

alternative investments abroad or by buying in their stock or cleaning up their balance sheets.  

Consumers borrow when they believe it makes sense to shift consumption forward.  But after the 

sobering experience of the last three years, they are inhibited from doing so by a lack of 

confidence that their income streams in the future will be sufficient to cover their payment 

obligations. 

On the supply side, we know that businesses are floating on a sea of liquidity.  Banks 

already hold over $1 trillion in excess reserves with us.  Their holdings of government securities 

as a percentage of their total assets are growing, as pointed out by Governor Duke in her 

comments yesterday.  Loans, as a percentage of assets, are declining.  If we had a level of bank 

reserves or liquidity in the marketplace that was binding or inhibiting loan growth, I could 

understand the impulse to relieve that stricture.  Incidentally, I hope we can succeed, as you 

indicated, in getting away from the expression “QE,” but I doubt it. 

I have no doubt that asset purchases will increase the level of bank reserves, they will 

lower rates marginally in the short term, and they will add more liquidity to the markets, 

meanwhile weakening the dollar.  The question for me is whether this works to the benefit of job 

creation for American workers and helping those most in need.  You spoke in Jackson Hole, Mr. 

Chairman, of the need to weigh the costs and benefits of further accommodation.  Yesterday you 

November 2–3, 2010 151 of 238



 

 

 

expanded upon that, and you acknowledged some of the costs.  But, like President Lacker and 

President Plosser and his referencing President Hoenig just now, I’m skeptical about many of the 

presumed benefits of further QE.  However, I’m certain of some of the costs.  One cost will be 

the risk of placing our quasi-independence in jeopardy.  We know that once a central bank is 

perceived as targeting government debt yields at a time of persistent budget deficits, the concern 

about debt monetization quickly raises its ugly head.  I expect the propensity to draw that 

conclusion has been enhanced by this congressional election.  Indeed, I believe that if the 

statement we discussed with Brian is unedited, we would be waving a red flag in the face of 

those who are our most volatile critics. 

I realize that there are two other countries that are engaging in quantitative easing.  As 

you know, I just don’t buy the analogy between the U.S. and Japan.  Let me give you a statistic, 

not for humor but to put this is in perspective.  More adult diapers are sold in Japan than 

children’s diapers.  It’s an aging society that is in no way comparable with the United States.  So 

the QE that I look at is that of the Bank of England.  But Governor King is offsetting the QE with 

an announced fiscal policy tightening that out-Thatchers Thatcher.  That is not the case here—

here, we suffer, just to stay with my diaper analogy, from fiscal incontinence.  If this were to 

change, then I would make a case for accommodation, but that is not yet happening.  And by 

providing monetary accommodation, I would suggest we are reducing the odds of fiscal 

discipline being brought to bear. 

I also see a risk of quantitative easing being accepted as the new normal.  Everything we 

know from monetary history tells us that, in times of crisis, we should open the flood gates.  That 

is Bagehot 101.  We did that.  It worked to pull us from the maw of financial panic and economic 

ruin.  But this is neither a time of panic nor is it a time of emergency.  If we were to come to be 

November 2–3, 2010 152 of 238



 

 

 

perceived as applying QE as part of our normal policy toolkit, I’m willing to bet that the markets 

will expect more, as was referred to earlier.  And, by the way, Nouriel Roubini is not alone in 

predicting QE3 and QE4.  Quantitative easing is like kudzu for market operators—you’re 

familiar with this analogy because you’re a southerner, Mr. Chairman—it grows and it grows 

and it may be impossible to trim off once it takes root in the minds of market operators. 

I might understand the case for accommodation if serious deflation were a clear and 

present danger.  It is not, as I pointed out yesterday by citing the trimmed mean and by giving 

my anecdotal reports.  I should add that, thanks to your leadership, Mr. Chairman, and the 

support of this Committee in engineering the liquidity measures implemented during the panic of 

2008-2009, and by avoiding the policy errors of the 1930s, serious deflation has not happened—

neither M2 growth nor inflation has fallen off the cliff.  And while nominal growth is less than 

desired—I have actually trimmed back my estimates for the next several years—and is very 

painful, nominal income is growing, however, incrementally.  It’s not shrinking. 

I’m skeptical about the purported benefits of a weaker dollar in exchange markets.  Much 

of what we export is in the form of high-yield goods and services and in commodities like 

soybeans, for example, which we produce with enormous efficiency.  As Nathan pointed out, the 

recent statistics indicate that much, though certainly not all, of what we import is used to clothe 

and support lower-income earners, the very people who are suffering from high unemployment 

and lack of job creation, whom we endeavor to help as part of our dual mandate. 

The Walmarts, the Dollar General Stores, the Costcos, the Michaels, and other stores 

where the most affected people buy necessities are faced with a further squeeze on their margins, 

and they will likely react to higher import prices by driving productivity even harder, which 

means selling more while employing even fewer workers.  As to warding off protectionism, from 

November 2–3, 2010 153 of 238



 

 

 

what I’ve learned about that dynamic by serving as the Deputy U.S. Trade Representative, much 

depends on the skills of the Chief Executive and congressional leadership.  And when push 

comes to shove, Presidents and good congressional leaders tend to steer the Congress away from 

its baser instincts.  Dollar depreciation, however, if viewed as a deliberate intention of U.S. 

government policy, will work against us in terms of the rules-based system we have at the WTO 

and other rules that we have to limit the potential damage of protectionism. 

As to the proposition that higher prices of financial assets will liberate those most in 

need, I wonder if this is, indeed, true.  We’re already seeing the beginnings of speculative 

activity in stocks and bonds and commodity markets and buyouts, and the rich are getting richer.  

Woody Allen said once that being rich beats being poor.  Well, that’s true.  It’s not funny, 

however, and I find no delight in it, and I see considerable risk in conducting policy with the 

consequence of transferring income from the poor, those most dependent on fixed income and 

the saver, to the rich.  Senior citizens and others who saved and played by the rules are earning 

nothing on their savings, while big debtors and too-big-to-fail oligopoly banks benefit from their 

subsidy.  Now, outside of monarchies, I know of no democratic system, and certainly no 

President on the right or the left, who would tolerate that kind of policy, let alone advocate it.  

And I expect a reaction against it that might lead to political retribution against us. 

Then, there’s the issue of exit policy.  The more we engage in quantitative easing that 

moves us further out the yield curve and the more we load our balance sheet with price-sensitive 

assets, the greater the likelihood of our realizing a loss on our holdings.  So I ask you to consider 

the prospect of appearing before a House Banking Committee in, say, 2013, to report that the 

central bank of the United States has generated a loss—this is a tail risk, but I think we need to 

consider it.  We believe the loss is not likely to happen.  We believe, according to Brian’s 

November 2–3, 2010 154 of 238



 

 

 

excellent briefing—and, by the way, we appreciate what you do even though we beat up on you 

so often—that we can cover losses through the stream of income.  But there should be some 

more sensitivity analysis done on this front and not just a single point analysis of a 100 basis 

point reversal. 

The Committee might consider that we could be prescribing the wrong medicine for the 

ailment that our economy is suffering.  Liquidity and abundant money are not the binding 

constraints on economic activity.  The binding constraints are uncertainty about income and 

future aggregate demand, the disincentives fiscal and regulatory policies impose on 

decisionmakers, and the reluctance, given those disincentives, of employers to create jobs for our 

American people.  The remedy for what ails the economy is in the hands of the regulatory and 

the fiscal authorities, not the Federal Reserve, and throwing another $600 billion to $1 trillion at 

the economy to see if it will generate a spark in the engine of the economy is, in my mind, a 

questionable tactic.  We are uncertain that it will lead to behavior that creates jobs or spurs final 

demand.  We can be certain that it will lead to a declining dollar that will encourage further 

speculation, that it will promote commodity hoarding, that it will accelerate the transfer of wealth 

from the deliberate saver and the unfortunate to the more well-off, and that it will place at risk 

the independence of this great institution. 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I respectfully recommend that we not engage in any further 

quantitative easing, regardless of market expectations that we have created through our public 

statements.  Now, I expect the Committee will decide that the benefits of further accommodation 

outweigh the costs that I have outlined.  And, like the Texas Rangers, I will be gracious in defeat.  

However, I do ask that we leave some room for adjustment in this endeavor in the case of an 

adverse reaction.  I have some editorial suggestions.  If you decide to adopt alternative B—and I 

November 2–3, 2010 155 of 238



 

 

 

want to record that I am firmly against it—I’d first reiterate my suggestion regarding Brian’s 

statement; specifically, to keep the markets from front-running us, I’d suggest using the phrase 

“up to” before the term “$600 billion” or “$75 billion,” or whatever the number is in A or B. 

I would also suggest that, in paragraph 3 of B, we change the words as follows.  Keep 

“To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery,” because, after all, that’s what we are trying 

to do—we’re trying to increase employment and decrease unemployment.  But then strike “and 

to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate,” and say instead “while 

maintaining the firm commitment to keep inflation within levels consistent with its mandate.”  I 

would do the same in the first sentence in paragraph 5, after it says “to support the economic 

recovery.”  I would say, “…and to maintain inflation within levels consistent….”  The reason for 

that is that I’m a firm believer in the dual mandate, but I know that it’s not just people of Tea 

Party inclination, but very serious critics, like Paul Volcker and others, who worry that we might 

overemphasize one mandate at the expense of the other.  I’m a believer in the dual mandate, but I 

think we have to be mindful of the fact that there is a fear in the marketplace that there might be 

inflationary consequences of our actions.  Emphasizing twice that we will maintain inflation 

“within levels consistent with our mandate” is the way to word it. 

Returning to Brian’s statement, in the first paragraph I would recommend “up to” an 

additional $600 billion, and “up to” $850 to $900 billion, and “up to” $110 billion per month.  In 

terms of your 35 percent rule, I’d say that the Desk may be allowed, on occasion, to move above 

35 percent.  The reason for that is to keep the market slightly on its toes and to prevent front-

running, and to give us a little leeway.  I also would like the “up to” phrase in there, because 

otherwise we’re binding next year’s Committee.  That may be something some desire to do, but I 

don’t think it is the proper thing to do.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

November 2–3, 2010 156 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  May I just make sure I understand your suggestion on 

inflation?  You said “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery while maintaining 

inflation within levels consistent with its mandate.” 

MR. FISHER.  “While maintaining its firm commitment to keep inflation within levels 

consistent…”  I think that would be reassuring to the marketplace and also reassuring to our 

critics, who, I think, are going to turn up the volume. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today I know the Committee will adopt 

some version of alternative B as it goes through this process.  The markets are, as I said 

yesterday, 100 percent certain, and so am I.  And Bill English has appropriately outlined the 

market’s reaction should we fail to act on alternative B, and that’s unfortunate and unpersuasive 

to me. 

I acknowledge that we all want what is best.  Certainly I do, and so I hope the Committee 

is correct and that I’m wrong.  I strongly disagree with the course being charted here today.  The 

Committee takes this action expecting it will incent portfolio adjustments, thus changing relative 

prices and somehow spurring aggregate demand.  This will stimulate gross domestic product and 

reduce unemployment, as we pursue maximum employment; support higher but stable inflation; 

support lower but stable long-run interest rates; and support stable long-run growth—all 

desirable outcomes.  I, in contrast, see other outcomes, and they’re not unprecedented.  We have 

experienced them here recently.  They’re long-run consequences.  We may see some short-run 

improvement, but not long run.  There will be, I’m sure, in the end, a lot of givebacks.  

Experience tells us that. 

November 2–3, 2010 157 of 238



 

 

 

This course sows the seeds of instability, in my opinion.  We’ll get more portfolio 

adjustments.  We’ll get, I think, portfolio distortions.  We may get some stimulus, but we’ll also 

get asset price inflation.  And we’ll get higher longer-term inflation expectations in time as we 

continue on this course.  We’ll have more fragile, less stable GDP growth, and more fragile, less 

stable employment in the future, even though we may get some temporary reductions in 

unemployment.  The economy is undergoing major and unavoidable rebalancings from past 

actions.  That includes the deleveraging of consumers and financial institutions encouraged by a 

period of very low interest rates.  Even though we are going through these adjustments, the 

economy is expanding.   

For reasons I have given in prior meetings this year, I believe our funds rate target should 

be low but not zero, to encourage a better resource allocation than zero will get us.  Still, I clearly 

do not agree that we should undertake another LSAP.  In the most general terms, the purported 

benefits are small and the risks are large, and I’ll outline three that are of particular concern to 

me.  And I’ll state that my overall concern focuses on the longer-run effects of well-intentioned 

short-term actions, the accumulation of small effects that will eventually lead to problems. 

First, without clear objectives, we’re likely to keep the funds rate too low and our balance 

sheet too large, leading to further misallocations of resources and more imbalances down the 

road.  Notice that I have said nothing yet about inflation.  Under an LSAP program, would we 

continue asset purchases until the unemployment rate is 9 percent, or maybe 8 percent, or maybe 

less?  Would we continue until near-term inflation rates climb to 2 percent or 3 percent, so we 

get an average rate that we would like?  Would we aim to reduce the 10-year Treasury rate to 

2¼ percent, or maybe 2 percent, or less?  We will chase an open-ended commitment, I think, 

over time that introduces additional uncertainty and volatility into an already chronically 

November 2–3, 2010 158 of 238



 

 

 

uncertain business environment.  Also, I agree that the tools are available, as has been pointed 

out here, to reduce excess reserves when the time is appropriate.  I do not believe that we will act 

at the right time or at the right speed—that’s our practice—because the Federal Reserve doesn’t 

have a good track record of withdrawing policy accommodation in a timely manner, no matter 

how much we say we will. 

Second, we risk undermining the Federal Reserve’s independence, in my opinion.  When 

we are a ready buyer of government debt, we become a convenient source of cash for fiscal 

programs.  During a crisis, that may be justified, but as a policy instrument, during normal or 

recovering times, it is a very dangerous precedent.  Moreover, by purchasing $600 billion of 

Treasury securities, with the projected 2011 budget deficit of $1 trillion, we appear—and I use 

that word advisedly—to be monetizing more than half the deficit. 

Third, I think adopting another LSAP program risks over time letting inflation 

expectations become unanchored, no matter our admonitions to the contrary, thereby 

undermining our credibility.  One of the objectives is to raise inflation in the near term while 

maintaining longer-run inflation expectations at about 2 percent.  That’s a policy that amounts to 

fine-tuning inflation expectations—a variable we cannot precisely or accurately measure—and it 

could easily lead to greater uncertainty and volatility and untimely higher inflation expectations.  

Moreover, with the balance sheet approaching $3 trillion, we risk undermining the public’s 

confidence in our commitment to long-run price stability, as well as contributing to inflationary 

expectations becoming unanchored and encouraging speculative investments—that’s almost 

certain.  I believe that, by monetizing the deficit and by having long-run inflation expectations 

rising more than planned, we risk undermining our credibility as a central bank.  In time, we 

November 2–3, 2010 159 of 238



 

 

 

could see longer-term Treasury rates rise rather than fall, thereby negating one of the purported 

benefits of the policy. 

While I agree that unemployment is too high, I do not agree that inflation is too low or 

that there is a serious risk of deflation.  Moreover, since the economy is recovering, it is most 

likely that the maintenance of the exceptionally accommodative policy rate that we have had so 

far will lead, over time, to moving our economy forward.  If we ease further, or if we leave the 

accommodation there too long, we will overshoot, and that’s not consistent with our long-run 

mandates.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 11:00.  I understand that coffee is ready.  

Why don’t we take 20 minutes for refreshments? 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if it’s great to be speaking 

after the break when everybody’s on a sugar high from the doughnuts.  [Laughter]  I support the 

policy action in alternative B.  I also support the implementation approach detailed in paragraph 

3 of alternative B.  I think it’s appropriate at this time to respond to evidence suggesting that the 

risks of further disinflation remain elevated.  I think risk management is the justification for the 

action, an insurance policy that has the intent of taking deflation risk off the table. 

As I said in the economy round, my sense is that the headwinds restraining the economy 

and the structural adjustments required may make further monetary stimulus through an LSAP 

program less effective than we would like.  I think it’s important, therefore, to be measured in 

our expectations about how much further stimulus can accomplish in the current environment.  

There’s simply a lot of uncertainty associated with this policy action. 

November 2–3, 2010 160 of 238



 

 

 

I prefer an approach that preserves flexibility and stresses the conditionality of the policy 

and does not lock us into specific triggers for future action at this time.  I think paragraph 5 

serves to make it clear that the pace and size of the program will be continuously evaluated as the 

economic outlook evolves.  That said, I agree with the suggestion that discussion of the decision 

framework associated with conditioning would be useful.  I also want to add that, even though 

it’s not a consideration at this meeting, I remain sympathetic to the idea of using this moment to 

be more explicit regarding an inflation objective. 

I am not entirely comfortable with the language in paragraph 2 of alternative B.  It seems 

likely to me that changing the language to call out the unemployment rate specifically will 

inevitably invite the conclusion that we have a specific rate in mind and that we are introducing 

an unemployment target as a guide for future monetary actions.  I’m sensitive to the fact that we 

are pursuing a dual mandate, of course, but, in my opinion, the language we have been using 

does appropriately honor the mandate.  Specifically, I think the statement that “Measures of 

underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat below those the Committee judges most 

consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price 

stability,” makes it clear that we have a focus on labor markets.  More importantly, it does so 

without risking overinterpretation of how much we can do about altering the path of the 

unemployment rate in the near or even medium term.  Most of our forecasts suggest that the 

unemployment rate will remain above what anyone would call desirable levels, even after the 

pace of the economic recovery has improved.  I think the current version of paragraph 2 in 

alternative B may well create issues in exiting from that language.  The September language, it 

seems to me, still serves us well.  But if the Committee feels the need to put somewhat more 

emphasis on employment, I would suggest something closer to the language in the initial version 

November 2–3, 2010 161 of 238



 

 

 

of alternative B that was circulated last week.  A streamlined version of that would say 

something like, “The pace of economic recovery would likely be too slow to make acceptable 

progress toward maximum employment, and underlying inflation likely would remain 

undesirably low for some time, posing risks to the economic recovery.”  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the whole, I favor greater monetary policy 

accommodation to reduce our dual mandate losses.  The inflation outlook greatly underruns my 

assessment of our mandate-consistent objective, and resource slack is much too large.  We need 

to provide monetary conditions that support a clear downward trajectory for unemployment 

sooner than what is in the current outlook.  I favor additional quantitative easing along the lines 

described in alternative B.  I might ultimately prefer a larger figure than the $600 billion in 

alternative B, but the stated intention to adjust the program as needed provides sufficient scope 

for adequate additional actions.  I would not really favor any language like “up to”—if anything, 

I might favor “at least” $600 billion. 

Having said this, I have a number of concerns about our strategy going forward.  My 

bottom line is that we can do better by providing greater clarity about our intentions.  There is 

reason to be skeptical that the magnitude of $600 billion in Treasury purchases will have a large 

effect on long rates, and others have spoken on that.  Although, Mr. Chairman, you made an 

excellent case last night, my own view is that LSAPs would be a more effective policy tool if 

they were combined with clearer communication regarding future monetary policy.  Real interest 

rates will decline further if the public clearly understands that the LSAPs represent part of a 

concerted plan to get inflation at least up to our objective.  Communicating our policy goals 

November 2–3, 2010 162 of 238



 

 

 

would also clarify the conditionality of our “extended period” of low interest rates.  This 

communication task would be much easier if we had an explicit inflation objective.  Knowing 

our target, the public and markets could make credible inferences on their own about how long 

we will need to keep interest rates low.  We then would not need to use complex language such 

as that in alternative A. 

I continue to see big downsides to the status quo approach to describing our objectives.  I 

worry that our qualitative descriptions only paper over significant differences in objectives.  In 

the not too distant future, this qualitative approach will lead to much misunderstanding on the 

part of the public.  Those of us who were around for the communication subcommittees over the 

last 10 years remember how difficult it was to construct a qualitative statement that survived the 

stress tests we imposed on them. 

Let me use the current statement as an example of such problems.  Consider the phrase 

“the unemployment rate is elevated.”  First off, frankly, this seems a touch clueless to me at 

9.6 percent, but I’m not going to talk about it anymore.  Imagine how this language is likely to 

evolve over time.  If unemployment goes to double digits, which modifier of “elevated” becomes 

appropriate?  “Really” elevated?  Next, what about when unemployment falls to 7.8 percent?  

Will it still be “elevated?”  I think so.  This is a tougher call.  If it’s simply high, does that mean 

it’s less important?  How will changes in modifiers be interpreted?  It’s going to be an issue.  I 

think a reasonable statement would be one that expresses dissatisfaction with the lack of 

substantial evidence of a downward trajectory for unemployment over the next 12 months; I 

haven’t studied it, but that sounds more like the earlier language, as President Lockhart just 

mentioned. 

November 2–3, 2010 163 of 238



 

 

 

I also am nervous about the statement of flexible review in paragraph 5 of alternative B, 

in which the Committee will regularly review the pace and size of its purchases and “will adjust 

the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.”  I agree with the 

intent, but I simply don’t know how the public can draw meaningful inferences about our 

reaction function from this statement without more clarity on our inflation and unemployment 

objectives.  And our differences of opinion have already been raised numerous times this 

morning. 

Finally, if you give any consideration to the view that today’s situation is both 

extraordinary and unacceptable, I don’t see how the “go slow” approach of Bill Brainard could 

be viewed as optimal or even best—I’m referring to some of the thoughts that you expressed last 

night, Mr. Chairman.  Our misses are large.  As I mentioned earlier, I think that bad policy would 

also lead to large misses.  There’s great uncertainty about the effectiveness of our policy tools 

and whether they will enable us to begin the process of adjustment back to a better equilibrium. 

Some people have used the term “geeky”—I prefer to call this “super rocket science.”  

[Laughter]  The optimal control dynamics are screaming for robust approaches, that is, large, 

decisive actions in the face of potentially impotent tools.  But I understand that the truly large 

actions are not on the table today.  The reason I earlier poked at the language in alternative A that 

discussed inflation rising to our mandate levels is my concern about take-back risk, or smaller 

versions of 1937 risk.  For our policies to be effective, the public is going to have to expect that 

we’re going to be easing for some time; that inflation is going to be returning to where it ought to 

be; and that maybe we might even overshoot a little bit.  We can’t fine-tune that type of thing.  I 

think it will be a big problem for us to get the economy moving towards escape velocity if the 

November 2–3, 2010 164 of 238



 

 

 

public worries greatly that a risk-averse Fed will not follow through with adequate actions to 

meet the dual mandate.  

In closing, I think your arguments, Mr. Chairman, for $600 billion in LSAPs are very 

strong.  It does have a little bit of a threading-the-needle feel to me, and I would much prefer to 

be more aggressive.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I see two compelling 

reasons for resuming purchases of long-term securities at this point.  First, we are currently 

falling well short on both of our mandates, and just as importantly, we’ve made no progress for 

more than one-half year now.  Moreover, even if we achieve the consensus forecast for economic 

growth in the upcoming periods, progress towards achieving our mandates will be painfully 

slow.  As shown in the Tealbook simulations, additional monetary stimulus in the form of asset 

purchases will help us reach our goals sooner.  Second, I see a strong argument for taking out 

insurance against downside risks.  For example, at our current levels of unemployment and 

inflation, further negative shocks to the economy would be very costly.  Even in the absence of 

such shocks, there is a small but dangerous possibility that the slow trend of disinflation will 

continue, and we will slip closer to a Japanese-style period of stagnation.  After all, deflation in 

Japan developed only after many years of grinding disinflation.  I do recognize that further asset 

purchases carry some risks, but I believe that the benefits of this action, both in terms of meeting 

our mandate and of managing risks, outweigh those concerns.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I remain concerned about doing 

more quantitative easing or doing another large-scale asset purchase.  First, I perceive the 

November 2–3, 2010 165 of 238



 

 

 

expected benefits of further—I’m going to keep saying “quantitative easing” because that’s what 

I’ve written here—quantitative easing [laughter] to be small, especially in terms of inflation, but 

also in terms of unemployment.  The forecasts on pages 4 and 5 of the Tealbook Part A strike me 

as consistent with this view.  Second, I believe that quantitative easing may well have significant 

downside risks.  I will not go through these in great detail.  Others have spoken extremely 

eloquently about them:  President Fisher, President Hoenig, President Plosser, President Lacker, 

all elaborated on these risks at great length and, I’m afraid, in a compelling way. 

But I will talk about one risk.  I think this is the most direct risk coming out of a large-

scale asset purchase, because it’s what the purchase is all about, namely, to take duration risk out 

of the private sector and transfer it to taxpayers—that is what the heart of the LSAP is.  We have 

to be thinking about whom we’re taking risk from and whom we’re transferring it to.  The 

essence of the LSAP relies on a segmented markets view of the world, where there are some 

people participating in bond markets and other people who have less access to it.  The people 

who are participating in the markets are the ones who benefit from this.  The ones who are not 

participating are the ones who don’t benefit.  This follows up on President Fisher’s eloquent 

description of the distributional consequences of our policies.  Typically I would think the people 

who are participating in asset markets are wealthier and more educated, while the people who are 

not able to are less wealthy, less educated.  In addition, while staff work has been thorough and 

very compelling on the asset pricing side, the ultimate macroeconomic impact of this risk shift 

has remained murky to me. 

Despite these concerns, and given your arguments yesterday, Mr. Chairman, and given 

the strength of consensus among the voters in the Committee, and I’ll emphasize the word 

“voters” here, I’m willing to go along with alternative B.  Let me talk about ways alternative B 

November 2–3, 2010 166 of 238



 

 

 

could be strengthened.  First, the word “unacceptably” in paragraph 2 seems to imply 

considerably more control over the recovery process than we actually have—I think we’re taking 

ownership for slow economic growth through that word.  I would recommend the word 

“disappointingly” or more simply the word “too.” 

Second, and more substantively, I would go along with President Pianalto’s 

recommendation of moving paragraph 4 from alternative A into alternative B, and I liked her 

rewording of it as well.  In general, it strikes me that an LSAP is not necessarily the most 

convincing tool that we have available.  I think forward guidance, as in paragraph 4 of alternative 

A, is a tool whose costs and benefits I understand better.  I think President Plosser’s suggestion 

of cutting the interest rate on excess reserves also is something that we should study more—

again, it could help us achieve our dual mandate.  We’re not competing with huge benefits on the 

table here—the LSAP is not going to take us down to 5 percent unemployment—so I think we 

have to explore all the possibilities. 

My third suggestion relates to paragraph 5 of alternative B.  It says we’re going to do this 

regular review of the LSAP based on incoming information.  I would like to suggest that, after 

“in light of incoming information,” we add the phrase “about the rate of progress toward its 

objective.”  The idea is that, if we were in the lucky circumstances of seeing 1.3 million jobs 

created over the next six months—which I think is unlikely, I have to admit, given my own 

forecast—that might lead us not to do further accommodation.  So I want to put the focus on the 

rate of progress, not the levels. 

Finally, I really feel that this institution faces a credibility problem if we are not clear that 

we expect we are going in the right direction, but we expect our movement to be “limited,” 

“modest,” “small”—I don’t know what word you want to use.  I have not heard anyone around 

November 2–3, 2010 167 of 238



 

 

 

the table suggest that we’re going to be making striking progress toward our dual mandate by 

adopting this program.  I think we should be clear with the public about that, and the way we can 

do that is in our communication through the minutes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B generally.  I 

support the suggestions just made by President Kocherlakota to switch to the word 

“disappointingly” instead of “unacceptably,” and to include the phrase “about the rate of 

progress” in paragraph 5.  I also support the suggestions made by President Fisher to add “up to” 

in various places in the statement of alternative B. 

I distributed a memo that outlined my preferred approach to alternative B, which I’ll 

briefly recap here.  My preferred approach would be a threefold modification to paragraph 2.  

The first sentence of the paragraph would be unchanged.  Let me stress that I think the goal here 

is more satisfactory progress toward price stability and maximum sustainable employment, so I 

don’t think there’s very much doubt about what the goal is.  The first change would be in the 

next sentence, where I would suggest announcing the pace of purchases, which is $75 billion per 

month.  Then I would include a sentence that has some forward guidance, namely, “The 

Committee judges that, based on the current economic outlook, this pace of purchases will 

continue through the second quarter of 2011.”  What I especially like about that is the phrase 

“based on the current economic outlook.”  So we would be saying that, yes, we think this pace of 

purchases will continue on for a while, but we’re also aware that the error bands around our 

forecast are gigantic and lots of things can happen in the interim, not to mention the program 

could go badly, and we may want to reconsider. 

November 2–3, 2010 168 of 238



 

 

 

If we did it this way, we would let the markets do the math and get away from the idea of 

putting a big number in the statement, which I do not like.  The markets are certainly good at 

math—better than I am—and they will substitute their own numbers, and they will also 

substitute their own forecasts for how they think the economy is going to evolve over the coming 

eight or nine months and make an assessment themselves of what they think the Committee will 

do going forward.  I think that’s the kind of dynamic we’d like to have, namely, the private 

sector assessing how they think the economy is going to evolve and, therefore, what they think 

the policy reaction will be.  In the meantime, we’d be making statements about how we see the 

economy evolving and how we see policy evolving going forward.  That’s the normal monetary 

policy dynamic that I think would be useful in this situation. 

Finally, I would move the state-contingent sentence from the very end of paragraph 5 up 

to paragraph 3 immediately after the sentence I just discussed.  That sentence says “the 

Committee will regularly review…” and so on.  So right after providing the forward guidance, it 

would say the Committee will regularly review this decision.  This emphasizes the fact that 

everything depends on the data, and it might change going forward.  I see the tool statement in 

paragraph 5, “the Committee will employ its policy tools as necessary,” as reminding markets 

that we can and will use alternative tools if necessary, so I think it’s a bit out of place to put the 

sentence about the regular review in that paragraph.  I thought that paragraph was intended to 

remind people that we’ve been very innovative during the whole crisis over the last three years, 

and we certainly remain determined to be innovative in the future should conditions deteriorate 

further.  So I see the first sentence in paragraph 5 as not the state-contingent idea that I wanted to 

get across.  I would prefer that state-contingent idea to be in paragraph 3.  These edits are all 

minor, I would say, but that would be my preferred way to go ahead. 

November 2–3, 2010 169 of 238



 

 

 

Let me comment on a few other issues.  On the question of so-called “LSAP” versus 

“quantitative easing,” I do not like the “large-scale” part of “large-scale asset purchase.”  I think 

that smacks of a desire to surprise markets, which is hardly ever optimal policy.  Unless you 

think that we’re in some kind of dire situation, I would not recommend that.  The policy is a 

systematic response to shocks and to the state of the economy, so I prefer simply “asset-purchase 

program.”  I don’t think it would be possible to get off the “quantitative easing” language, nor is 

it really necessary to do so.  We can probably shape that language and define it as we wish.  I 

think that, as it stands now in markets, “quantitative easing” connotes an inflationary policy, 

frankly, and I think that works fine for our current purposes.  The Committee, in my view, is 

defending its implicit inflation target because we are on the low side of it.  I also see inflation 

expectations as the primary determinant of actual inflation.  So, to the extent that we’re able to 

push inflation expectations higher, I would expect that to have an effect on actual inflation; as 

the staff has emphasized repeatedly in the Tealbook, inflation expectations are acting as an 

anchor balancing slack effects that are in that model. 

I see the policy, more broadly speaking, as preventing us from falling into a deflationary-

trap steady state like the one that Japan has been stuck in for some time.  I have argued that near-

zero rates alone allow a disinflationary drift in expectations.  With near-zero rates for several 

years, which is what we’re looking at in all likelihood, and no other policy moves to supplement 

the zero interest rate policy, the Fisher relation—that’s Irving Fisher, not Richard Fisher 

[laughter]—dictates expectations of a mild deflation.  As I see it, this is exactly what has 

happened in Japan, and, even though we’ve been talking about it for a long time around this 

table, I’ve seen very little to dissuade me from this view.  I think we should take this theory more 

seriously than we already have.  It’s a very general argument that spans many different models.  

November 2–3, 2010 170 of 238



 

 

 

It requires only an inflation target, a Taylor rule, and a Fisher equation.  You can put any other 

favorite features that you want in your model, but, once you do that, you’ll still have a second 

steady state that looks exactly like what has happened in Japan.  For the U.S. to move toward 

that type of steady state is a serious risk.  As I argued yesterday, nominal contracting in the U.S. 

means that those contracts were set up based on an implicit inflation target of 2 percent.  If we 

went to minus 1 percent inflation, there would have to be some transition to that kind of a steady 

state.  That would further disrupt housing markets, in particular.  Also, I think that if the U.S. 

went into that kind of a steady state, there would be global implications.  You might also get 

Europe into that steady state—Japan is already there—and then you’d be in a very difficult 

policy situation for a long period of time. 

Therefore, I think it’s important to take preemptive action to avoid that outcome.  So far, 

what we’ve done ahead of this meeting suggests that this policy seems to be working, but I 

would be cautious and withhold judgment on that—it’s unclear at this point, and we don’t know 

how well it will work going forward.  If we are able to get past this risk, we will face new 

challenges.  I’m very cognizant of those, and many voices around the table, including President 

Lacker, President Plosser, President Fisher, President Hoenig, President Kocherlakota, and 

others, have aptly articulated them.   

Let me talk about just a couple more issues and I’ll be done.  On the issue of fed funds 

rate equivalence, I think I’ve come to the conclusion that this is probably not the right way to 

think about our QE policy.  I think that those calculations are too linear and too local.  They’re 

estimates around a particular point which are then extrapolated out for very large purchases.  I 

think nonlinearities are probably quite important in our policies.  These very linear, very local 

estimates of the effects of asset purchases tend to indicate that buying the entire outstanding 

November 2–3, 2010 171 of 238



 

 

 

stock of Treasuries would have small effects.  I think that’s indefensible and surely not the right 

analysis.  So we need something better than what we’ve got on this dimension. 

On rationalizing missing both sides of our mandate, I’ve argued previously and a little bit 

this morning that this is not a good argument by itself.  The fact that unemployment is high and 

inflation is low is nothing more than the impulse response that you would expect from a very 

large shock to the economy.  Furthermore, if we take our model forecast seriously, we’re going 

to continue to have high unemployment and inflation below target—it takes a long time to return 

to steady state, especially when the recession is associated with a financial crisis.  I think 

President Lacker had exactly the right take on this:  It’s all about the pace of returning to the 

steady state—President Kocherlakota, also raised this—it’s not about the levels or the mere 

citing of the fact that unemployment is high and inflation is low. 

On the risks to our policy, I agree with yesterday’s statement by the Chairman.  So I’m 

going to skip over any further comments on that. 

Regarding the challenges going forward, I see three in addition to the many others that 

have been talked about here.  I actually think our policy may be fairly successful on the inflation 

side—maybe too successful—and we may end up overshooting our implicit 2 percent inflation 

target.  I think we have to think about how we might react to that situation in the coming 

quarters.  Unemployment will probably remain quite high, and, in that case, there could be a 

national discussion about stagflation—with inflation moving up and unemployment not moving 

very much—so we have to be prepared to confront that argument.  The U.K. has that situation, to 

some extent, and the language they use in response says that their forecast is predicting a return 

of inflation toward target.  As it stands right now, I’m not sure we’re in a good position to make 

that argument. 

November 2–3, 2010 172 of 238



 

 

 

I think it’s also possible that this pace of purchases will prove to be a little heavy-handed, 

based on Brian Sack’s presentation earlier, and pushing the Desk to capacity in some sense.  We 

may have to be prepared to back off a little bit from that pace if we get market functioning 

problems.  I think we ran into some of that with the MBS purchases, especially late in that 

program, and especially with agency debt.  I’d want to be careful that that kind of thing is not 

then interpreted as a backing off of monetary policy. 

Finally, let me just say that it has become a lot more popular now to talk about mandate-

consistency around the table.  This was an issue that I thought had been settled long ago, but 

maybe it’s an appropriate time to revisit it.  It’s making me a little bit nervous.  I think we could 

unintentionally ignite a debate on price stability that may not be wise.  I think this Committee has 

come to the conclusion, mostly in the 1990s, that something like 2 percent was a reasonable 

number, and we could call that price stability.  But it’s very reasonable to say that that isn’t really 

price stability.  Price stability must mean zero inflation, so I think it’s a little bit tricky to 

reemphasize these mandate issues that have long been settled.  We felt that providing price 

stability, as we think about it, is the best backdrop toward full employment, and I think we 

should probably stick with that and not stir up that debate again.  But I’d like to hear others’ 

views on that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  You gave an eloquent, 

detailed, and very convincing defense of this alternative in your remarks yesterday, so I’ll just 

reiterate and emphasize my agreement with a few of the points you made. 

First, the outlook for employment and inflation are dismal.  We will miss both objectives 

by a country mile for years to come.  Of course it will take considerable time after such a large 

November 2–3, 2010 173 of 238



 

 

 

shock to attain our objectives no matter what, but optimal policy calculations call for much more 

stimulus—as you explained in detail yesterday.  The pace of progress is inadequate.  Further, 

LSAPs are not a panacea, but they can make a meaningful difference.  We’ve seen a significant 

improvement in financial conditions on longer-term rates, equity prices, and the dollar during the 

intermeeting period as markets have increasingly built in the expectation that we will act.  The 

improvement in financial conditions we’ve already seen will help to support a stronger recovery 

and help to return inflation towards levels consistent with our dual mandate. 

If one stares at the graphs on page 5 of the Tealbook showing the paths of GDP and the 

unemployment rate under alternative policies, the benefits do look minor.  But putting numbers 

on them, as you did yesterday, suggests a meaningful improvement.  You estimated that a 

$600 billion program would create about 750,000 jobs by the end of 2012.  A similar calculation 

suggests the program would raise output over the next two years by around $125 billion.  

Expanding our balance sheet may entail some risks, but the benefits are nontrivial, and I agree 

with your assessment that the risks are manageable, especially if we proceed cautiously.  I also 

agreed with your comments concerning the possible impact of this policy on the dollar.  On 

balance, I believe that because it has a positive impact on U.S. growth, our actions are not on net 

harmful to our neighbors.  A stronger U.S. recovery, I believe, is very much in their interests. 

Contrasting alternatives A and B, I prefer B.  I think it makes sense to commit at the 

outset to a dose of purchases that we can be quite confident we will want to undertake and to 

attach greater conditionality to purchases beyond that level, so we can see how economic 

conditions are evolving once the program gets under way.  My expectation, based on a forecast 

similar to Tealbook, is that we should and will end up purchasing roughly $1 trillion of longer-

November 2–3, 2010 174 of 238



 

 

 

term securities; but the $600 billion initial commitment, which, I guess, is the equivalent of 

around a 75 basis point cut in the federal funds rate, is a sufficient step for today. 

The wording in paragraph 5 leaves open the possibility of purchases beyond $600 billion 

and suggests a bias towards ease, but it doesn’t lean too heavily in that direction.  It also leaves 

open the possibility that if the data surprises are sufficiently strong to the upside, we might not 

complete the intended $600 billion of purchases.  But I think the bar for us to stop short of 

$600 billion should be quite high.  I would not, therefore, want to add “up to” to qualify 

$600 billion in paragraph 3. 

I see both pros and cons to altering the “extended period” language along the lines of A4.  

On balance, my preference is to leave well enough alone.  A4 slightly improves the clarity 

around our “extended period” commitment by setting out conditions that would be required for 

us to raise the funds rate target before mid-2012.  But, because mid-2012 appears to be the modal 

market forecast for liftoff, the statement will not push out market expectations very much.  And 

the wording of the conditions around that promise still leave plenty of scope to keep markets 

guessing how high exactly is “elevated,” and what data would convince us that inflation 

expectations are no longer well anchored. 

Of course, it’s hard to be more specific because, as a number of you have emphasized, we 

haven’t agreed about such matters among ourselves.  I think our current language is working 

quite well, in the sense that incoming data surprises move market expectations about liftoff in 

ways that seem appropriate, and those reactions have been working to strengthen the 

transmission mechanism. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

November 2–3, 2010 175 of 238



 

 

 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll begin with my views on policy.  I’ll end 

with a discussion of my vote.  In between, I’ll discuss some of the broad themes you and others 

raised about of why we’re moving in this direction and try to provide a countervailing view.  I’ll 

talk about some of the additional risks to this approach that haven’t been mentioned in any great 

detail, and I will ask for a modest change in the statement. 

First, my views on policy.  As I said when we met by videoconference, my views are 

increasingly out of step with the views of most people around this table.  The path that you’re 

leading us to, Mr. Chairman, is not my preferred path forward.  I think we are removing much of 

the burden from those that could actually help reach these objectives, particular the growth and 

employment objectives, and we are putting that onus strangely on ourselves rather than letting it 

rest where it should lie.  We are too accepting of dangerous policies from others that have been 

long in the making, and we should put the burden on them. 

I can think, Mr. Chairman, of a tough weekend that the Europeans had, particularly your 

counterpart at the ECB, in the spring or summer, when we all knew that the European Central 

Bank, rightly or wrongly, was going to take action.  But Jean-Claude Trichet did not take action 

until very late that Sunday night, until the fiscal authorities did their part.  He thought that if on 

Friday night he were to say all of the things he’d be willing to do, he’d be taking the burden off 

the fiscal authorities.  He chose to wait.  I think we would be far better off waiting.  If we 

proceed on this path, as I suspect we will, I would still encourage you to put the burden where it 

rightly belongs, which is on other policymakers here in Washington, and to do so in a way that is 

respectful of different lines of responsibility. 

Like some around the table, I think the risk-reward trade-off in this exercise is poor.  The 

benefits strike me as small and fleeting.  The risks strike me as unknown, uncertain, and 

November 2–3, 2010 176 of 238



 

 

 

potentially large.  If this were some one-off game and we were in the final state, I suspect we 

could get away with it.  There wouldn’t be huge benefits.  There wouldn’t be any reputational 

consequences.  There’d be no effect on others, and we could take all of their behavior as given.  

But it is not.  This is a game that will be run many times over in the ensuing months and, I’m 

afraid, years, and if we run this game long enough, the risks that I and some others have talked 

about, I’m afraid, will materialize.  Thus, if you do take us in this direction, the policy must be to 

see if we can’t get in this game and out of this game before these risks materialize. 

Let me talk broadly about a few themes about why some think this will be effective, and 

provide my own views.  I won’t talk in the language of the academy, but I will talk in the 

language of markets. 

I’ve heard three themes.  One is that we’re going to get financial markets to provide a lot 

more benefit to the real economy, and we’ll get a virtuous circle.  Higher asset prices will end up 

driving more consumer wealth, more confidence.  Business leaders and consumers will feel 

better, and that will find its way into the real economy.  In my view, that’s a risky proposition.  I 

do not think of financial markets and the real economy as separate, as exogenous to one another.  

They are two ways of looking at the same underlying phenomena. 

And my own view, Mr. Chairman, is that sometimes financial markets get ahead of the 

real economy.  Sometimes the real economy gets ahead of financial markets.  But when one gets 

too far away from the other, it is usually pretty ugly when they ultimately converge, and I am 

skeptical that we can persuade and convince asset prices to do the hard work that needs to be 

done on the real economy side for anything more, perhaps, than a fleeting period.  I am skeptical 

that further lowering risk-free rates across the curve will last long enough for these confidence 

and wealth effects to find their way into the real economy. 

November 2–3, 2010 177 of 238



 

 

 

My own take on the capital markets, Mr. Chairman, as you know, is that we’ve had these 

“risk on” and “risk off” days.  Markets don’t seem to me to be making hard decisions that they 

like this asset and not that, that they like this country and not that, that they like this industry and 

not that.  Instead, they seem to be making judgments based on us.  They seem to be full of 

confidence some days, and in full retreat on others.  So I worry about putting too much burden 

on the financial markets to do the work of dragging up the real economy.  I think that is a risky 

proposition. 

Second, there’s an argument about increasing inflation and the benefits that could bring.  

In my view, this attacks a risk that is not predominant with a tool that is not fine-tuned in an 

environment that is not conducive.  I’ll call this argument the nominal revenue argument.  This 

argument says that, with higher inflation, businesses are going to have higher revenues.  They’re 

going to feel better because their top line is moving.  They’re then going to be more inclined to 

invest more.  They’re going to grow capital expenditures.  This will happen everywhere around 

the economy, and we’ll be in a better place.  I don’t believe it.  I don’t believe that will lead to 

lower unemployment.  I don’t think those CEOs will be fooled that their costs haven’t increased 

as much as their revenue.  I think they’ll be very focused on their profit margins.  And, as some 

have said, I don’t think that we really do have much of a deflation problem.  If the judgment of 

the majority of this group is that we do, it strikes me that there are better tools, more effective 

tools, for raising inflation and inflation expectations than buying these longer-term assets.  I can 

imagine that a speech or two by the Chairman of the Federal Reserve—with your credibility, 

your insight, and your persuasive abilities—would do much of the hard work that this balance 

sheet expansion is doing. 

November 2–3, 2010 178 of 238



 

 

 

The third argument that I’ve heard is about foreign exchange, and I think even those who 

do believe that there are real benefits in terms of net exports from weakening the foreign 

exchange value of the dollar, are hesitant and rightly so to say those words in public venues.  

They don’t consider that to be politically correct.  I think there’s a good reason for that.  I think 

it’s a dangerous policy.  I think it is risky pool playing in the foreign exchange markets, asking 

them to do so much of our work when the world’s recovery is resting on this.  I think this is a 

particularly risky strategy when you have the world’s reserve currency.  If we were monetary 

policymakers in the U.K. or other places, and it turned out that we got a little ahead of ourselves, 

so that gilts weren’t valued as much as we had thought they would be, well, the gilt market 

would be a little bit confused for a while, but it wouldn’t change fundamentally the value 

underpinning every asset everywhere in the world.  So I worry about playing in these markets.  I 

don’t think that that’s one that’s likely to yield benefits.  While there could be some 

improvement in net exports—and I don’t want to dismiss that—I think these other risks are much 

more significant, and I think about investment that goes in the opposite direction of these net 

exports.  If the world comes to not believing in the underlying value of our currency, then at 

some point the world will say, “That is not where I want to be investing my excess reserves and 

excess cash.” 

Those are brief responses to, I think, well-intended arguments in terms of channels by 

which this could work.  Let me make a few other points about tools and risks.  As I mentioned, I 

think we’re underestimating the risks of interfering in size and in force in the longer-term 

Treasury market, and I think that Brian and his colleagues have a very difficult job to try to be 

price-takers and not price-makers in these markets.  As I mentioned, this is not a one-off game.  

We’ve already seen examples of ad hoc interventions by policymakers around the world that can 

November 2–3, 2010 179 of 238



 

 

 

interrupt capital flows and cause some retrenchment from globally integrated monetary and trade 

architectures, and I think this is very risky.  I think the adoption of nonstandard tools introduces 

new uncertainties about the conduct of policy, which I haven’t heard reasonably and finely 

understood by this group.  In addition, by using such expansionary policies now, we are risking 

leaving ourselves ill-prepared for an exogenous global shock which I cannot anticipate.  It might 

have nothing to do with the policies that we’re putting in place, but, boy, oh, boy, I don’t know 

how we’d respond if a shock happened anywhere else around the world. 

Let me raise two more concerns before going to the statement.  One is the stagecraft.  I 

would say that all of us want the policy that comes out of the Fed to be successful.  Part of that 

policy success depends on what a former member of this group called “theater” and what I’d call 

“stagecraft.”  I don’t think the stagecraft over the last six weeks has been optimal, and I look to 

Governor Yellen’s subcommittee to see if we can’t improve that, because I wouldn’t dismiss the 

importance of the formation of these views and communication of these views to the ultimate 

success of our policies. 

Second, I’d like to build on a point that Narayana and a couple of others made about exit.  

The exit plan is not fully understood by me.  It’s not obvious to me when we will stop expanding 

the balance sheet.  It’s not obvious to me what will satisfy our conditions of saying, “Yes, this 

worked,” or, “No, that didn’t work.”  Instead I fear that, if the unemployment rate remains, in the 

language of the moment, “unacceptably high,” it’s not obvious to me that this Committee has 

explained to markets why they would no longer be willing to go down this path of QE2 and 

beyond. 

Let me turn to the statement and see whether I can’t make a modest proposal to try to 

bridge some of these risks in what is, in my view, a very suboptimal set of outcomes.  I won’t 

November 2–3, 2010 180 of 238



 

 

 

focus on a lot of the suggestions that have been put forward, though I’m sympathetic to them.  

Very simply, in paragraph 3, I would suggest that you would have a better chance of succeeding 

and that we have a better chance of communicating if we were simply to reverse the order of the 

operative sentence on asset purchases.  I don’t think this makes a ton of difference, but it 

certainly would make me more comfortable.  So I would rewrite the final sentence of 

paragraph 3 as follows: “In addition, the Committee intends to purchase additional long-term 

Treasury securities at an average pace of about $75 billion, which is intended to constitute a total 

increase of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.” 

Now, I don’t like anything about alternative B.  I am not in love with this sentence in any 

formation, but I think that change at least captures what I take away as maybe my own reading of 

alternative B, which is that we’re going to move at $75 billion a month, and adheres to your 

suggestion yesterday, Mr. Chairman, which I took very seriously, that we are going to try to 

monitor these risks and we are going to be very attentive to developments.  By putting that first, 

it strikes me that you’re giving yourself at least the option that you will be prepared to take 

action if these risks materialize.  The $600 billion then is the summation of that expectation, but I 

do think it would go some way toward suggesting that this thing is not on total autopilot, given 

the risks that I see. 

I won’t comment in any great detail on what others have put forward on the statement.  I 

do consider the use of the word “unacceptably” in paragraph 2 to be really odd and not 

something that we could well explain.  So I don’t think that that’s useful.  I’m also sympathetic 

to Richard’s suggestions on inflation, mostly because I don’t think we want to suggest we have a 

ton of work to do on the inflation front. 

November 2–3, 2010 181 of 238



 

 

 

So having given you my views, having told you I think probably more than you or 

anyone wants to know about my sense of the risks, and having made a modest suggestion to 

alternative B, let me try to talk a little bit about my vote.  How in light of all this do I justify not 

dissenting?  If I were in your chair, I would not be leading the Committee in this direction, and 

frankly, if I were in the chair of most people around this room, I would dissent.  My respect for 

you during this last four and a half years is incredibly high.  I am awed by the burdens that you 

are confronting, and I wouldn’t want to undermine at this important moment the chance that this 

program could be successful.  I know a lot of people around this table feel total conviction on the 

opposite side of where I do. 

I think this is called the Bernanke Fed for a reason.  I’ve got a lot of confidence that if the 

risks that I talk about materialize, you will not hesitate and you will change your view, you will 

change this experiment.  That’s not just a hypothetical—when we did the LSAPs the first time, 

we did a $300 billion Treasury purchase, which I did not think was a good idea, and you stopped 

it because it was not working, and we pivoted to these mortgage-backed securities.  There, again, 

I had my own misgivings, but I think that was more fertile ground.  As I had mentioned then and 

frequently since, that market was broken long before we ever found it.  So, I think you did some 

good there in the crisis, and I’ve seen your willingness to change your view, and I will count on 

that if these risks that I talk about, however unlikely, do end up materializing. 

Let me talk about what could change my support for alternative B, which, as I’ve 

indicated, I offer with the greatest reluctance.  If inflation were to move up and were to be 

broadly consistent with the implicit inflation target in different people’s minds around this room, 

even if unemployment were unacceptably high, I think that would be time to stop this program.  

If inflation expectations were to move out of the range that they have been in for a long time, that 

November 2–3, 2010 182 of 238



 

 

 

would be a reason to end this program, even if unemployment were exceptionally high and GDP 

were well below what we think the economy is ultimately capable of.  And if these other risks 

that I talked about did materialize in the foreign exchange markets, I’m confident that you would 

be unafraid to change your views on that. 

What about the wording in alternative B?  The version of alternative B that I can, with the 

greatest reluctance, not dissent from suggests that the LSAP program is, in fact, limited, that the 

judgments that are being made on this incremental $75 billion are circumscribed, and that the 

program is subject to serious regular review.  I must admit that I don’t like the phrase 

“continuous review” because I don’t like the idea that it is every day that markets might worry 

whether our views change.  So “regular review” or “periodic review,” which might coincide with 

FOMC meetings, but obviously could coincide with market events, strikes me as a little better.  

Ultimately, I think that’s subject to rigorous review, and if this program were to end at $300 

billion instead of $600 billion, as the first attempt did, then I suspect we probably haven’t done 

too much harm. 

So if my reading of this and my reading of your willingness, Mr. Chairman, to change 

course is right, and if these judgments were to materialize and the reaction function of this 

Committee were to change, then I can support it.  I will have no choice but to dissent, I think, at 

future meetings if these risks materialize and if these benefits don’t end up coming.  This is 

maybe a little bit more than you wanted to know on my personal struggle on this and also on the 

risks that I see.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and it is “regularly review” in the current 

statement.  Governor Duke. 

November 2–3, 2010 183 of 238



 

 

 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for taking the time yesterday to 

lay out your reasoning so completely.  In my time here, I’ve learned to respect and be guided by 

your reasoning and your instincts, and I’ve also learned to trust your integrity.  So I was pleased 

to hear your commitment to the notion that, if at any time the costs of these actions are 

unacceptably higher than expected, we will stop.  On that basis alone, I would probably be 

willing to support alternative B, but I came in here with a few other reasons to support this action 

and a few concerns. 

I don’t disagree with the need for action.  I’m just troubled by the limited projected 

results from this action.  Given the discussion of pace versus level, when I looked at the graphs 

in the inset box, it seemed to me that the difference between alternatives was less than one 

quarter in terms of time.  I may be a little wrong on that because the graphs were small and I 

didn’t actually have a ruler, but that’s what it looked like.  [Laughter]  Therefore, perhaps the 

strongest reason that I can find to proceed with LSAPs is the healing effect of low rates.  

Understanding that banks and their customers need to heal before they reengage, it may be 

enough of a reason.  And while I think the benefits are small, I’ve come to view the cost as 

equally small.  Although still untested on a large scale, our exit tools are at the ready, and 

inflation threats seem far away.  I’m anxious about the potential for asset bubbles, but I do 

believe we have a tight enough clamp on the financial system to limit those risks at the moment. 

However, given that I expect the benefits to be small, I still question what’s next.  It 

doesn’t feel really right to choose a strategy because I think it’s unlikely to do much harm if I 

also expect it to be unlikely to accomplish the mission.  While we’re framing this action as state-

dependent, I don’t see much actual room to maneuver in reaction to different economic 

conditions.  With total monthly purchases as a constraint, our actual ability to react to incoming 

November 2–3, 2010 184 of 238



 

 

 

data going forward seems limited to extending or not extending the time frame and the total 

amount.  I wholeheartedly endorse President Kocherlakota’s suggestion that we need to 

understand how we would define good and bad outcomes and what we might do in response to 

them.  I’m not sure how much scope we actually have, but it sounds like many around the table 

have different expectations about what comes next. 

Let me end with two reservations, just in case anyone missed them when I wove them 

into my comments yesterday.  We’ve talked about the difference between LSAPs and 

quantitative easing, but the fact is we will be injecting more reserves into the system.  The last 

time we had large purchases, reserves didn’t grow very much.  They had already grown as banks 

snapped up much needed liquidity, so, for the most part, our purchases represented a substitution 

of assets purchased for liquidity facilities’ repayment.  For their size, the LSAPs didn’t really 

expand our balance sheet or the reserves very much.  But the banking system doesn’t have the 

same thirst for additional liquidity at this time, so we need to monitor the response to additional 

reserves.  My second reservation comes from my concern about the mortgage market.  I can’t tell 

from the staff projections how much of the benefit of this action is expected to come from 

improvements in house prices or the mortgage market, but I still believe that channel is too 

broken to work. 

In summary, I support alternative B with the understanding that we will closely monitor 

the costs and benefits as we go along and hope that we will also continue to look for even 

stronger actions or uses of our tools to improve the outlook for unemployment. 

Turning to the statement, I do prefer “disappointingly slow” to “unacceptably slow.”  

And I don’t like the “up to” language—I think that conditions it too much.  As to paragraph A4, I 

think markets already expect that timing, so I don’t see that it adds anything in terms of 

November 2–3, 2010 185 of 238



 

 

 

expectations, and I thought President Fisher’s suggestion, “while maintaining a firm commitment 

to keep inflation within levels consistent” and so on might signal the same thing and in a more 

efficient way.  Finally, I do sort of prefer the discussion of rate of progress rather than levels.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a difficult decision for me, and I 

think it was a difficult decision for most of you.  The only people I worry about are the people 

who think that the decision was easy, whether to do nothing or to do precisely this, because I do 

think that, as many people have pointed out, there are nontrivial costs and nontrivial benefits 

associated with, for example, each course of action that the Tealbook tried to play out for us.  

This shouldn’t be a surprise.  When one is faced with difficult problems, policy responses are 

invariably not going to be perfect.  You’re going to have shortcomings with each, and you’re 

going to have advantages with each. 

From my point of view, as you could tell from yesterday, I’m most concerned with the 

present and, perhaps, future absence of sufficient aggregate demand to move us out of this rather 

sluggish growth pattern which, I fear, will be self-reinforcing.  And I certainly don’t believe that 

$600 billion of additional asset purchases over time will turn that situation around. 

I’m nonetheless in favor of the action proposed in alternative B for a couple of reasons.  

First is the potential for deflation.  I think this really is worth emphasizing—Jim Bullard did it 

again today, John Moore did, as well, and others have alluded to it.  Even if the potential is not 

large in probability terms, it’s one that would have such costs that the extra bit of insurance 

against it seems to me important.  Second, the real economy effects hypothesized by the staff 

with the implementation of this plan would have some influence on changing the balance of 

November 2–3, 2010 186 of 238



 

 

 

people’s portfolios and thus where money is being extended in credit markets, and it would have 

some effects at the margin, which, after all, is where economic policy is generally made. 

There are certainly risks.  The Chairman detailed a number of them yesterday, and 

several of you have mentioned them today.  To me, the risk of excessive leverage developing in 

some markets is among the most important of those, and I think it is incumbent on us in our 

supervisory and new financial stability roles to monitor the growth not so much of asset prices as 

of the leverage associated with that. 

Having said that there are risks, I’d also say that some of the things that I’ve heard 

described as risks don’t worry me as much.  First, there’s concern that if we do something today, 

then markets will expect that we’re going to do more later with QE3 and QE4, as Nouriel 

Roubini is now discussing publicly.  I think we can’t have it both ways—we either worry about 

market expectations or we try to lead market expectations.  In taking this action today and 

through the words of the Chairman and I hope the consonant words of others over time, I think 

we can shape market reactions as to what may happen in the future. 

Second, there’s concern about our independence.  I think that, if we fail to take a 

monetary policy action that we think is the right action for fear that it will lead to encroachments 

upon the monetary policy independence of this Committee, then the Committee has already lost 

its monetary policy independence, because it is now being moved by expectations of how others 

will assess it.  I distinguish this from—just to pick something out of the air—the Fed doing 

consumer protection rules.  As many of the people around the table know, I thought that was 

better done in another agency precisely because of the partisan nature of much of those 

responsibilities and because they are not directly relevant to monetary policymaking.  I feared it 

might have effects upon our monetary policymaking function.  Indeed, I think it already has.  

November 2–3, 2010 187 of 238



 

 

 

But, if we believe in the independence of this Committee to set monetary policy as we think best, 

removed from the politics of the moment, then I think we have to proceed on that basis. 

Third, there’s concern about dollar depreciation.  I really don’t understand the concern 

here, to be perfectly honest.  I’ve been doing international economics for a long time, and every 

time the Fed moved, those of us who paid attention to trade and investment flows would always 

think about the effect on the dollar and, thus, on both trade and investment flows, whether we’re 

easing by reducing the federal funds rate by 50 basis points or by reinitiating an asset-purchase 

program as we’re considering doing today.  So, in terms of the perception that we’re going to 

have such an effect, this really is not news—it’s the way things have always been.  The attention 

to it may be heightened at this juncture because there has been some question about the dollar’s 

position over time.  I am one who shares some concerns about the dollar’s position and the 

potential for instability in foreign exchange markets, but I must say that that situation has 

developed over the last decade as large current account deficits and large budget deficits were 

run even in a period of economic growth.  I don’t think that the actions of this Committee in 

initiating an additional $600 billion in purchases are going to tip us towards foreign exchange 

instability in the context of those broader problems which are going to have to be confronted by 

the country over time, including having a more sustainable external balance. 

Fourth is the argument that it would be better if other parts of the U.S. government took 

their own policy actions.  I agree it would be far better if aggregate demand were being 

supported by the political branches of government.  But it’s not, and I don’t think Section 2(a) of 

the Federal Reserve Act reads this way: “The Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market 

Committee shall take such actions once they have told the rest of the government what’s best for 

them to do.”  [Laughter]  We’ve got the mandate to take such actions as we can, seeing the world 

November 2–3, 2010 188 of 238



 

 

 

as we see it and taking it as we find it, just as sometimes people wish that the private sector 

would be doing things differently, but it isn’t, and, therefore, monetary policy action is called for.  

So I think that there is an obligation on our part to do what we can, taking the world as we find it.  

Now, I do not disagree with Kevin that some prodding of the other branches of government to do 

their part would be valuable, but that doesn’t seem to me to undercut our obligation to take the 

actions that we can in an effort to achieve the dual mandate. 

I am in support of alternative B.  I think that, as President Evans suggests, there would be 

an argument for doing more precisely to get the benefits up.  I can see the arguments of those 

who think that the risks may be disproportionate to the benefits, so they don’t want to do 

anything.  I come down on the side of saying that the risks are exceeded by the potential benefits, 

particularly in these circumstances where we do need to be mindful of the potential for 

deflationary traps—we’re already in a liquidity trap.  We have to think in a prophylactic fashion 

as well as an incremental fashion.  I’m sorry, this is a bit of a digression—I do vividly recall in 

the 1990s pleading with Japanese authorities not to raise their value added tax and to take more 

aggressive action to stop their economy from sliding into a liquidity trap and being met with a 

whole line of arguments that “things are getting better, we just have to be a little bit patient.”  

There was an inability to pull out of conventional policymaking thinking and to see that the 

situation was actually quite different. 

Is this policy move we’re contemplating destined to be a great boon and prod to the 

economy?  No.  However, I think the risks, which are real, are well worth assuming both as a 

means of stopping a slide towards deflation if one were to start to develop and as a means to 

provide an incremental prod towards activity in the real economy. 

November 2–3, 2010 189 of 238



 

 

 

With respect to all the suggestions on the language in the statement, I’ll just note the ones 

that particularly appeal to me or that somewhat troubled me.  I like both of Narayana’s 

suggestions, and I think a lot of people do.  I don’t like the “up to,” even though I understand 

why Richard proposed it, and I like Kevin’s formulation better.  The reason I don’t like “up to” is 

that it makes it seem that there’s not a presumption that that’s what we’re going to do, and I think 

we should have a pretty strong presumption that it’s going to be $600 billion during this period, 

not more and not less.  But, as Kevin suggested, if serious problems were occasioned by the 

policy, or as Narayana suggested, if unexpectedly we got this huge burst of activity or, I would 

add, if unexpectedly the slide towards deflation seemed to be taking place, then, of course, we 

should change policy.  But I would hope there would be a reasonably strong presumption for 

action, because I don’t think we want to get into fine-tuning even though we do want to react to 

the world as we see it.  Regarding paragraph 4, I don’t feel strongly about the actual language in 

A versus B, but I think, as Janet said, we might be well advised at this particular FOMC meeting 

to minimize the number of changes except those we think are really necessary in order to reflect 

our assessment of the economy and the action we’re taking today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given that the economic recovery is too weak 

to deliver acceptable progress toward our dual objectives, additional monetary accommodation is 

appropriate.  Although it is appropriate, I believe its effect should not be overstated, and its risks 

need to be monitored.  The effects need to be viewed as not particularly overwhelming at this 

point.  FRB/US simulations suggest that the implications for real GDP and unemployment would 

be small.  Moreover, there currently is not a particularly robust short-term accommodative fiscal 

policy.  In addition, I wonder about the strength of the linkage between longer-term interest rates 

November 2–3, 2010 190 of 238



 

 

 

on Treasuries and the terms and availability of credit to small and medium-sized businesses.  

These businesses, as we know, are an important source of job creation, and I’m uncertain about 

the extent to which lowering longer-term interest rates will open the spigot further to new 

lending.  This uncertainty is exacerbated by a supervisory policy that is uncoordinated, either 

rightly or wrongly, with monetary policy.  Similarly, I view the so-called wealth effect as having 

minimal further effect.  Equity prices have risen and may rise a bit more, but perhaps not enough 

to induce households to embark on much of a sustained spending spree. 

Despite these mitigants, the staff estimates that $600 billion of purchases leads to a 

reduction in the unemployment rate of approximately 0.3 percentage point.  This is small, but not 

inconsequential.  Alternatively understood, it’s small but, at this time, is not overtaken by risks 

that make doing nothing the better course of action.  Incidentally, I cast substantial doubt on the 

proposition heard around the table this morning that doing nothing here will somehow push and 

direct fiscal policy in the right direction in a timely and predictable way.  I view fiscal policy as 

highly uncertain, and, frankly, I believe it disingenuous at best to think that we can pass the 

buck, so to speak, back to the Congress. 

Accordingly, I would support the policy action and statement described in alternative B.  

As between A and B, it strikes me that it is desirable to maintain flexibility in the timing and 

extent of any purchases above and beyond the $600 billion.  An even larger purchase program 

could be necessary, and alternative B signals that possibility.  A more incremental approach 

gives the Committee the chance to understand with precision the effect of increases in the 

balance sheet and the chance to incorporate incoming data—in a “regular” if not a “continuous” 

way—that could permit a more precise determination of the amount of stimulus or withdrawal of 

stimulus that the economy will need.  In addition, this more incremental approach may help allay 

November 2–3, 2010 191 of 238



 

 

 

any lingering concerns among some members about the Committee’s ability to execute a smooth 

exit from policy accommodation. 

Moreover, whether this is desirable or not, public statements by members of this 

Committee, this so-called stagecraft, have provided financial markets with the strong expectation 

that the Committee will announce an expansion in the balance sheet at this meeting.  Should we 

choose to determine that the threshold for undertaking further accommodation has not been met, 

as in alternative C or D, we would significantly surprise market participants and, as a result, 

longer-term interest rates would rise more than forecast, which, in my view, would stall the 

recovery at this point.  Since the time of the Chairman’s Jackson Hole speech, we’ve seen that 

the prospect of purchases can succeed in lowering interest rates.  Given the magnitude of excess 

capacity, there’s little risk of inflation today, and the risk of future inflation is minimal, so long-

term interest rates should not rise dangerously in response to the interventions because this 

Committee has a credible record of reasonably anchoring inflationary expectations.  That record 

is what makes the course of accommodation described in alternative B, to my mind, credible. 

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The 

issue of whether to do another round of LSAPs is really—as both proponents and opponents 

have made clear—about costs versus benefits.  I think we mostly agree that the benefits of the 

LSAPs decline with size, so each additional dollar of LSAP has less benefit in terms of reducing 

longer-term rates and easing financial conditions, while the costs increase with size, so, as we do 

more, the costs of this program increase in terms of exit difficulties or balance sheet risk.  This 

means that at some point these diminishing benefit and rising cost lines must intersect, and what 

November 2–3, 2010 192 of 238



 

 

 

we’re really arguing about is where that point is.  In addition to the intersection of those lines, I 

think we also need to focus on what we can do to shift that cost line—it’s not as if it’s 

immutable.  The better we communicate to markets about what we’re doing and why, the more 

we can reduce the cost of the LSAP program and push out the point where those two lines 

intersect. 

On the issue of communications, I think we can reduce the cost of LSAPs by being clear 

on three issues.  First, I think we can explain very clearly why this does not represent 

monetization of the debt.  The two are very, very different.  Unlike monetization of the debt, the 

increase in the size of our balance sheet will be temporary, not permanent—as soon as we see the 

economy coming back to the point that we think the dual mandate is going to be satisfied, the 

program is going to end.  Monetization of the debt, in contrast, involves increasing the balance 

sheet and creating inflation that you live with forever. 

Second, I think we have to continue to work on explaining to market participants why we 

can exit smoothly from this period of monetary policy accommodation when the time comes.  

There are still people, very smart people, who think this is ultimately going to lead to an inflation 

problem.  My own view is that the ability to pay interest on excess reserves gives us the ability to 

limit credit creation, so we will not have a longer-term inflation problem. 

Third, I think it would be useful if we leaned a bit against the idea of a currency war.  I 

find, as Governor Tarullo does, a lot of this disheartening, because I view the LSAP program as 

having effects on the currency markets that are very similar to what happens when we reduce 

short-term interest rates—the program changes interest rate differentials, and that has effects on 

currencies.  I don’t think that’s meaningfully different in kind from traditional monetary policy 

easing measures. 

November 2–3, 2010 193 of 238



 

 

 

In terms of the benefits associated with further LSAPs, I think we can increase them by 

explaining very clearly why we’re doing this—we’re doing this to ease financial conditions in 

order to support economic activity consistent with our dual mandate obligations.  The better that 

market participants and the general public understand the rationale for our actions, the more our 

actions will be confidence-inspiring, which will increase the magnitude of any benefits. 

Now, in terms of considering the benefits and costs of an additional LSAP program today 

as compared with a few months ago, I’d say the evidence in favor of the benefits has become a 

lot more compelling, because we’ve essentially run a test over the last six weeks as the market 

has gone from pricing in a very low probability of LSAPs to pricing in a much higher probability 

of LSAPs.  What has happened over that period of time?  Financial conditions have become 

much more accommodative, bond yields are down, equity prices are up, and the dollar has been 

slightly weakened.  Also, inflation expectations have risen, which was actually quite helpful, 

because it reversed the earlier decline we saw during the summer when deflation risks were 

becoming a more prevalent fear in the market. 

The Tealbook underscores this by pointing out that the unconstrained federal funds rate 

now, given the expectation of the LSAP program, is actually a little bit higher than it was in the 

prior LSAP.  So the Tealbook is basically saying this is a substitute for further cuts in short-term 

interest rates, which we can’t do because of the zero lower bound. 

In terms of the issue of continuous adjustment versus “shock and awe,” I favor providing 

the most clarity we can to market participants while, at the same time, retaining some discretion 

to increase or reduce the program size as the economic outlook changes going forward.  I view 

the $600 billion figure in alternative B to be the amount that we are highly likely to want to do, 

so that the threshold for rolling it back is significantly higher than the one for doing more.  I 

November 2–3, 2010 194 of 238



 

 

 

think it’s preferable to communicate this bigger figure to the market; if we were not to do so, we 

would create, I think, unnecessary uncertainty about our future actions.  Since the LSAP program 

is mostly about stock effects rather than flow effects, introducing more conditionality than 

necessary would just undercut the power of this action to ease financial market conditions, which 

is what we’re seeking to encourage.  Doing it this way also gives us the benefit of allowing us to 

take a little break for several meetings to see how things are evolving, so we actually have some 

time to judge how the program is working and whether the costs and benefits are still in the 

direction that we currently anticipate. 

I have two final points.  First, I’d like to keep the door open to changing the type of 

securities purchases, should market conditions change significantly.  If, for example, agency 

MBS spreads were to widen significantly, then I think we should keep an open mind about the 

wisdom of shifting a portion of future purchases from Treasuries into agency MBS.  No one has 

mentioned that, and I’m not saying that I think it’s likely that we’re going to want to do it—I just 

wouldn’t want to rule it out categorically. 

Second, I think we need to be very clear about our expectations of what this LSAP 

program is going to do.  This is not a panacea, and I think we need to communicate that clearly 

to market participants.  I’d really expect today’s announcement to have very small effects on 

markets.  Brian and I have a little bet on whether the market is going to react slightly positively 

or slightly negatively to this announcement.  But the emphasis is on the word “slightly.”  It’s 

already priced in to a very large degree, so this is not going to be a big surprise, and we shouldn’t 

judge the success of the program by what the markets do today—we should judge the success of 

the program by what the markets have done over the last six weeks or so. 

November 2–3, 2010 195 of 238



 

 

 

In terms of language, I think there’s a pretty strong consensus for substituting 

“disappointingly” or “too” for “unacceptably” in alternative B.  I’m not a fan of moving A4 into 

B4, just because I think it wouldn’t do very much.  I think the markets already have an 

expectation of mid-2012, and I think it just creates one more moving part that makes it a little bit 

more difficult to explain and interpret.  So, at this meeting, I’d favor doing one major change 

rather than two.  I don’t like “up to.”  I think we’re highly likely to do $600 billion, and putting 

in “up to” qualifies that more than I feel is appropriate.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’d like to extend my sincere thanks to the 

members of the Open Market Committee.  Obviously, we don’t agree on all the aspects we’ve 

been discussing—although I think that, to some extent, the disagreement is less fundamental and 

more a sense of weights that are placed on different benefits and costs or risks.  In any case, the 

views expressed around the table are evidently very sincerely held, very well expressed, and very 

useful.  We began this meeting by talking about the benefits of collegial interaction, which, as I 

said, are enormous.  I also can say, quite frankly, that my own views have been influenced by the 

very careful and thoughtful statements that we have heard yesterday and today.  So I very much 

appreciate your thoughtful contributions, and I hope everybody understands that I do find this 

debate very constructive. 

Let me try to frame this at three different levels to help us think about the nature of the 

action we’re taking.  In some sense, the most basic level is the one I focused on yesterday, which 

essentially takes off from the staff forecast and then tries to assess the quantitative impact of 

these actions, which operate through various channels.  I said that my guess would be that the 

actions would be somewhat stronger than the staff predicted.  Monetary policy can be 

surprisingly powerful—I think there’s a tendency to underestimate that.  In any case, at that level 

November 2–3, 2010 196 of 238



 

 

 

the case seems pretty clear, because we are missing the two objectives under our mandate in the 

same direction, and not just now but for what we expect is a long period of time.  So, at that first 

level, the analysis says that we should be doing what we can to move in the direction of our 

mandate. 

A second level, maybe one step up, says basically, “Well, there are likely to be relatively 

small benefits coming from these actions and a whole bunch of undefined risks.”  A number of 

people around the table took that approach, particularly those who are most concerned about it.  

That has clearly been the line that a lot of the external critics have taken:  “The benefits are 

small, and we don’t know what’s going to happen, and my personal view is that risk X is really 

the most serious one.”  I think it’s important that we look at those risks, as we have, including 

discussing them at some length.  Of course, that way of framing the problem makes it a much 

more uncertain decision. 

I’d like to ask you to think about this at yet one higher level—and we all alluded to this—

which is that there’s an implication that taking no action is a relatively safe thing to do.  There is 

no safe thing to do—any action we take or don’t take is going to expose us to the judgment of 

history if we make the wrong decision.  In particular, taking no action has risks.  It may be true 

that deflation isn’t one of those risks, although that could happen down the road—currently, I 

think, the odds of that are relatively small.  But another risk with greater odds of materializing is 

that the recovery could falter, and we could begin to see unemployment rising, and we could get 

into a more serious downward spiral.  Therefore, not taking action is a risky step, just as taking 

action is a risky step.  We’re caught between action and inaction—each has implications, and we 

need to make an appropriate decision. 

November 2–3, 2010 197 of 238



 

 

 

I’d like to frame our decision today as a very conservative, middle-road approach, 

namely, we recognize that doing nothing carries serious risks of further disinflation and of a 

failure of the recovery to meet escape velocity, and, therefore, we’re going to take some actions 

to try to move us closer to our mandate and to take out some insurance against those bad 

downside risks.  Furthermore, in doing so, we’re not going to do “shock and awe”—we’re not 

going to do something extraordinarily large and dramatic.  Instead, we’re going to undertake an 

asset-purchase program that will play out over a period of eight months, with the purchases 

equaling $75 billion a month.  This is a substantial period of time—indeed, in some sense, the 

program has already been in place for two months, since we’ve already seen a lot of the effect on 

financial markets.  Having such a substantial period of time means that we can be very vigilant 

about monitoring whether the program is having the effects that we hope it will have and 

whether other considerations are arising.  I do appreciate Governor Warsh’s comments, and I 

want to reassure him, and others, that I take very seriously the need to review regularly not only 

the evolution of the economy, but also the emergence of risks.  So, in undertaking this program, 

we will review, we will be conditional, we will continue to monitor the risks that do exist.  We 

will do all of this over a substantial period of time, and, in particular, we will be very careful 

about inflation.  I want to reiterate that, again, there is no hidden agenda here to drive inflation to 

a high level.  That will be a very important consideration as we look forward. 

To summarize, I think that this is the right step.  In the broad context, I think it is a 

reasonably cautious step.  It hedges us against risks in both directions, and it gives us a 

substantial amount of time when we can be relatively more passive and observe developments.  

Although I don’t anticipate, for example, fine-tuning or small jiggering of the amounts from 

meeting to meeting, I do think we should be prepared to make significant changes if either the 

November 2–3, 2010 198 of 238



 

 

 

benefits or the costs prove different from what we anticipate.  Again, recognizing all of the 

concerns that people have, as well as the issues about impact and the like, I do think this is a 

conservative action, which, perhaps, seems a bit ironic, given the conversation.  It is one that 

attempts to take an appropriate step in the right direction, but in a careful and measured way, and 

it is one that will be reviewed as we go through the next eight months.  My recommendation, 

therefore, is to go ahead with this program. 

There were a lot of very good statement suggestions, and, although it always makes me 

nervous to edit these things on the fly in the meeting, I will propose adopting some of them, and 

I’d like to just go through and see how they work.  The first thing I would suggest, and I will 

check with all of you on each of these, is in paragraph 2.  I don’t think this really brought 

President Lacker along, but are you negative, President Lacker on “over the longer run?”  I 

thought the benefit of adding “over the longer run,” consistent with what President Bullard said, 

was that it emphasizes the fact that just because we are not at our targets today doesn’t mean that 

we are not doing optimal policy. 

MR. LACKER.  What does it mean arithmetically?  If you had to write it down 

arithmetically, what would “over the longer run” mean about the unemployment rate? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we will be calculating that over time, but I think most 

of us would put high odds that our longer-run natural rate of unemployment is below 9.6. 

MR. LACKER.  You mean the natural rate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The natural rate. 

MR. LACKER.  Well, that’s not uncontroversial. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  9.6? 

MR. LACKER.  No.  I’m not saying we’re at the natural rate, but, I mean— 

November 2–3, 2010 199 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So this doesn’t help you at all.  Does it help you, 

President Bullard? 

MR. BULLARD.  What are we proposing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m proposing to reinstate the phrase “over the longer run” 

in the fourth line of paragraph 2, in order to say that these two things are inconsistent over the 

longer run with the dual mandate.  Is that good? 

MR. BULLARD.  I support that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Others?  Do others have comments?  [No response]  All 

right, I see a few nods, and President Lacker’s objection is noted.  So we’ll add “over the longer 

run.” 

The second one that got some support was from President Kocherlakota and it referred to 

the phrase “unacceptably slow.”  I would propose getting rid of the phrase “it judges that,” 

because we wouldn’t judge disappointment, so that the last phrase would be “progress towards 

its objectives has been disappointingly slow.”  All right?  [No response]  Okay. 

There are a couple of other suggestions.  One was motivated by President Fisher’s 

comment—I’m talking now about his comment about inflation and price stability.  There’s a bit 

of anxiety, I think, about phrases that involve intentional increases in inflation, admittedly.  So 

here’s a proposal:  In the two places where we have the phrase “to return inflation, over time, to 

levels consistent with its mandate,” how about changing it to “to help ensure that inflation, over 

time, is at levels consistent with its mandate?”  The revision doesn’t have the sense of having to 

push it up, and it also finesses the differences among us about what the inflation target is. 

MR. FISHER.  I think that’s better than what we have.  And “to help ensure” is the 

operative phrase. 

November 2–3, 2010 200 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So that’s in two places:  at the end of the first 

sentence in paragraph 5 and in the middle of the first sentence in paragraph 3. 

MR. FISHER.  That would be an improvement. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is that an improvement for you?  Okay.  If I’m going too 

fast, you let me know. 

MR. WARSH.  Or “unacceptably slow.”  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Lunch has been ready for an hour, I would like to point out, 

and we started at the second round today.  There was also a small suggestion for the very last 

sentence—again, from President Kocherlakota.  In the clause that starts “in light of incoming 

information,” we could insert, “concerning progress towards its objectives.”  Is that what you 

suggested? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  No, I suggested “about the rate of progress towards its 

objectives.”   

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  How about “concerning the rate of progress 

towards?” 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That’s fine. 

MR. WARSH.  You had “including,” not “concerning” in your version, Mr. Chairman, 

because that’s not the only piece— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, now it’s getting confusing.  

MR. FISHER.  Could you read it, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  The Committee will review the pace of its purchases 

and the overall size of its program “in light of incoming information concerning the rate of 

progress towards its objectives.” 

November 2–3, 2010 201 of 238



 

 

 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Sounds good. 

MR. WARSH.  Are there things we’re missing that are not included in that new phrase? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Would you like to comment? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could say “such as.” 

MR. WARSH.  I’m fine with Narayana’s suggestion—I think it’s great.  I just wouldn’t 

want to limit the range of things the public understands to be part of our reaction function.  We 

should have our eyes wide open, and, if Narayana thinks it’s prudent, as do you, to reference one 

of those, that’s fine, but it shouldn’t be to the exclusion of a broader set of issues. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could qualify it with the words “such as.” 

MR. TARULLO.  Doesn’t that undermine what you’re doing?  

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  What else do we care about? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we care about the level of risk. 

MR. LACKER.  Well, “objectives” is pretty broad, isn’t it? 

MR. WARSH.  We’ve already said twice in the statement that the objectives are inflation 

and economic growth. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I’m now concerned that we’re leaving out an 

important set of criteria, namely, emerging risks, side effects, and so on.  So I guess I would 

propose to leave it as it is, unless you have an alternative. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Let me suggest another alternative, which would be to change 

the word “concerning” to “including.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Including” what? 

November 2–3, 2010 202 of 238



 

 

 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  “The rate of progress towards the objective.”  You had 

suggested the phrase “concerning the rate of progress towards objectives,” and I’m suggesting 

changing the word “concerning” to “including.” 

MR. LACKER.  We care about risks, because it’s a risk to achieving our objective.  It 

should be tautological here. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But we could care about things that don’t directly bear on 

inflation and economic growth. 

MR. LACKER.  Financial stability?  Well, that’s one of our objectives now, right?  

MR. TARULLO.  I think the issue may be, Jeff, that while we think about financial 

stability pretty regularly as one of our responsibilities, I’m not sure that everybody externally 

includes financial stability as an objective.  Everybody else tends to think in terms of the dual 

mandate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t know what to do. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  I think we can be too cute here in trying to frame the conditionality.  

I think the original language, just “incoming information,” is enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I take the general concern that, through various 

communication media, we need to have better explanations of what our criteria are.  President 

Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Well, I’ve changed my mind on this.  This would add yet another 

reference to our mandate, and I think we mention it, what, five or six times?  We’re 

perseverating. 

November 2–3, 2010 203 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I think we’re going to stick with the status quo, if 

that’s okay. 

On the insertion of “up to,” I agree with the majority of people who spoke about it, in that 

it seems inconsistent with the notion that we’re going to be reviewing this program—we could 

conceivably increase it, and we could conceivably decrease it.  So I don’t think that captures the 

spirit of the program. 

Kevin, I’m hoping that you would be satisfied if we took the very last sentence, “The 

Committee will regularly review,” and put it up to the end of paragraph 3—this is something that 

President Bullard also suggested.  Between that and the language about price stability, we have, I 

think, qualified that and made it more conditional. 

MR. WARSH.  Just one question.  What’s wrong with my proposal, if we’re using the 

identical words?  Teach me—what’s your hesitation? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The problem has to do with the fact that the flow rate is not 

equivalent to the level of the funds rate.  The way we connect these things is by thinking about 

the total stock of holdings and what the relationship is to the level of the interest rate.  I don’t 

think, therefore, that an emphasis on the flow primarily—and I know President Bullard disagrees 

with me—is enough information.  There needs to be some kind of marker about what our 

expectation is in terms of the total purchases.  And I’d like to add that, just as it was easy to stop 

the $300 billion Treasury program you mentioned because we had given a number, so it will be 

easier to stop this if we have given a number.  If we just have it open-ended, at every meeting it 

will be harder and harder to make that decision. 

MR. WARSH.  I don’t really understand.  I’m not suggesting that we exclude putting a 

number in.  I’m only suggesting that we begin by stating what we are now committing to do, 

November 2–3, 2010 204 of 238



 

 

 

with the same verbiage on intents and expectations; that is, this is what we have decided to do 

today, and the news is the $75 billion per month.  I don’t really understand why it defeats the 

purpose of your and the majority’s objective by simply saying “beginning with what we have 

decided to do today,” with your very expectation of what is going to happen by the end of the 

second quarter. 

MR. TARULLO.  Kevin, what does it add from your point of view? 

MR. WARSH.  I think it makes it clear that, should the risks materialize, however remote 

they may be, the path could change. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that’s why I am suggesting putting this last sentence up 

into paragraph 3, to make it directly follow. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think, in particular, the sentence does that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “The Committee will regularly review”— 

MR. WARSH.  Well, I think for all the fights that we’ve had about the right policy, the 

delta between your ask and my ask is de minimis, so neither of us should be prepared to go crazy 

about it.  [Laughter]  But I would say it does indicate to me, if I understand the fierce views held 

by many, a certain lack of comfort with revisiting this, because I’m talking about the exact same 

words.  I won’t fall on my sword over it, but I must say I’m puzzled by why this would be 

something that causes concern, with the exact same words and the exact same numbers.  I think 

it tries to put the emphasis on what I took from your statements yesterday and today, which is 

that you’re going to review this regularly, and, if the risks arise, you’re going to stop.  Instead, by 

leading with $600 billion, it says: “It will be $600 billion, and now I’m going to tell you how 

we’re going to get there.”  I think those are different messages.  I won’t change my vote because 

of it, but I must say I’m concerned by the fervor on the other side of the question. 

November 2–3, 2010 205 of 238



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, I propose to leave it.  I think we need to have the 

marker as the broad expectation, which is the equivalent of the policy move that we’re doing 

today.  I think that’s an important marker.  I do think, though, that it would be useful—and I 

hope it helps you some, at least—to put the last sentence up into paragraph 3. 

MR. TARULLO.  I’m sorry.  Kevin, would you mind just reading again what you had 

proposed? 

MR. WARSH.  Sure.  “In addition, the Committee intends to purchase additional long-

term Treasury securities at an average pace of about $75 billion per month, which is intended to 

constitute a total of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.” 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m where the Chairman is. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it conveys too little conviction.  Although I think we 

all agree we need to monitor the program, I don’t think there is a very strong bias, among those 

who want to go ahead at least, that the expected amount is going to be significantly less.  That’s 

an expectation of where we are going to be. 

MR. WARSH.  I mean, I didn’t change any words, so it’s hard for me to understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if there’s no difference in meaning, then why the 

concern? 

MR. WARSH.  Because I think what we’re trying to announce is what we’re doing, 

right?  And what we’re doing, by virtue of this action, is this amount.  Again, I’d say there is not 

a huge difference between us, and I appreciate your moving the other sentence up, but the 

fervency of the Bernanke-Dudley views on this does strike me as suggesting a difference. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

November 2–3, 2010 206 of 238



 

 

 

MR. LOCKHART.  This may be too simplistic a way of thinking about it, but I think 

there are differences of opinion around the table about how much we want to stress the absolute 

stock amount.  To cut through that, I’d be consistent with what I remember we did when we 

announced the first LSAP, which was to lead with the amount.  I think people are going to parse 

this statement for every nuance more than they have ever parsed a statement, so to add another 

invitation to misinterpret what we’re saying doesn’t make sense to me.  If the first time around 

we said we were going to do a program of X, I would stick with that, just to keep it simple. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s a conceptual issue.  The flow rate is not the choice 

variable, it’s the expected amount that is, in some sense, the choice variable. 

MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, we would be letting the markets do the math under 

Kevin’s approach. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand that, you know, multiplication is commutative 

and everything.  [Laughter]  I understand that. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, could you read paragraph 3 as it now stands? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery, 

and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the 

Committee decided today to expand its holdings of securities.  The Committee will maintain its 

existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its security holdings.”  The next sentence 

is unchanged.  Then, get rid of “in particular,” “The Committee will regularly review the pace of 

its security purchases and the overall size”—and then that sentence goes on just as it is. 

MS. DUKE.  I don’t see how “in particular” is— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I got rid of “in particular.”  That’s my proposal.  Are there 

any further comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Debbie? 

November 2–3, 2010 207 of 238



 

 

 

MS. DANKER.  The vote will be on the statement for alternative B and the directive that 

goes with that, as passed out by Bill, except with the four changes, one of them in two places.  In 

paragraph 2 on the fourth line we are adding “over the longer run” between “consistent” and 

“with its dual mandate.”  The final line of paragraph 2 replaces “unacceptably” with 

“disappointingly.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And get rid of the “judges that.” 

MS. DANKER.  And removes “it judges that,” correct.  The Chairman just read 

paragraph 3.  Paragraph 4 is unchanged.  Paragraph 5 consists now of the one sentence which has 

been changed along the same lines as the first sentence in 3, so that it refers to “support the 

economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its 

mandate.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And the last sentence has been moved up to paragraph 3. 

MS. DANKER.  Correct.  As you read it. 

 Chairman Bernanke  Yes 

 Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 

 President Bullard   Yes 

 Governor Duke   Yes 

 President Hoenig   Respectfully, no 

 President Pianalto  Yes 

 Governor Raskin   Yes 

 President Rosengren  Yes 

 Governor Tarullo   Yes 

 Governor Warsh   Yes 

 Governor Yellen   Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  As I discussed yesterday, I’m not going to do 

any kind of attribution briefing or anything like that today.  I am going to do a very generic 

800-word op-ed tomorrow morning, which will basically say that the Fed thinks that progress is 

too slow, and we’ve taken this action.  I take the Committee’s discussion at the videoconference 

November 2–3, 2010 208 of 238



 

 

 

as allowing me to break the blackout period in that way.  I’ll also have opportunities on Jekyll 

Island, if comments come up, and, of course, I know many of you have speeches, and so on, 

coming up. 

We also agree tentatively—and I just want to make sure it’s okay—that we’re going to 

vote on the minutes and the SEP separately, so that the projections can be released a day early 

and I can give a press conference related to the projections.  Any problem?  [No response]  And 

the Desk is going to release its statement.  Brian, do you have any comment on your statement—

are you still working on it?  

MR. SACK.  Well, we intend to break the $110 billion per month figure into its two 

components and list each in the statement.  And we are making changes to the language on the 

35 percent limit.  We can’t quite figure out how to handle some of the suggestions—the “if 

necessary” language or the “on occasion” language—because it suggests different judgment 

criteria from what we actually plan to use.  We’re afraid that would be confusing, so we’re trying 

to soften the language that we’re using in the paragraph. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’d like to make one point about the 35 percent limit.  

That’s being driven not by the Desk actions, but by what people are actually offering.  And so I 

think it is really important that we understand it’s not the Desk actively seeking to drive the level 

of securities up, but it’s the offerings of securities that happen to be cheap relative to other 

securities in the market. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I trust you to be very careful here in the way you word it, because, again, 

it can be a spark that incites the people who are quite critical of us.  You mentioned that some 

November 2–3, 2010 209 of 238



 

 

 

very smart people are concerned about inflation and about whether we’re opening that door.  So 

just be careful, that’s all. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Without trying to get into the business of editing this—I will 

get into the business of editing it.  [Laughter]  I would just suggest that you lead with your 

second sentence, which is about the justification for why it might go above the 35 percent; that 

is, start by talking about the reasons for that, and then say explicitly, “in order to help maintain 

liquidity and avoid dislocations in individual securities, SOMA holdings may exceed, on 

occasion, the 35…”   

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  You have the spirit of the comments. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There are also the FAQs that will provide more nuance. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have until 5:00 tomorrow, if you want to make any 

changes in your forecast.  There is lunch available—there’s no presentation.  Our next meeting is 

December 14.  Thank you again for a very productive meeting. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Where is your op-ed? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The Washington Post.  The meeting is adjourned.  Thank 

you. 

END OF MEETING 

November 2–3, 2010 210 of 238




