











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, September 21, 2010


 

 

 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

September 21, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of 

the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, 

D.C., on Tuesday, September 21, 2010, at 8:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Sandra Pianalto 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

Kevin Warsh 

Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and 

Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 

Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist 

David J. Stockton, Economist 

Alan D. Barkema, James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, 

Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, 

Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of 

Governors 

September 21, 2010 1 of 151



 

 

 

Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors; William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Eric M. Engen and Michael G. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 

Governors 

Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 

Gordon Werkema, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 

Harvey Rosenblum and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 

Banks of Dallas and Chicago, respectively 

David Altig, John A. Weinberg, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 

Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, and Minneapolis, respectively 

Chris Burke, John Fernald, and James M. Nason, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks 

of New York, San Francisco, and Philadelphia, respectively 

Gauti B. Eggertsson, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

September 21, 2010 2 of 151



 

 

 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

September 21, 2010 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  I need a motion to close the 

Board meeting. 

MR. WARSH.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The five at the table are stretching out pretty well here.  

We’re thinking of leasing out a few offices.  [Laughter] 

I think there is potentially some good news, in that we have some prospect of getting two 

people appointed before the Congress goes back on break.  Peter Diamond will have to have 

another hearing—he needs to convince Senator Shelby that he’s a qualified economist.  

[Laughter]  Is Linda Robertson here?  Any comments? 

MS. ROBERTSON.  It’s a positive step.  As one knows with the United States Senate, 

steps have to add up to actual completion by vote or acclamation with unanimous consent, and 

these steps can get tricky.  But it’s definitely a positive step. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re making progress, and we hope to come to a 

resolution at some point. 

Before we get started, I wanted to address an issue that came up during the intermeeting 

period relating to the preparation of the minutes.  One of our colleagues raised a concern that the 

first draft of the minutes this time didn’t fully reflect the discussion at the meeting, and I wanted 

to explain what happened and what we did about it.  The background is that, based on 

longstanding tradition and reflecting the Federal Reserve Act’s requirement that we explain why 

the Committee took the action it did, we have always had a so-called “policy paragraph,” which 

explains the action taken by the Committee and gives the specific reasons cited by the members, 

that is, the voters, for their support of that decision.  Normally, there’s no issue, because 

September 21, 2010 3 of 151



 

 

 

generally there’s a substantial overlap of views between the voting members and nonvoting 

members, and we’re able to represent the full range of the discussion.  But in the first round of 

the review of the minutes from the last meeting, it was felt that that was not the case. 

I’ve had some discussions with Scott and with the Secretariat.  This matter was actually 

raised at the December 2004 FOMC meeting, when we discussed the more rapid turnaround of 

the minutes.  There’s a very longstanding tradition of restricting that paragraph to the views of 

the members. 

That being said, I certainly believe, and I’m sure that we all agree, that the minutes ought 

to reflect the full range of discussion at the table and not just the views of those who happen to 

be in the voting cycle.  We were able to do that this time by looking for overlaps between views 

expressed by participants and members, by including additional material, and so on.  So let me 

just assure everybody that we will continue to maintain the principle that the full range of views 

should be reflected in the minutes, and we will find ways to do that. 

I think changing the current structure of the minutes is something we would not do 

lightly.  It’s a very longstanding tradition, and if we want to change it, I think we need to have a 

fuller discussion.  President Plosser, do you want to comment?  If anyone wants to comment, I 

can take one or two comments, but if we want to go into this in greater detail, we probably need 

to put it on the agenda for a future meeting.   Do you want to make a comment? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Let me just make one or two comments.  I think this is an important 

issue, because it’s about transparency—it’s about making sure that the minutes reflect the range 

of the discussion.  Mr. Chairman, you’re correct, that, given the turnover in members, oftentimes 

the differences in views between members and participants aren’t that great.  This time happened 

to be more unusual in that regard. 

September 21, 2010 4 of 151



 

 

 

I understand the longstanding tradition of focusing the policy paragraph on why the 

members chose to do what they did.  Because we distinguish between members and participants 

in other sections of the minutes, I’m not convinced particularly that you can’t carry out a similar 

strategy in that paragraph, talking about what members said, what participants said, and then at 

the end noting that the members decided “X.”  The alternative would be, I would think, to 

expand the economic go-round, where you do talk a lot about members and participants.  You 

could open that section up more to policy discussions between members and participants, even if 

you kept the policy paragraph focused on the members. 

I think we ought to be able to find a way to make sure that this long tradition of 

distinguishing between what members and participants say gets incorporated, because, 

otherwise, I do worry that down the road somebody is going to look at the transcripts and the 

minutes and find a disconnect, and I don’t think that would serve us well.  So I would encourage 

continued work on this, and I think we ought to have some process that ensures that this happens 

in some way.  Those are my comments. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bill, did you have a comment? 

MR. ENGLISH.  I just wanted to point out one thing.  In the structure of the minutes, 

until you get to the policy paragraph, everything is in terms of the participants.  So there isn’t a 

separate discussion of participants versus members at that point. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Oh, is that right? 

MR. ENGLISH.  It’s all in terms of participants, and then in the policy round, it’s in 

terms of members. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I stand corrected then. 

September 21, 2010 5 of 151



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I agree with what you said, President Plosser.  On the one 

hand you need to have this correspondence of the members because, for one thing, we report 

their votes. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That being said, I think that there are plenty of ways to 

make sure that there is substantial description of the discussion so that everybody’s views are 

represented.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  I was a participant in the December 2004 discussion—a member 

actually.  I’ve always been curious about this disconnect and expressed to the Chairman at the 

time that it seemed to me more logical to have a broader reporting. 

I wasn’t aware of Scott’s interpretation of the Federal Reserve Act.  Personally, I can’t 

see why it would preclude reporting on participants’ policy views. 

The widespread understanding of anyone who has paid attention to this issue, including 

people outside the Fed, is that participants’ policy views are not reported in the minutes—they do 

not appear.  Are we changing that or finding a way to finesse it?  I ask because this overlap 

strategy leaves open the possibility that a participant may express a view orthogonal to members’ 

views while the minutes remain silent on that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I just point out this hasn’t been a significant problem 

in the past. 

MR. LACKER.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is the first time this has come up in quite a while.  So 

the principle is that, while the minutes wouldn’t cover every single minor point that anyone 

makes, all of the important views ought to be reflected in the minutes.  I think we can do that 

September 21, 2010 6 of 151



 

 

 

without changing the structure of the members’ policy paragraphs.  First, we can continue to 

exploit overlaps when they do occur, allowing for a member to express a view that was more 

widely held.  Second, there’s obviously no reason why we can’t expand the discussion.  The 

structure of the minutes is that first are reports and staff views, and then finally the general 

discussion of the participants on a variety of topics, including the outlook and policy approaches 

and so on.  I think we ought to work to make sure that that part reflects all the views.  The 

Secretariat has heard from me that that’s what we need to do, and the one thing I would suggest 

to all of you is that you get back your comments on the first draft as quickly as possible to make 

sure that there’s not any kind of logistical issue involved.  Okay? 

MR. LACKER.  The intention is that the expanded content would be in the general 

discussion, not in the policy section. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The objective is to make sure that everybody’s views are 

represented.  We’ll find a way to do that.  If that involves expanded content prior to the critical 

paragraph, we will do that. 

MR. LACKER.  I welcome this change.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Thank you. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again, for responding. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  I don’t want to belabor this point, but I had the same reaction when I 

looked at the minutes, and then I remembered, “Oh, yeah, that’s a members’ paragraph, always 

has been.”  Then I reminded myself that, in order to get certain views into the minutes, I needed 

to express those views in the context of the outlook or the inflation discussions, focusing on the 

merits of what the particular arguments were.  I would think that those are the types of 

September 21, 2010 7 of 151



 

 

 

participant comments that could be most readily incorporated.  It’s really only at the end, where 

you say, “But you know, in my opinion, X is what we ought to do.”  So I think what you’ve 

described is quite workable, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks, and if it’s not, I’m completely open.  Again, 

I think we share the objective of representing the full range of views.  If this continues to be a 

problem, we will address it somehow, and we’ll put it on the agenda if necessary. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Moving on to the business of the meeting, the first item is 

the return of Debbie Danker.  We’d like to propose her as Deputy Secretary for the rest of the 

year until the January 2011 organizational meeting.  Debbie served as FOMC Deputy Secretary 

from November 2004 through August 2009, and she has just recently returned to the Board after 

spending a year at the Treasury as a Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary for Domestic 

Finance. 

MR. HOENIG.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objections?  (No response.)  All right.  Thank you.  

Our next item, as usual, is our briefing on financial developments and System facilities.  Let me 

turn to Brian Sack. 

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Financial markets have demonstrated 

considerable sensitivity to perceived changes in the economic outlook and to FOMC 

communications, but financial conditions ended the intermeeting period with only 

small changes, on net. 

As shown in the upper left panel of the first exhibit, longer-term Treasury yields 

declined notably early in the intermeeting period, as investors became increasingly 

concerned about economic growth prospects.  At one point, the 10-year yield was 

down about 35 basis points.  However, sentiment in recent weeks improved following 

several positive data surprises, causing yields to retrace a sizable portion of their 

                                                 
1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

September 21, 2010 8 of 151



 

 

 

earlier decline.  On balance, the 10-year Treasury yield ended the period about 

10 basis points lower. 

More broadly, Treasury yields remain significantly below their levels of just a 

few months ago and appear unusually low by historical standards.  This broad decline 

in yields has been driven primarily by downward revisions in the outlook over that 

period and by the anticipated policy response of the Federal Reserve, in terms of the 

paths of the federal funds rate and its balance sheet. 

The revision to the path of the federal funds rate has been sizable over this period, 

as shown in the upper right panel.  According to current futures prices, a rate hike is 

not fully priced in until early 2012.  A similar pattern is evident in the Desk’s primary 

dealer survey, shown in the middle left panel.  The median of the distribution for the 

timing of the first rate hike moved out into 2012, and respondents now place about 

25 percent odds on no policy tightening occurring until the second half of 2012 or 

later, as can be seen in the far right bucket.  It’s not a good sign that we need to add 

more buckets to the range of responses for this question. 

The effects of the revision to these expectations can also be seen if we decompose 

the decline in longer-term Treasury yields since the spring into one-year-forward 

rates.  As shown to the right, forward rates spanning the next several years have fallen 

the most dramatically, presumably reflecting the shift in the expected funds rate path.  

However, that has not been the entire story, as even more distant forward rates have 

moved down appreciably. 

There are several potential explanations for the decline in longer-term forward 

rates.  One possibility is that the term premium on Treasury securities has moved 

down notably, driven in part by the decision by the FOMC to begin reinvesting the 

principal payments on the SOMA portfolio and the possibility of further balance sheet 

expansion.  As shown in the bottom left panel, the Desk’s primary dealer survey 

indicates that market participants have placed increasing odds on an increase in the 

size of the balance sheet, with the most recent readings indicating a 40 percent chance 

by the end of the year and a more than 50 percent chance over the next two years.  

The median dealer expectation for the size and length of a purchase program, if 

enacted, was $625 billion over 12 months. 

Another potential explanation for the decline in forward rates is that longer-term 

inflation expectations are not completely anchored.  The bottom right panel shows the 

evolution of the five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation rate since the middle 

of last year.  It may be a concern that this measure has generally drifted lower in 

recent months and that it swung considerably over the intermeeting period in a 

manner highly correlated with investors’ views on economic prospects.  While 

several factors could be influencing this measure, inflation expectations have likely 

played some role, as discussed in detail in the Tealbook. 

 As shown in the upper left panel of the second exhibit, equity prices also swung 

widely over the intermeeting period in response to shifting sentiment about growth 

September 21, 2010 9 of 151



 

 

 

prospects.  At one point, the S&P 500 index was off 7 percent, but it subsequently 

recovered to finish the intermeeting period about flat. 

Bank share prices, also shown in the chart, have fluctuated over an even wider 

range.  Those share prices had moved down notably since the spring, in response to 

the weakening economic outlook, falling net interest margins, and the ongoing 

assessment of the implications of the Dodd–Frank legislation.  However, they have 

recovered more recently with the upswing in broader equity markets.  In addition, 

they received a boost in recent weeks from the announcement of further details on the 

Basel III global capital standards.  Investors apparently took comfort from the fact 

that the transition period for the standards would be longer than anticipated and that 

the new regulatory capital ratios were on the lower end of expectations.  Bank CDS 

spreads, shown to the right, inversely tracked the movements in equity prices and 

finished the intermeeting period little changed. 

Money markets have shown signs of greater comfort with the banking sector in 

recent months.  As can be seen in the middle left panel, the three-month spread of 

LIBOR over OIS fell back to around 10 basis points, as investors became more 

willing to extend short-term term credit to financial institutions.  The forward spread, 

which had widened more sharply in the spring, also improved, although it remains 

above its levels from earlier this year. 

In addition to the improvement in LIBOR, anecdotal reports suggest that term 

funding has become more readily accessible for a number of European banks that had 

faced funding pressures in recent months.  But while short-term borrowing conditions 

may be improving for some firms, conditions remain stressed for financial institutions 

in some peripheral European countries.  One sign of this stress is the dependence of 

those banks on the European Central Bank (ECB) for their euro-denominated 

funding, shown in the middle right panel.  Banks in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal 

have been heavy users of liquidity provided by the ECB, as funding from market 

sources remains difficult to find or more expensive for those institutions. 

Concerns about the financial institutions in those countries are deeply intertwined 

with concerns about the financial status of their respective governments.  As shown in 

the bottom left panel, sovereign debt in Ireland and Portugal came under renewed 

pressure over the intermeeting period.  Ireland, in particular, has been a key focal 

point in the markets, as negative news emerged about additional capital injections that 

may be needed to support the banking system.  Nathan Sheets will discuss this 

situation in more detail in his briefing. 

The bottom line is that peripheral Europe continues to face pressure.  However, 

the pressure this time around seems contained to a smaller subset of countries in the 

periphery, and the impact on broader financial conditions in Europe has been 

relatively modest. 

Indeed, despite the ongoing problems in some peripheral countries, the euro has 

held up well, presumably reflecting the strength of core European countries.  As 

September 21, 2010 10 of 151



 

 

 

shown to the right, although the dollar appreciated against the euro immediately 

following the last FOMC meeting, the currency pair has retraced, leaving the dollar 

only marginally stronger against the euro over the intermeeting period and well below 

the peak reached in the spring. 

In contrast, the dollar has been on a steady trend of depreciation against the yen 

since the spring, in large part reflecting that U.S. yields have been moving lower, 

while Japanese yields, already constrained by their low levels, have held relatively 

steady.  In response to this trend, the Japanese Ministry of Finance last week decided 

to intervene in the dollar–yen market to weaken the Japanese currency, accounting for 

the jump in the series at the end of the chart.  More details about the intervention will 

be offered in Nathan’s briefing. 

Your final exhibit turns to recent developments regarding the Federal Reserve’s 

balance sheet.  The Committee’s decision to begin reinvesting the principal payments 

from agency debt and agency MBS into longer-term Treasury securities, conveyed in 

the August FOMC statement, prompted an immediate decline of about 6 basis points 

in the 10-year Treasury yield, as shown in the upper left panel.  Information gathered 

from interviews the Desk conducted with the primary dealers after the FOMC 

meeting suggests that the market had moved to price in considerable odds of this 

decision by the time of the meeting, perhaps accounting for an additional 6 basis 

points of movement in the yield before the announcement.   

Putting these pieces together, our best estimate is that the decision itself 

accounted for a 12 basis point decline in the 10-year Treasury yield.  Since 

expectations for the federal funds rate adjusted very little, most of this effect appears 

attributable to the portfolio-balance channel.  That response is largely in line with the 

effects of the earlier rounds of large-scale asset purchases, once scaled for the size of 

the balance sheet surprise in this case.   

The effects of the FOMC statement on markets were more complicated, though.  

The somewhat downbeat description of the economy, coupled with the somewhat 

unexpected reinvestment announcement, may have led investors to believe that the 

Committee’s assessment of the outlook had changed notably.  That perception 

contributed to the heightened concerns about the economic outlook that emerged in 

the period following the meeting and that prompted sizable movements in yields and 

other asset prices. 

The Desk’s efforts to implement the Committee’s decision to reinvest principal 

payments on agency debt and MBS have gotten off to a successful start.  To date, we 

have conducted 12 operations and have purchased about $28 billion of securities, 

with the majority of those purchases occurring in the four- to ten-year sector of the 

yield curve, as shown to the right.  Our operations to date have been met with very 

strong interest by dealers, with a median offer-to-cover ratio of about 7. 

Based on the procedure outlined at the last FOMC meeting, our purchases are 

following a monthly calendar.  About a week into the month, we announce the 

September 21, 2010 11 of 151



 

 

 

schedule of operations to take place over the subsequent month and the anticipated 

cumulative amount of purchases from those operations, with that amount calibrated to 

offset the expected paydown of our agency debt and MBS holdings over that period.  

As indicated in the middle left panel, purchases this month should total around 

$27 billion.  We expect purchases to pick up to a pace of around $30 billion a month 

over the next several months before falling back in mid-2011. 

Looking at the cumulative changes in our holdings, we now anticipate a further 

paydown of about $300 billion in agency MBS from now through the end of 2011—

slightly above the pace anticipated at the time of the last FOMC meeting.  When 

added to the paydowns that have occurred to date, the cumulative level of agency 

MBS paydowns is projected to be around $450 billion by the end of 2011, as shown 

by the blue line in the right panel.  The figure also shows how this projection changes 

if long-term interest rates were to shift by 50 basis points relative to the Tealbook 

assumption, indicating that the pace of MBS paydowns is quite sensitive to the level 

of longer-term yields.  In addition to the MBS paydowns, the total cumulative decline 

in our agency debt holdings through 2011 will be around $70 billion. 

With the paydown of our MBS holdings, our presence in the market will diminish 

over time.  As reported in the bottom left table, our current holdings represent 

24 percent of the entire universe of 30-year, fixed-coupon agency MBS, with much 

higher concentrations in certain coupons.  As we receive principal payments on our 

holdings and as new production of MBS reaches the market, our share of the 

outstanding amount is expected to fall to 17 percent over the next year.  By contrast, 

our holdings of Treasury coupon securities are only about 12 percent of the market 

today, and that share is projected to rise only modestly over the next year under the 

current reinvestment strategy.  Both the Treasury and the MBS markets continue to 

function well, though the high level of gross fails in the MBS market has persisted. 

At the last FOMC meeting, members noted that the decision to reinvest in 

Treasuries as opposed to MBS could be altered if market conditions were to change.  

One factor that may be relevant to that decision is the relative pricing of MBS to 

Treasuries.  The bottom right panel shows the spread between MBS and Treasuries, 

adjusted for the prepayment option embedded in MBS.  This measure began to move 

higher around the time of the last meeting, reportedly because the decline in longer-

term yields was expected to create a large flow of new supply of MBS to the market.  

However, the measure has since reversed and is now only marginally higher, on 

balance, since the last FOMC meeting. 

I will close my briefing with a brief update on the development of our two 

reserve-draining tools. 

Following the course of action described at the last FOMC meeting, the Board 

announced a program of ongoing small-scale operations for the term deposit facility 

(TDF).  Under the announced program, TDF auctions will be held about every other 

month.  Two TDF auctions have been scheduled for the remainder of this year, with 

each offering $5 billion of 28-day deposits.  The objective of this program is to ensure 

September 21, 2010 12 of 151



 

 

 

the operational readiness of the TDF and to provide eligible institutions with an 

opportunity to gain familiarity with term deposit procedures. 

For reverse repurchase agreements, there have been two notable developments 

since the last FOMC meeting.  First, we completed our set of small-scale operations 

with primary dealers using MBS collateral.  With these operations complete, we now 

have the capability to operate with the primary dealers using all three types of 

collateral in the SOMA.  Second, we publicly announced the list of money market 

funds that we have established as counterparties for reverse repurchase agreements.  

We anticipate conducting small-scale operations with those counterparties in coming 

weeks. 

A primary objective going forward will be to continue expanding the list of 

counterparties.  As the next step in this direction, the Desk would like to publish a 

new set of criteria that will allow a broader set of money market funds to become 

eligible counterparties, including funds that are not as large as those that have already 

been included.  Unless there is any objection from the FOMC, the Desk will take this 

step later this week.  That concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Questions for Brian?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Brian, even though we have been through the August period, any 

comments on the issuance calendar and what’s happened in terms of corporate bond spreads, 

whether it’s high-quality or B-rated or junk, over Treasuries,? 

MR. SACK.  Issuance continues to be heavy—very much the same pattern that we’ve 

seen for some time, namely, corporations that can access financial markets are terming out their 

debt and substituting longer-term debt for shorter-term debt.  In terms of spreads, there wasn’t 

much change over the intermeeting period.  I know there has been some recent attention in the 

press, including the Wall Street Journal, about the levels of spreads, raising the possibility that 

they could be too low.  But, to us, there’s nothing new regarding that issue, and we’ve been 

talking about that for six months.  We remain comfortable with the level of corporate spreads, 

given the health of corporate balance sheets. 

MR. FISHER.  If I may, I’d like to ask a follow-up about your chart on the 10-year 

Treasury yield.  Although that’s a very short period, all things being equal, would one have 

September 21, 2010 13 of 151



 

 

 

expected, with rates coming down as they have, in part or in whole in response to our last FOMC 

decision, that the S&P might have appreciated and the dollar might have depreciated instead of 

doing what they did? 

MR. SACK.   Well, the change in yields on net ended up being relatively modest—I cited 

10 basis points in the briefing—so that would give a modest upward boost to equities, but not 

much. 

MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, is there a way that we can get a reasonable sense, 

historically speaking, of the percentage of our Treasury securities in the market?  As I understand 

it, we basically come back to levels that we had in terms of Treasury holdings pre-crisis in 

absolute dollar amounts.  But I’m just curious if, at some point, not necessarily this morning, we 

could just get that information. 

MR. SACK.  We can.  I don’t have the long history at my fingertips, but you’re correct.  

Before the crisis, our holdings of coupon securities were about 16 percent of the market.  So 

we’re moving back towards that level, but we could take a look at the longer history as well. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Before we did the large-scale asset purchase program, we had a 

group of memos looking at the cross-correlation among mortgage rates, Treasury rates, and 

corporate rates, and I was just wondering if any work had been done to see if those cross-

correlations had changed since those memos were originally done.  I’m not suggesting this 

necessarily for this meeting, but maybe at a future meeting it would be of interest to see whether 

any of those relationships had changed, given the various changes that have occurred over the 

last several years.  And maybe you have an impression of whether they have changed. 

September 21, 2010 14 of 151



 

 

 

MR. SACK. I obviously don’t have it at my fingertips, but I have a few thoughts.  As we 

watch markets, we tend to think that the movements in Treasury yields that are induced either by 

changes in the outlook or changes in Fed balance sheet policies are feeding through to a broader 

set of rates.  The big story on corporate spreads, of course, has been the narrowing over the past 

year with the improving economic conditions.  On the mortgage side, once we corrected market 

function, the stories on spreads have been more idiosyncratic to the mortgage market, that is, to 

the effects of the possibility of a government-sponsored refi program or uncertainty about the 

futures of the GSEs, and so on.  So, from casual observation, we think that most of the 

movements in spreads aren’t some kind of endogenous reaction to movements in Treasury 

yields—they’re due to other factors, which means that policies that push around Treasury yields 

should be expected to pass through broadly to those other rates.  We can take a deeper look at 

this. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, what’s the Desk’s view, based on 

either the lessons we’ve learned in the MBS market or from a broader perspective, of the level of 

LSAPs relative to the pool of, let’s say, longer-term Treasuries, where we might be running risks 

of getting in the way of market functioning?  Are there rules of thumb?  Are there levels at 

which, putting policy considerations aside, you’d get less comfortable and the Desk would feel 

as though we’re just matching bids and asks with each other in that market? 

MR. SACK.  Considerations of large expansions of the balance sheet and large purchases 

of Treasury securities, of course, raise this issue.  I don’t think we have a clear sense of a 

threshold or a trigger, but I’ll note a couple things.  LSAPs in the range of $500 billion to 

$1 trillion put us up around or possibly above the 24 percent figure of where we are for MBS.  

September 21, 2010 15 of 151



 

 

 

Having said that, I think it’s hard to make that comparison directly, because, underlying that 

24 percent figure for MBS, we have holdings of certain coupons that are extremely 

concentrated—we still own 60 to 75 percent of the entire outstanding amount of the 4 and the 

4.5 coupons.  My guess is that, if Treasury purchases are distributed across the entire curve, we 

could actually push those readings higher before we get into significant problems with market 

function, but that will depend very much on how we buy, at what pace we buy, and what 

maturities the FOMC wants to target.  So I think the short answer is that we think we have 

considerable room, but if we’re going to consider very large LSAPs, then that definitely becomes 

a relevant consideration. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just to follow up on that, Brian, there’s a 

certain amount of new issuance that goes on, and sometimes if the central bank is viewed as 

buying up all the new issuance, then that would be considered interfering with market 

functioning—matching bid and asked, as Governor Warsh was saying.  Does that have any 

bearing on this?  And how much is new issuance monthly at the current pace? 

MR. SACK.   Again, I think this is another difference between buying MBS and 

Treasuries.  In the MBS market, we operated almost exclusively in the TBA market, because 

that’s where all of the liquidity is.  So, by design or by necessity, we ended up buying new 

issuance.  In the Treasury market, we have more flexibility—we buy across the curve, and we 

actually often end up buying a lot of off-the-run securities because they’re relatively cheap if the 

new ones have an on-the-run premium.  With that flexibility, we can allow the market to digest 

the new issuance, and we can still ramp up our holdings.  In terms of the pace of issuance, the 

September 21, 2010 16 of 151



 

 

 

most recent forecast from the primary dealers has about $1.2 trillion of net issuance over fiscal 

2011.  

MR. BULLARD.  $100 billion a month. 

MR. SACK.  $100 billion a month, right. 

MR. BULLARD.  Let me sharpen this up a little.  Suppose you said, “Well, we’re going 

to buy all of the new cars that come out.”  And that’s okay, because there’s a vast market for 

used cars out there, and cars are being traded all the time.  Still, I think you’re going to have a 

big impact in the market for cars if you decide you’re going to buy up all the new cars.  I would 

think the same is true of Treasury issuance.  Sure, it’s a vast market, but a lot of those decisions 

have been made—they all really want to hold these securities at their current values, and they’re 

not in the market, really, at all, at current prices. 

MR. SACK.  When you say “a big impact,” it depends on what you mean. 

MR. BULLARD.  Well, for market functioning. 

MR. SACK.  Okay. 

MR. BULLARD.  Aside from policy concerns, just market functioning. 

MR. SACK.  At some point, yes, if you take an excessive amount of Treasury securities 

onto the balance sheet and out of the market, presumably you’ll start to affect market function.  

What I’m arguing is that we still have a lot of room on the Treasury side, because we can buy 

across the curve, because we can buy old issues, and because, as you pointed out, there is a lot of 

new issuance still coming to the market. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions for Brian?  [No response.]  If 

not, I need a motion to ratify domestic open market operations. 

September 21, 2010 17 of 151



 

 

 

MR. WARSH.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, it is ratified without objection.   

Let me just note that, as usual, the staff circulated several memos on financial stability, 

including memos on asset valuations, leverage, and risks facing the banking sector.  In addition, 

the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on dealer financing terms made its debut in the 

Tealbook.  Again, we are continuing our efforts to make sure that financial stability issues are 

integrated into our discussion.  Of course, in our meeting this afternoon and tomorrow, we will 

be talking about very substantial expansion of the Federal Reserve’s capacity to monitor 

financial stability issues, which, again, we will want to integrate, obviously, not only into our 

oversight and supervision, but also into our monetary policymaking.  So I just take note of that, 

which, I think, is very important.  And a number of you, of course, have expressed those 

concerns as well. 

Our next item is the economic situation.  Let me turn to Dave Stockton.  

MR. STOCKTON.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On balance, the data that we 

received over the intermeeting period continued to surprise us to the downside.  We 

now estimate that the growth of real GDP in the second quarter was likely in the 

neighborhood of 1¾ percent at an annual rate, about ½ percentage point below our 

August projection.  And weaker readings on the labor market, softer spending data, 

and continued lackluster surveys of consumer and business sentiment led us to mark 

down projected GDP growth in the second half of this year by a similar amount to 

2 percent.  I thought I’d take a crack at answering three related questions this 

morning:  Where is the weakness occurring?  What is causing that weakness?  And, 

how long will it persist?  So as to avoid disappointing you almost immediately, let me 

admit right up front that my answers to these questions are likely to garner me a 

gentlemen’s C at best.  But eight o’clock classes were never my strong suit. 

Let me begin with the labor market, which has continued to underperform our 

expectations.  Gains in private payrolls averaged 87,000 in July and August, about 

half the pace that occurred in the spring, leaving the level roughly 50,000 short of our 

last projection.  More recently, initial claims for unemployment insurance appear to 

have retraced their blip up in August, but, at 450,000, they remain at a level 

consistent with only modest employment gains. 

September 21, 2010 18 of 151



 

 

 

We have also been surprised by the dismal performance of housing markets.2  In 

response to the weaker data on housing sales and starts, we marked down our 

residential investment forecast by enough to knock ½ percentage point off of the 

growth of real GDP in the current quarter.  This morning we received the starts data 

for August.  Total starts rose nearly 60,000 units to 598,000 in August.  That was 

stronger than we were expecting, but all of the surprise was in the volatile 

multifamily sector.  Single-family starts edged up to 438,000 units last month from a 

downward revised level in July; on average over the two months, single-family starts 

were right in line with our forecast.  Meanwhile, single-family permits moved down a 

bit further and point to somewhat weaker starts in the next couple of months. 

The steep decline in sales of new and existing homes in the past few months 

suggests that the homebuyers’ tax credit played a bigger role than we had earlier 

assumed in holding up the housing market late last year and early this year.  With 

those effects unwinding, underlying housing demand now looks surprisingly weak, 

especially given the low levels of mortgage rates and house prices and, hence, the 

favorable state of affordability.  High unemployment, the accompanying uncertainty 

about income prospects reported by many households, and still tight credit conditions 

have likely damped demand.  Moreover, potential buyers may be coming to the same 

view as we did in this forecast:  With sales weak and supply ample, prices are more 

likely to weaken a bit further than to begin a sustained climb.  The anecdotes from the 

Beige Book and elsewhere reinforce the view that housing activity remains depressed, 

and we’ve basically pushed off any meaningful recovery in this sector until next year. 

Nonresidential construction also has come in below our expectations.  At the time 

of the last Tealbook, the BEA estimated that nonresidential investment had increased 

at an annual rate of 5 percent in the second quarter.  The incoming information now 

suggests that spending in this area likely fell at an annual rate of about 2½ percent in 

the second quarter, and the trajectory of the data on construction put in place indicates 

that, rather than flattening out as we had expected in August, nonresidential 

investment is continuing to drift lower. 

Elsewhere in the business sector, equipment spending appears to have slowed 

sharply this quarter after posting double-digit gains since late last year.  Some of this 

slowdown reflects a dropback in purchases of motor vehicles, which rose very rapidly 

in the first half of the year.  But the deceleration is broad-based.  Shipments of 

nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft fell in July, and new orders, which had 

been outpacing shipments for nearly a year, dropped back below the level of 

shipments.  The incoming information on software also has softened of late.  The 

weaker data line up well with the anecdotal reports on capital spending plans and 

business sentiment, which have been subdued at best.  In light of the incoming 

information, we have lowered projected growth in real E&S spending in the second 

half of the year to show an increase of just 2 percent at an annual rate, more than 4 

percentage points less than in our August forecast. 

                                                 
2 A document on the housing data that Mr. Stockton distributed is appended to this transcript (appendix 2).  

September 21, 2010 19 of 151



 

 

 

Not all of the news has been bad.  Last week’s report on retail sales in August was 

a modest upside surprise for us.  We had been expecting retail control spending to be 

about flat last month, and instead it increased 0.6 percent.  But with employment 

expanding only slowly, wages subdued, and sentiment at depressed levels, we haven’t 

read too much into the August jump and are expecting more modest gains in coming 

months.  As a consequence, we expect real PCE to increase at an annual rate of just 

over 2 percent in the second half, about ¼ percentage point faster than in our August 

forecast.  At this point, consumer spending seems to be muddling along, with few 

signs of either a pickup or a deceleration. 

Taken together, the constellation of incoming data indicates that the economy is 

generating less income, less spending, and less production in the near term than we 

had been expecting.  That, in turn, implies less impetus to activity as we enter 2011.  

In addition to those less favorable dynamics, the projections for the prices of equities 

and homes are somewhat lower than in our August forecast, and, as Nathan will 

discuss shortly, growth of foreign activity is projected to be a bit slower and the path 

of the exchange value of the dollar slightly higher.  All told, we reduced our forecast 

of the growth in real GDP in 2011 by ¼ percentage point to 3¼ percent, with above-

trend growth not expected to emerge until the middle of next year. 

Given the substantial and successive markdowns that we have made to the 

projection since April, concerns that the economy could be approaching a so-called 

stall speed that will trigger a renewed cyclical downturn are understandable.  Stall 

speeds are not a feature of our largely linear models.  But it could well be that at very 

low growth rates, the economy is more vulnerable to adverse shifts in expectations or 

other exogenous shocks that could set off the cyclical dynamics associated with 

recessions.  Just looking at the data, one observes that growth of real GDP below 

1 percent typically precedes a recession, as does a rise in the quarterly average 

unemployment rate of more than ¼ percentage point.  Of course, whether these 

figures represent thresholds in any meaningful economic sense isn’t clear.  In any 

event, our forecast doesn’t anticipate breaching either of these limits, but, obviously, 

we’ve moved closer in recent projections.  Along the same lines, as we noted in the 

Tealbook, a variety of statistical models indicates that the probability of recession has 

risen in recent months, though those probabilities are still estimated to be rather low. 

While recession still seems like a low probability, an outright contraction in 

activity is not the only concern raised by the change in the economic landscape in 

recent months.  In June, we thought the economy was in a pause.  By August, the 

evidence suggested we had entered a soft patch.  Now, the further downside surprises 

in a wide array of data could raise a concern that, rather than traversing a soft patch, 

we may have stumbled into something more like the La Brea tar pit. 

So what forces are holding back aggregate demand, and how and when will those 

forces abate?  In the late spring, we thought the pause was largely associated with the 

European debt crisis and its potential fallout for the United States.  We assumed that 

once it became clear that Europe would muddle through, growth would resume along 

the lines observed earlier in the year.  But evidence that Europe will likely muddle 

September 21, 2010 20 of 151



 

 

 

through seems to have done little to lift spirits or spur a more robust resumption of 

growth in the United States. 

Instead of generating direct spillovers to U.S. activity, events in Europe may have 

served as a reminder to many economic agents that the economy remains vulnerable 

to unforeseen events, of which the European sovereign debt crisis is only one.  

Perhaps as a consequence, heightened uncertainty, increased risk aversion, and the 

more downbeat sentiment of households and businesses have not significantly 

receded in recent months.  When overlaid on an economy in which households are 

still in the process of deleveraging, credit remains tight for many borrowers, fiscal 

stimulus is fading, and the boost from inventories has about run its course, these 

forces seem to be exerting a more persistent drag on demand than we had expected.  

Moreover, a larger fraction of the demand that we are generating appears to be 

flowing to foreign producers than we had earlier anticipated. 

I don’t want to exaggerate the extent to which the incoming data have 

fundamentally altered our view of the economy.  Much of what we thought would 

transpire a year ago has come to pass.  The economy turned up, driven not only by 

positive impetus from the inventory cycle and fiscal stimulus, but also by an 

improvement in private demand.  The labor market ended its deterioration and is 

gradually improving.  With plenty of ups and downs, financial conditions have been 

slowly repairing.  So, it doesn’t seem like an entirely different economy from the one 

we were expecting. 

But it does seem like a different recovery.  The growth of real activity is slower, 

the headwinds associated with the aftermath of the crisis appear stronger, and the 

handoff from inventories and fiscal stimulus to private demands is fainter.  In contrast 

to our earlier expectations, the recovery has not been of sufficient strength to reduce 

the margin of slack materially or prevent some further disinflation. 

Could we have overreacted in marking down our forecast by as much as we have 

since the spring?  Certainly.  One of the messages that we hoped to convey with our 

stronger and weaker recovery scenarios that we included among the alternative 

simulations was our considerable uncertainty about the timing of when growth will 

pick up.  We simply don’t have a lot of science to offer you, and we see credible 

arguments for both an earlier and later step-up than we have incorporated in the 

baseline forecast. 

Let me conclude with a few remarks about the supply side of our forecast.  The 

high level of permanent job loss and the accumulating evidence of a decline in the 

efficiency of job matching led us to mark up our estimate of the NAIRU by an 

additional ½ percentage point to 5¾ percent.  When our estimates of the effects of 

extended unemployment insurance are added on, we put the effective NAIRU 

currently at about 6¾ percent.  In this forecast, we kept the growth rate of potential 

output going forward unchanged from our previous projection, though, with the 

revised data from the NIPA revisions now in hand, we are undertaking a more 

thorough scrubbing of the supply side of the projection for the November meeting. 

September 21, 2010 21 of 151



 

 

 

Taken together, the downward revisions that we made to actual GDP and 

potential GDP in this projection were roughly comparable, and the level of the output 

gap is not much different at the end of 2012 than in our August projection. 

Likewise, our inflation projection also is nearly unchanged.  The incoming data 

on prices have been very close to our expectations.  Taken together, last week’s 

reports on the CPI and PPI for August had little net effect on our core PCE price 

projection.  We expect core price inflation to run just above 1 percent in the second 

half of this year and then to drift down just below 1 percent in 2011 and 2012.  After 

factoring in food and energy prices, total PCE price inflation is expected to decrease 

from 1.2 percent this year to 1.1 percent in 2011 and 1.0 percent in 2012. 

The basic story behind this pattern also is unchanged.  A wide margin of slack and 

subdued labor costs put some mild downward pressure on price inflation, which is 

mitigated by our anticipation that inflation expectations will remain largely anchored.  

Nathan will continue our presentation. 

MR. SHEETS.  The broad dollar index is only slightly stronger than in our last 

forecast, but foreign exchange markets have nevertheless been the source of some 

fireworks.  On September 15, the Japanese Ministry of Finance intervened 

unilaterally to weaken the yen, which had approached record nominal highs against 

the dollar.  The Japanese authorities purchased $25 billion, their largest one-day 

operation in history, and the yen depreciated about 3 percent against the dollar in 

response.  Since then, the yen has held steady at about ¥85½ per dollar.  Coming so 

soon after Prime Minister Kan’s victory in his party’s leadership election, the 

intervention and its timing clearly had political overtones.  That said, the operation 

seemed to surprise market participants, mainly because it was Mr. Kan’s defeated 

rival who had vigorously advocated intervention.   

In justifying the intervention operation, Japanese officials argued that the rising 

yen was reducing the competitiveness of exports, driving down equity prices, and 

weighing on business sentiment.  They also emphasized the need to ensure that there 

were “two-sided risks” in the market.  On the other hand, the yen was not particularly 

strong in real effective terms; recent moves in the yen seem reasonably well 

explained by the evolution of interest rates and shifts in risk appetite; and Japanese 

exports have been expanding at a solid pace. 

Turning to U.S. trade, real exports of goods and services grew at a 10 percent rate 

in the first half of this year and should continue at that pace in the second half.  

Imports, on the other hand, exploded in the second quarter, posting 33 percent 

growth, even faster than the estimate that I reported at your August meeting.  Import 

growth in the second half of the year is projected to fall back to just 4 percent, 

reflecting payback from several factors that lifted the second-quarter number, 

including a perplexing seasonal adjustment procedure for oil imports.  Notably, the 

July trade data showed a contraction in imports, broadly consistent with this 

projection.  In 2011 and 2012, imports are likely to strengthen, in line with the 

projected U.S. recovery. 

September 21, 2010 22 of 151



 

 

 

Driven by the surge in imports, net exports in the second quarter subtracted a 

staggering 3½ percentage points from real GDP growth.  As imports fall back to a 

more sustainable pace, we expect net exports to contribute ½ percentage point to 

growth in the second half of this year and to be roughly neutral thereafter.  Strong 

export growth—supported by a depreciating dollar and a moderate foreign 

recovery—should about offset the contribution from imports, which expand more 

slowly but from a larger base. 

The strength of the recovery abroad surprised us in the second quarter, with real 

GDP growth rising to nearly 6 percent, a percentage point stronger than we had 

estimated in August.  Activity in the euro area continued to show remarkable 

resilience, with GDP expanding at almost a 4 percent rate in the quarter and the 

German economy—boosted by strong external demand—recording its most rapid 

quarterly growth rate since reunification.  Not to be outshone by their advanced 

economy counterparts, the emerging market economies collectively grew at an annual 

rate of almost 10 percent in the second quarter, with activity in Mexico posting a 

particularly sizable gain. 

Indicators for the third quarter, however, point to a deceleration in foreign 

activity, broadly in line with our expectation of a moderate recovery abroad.  In 

emerging Asia, PMIs in a number of the smaller economies have moved down 

markedly in recent months, and their exports and production have slowed.  Early in 

the intermeeting period, Chinese indicators for July also posted softer readings but 

generally bounced back in August, with industrial production, retail sales, fixed-asset 

investment, and the PMI all posting gains.  All in all, we see growth in emerging Asia 

stepping down from its double-digit first-half pace to about 4½ percent in the second 

half of the year, with growth rising slowly thereafter.  This outlook is just a bit 

weaker than in the last Tealbook.  While there is a notable risk that the recent data 

may be signaling a more pronounced slowdown in emerging Asia than is seen in 

these projections, we expect that private domestic spending will help support the next 

stage of the region’s recovery, as stimulus from the rebound in trade and inventories 

abates.  And many of these economies have scope to use expansionary policies to 

stimulate economic growth if the recovery falters. 

In the euro area, indicators for the third quarter have been mixed.  Manufacturing 

PMIs edged down in August, and the most recent readings on industrial production 

have been flat.  Retail sales and consumer confidence, however, came in stronger than 

we had expected.  Looking ahead, we see growth in the euro area moving down to 

around 1½ percent on average through the end of next year.  This projection is a bit 

stronger than in August, in line with our reading of the recent data.  We continue to 

expect that banking sector stresses and fiscal turmoil will restrain the pace of 

recovery. 

Notably, we are also seeing significant divergence within the euro area.  As I 

mentioned, German economic growth boomed in the second quarter, but Spanish and 

Portuguese GDP eked out only modest gains, and a 7 percent contraction in Greek 

GDP furthered the country’s apparent slide from advanced economy to emerging 

September 21, 2010 23 of 151



 

 

 

market status.  We judge that even if Greece adheres to its fiscal adjustment program, 

further steps will need to be taken to address its debt sustainability problems.  Such 

steps could include a modification in the terms of its debt held by the official sector, 

the provision of additional funds from European or international institutions, and a 

restructuring of its obligations to the private sector.  Our forecast maintains the 

working assumption that such steps can be taken without disruptions for the euro area 

as a whole. 

That said, news out of Ireland has taken a turn for the worse in recent weeks.  

Ireland’s two largest banks reported sizable first-half losses and sharp increases in 

their nonperforming loans.  In addition, the authorities announced a large capital 

injection for Anglo Irish, the third largest bank.  Still severe economic conditions, in 

particular falling house prices and a drop in nominal GDP of nearly 20 percent over 

the past three years, threaten to weaken the banking system further.  While the 

government has moved resolutely to address these problems, the banking system is 

very large relative to the economy, and these efforts have raised concerns about the 

sustainability of the resulting fiscal obligations.  S&P now estimates that the gross 

cost of resolving the banking sector’s problems could surpass 50 percent of GDP 

(excluding future recoveries) and, accordingly, has notched the country’s credit rating 

down from AA to AA-.  The thorny challenge of how to support large banks in small 

countries, which manifested itself most starkly in Iceland, is a notable risk to both 

global financial stability and the foreign outlook. 

In sum, we expect foreign growth to slow from the 6 percent second-quarter pace 

to about 2¾ percent in the second half of this year.  Growth abroad should then rise to 

a little under 3½ percent in 2011 and 2012, as financial stresses wane and private 

spending firms.  This outlook has been revised down some since August, reflecting 

the slightly softer outlook for emerging Asia and the weaker path of U.S. activity.  

While our forecast envisions an anxiety-soothing, soft-landing scenario for foreign 

growth, we recognize that the risks around this outlook are high.  In addition to 

concerns about the durability of the U.S. recovery, our projections for activity abroad 

could be pulled down further by banking or fiscal stresses in Europe, a disappointing 

performance of private demand in emerging Asia, or—in the wake of the Japanese 

intervention and with Congress now considering trade sanctions against China—an 

increase in protectionist pressures, trade frictions, and beggar-thy-neighbor policies.  

Thank you, and we’re happy to take your questions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If a country goes from advanced status to emerging market, 

is that a submerging market?  [Laughter] 

MR. SHEETS.  I know that over the years Japan has been referred to in those terms, and 

maybe Greece is raising them a notch. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Questions for our colleagues?  President Plosser. 

September 21, 2010 24 of 151



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  Dave, I appreciate your discussion.  These are very challenging times 

for forecasting, but I’ll ask the question I often ask:  You’ve revised your forecast down, and 

you’ve shaped it by the incoming data, but how much of it was driven by your model and how 

much of it was due to add factors and judgmental factors that you added into the forecast at this 

point? 

MR. STOCKTON.  With this forecast, I’d say it’s just about half and half.  About half of 

it was surprises from the incoming data that, in essence, drove us off the model.  But half was 

due to the assumption of somewhat weaker stock prices, somewhat weaker house prices, the 

slightly higher level of the dollar, and the weaker foreign activity.  So those were sort of 

endogenous.  Those were revisions consistent with the model. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  When you say “part of the model,” how do you treat 

residuals?  Aren’t residuals going to be assumed to decay over time? 

MR. STOCKTON.  They do decay.  In this case, we have those residuals decaying over a 

longer period than we did previously.  We’re off the model for a longer period of time, as we 

think the evidence that we’ve accumulated suggests that the influences that are depressing 

activity beyond the model’s explanatory factors are going to be more persistent. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’d just like to follow up, because I think the Chairman’s point is a 

better way of getting at what I was trying to say.  We use this notion—and forecasters use it—of 

momentum carrying forward and persistence.  Some of that persistence is inherent in the way 

you write the structural model down.  Some of it is based on assumptions about what the shocks 

themselves are doing over time.  Time-series models and time-series variations in GDP growth 

September 21, 2010 25 of 151



 

 

 

from quarter to quarter are pretty volatile.  There’s some persistence, but the serial correlation is 

not huge in terms of growth rates.  The Chairman’s question was about the nature of the 

persistence of the residuals.  Is it an estimated parameter, or is it something that you’re just 

assuming? 

MR. STOCKTON.  That’s a legitimate point.  There is sort of an estimated persistence in 

the residuals that we just know from the basic model’s past errors.  We attributed more than that 

level of persistence for this judgmental factor, because we think that this time is different from 

the average historical experience; specifically, those residuals will fade away more slowly 

because of the financial crisis. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  David, do you have notions of 

how well these judgment factors have improved your forecast historically? 

MR. PLOSSER.  You made him take off his glasses.  [Laughter] 

MR. STOCKTON.  If I’m going to get hit, at least I have my glasses off.  I can’t answer 

that question with any precision.  But what I can do is point to the confidence intervals that we 

have around our forecast.  These are based on our actual forecasting record, which includes the 

behavior of the model itself as well as the judgmental add factors that we’ve put on it in the past.  

And, as you can see, those confidence intervals are pretty darn wide. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Can I just ask a question quickly of Nathan?  I recall that data indicated 

that last year that U.S. FDI abroad was about $248 billion, and FDI in the United States is about 

September 21, 2010 26 of 151



 

 

 

half that, $120-some-odd billion.  Do we have a sense of how those numbers are tracking this 

year? 

MR. SHEETS.  I don’t have that at my fingertips, but that’s something that we do follow, 

and we can get you an answer to that. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Seeing no other questions, we are ready for our 

economic go-round.  We want the full benefit of everyone’s wisdom, but please remember this is 

a one-day meeting, so please try to keep that wisdom as tightly expressed as possible.  President 

Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business conditions in the Third District 

have changed very little since our last meeting.  There continues to be an uneven pattern of 

incoming data that has been established during the course of the summer.  The outlook among 

business contacts is still positive but has not improved much since our last meeting; but neither 

has there been much further weakening in their outlook.  Nonetheless, sentiment is cautious in 

most sectors.  Retail activity actually showed some strength in the intermeeting period, and 

manufacturing fell slightly.  Our BOS general activity index came in negative in August for the 

first time, after nearly a year of being positive.  There was a slight rebound in September, but 

that only suggests that regional manufacturing was essentially flat but not necessarily declining 

very much. 

The incoming data at the national level indicate that the pace of recovery was tepid 

during the summer, but recent industrial production and consumer spending reports have 

modestly surprised to the upside.  This may signal that the end of the summer may correspond to 

the low point of this soft patch rather than an imminent return to recession.  This prediction, 

September 21, 2010 27 of 151



 

 

 

obviously, must be tempered by reports of ongoing weakness in the labor market, continuing 

retrenchment in the housing market, and reports of weak real activity from a few of our contacts. 

Business leaders continue to stress that the cost of health care reform and other costs are 

obstacles to hiring.  For example, they are concerned about significant increases in 

unemployment insurance premiums that the states will have to impose to replenish their UI trust 

funds.  Let me also note that labor market activity tends to lag in recoveries, and problems in the 

housing market are likely related to permanent changes in fundamentals rather than the results of 

transitory factors.  Banks and other financial institutions indicate that hiring, however, is 

concentrated in compliance officers, legal help, and technology people to meet regulatory rules 

and their costs. 

Monetary policy has been exceptionally accommodative for more than two years.  There 

is a generous supply of liquidity available for financial markets to support real activity.  

Moreover, the financial markets appear to be in good working order.  The incoming information 

suggested that fewer instances of credit demand going unsatisfied are out there. 

The labor market is still, of course, the major concern to us all.  Unemployment is much 

too high and is the cause of real pain and suffering in the U.S. economy.  However, private 

payroll employment growth has been positive since the first of the year, and, in my view, the 

current state of the labor market is an example of a problem that is not amenable to future 

monetary policy accommodation.  I believe that the sources of the slow adjustment in labor 

markets are more about persistent supply and wealth shocks, requiring worker reallocations both 

across time and across space, as well as disparities between skills in demand and workers who 

are likely to be available.  No doubt, aggregate demand is one source of the currently high 

September 21, 2010 28 of 151



 

 

 

unemployment rate.  But the role that fundamentals have played in the run-up of the 

unemployment rate, and its persistence, in my view, looms large and has been underestimated. 

I am looking forward to our discussion of these issues in January, and I think it may be 

presumptuous of us to take further action without having that thorough discussion before going 

forward.  While my current view is that monetary policy has limited ability to improve the pace 

of this recovery further, I do believe that deflation is a potential problem that monetary policy 

can, in fact, solve.  I say “potential,” because I see little evidence to suggest that sustained 

deflation is a serious risk. 

To update my statement from our previous meeting, nominal GDP growth was about zero 

in Japan during most of the lost decade of the 1990s.  For the last year, the United States has 

witnessed nominal GDP growth of about 4 percent or a little less.  Overall, inflation has slowed 

somewhat since the beginning of the year.  Over the last three months, the commodity 

component of the CPI has grown at 2¾ percent.  The durable goods prices in the CPI have grown 

at 2.1 percent, and the services component is up only about 9 percent.  To me, this does not 

suggest a serious threat of sustained deflation going forward. 

I continue to believe that the odds are great that the recovery will remain at a moderate 

pace over the medium term.  I think this forecast is consistent with the Board staff lowering its 

forecast for real growth by a little less than .05 percentage point. 

All in all, I think recoveries are never smooth.  Also, I want to stress that the data we use 

to infer the state of the economy are subject to revision and are highly volatile.  I agree with the 

Board staff that the data available since our last meeting have yielded only marginal increases in 

the probability of another recession, since we are now out of the last one, let alone serious 

retrenchment.  Growth in the U.S. economy has slowed in the past several months, but it is not 

September 21, 2010 29 of 151



 

 

 

negative.  It seems to me that, without an unexpectedly large shock, persistent negative growth 

going forward seems unlikely.  I think it best to wait and see the path of the economy for the rest 

of the year, including the year-end holiday season, before considering additional steps, whose 

effects may be highly dubious at best.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy showed signs 

of slowing in the summer.  District auto dealers and general retailers reported mixed results.  The 

back-to-school season in particular was middling, according to one major retailer.  Optimism is 

limited for the remainder of the year.  Employment in the District has resumed tracking the same 

trends as the national data.  District agriculture is a bright spot, as many areas in the region seem 

poised to enjoy bumper harvests and relatively strong prices.  Residential sales in construction, 

on the other hand, have weakened over the summer.  The promising signs from the spring have 

largely disappeared.  Commercial and industrial real estate markets remain weak, and 

commercial lending remains stagnant. 

Contacts in the transportation industry seem to be optimistic about business prospects.  

While there has been some slowing during the summer, in general volumes and revenues 

continue to improve.  One contact noted that the intermodal shipping business remains 

particularly strong, seemingly suggesting that imports remain on track during the third quarter.  

Large businesses with a presence in or connection to Asia continue to do well.  Business 

uncertainty is important and is affecting capital expenditure decisions. 

Turning to the national economy, I concur with much of the Tealbook analysis, which 

suggests that the economy is working through a softer phase of the recovery and will likely 

improve toward a more rapid pace of growth in 2011.  During this softer phase, we are 

September 21, 2010 30 of 151



 

 

 

susceptible to negative shocks that could derail the recovery, but, so far, I do not think we have 

encountered such a shock, so I think it is reasonable to base policy on the projection that the 

economic recovery will continue and, in fact, gather steam next year.  It would not be at all 

unusual to experience an uneven recovery.  In fact, the unusual case would be one where 

economic recovery is perfectly smooth.  Also, the current recovery process is in response to a 

very large shock, and the shock was associated with a financial crisis.  Both the size of the shock 

and the fact that it was associated with a financial crisis suggest that, according to the empirical 

evidence on these matters, the recovery process will be a long one.  In addition, further shocks 

will hit the economy during this process. 

I want to comment for just a minute on the nature of optimal policy.  What does the 

economy look like under an optimal monetary policy?  We have talked repeatedly about being 

away from the dual mandate on two dimensions, both inflation and employment.  It is far from 

clear that this is a good way to think about whether policy is optimal or not.  In some simple 

models of stabilization policy, shocks buffeting the economy can be offset perfectly, so that key 

variables, such as output, employment, and inflation, never deviate from their steady-state 

values.  Monetary policy in that case completely smoothes the business cycle.  This is surely not 

the world that we live in.  The empirical evidence of which I am aware indicates that monetary 

policy can only mitigate a fraction, and a rather small fraction at that, of the variance of key 

quantities in the economy.  This is an important job, to be sure, and we should strive to carry out 

the optimal policy, but we should not expect that that policy will completely or even largely 

stabilize the fluctuations induced by shocks.  And for an extremely large shock, such as the one 

to which we are trying to adjust, it would not surprise me if the trajectories of output, inflation, 

and employment appeared to be one-sided for a time, even under the optimal policy. 

September 21, 2010 31 of 151



 

 

 

I’m going to give you the geeky version of this, so you can check your BlackBerrys while 

I—[laughter].  The geeky version would be that you are at steady-state unemployment and 

inflation, and now you hit the economy with a large demand shock, so unemployment goes way 

up and inflation goes below target for a long time.  You then look at any slice of that, at any 

point in time, and you say, “We’re missing the mandate on both dimensions.”  But even in that 

model, with optimal monetary policy, this is not an indication of anything, really, except that you 

got hit by a large shock.  So that’s my story on that. 

Let me turn to inflation and inflation expectations.  Inflation measured from one year ago 

continues to be about 1 percent by a variety of measures.  Inflation expectations measured by 

market-based TIPS break-even inflation rates seem to be moving somewhat lower.  The five-year 

TIPS break-even inflation rate is about 1.2 percent, somewhat low for a horizon like this, and 

down substantially from earlier this year.  The September expected inflation yield curve 

produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland indicated a shift down in the entire curve 

from the August level.  The whole curve is significantly lower than it was earlier this year.  The 

Cleveland measures adjust for many factors in these data.  This curve remains upward-sloping 

but is rather low.  A decline in inflation expectations of this amount is not severe enough at this 

point to warrant an argument that we are slipping into a Japanese-style deflationary regime.  

Still, we remain susceptible to negative shocks, and it’s not outside the realm of possibility that 

such an outcome could occur. 

I have argued that we should be prepared to take action, should we encounter further 

negative shocks that raises the risk of such an outcome.  One difficulty of deciding monetary 

policy in this environment is that our largely linear models are not easily adapted to study this 

issue.  Models we use have never heard of an unintended steady state with near zero nominal 

September 21, 2010 32 of 151



 

 

 

interest rates and a slight deflation.  In some private-sector analyses, probabilities of 0.25 or 0.3 

are put on the Japan-like scenario.  But our models do not admit such a possibility, leaving us 

policymakers with a judgment call on this issue.  Even some of the most extensive analysis in 

this area—Evans, Guse, and Honkapohja, in particular—does not even get the convergence to 

the trapped steady state to match the Japanese and the U.S. data appropriately. 

One might be tempted to argue that policy should be extremely aggressive in order to 

avoid the unintended Japan-style steady state, and because we are missing our mandate on two 

dimensions.  I have argued that the mandates argument is not necessarily right, as the economy is 

adjusting back to normal following a very large shock.  Even under optimal monetary policy, one 

might observe low inflation and high unemployment for a long time. 

As for avoiding the Japanese-style steady state, I have seen no analysis that suggests 

“shock and awe” would work or even that it would be helpful.  Large policy moves are normally 

to be avoided expressly because they can be destabilizing.  For instance, a very aggressive 

Treasury purchase program could be viewed as the beginning of a process of competitive 

devaluation, weakening the dollar and leading to a reaction worldwide.  This would likely be 

counterproductive with respect to our goals. 

In this situation, without models that are complete enough, I think we need to rely on 

what we have learned about optimal monetary policy over the last 25 years.  First, optimal policy 

is state-contingent—it adjusts as information arrives.  Second, we adjust in relatively small 

amounts, because the impact comes not from the adjustment itself, but from the expected policy 

path out into the infinite future.  And, three, rule-like behavior, to the extent possible, is very 

desirable to keep expectations well anchored.  I think following those principles is very 

important.  We are obviously in uncharted territory, but these lessons transfer from the earlier 

September 21, 2010 33 of 151



 

 

 

experience with interest rate targeting, and we should heed them going forward.   Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  It is never good news when the staff feels that it is necessary to 

create a box looking at the probability of a recession.  Whether or not this is truly a harbinger of 

a recession, I agree with most forecasters who expect very slow economic growth for the second 

half of this year, and this is coupled with the not-insignificant risk of a negative tail event.  Much 

slower economic growth could be generated by a combination of fiscal austerity, further 

deceleration in final sales, or realization of the risk highlighted in the other striking box in the 

staff documents, namely, the risk implied in the very elevated rate for credit default swaps for 

sovereigns and banking institutions in Europe. 

Slow economic growth for the second half this year implies that we can expect little 

improvement in labor markets in the short run.  In fact, it is quite possible that we end the year 

with unemployment at or above the very elevated rate we had at the beginning of this year.  

While some structural dislocation occurs in every recession, this recession has been 

characterized by a widespread decline in the demand for labor.  In the 1990 recession, the only 

industry to experience a peak-to-trough loss of employment of 5 percent or greater was 

construction.  In the 2001 recession, the only two industries to experience peak-to-trough loss of 

employment of 5 percent or greater were manufacturing and information technology.  However, 

in this recession there has been a peak-to-trough loss of employment of 5 percent or greater in 

construction, manufacturing, retail trade, wholesale trade, transportation, information 

technology, financial activities, and professional and business services.  Consistent with job 

losses reflecting a widespread decline in demand, a survey by the National Federation of 

September 21, 2010 34 of 151



 

 

 

Independent Business asked small businesses whether they had one or more hard-to-fill jobs 

vacant.  Only 10 percent said yes, which remains near the 25-year low for this survey question. 

While New England is doing better than many areas of the country, community banks in 

my District are reporting more home foreclosures and nonperforming residential loans.  They 

report that most of these foreclosures are being triggered less by job loss and more by households 

finally depleting their resources and giving up on an economic rebound.  A very slow recovery 

can have significant negative long-run implications for both employment and households’ 

financial condition.  We continue to see evidence of disinflation.  The core CPI is currently just 

below 1 percent and is expected to remain far below 2 percent through the forecast period of 

2012.  As President Evans highlighted at the last meeting, large misses for years on the upside of 

our inflation goal would not be acceptable and would warrant a significant policy response.  If 

so, then large misses for years on the downside of our inflation goal should also not be 

acceptable and warrant a significant policy response.  Fiscal policy may be the most effective 

policy tool when we hit the zero lower bound for interest rates.  However, if fiscal stimulus is not 

forthcoming, and if we are not making significant progress towards both elements of our policy 

mandate, then monetary policy should not remain on the sidelines. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, I focused 

my conversations with directors and other business leaders on the issue of uncertainty.  The good 

news is that many were feeling more certain about the outlook now than they were in the spring.  

The bad news is that they are now more certain that economic growth will be slower the 

remainder of this year than they thought in the spring.  This is leading many business executives 

to keep a tight grip on hiring and capital spending. 

September 21, 2010 35 of 151



 

 

 

Most large company executives reported solid earnings, strong balance sheets, and the 

ability to remain profitable, even at the current operating levels.  Many have adjusted their 

business models several times to be profitable at the current low levels of output, yet they have 

the financial and physical capacity for more growth.  And it is worth noting that GDP profit 

measures have regained their pre-recession levels, unlike many of the other data series that we 

have been watching. 

Of course, smaller businesses have tended to struggle more in this expansion.  It is harder 

to assess the prospects of small businesses, because they are so diverse, but the survey of small 

businesses that was conducted by the National Federation of Independent Business is pointing 

very consistently to a lack of demand as the single most important problem facing the 

respondents.  At this point, they are not expecting more than a gradual pickup in demand.  But 

they are also not expecting a further decline in demand.  The bankers I spoke with remain 

particularly uncertain about their prospects.  Continuing regulatory reform discussions and the 

proposals for further capital requirements were the major sources of their concerns.  But they 

also continue to report weak loan demand, and most of them are still looking for profitable 

lending opportunities. 

On a more positive note, there is growing evidence that higher saving rates and debt 

reductions are gradually restoring health to household balance sheets.  This appears to be 

reflected in continuing retail sales growth; it is also showing up in reduced delinquencies in the 

banks in my District.  Of course, further improvements in consumer spending are going to 

require stronger labor markets.  Unfortunately, the hiring reports that I am hearing are still 

consistent with limited employment growth in the near term. 

September 21, 2010 36 of 151



 

 

 

Like others, my staff has been revisiting the natural rate of unemployment, and they 

applied statistical filters to calculate trends in job-finding and job-separation rates to impute the 

natural rate.  This approach leads to an estimate that is currently similar to the Tealbook’s, and it 

suggests only a slow decline in the unemployment rate, because the underlying trend in the job-

finding rate is substantially lower than in past recoveries. 

Although my outlook today is a little softer than it was at last month’s meeting, I have 

long expected the recovery to be gradual and bumpy.  And the recent information on economic 

activity is in line with that expectation.  My projection for GDP calls for roughly 2 percent 

growth for the second half of this year, with labor markets improving quite slowly. 

On the inflation front, we have been getting early signs that disinflation is abating.  This 

stabilization is evident in the price change distribution of CPI components.  On average, just a 

third of the overall index has been exhibiting outright price declines over the past three months, 

compared with nearly a half of the index exhibiting outright price declines over the first five 

months of this year.  Although these are encouraging signs, at this point inflation expectations 

are still well below my longer-run objective of 2 percent.  President Bullard commented on the 

Cleveland model.  One more observation from that model suggests that expectations embedded 

in markets are less than 2 percent from the current year to 30 years out. 

In sum, feedback from my contacts and analysis by my staff indicate that neither a 

stronger second half of the year nor a double-dip recession seems likely.  So I continue to see the 

risks for both output and inflation as tilted to the downside.  The current policy environment 

makes it more challenging to respond to downside risks, and the need to balance the costs and 

benefits of further policy actions add to my reasoning that the risks to both output and inflation 

remain to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

September 21, 2010 37 of 151



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell a story to frame my comments.  Three Texas 

Aggies apply to be detectives.  The Inspector General lines them up, holds up a picture, and says 

to the first one, “What do you see?”  The Aggie replies, “I see a man with one eye.”  The 

Inspector General says, “Of course you see a man with one eye.  It’s a profile.”  Then, he holds it 

up in front of the second Aggie.  He says, “What do you see?”  “I see a man with one ear.”  

“Well, didn’t you hear what I said to the other fellow?  Of course it’s a man with one ear.  It’s a 

profile.”  And then, he turns to the third, and he holds up the picture.  “What do you see?”  “A 

contact lens,” replies the Aggie.  “What do you mean?”  He said, “He’s wearing a contact lens.”  

He turns to his assistant and says, “Check the book.  Make sure that’s the case.”  The assistant 

comes back and says, “He’s absolutely right.  He’s wearing contact lenses.”  He turns to the 

Aggie and says, “Well, how could you tell?”  He says, “Well, hello.  If he only has one eye and 

one ear, he can’t wear glasses.”  [Laughter]  Now, why did I tell this story?  I don’t know—it’s 

just a great story. 

I think my job at this table is to round out or flesh out some of the perspectives we’re 

getting, so I think it’s very important to listen to the operators of businesses to get a sense of 

what they see going forward to supplement and complement the good work done by our staff and 

the Board staff, etc.  Let me just add parenthetically that I’m not surprised at the downward 

revisions.  This economic scenario is basically what we’ve been feeling would happen, and I 

think it’s implicit in the numbers we have submitted. 

My District, like others, has seen a slowdown in activity, although I cannot help but brag 

that 41 percent of all the goods-producing jobs in America have been created in my District, and 

certainly a fifth of all private-sector jobs. 

September 21, 2010 38 of 151



 

 

 

Let me report to you what I’m hearing from my interlocutors, and, Mr. Chairman, you 

have that list of who they are, in addition to the dozens of small business operators I talk to.  I 

want to complement some of the points made by President Pianalto.  My interlocutors report a 

slight improvement in the tone change from the last pre-FOMC soundings, with the emphasis 

being on “slight.”  I’m going to mention some names of corporations—some of this is inside 

information.  We can talk about expunging it from the record, but I think it’s important just to 

inform the views.  One careful observer, who is the CEO of Wal-Mart, feels that, and I quote, 

“Consumers are becoming more resilient, or maybe just more determined to get through this.”  

And this is confirmed by two of the middle-income quartile retailers that I talked to in “deep 

dive,” J.C. Penney and Michaels.  Consumers are opening up their pocketbooks slightly further 

but remain extremely sensitive to prices.  There is a marginally greater willingness to buy 

nonessential items, but only when they’re priced aggressively.  And I will add that there was one 

odd exception, month to date in September—maybe because of my own coffee consumption—

Starbuck’s has experienced the biggest volume surge in history of the company—clearly a 

discretionary, if addictive, expenditure. 

To a person, my interlocutors report their companies have even better access to credit 

than reported before the last FOMC and enjoy abundant liquidity.  Texas Instruments’ CFO said 

that the request for relaxation of payment terms by their customers has completely disappeared.  

I hear no reports of lagging receivables from small or large companies.  I actually asked Wal-

Mart specifically if it heard any comments or concerns about access to capital from any of its 

suppliers, which is a substantial supplier base, and it could think of only one—a very small 

company that developed a product to clean up garbage and garage oil spills.  And once Wal-Mart 

placed an order with it, every community bank in their district was crawling all over them to lend 

September 21, 2010 39 of 151



 

 

 

them money.  Among those that are creditworthy, I sense an even greater propensity for hoarding 

liquidity.  Example:  Dell said that it only has $15 billion on its balance sheet that it doesn’t see 

using in the foreseeable future.  Dell recently tapped the markets for another $1 billion “just 

because it’s so cheap.”  The last time I looked, its market capitalization, by the way, was only 

$24 billion.  Balance sheets are being actively re-leveraged at lower costs.  Cash as a percentage 

of market capitalization is at an all-time high.  Aggregate asset ratios are at a seven-decade high, 

and cash flow from current production is 12 percent above total investment expenditures 

economy wide. 

And yet, as all of us have pointed out, few are willing to commit to expanding U.S. 

payrolls, and all continue to cite nonmonetary factors—that is, fiscal, regulatory, etc., and, for 

those with a global reach in my sample, better opportunities for ROI elsewhere.  To quote one 

CEO and to take off on Sandy’s comment, “Part of it is uncertainty: We just don’t know what the 

new regs are going to cost, what the new rules will be.  Part of it is certainty:  We know that 

taxes are eventually going to have to increase to get us out of the fiscal hole that the Congress 

has dug us into.” 

I want to give you one specific example, which I thought was eye-opening.  Going back 

to the largest purchaser of food products in the United States, the firm offered to buy an entire 

apple crop in Washington.  I don’t know if you know about the economics of apples—there’s no 

reason for you to know it.  But 25 percent of any apple crop is not usable in terms of selling 

apples.  You make concentrate out of it.  Even though this company offered a specific contract 

over a multiyear period to this large producer, it would have required building another 

processing factory.  And despite the guaranteed contract and the attractive pricing of the 

purchase, it came back declining to build a new factory, because it couldn’t calculate the cost of 

September 21, 2010 40 of 151



 

 

 

workers and the eventual tax load that might be imposed upon the company, and it turned it 

down.  And guess where the order went?  To Chinese apple producers to produce the 

concentrate. 

All of my interlocutors are focused laser-like on enhancing productivity.  For example, 

AT&T just held its three-year budgeting meeting last Tuesday.  They agreed to budget all capital 

expenditures to zero top-line growth over the time horizon, not because they expect zero growth, 

but because, in the words of their CEO, they want to force-drive productivity.  An entirely 

different type of company, 7-Eleven, reported doing the same, by the way, almost verbatim.  

Indeed, almost all my interlocutors are budgeting similarly to, quote, “get less people to wear 

more hats.”  Few assign significant probability to a double dip. 

Among the retailers, most expect growth of top-line revenue to be positive but subpar in 

the second half, and then pick up through 2011, though all of my retailers, whether they’re in the 

bottom quartile or in the middle two quartiles have experienced a surprising and inexplicable 

pickup in activity following back-to-school sales beyond what they were expecting. 

In all but the bottom-income quartile, their same-store top-line increases year-to-date 

through Friday of last week are pretty much evenly divided between price increases and 

transactions volumes.  This is confirmed by Mastercard’s internal data, and its CEO’s 

interpretation confirming the general tone of the reports from my retail sources.  Having been 

caught short in last year’s holiday season, retailers have cautiously increased inventories but are 

very nervous about it.  As the CEO of Burlington Northern Santa Fe said, “Either the supply 

chain is a leading indicator of a better retail quarter in the fourth quarter, or some very big 

disappointments are in the works.” 

September 21, 2010 41 of 151



 

 

 

On the price front, retailers are reporting rising input prices from imported goods 

manufactured in China and from high transocean shipping costs.  Milk and grain prices are 

increasing.  However, as we might expect, they report insufficient, in their words, “pricing 

power” and are worried about having their margins squeezed, which provides them another 

incentive to maintain share prices by using their cash hoards not to hire new people but to buy in 

new shares or to increase dividends. 

Deflation was not mentioned by a single interlocutor.  Monetary policy, even among the 

most erudite, is simply not on the radar screens of nonfinancial businesses that I talked to, as 

capital is nominally cheap and abundant.  Fiscal and regulatory rules issues remain the stuff of 

concern in planning for payroll and domestic cap-ex expansion and are thwarting the 

transmission mechanism of hiring more workers. 

So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, that’s what I am hearing from my private-sector 

interlocutors.  I think the concern I have is the transmission mechanism, and I will make some 

comments on the efficacy of our policy when we go to the policy round.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The commentary from my directors this 

month was quite striking.  If we tally up the individual anecdotes, you find more positives than 

negative reports, and the overall picture you get if you just look at the anecdotes is one of modest 

improvement in economic conditions.  Our directors are speaking with increasing concern and 

frustration.  I’d call it bordering on anger about the restraining effects on business sentiment of 

uncertainty about potentially adverse government policy changes.  In addition to the usual 

culprits—health care, environment, and tax policies—this month we heard for the first time 

September 21, 2010 42 of 151



 

 

 

worries about forthcoming cuts in defense spending, a particularly important sector in our 

District.  Now, we’ve been hearing these complaints for months, and there’s been a lot of public 

commentary about them.  At first, the logical thing is to think of fear mongering and perhaps 

political agendas at work, but they’re widespread and persistent, and that’s what strikes me. 

The national economic news since the last meeting has also been mixed.  While 

uniformly positive would have been much better than mixed, I read the current reports as 

alleviating fears of a double dip and confirming the August outlook for generally sluggish 

growth going forward.  As a result, I find myself very comfortable with the Tealbook’s forecast 

of output growth—a bit slow for the remainder of the year but rising steadily to just above 

4 percent by the end of next year.  The data so far this year have been consistent with this 

outlook for sluggish economic growth.  Consumer spending has been rising pretty steadily at an 

annual rate of about a 2 percent.  It is likely to continue to expand at that pace. 

Although the labor market is still weak, private payrolls are gradually expanding, 

averaging an additional 95,000 jobs per month since the beginning of the year.  Business 

investment in equipment and software has been expanding briskly as well, and, while it might 

not contribute as much to economic growth going forward, I think the fundamentals look pretty 

good there. 

Inflation remains pretty steady at 1.5 percent overall on a year-over-year basis.  That lines 

up with my own inflation objective.  Various measures of inflation expectations remain about 

where they were at the last meeting.  I don’t see any evidence of a sustained disinflation.  So 

with regard to our inflation mandate, I think we’re doing just fine. 

All in all, my take on the real economy and inflation and where they’re going is basically 

the same as it was at the last meeting.  Of course, the strength of the recovery does remain the 

September 21, 2010 43 of 151



 

 

 

issue.  When you compare the first four quarters of this recovery to the first four quarters 

following the two deep postwar U.S. recessions—’74 and ’81–’82—you see that real GDP 

growth falls short this time by about 3 percentage points.  If you look at the components, you’ll 

find the shortfall is attributable to slower growth this time in consumption and residential 

investment.  The latter is perfectly understandable, given the overbuilding of the last two 

decades, and I don’t think we should be looking for housing to make any significant 

contributions to economic growth in the next few years, even if interest rates were noticeably 

lower.  So I think our aspirations should be calibrated to not expecting recovery in housing. 

Slower consumer spending growth in this recovery can be attributed in part to the fact 

that the saving rate hasn’t fallen this time the way it did in other recoveries, following deep 

contractions.  Elevated saving seems driven by debt reduction and limited confidence in the 

strength of income growth rather than by high interest rates, I think.  So it seems unlikely to me 

that lower Treasury yields would do much to discourage saving or slow the rate at which 

consumers are paying down debt. 

Another factor dampening consumption growth is the moderate pace of employment 

growth.  A significant pickup in consumption from its current modest pace, thus, would seem to 

require a pickup in new hiring.  As I indicated in my regional comments, though, I’ve been 

struck by the widespread reports of firms being unwilling to commit to new hiring or new 

investments until there’s a bit more clarity about some of the policies that could affect them in 

the future.  Eventually this current heightened level of uncertainty will dissipate, obviously, and I 

think at that point hiring will expand more rapidly.  But until then I think economic growth is 

going to be limited by forces that are largely beyond our ability to offset.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

September 21, 2010 44 of 151



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last spring this Committee was hardly 

optimistic about the pace of recovery.  The central tendency of our April projections, for 

example, showed a persistent failure to achieve anything close to our dual mandate.  The 

anticipated shortfalls vis-à-vis our employment and inflation objectives both widened in the June 

projections.  Unfortunately, the disappointing news this summer—lackluster employment, 

deteriorating sentiment, anemic retail sales, decelerating investment, and further price 

disinflation—has pushed the attainment of our policy objectives off even further into the future.  

The long slog we had been expecting in the spring now looks even longer and more painful. 

Furthermore, I think it’s clear that a shortfall in aggregate demand is the main culprit 

behind this bleak outlook.  We’re recovering from the worst global and economic financial 

meltdown since the Great Depression.  Households, businesses, and banks continue to struggle 

under debt burdens.  So the adverse headwinds holding back aggregate demand remain fierce. 

Of course, a negative shock to aggregate supply is also partly to blame, and we could 

improve our failing grade on our full employment mandate by grading on a curve, that is, by 

substantially raising the NAIRU.  President Kocherlakota noted last time that recent estimates of 

the Beveridge curve relating unemployment to job openings showed an outward shift relative to 

the 2000s, suggesting that the labor market is experiencing significant disruptions.  The outward 

shift seems undeniable, but I want to argue that, even so, it’s inappropriate to gauge changes in 

the NAIRU from Beveridge curve shifts alone.  In the first place, the Beveridge curve is only one 

relationship involved in determining equilibrium unemployment.  Mathematically, after all, it’s 

one equation and two variables, unemployment and vacancies.  Thus, you also need to 

understand the movement of vacancies to pin down where you are on the Beveridge curve.  Most 

September 21, 2010 45 of 151



 

 

 

models of frictional unemployment implicitly or explicitly have a second upward-sloping job-

creation relationship.  Then horizontal shifts in the Beveridge curve typically result in less than a 

one-for-one increase in the NAIRU.  Consistent with the theory, the Beveridge curve has 

empirically shifted in and out over history by far more than we think the NAIRU has moved.  

Indeed, the outward shift in recent quarters is well within the historical range of previous 

business cycle recoveries. 

A second point to emphasize is that shifts in the Beveridge curve may result from either 

structural or transitory factors.  Structural shifts could reflect greater mismatch. But the curve 

would also be expected to shift out if the pace of layoffs rises, as it did when the economy 

entered a tailspin.  A shift in the Beveridge curve for this reason would likely prove transitory or 

cyclical. 

Ultimately, then, it’s an empirical task to figure out how much of the recent movements 

in the Beveridge curve reflect cyclical factors related to the weak economy and weak aggregate 

demand and how much reflects more permanent changes affecting the NAIRU.  My staff has 

examined this issue using a variety of approaches.  These include analyzing data on vacancies 

and job-finding rates, asking all of our directors during the intermeeting period about their ability 

to find qualified workers, and estimating time-varying Phillips curve models.  Taking all of these 

analyses together, we arrive at a medium-term NAIRU of 5.75 percent, identical to the Tealbook.  

My staff also estimates that the extended unemployment insurance programs add about three-

quarters of a percentage point more, bringing the current effective NAIRU to about 6.5 percent.  

Thus, our best estimate is that there is about 3 percentage points of excess unemployment, 

considerably more than at this stage of the recoveries in 1975 and 1983, for example.  

September 21, 2010 46 of 151



 

 

 

Furthermore, over the next few years, as extended UI programs expire and mismatch is reduced, 

the NAIRU falls.  So there will be considerable slack remaining for years. 

My contacts confirm the conclusion that mismatch is a problem only for small, 

specialized jobs, and, without exception, they report that it is now easier to identify applicants for 

such specialized skilled jobs than before the recession.  If anything, they see an abundance of 

qualified workers, not a shortage.  As one contact put it, “Sure, we see mismatch.  We see many 

more applicants now who are overqualified relative to job requirements.”  Indeed, with an 

abundance of qualified applicants and a lack of sales, firms may well see some option value in 

holding vacancies open longer as they search for the really exceptional candidate. 

Of course, this considerable resource slack is also holding down wages and prices.  My 

contacts expect to raise nominal wages modestly, at best, and they don’t think they can raise their 

prices much, if at all.  Recently, they seem increasingly worried about deflation, not about high 

inflation.  I tried to reassure my contacts that deflation is unlikely.  That said, I’m not reassured 

by the Tealbook’s inflation confidence intervals, which imply as much as one chance in three 

that core inflation will be less than 0.5 percent in 2012, and work by my staff, which finds that 

yields on nominal and inflation-protected Treasuries price in about one chance in six that 

cumulative CPI inflation over the next three years will be negative.  No matter how you look at 

it, the probability distribution of future inflation outcomes is too low.  In sum, there is enormous 

resource slack, which I expect will persist for years, and inflation is running below desired 

levels. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The conditions in the Sixth District are 

consistent with the national picture of a slowdown in the middle of the year.  Generally speaking, 

September 21, 2010 47 of 151



 

 

 

activity in the District has been moving laterally, and there is a bit more pessimism, or at least 

backpedaling from earlier optimism, regarding the medium-term business outlook. 

That said, recent reports have been uneven by industry.  Activity in surface transportation 

or trucking remains especially strong.  Business travel also remains very strong.  Retail remains 

soft, but varies by specialty and price positioning.  Most notably, sales of retail home 

improvement material have slowed sharply.  Because of the weakness in the housing sector, 

homeowners appear hesitant to invest in their houses—even in smaller projects—because it 

amounts to putting additional equity into their homes. 

For the most part, however, I do not sense that businesses are preparing for a significant 

deterioration in the economy.  Rather, they seem generally of the mindset that activity will 

remain marginally positive, but subdued, for some time.  Firms continue to position themselves 

for this lackluster future by cutting costs and streamlining operations.  As President Fisher and 

President Lacker pointed out, a common, indeed, almost universal, theme is that uncertainty 

about economic policy and the fiscal situation, in particular, is paralyzing employment and 

investment plans.  This has become a mantra in the business community, whether or not fully 

justified.  The great majority of our business contacts seem to be in a “wait and see” mode as 

regards domestic investment and hiring.  This suggests to me that the Committee should be 

careful to avoid policies or communications that might add to uncertainty. 

On this point, in our board meeting last week, we posed the following question to 

directors:  If uncertainty were lifted, but not one additional customer came through the door, 

would you hire or invest?  Most responded in the affirmative, citing taxes, regulations, and costs 

associated with recent legislation as factors holding them back. 

September 21, 2010 48 of 151



 

 

 

Finally, on the price front, I detect no price pressures to speak of in either direction.  No 

one reports much in the way of pricing power right now.  The anecdotal reports in my District 

have not changed in tone or intensity enough to cause me to alter my current assessment of the 

economy and forecast.  As in August, I continue to believe a recovery is proceeding, if at a very 

slow pace for the moment.  I have not concluded this is something other than a temporary 

phenomenon absent big surprises.  My forecast conforms reasonably closely to the Tealbook 

through 2011, though I think structural factors and labor markets in certain industries are more 

significant than the staff seems to have assumed in contributing to a slow recovery and 

preventing faster achievement of the Committee’s mandated objectives. 

Hinting at my position in the policy round, the incoming data, while certainly 

disappointing, along with the anecdotal evidence, have not been sufficiently downbeat to 

convince me yet that the economy is evolving on a direr path than the Tealbook base case of 

slow recovery, no double dip, and avoidance of deflation.  The economic policy historical 

moment strikes me as one of hoping for the best but appropriately preparing for the worst. 

In a standard upside versus downside balance of risk, I judge the risk to economic growth 

as being weighted mostly to the downside.  I would also judge the risk to the inflation outlook as 

being biased to the downside, particularly over the medium term.  Given the modest growth path 

we appear to be on and the uncertainties that confront households and businesses, it seems clear 

the recovery is fragile and the economy remains vulnerable to shocks.  And all of this suggests to 

me a posture of full alert to near-term developments that contradict and further shape one’s 

confidence in the base-case scenario.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

September 21, 2010 49 of 151



 

 

 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views have not changed from our last 

meeting, and I will try to be brief.  What I might do is give you a perspective on our region 

through some anecdotal information that I think is germane.  I’ll start by saying that, from 

anyone’s perspective, monetary policy is not on the sidelines.  Monetary policy is highly 

accommodative.  In talking with bankers in the region, from regional institutions down to the 

smaller ones, they’re saying, “We have more deposits than we can deploy.  Liquidity is not an 

issue for us.”  One quipped to me that his largest nonperforming asset was his fed funds sold.  He 

can’t deploy this stuff.  From his point of view, our monetary policy is not the issue.   

This situation is showing up in other ways.  We’re seeing a lot of pickup in activity, as 

I’ve said before, in farmland.  Properties that were expected to go for maybe $4,000 an acre are 

clearing $6,000 and above.  Some that were in lower-quality areas that should be selling for as 

little as $1,000 an acre are selling for twice that.  The loans on that—and here’s where I get 

worried—are 80 percent of the value of the sale price.  You say to the lender, “Well, aren’t you 

worried about that?”  And he says, “Well, others are making the loan.  The credit system is 

active.” So we’re seeing a lot of lending activity out there that is looking to deploy money. 

The other thing—and we have verified this in some of the data—is that, as they look for 

yield, a lot of these banks are under pressure to go longer in their maturity structure, on their 

government securities.  If you look at the average length of maturity, it’s going out, so that 

they’re taking on more risk as they look for some form of yield going forward.  And I think it’s 

building its own unintended consequences in the long run, if this were to continue.  In talking 

with some of our regional companies, ones that are non-investment-grade, they’re finding 

financing plentiful, especially if they have a strong balance sheet and good audit.  So they’re not 

looking for financing. 

September 21, 2010 50 of 151



 

 

 

One of the largest temp companies in our region, which is national in scope, says people 

are turning to temp help because of the uncertainty.  Its sales volume on temp help is up 

50 percent again since the first of the year—it was up 50 percent since the middle of last year, 

towards the end, and now it’s up again.  It could put more people to work, but the people who are 

on unemployment will not come off it for those more modest wages, and that’s impeding some 

of the sales that it would otherwise have. 

So when you look at these developments, our District is continuing to grow modestly.  It 

is not booming, it is not moving fast.  The strong areas are agriculture and energy, but around 

that the rest of it is steadily up and going forward. 

My outlook for the national economy is similar—steady, modest economic growth.  I 

think that’s really quite encouraging when you think of the amount of adjustments that are taking 

place in the economy—the deleveraging that had to occur and the risks to the outlook in terms of 

the uncertainties that have been discussed by others.  We are really on a fairly good path, and, in 

that context, monetary policy is highly accommodative in facilitating that process.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have talked to a number of 

bankers and businesspeople in our District since the last meeting.  These conversations have 

circled around the same basic point, and it echoes much of what President Hoenig was just 

referring to.  Many businesses have resources available for investment, and many banks have 

resources available for loans.  Businesses are choosing not to use these resources to hire or 

expand, and banks are choosing not to make loans.  When asked why, they say the level of risk 

associated with these new opportunities is too high to make them worthwhile.  Instead, they put a 

lot of those resources into financial investments.  In other words, they foresee the risk-adjusted 

September 21, 2010 51 of 151



 

 

 

returns on available 10-year business investments or bank loans to be smaller than the 1 percent 

return embedded in a 10-year TIPS bond.  If you think about a five-year horizon, it means that 

they find the risks of five-year investments to be so prohibitive that they would rather invest in a 

five-year TIPS bond that is paying 25 basis points. 

I think this is the fundamental question in the recovery.  What is the source of the 

perceived risk?  And I agree—President Fisher has emphasized this, and many of you have 

mentioned this, as well—that some of this risk is attributable to uncertainties about the future tax 

and regulatory environment.  But I also believe that more must be going on.  In my view, I think 

households and firms are right to be uncertain about the likely performance of the U.S. economy 

over the next five to ten years.  For example, the employment-to-population ratio has fallen to 

58.5 percent, after being 62.7 percent in late 2007.  Before this recession, it had not been this low 

since late 1983.  This change is mirrored in what is usually a more acyclical variable—labor 

force participation—which has also reached a 25-year low. 

In my view, there’s a lot of uncertainty about the extent to which these changes in the 

labor market are likely to reverse over the next five years.  The issue is that these changes are in 

many ways simply accelerations of existing trends.  The employment-to-population ratio peaked 

in 1999.  Labor force participation peaked in 2000.  The past decade, in some ways, can be seen 

as one of labor market retrenchment that has accelerated over the past three years.  With this 

perspective, why would we expect significant increases in employment population or labor force 

participation in the next three or four years? 

There are other reasons for concern in the labor market.  As I mentioned last time, over 

the past two years the Beveridge curve has shifted to the right by 3 percentage points, meaning 

that, for a given rate of job openings, unemployment is now 3 percentage points higher.  Will it 

September 21, 2010 52 of 151



 

 

 

shift back as the economy recovers?  Well, it’s far from clear.  The good news is that it’s hard to 

find any single microeconomic cause for this shift, and I can assure you that staff people in 

Minneapolis have been looking for one, which gives one hope that it is not some transient fluke. 

But macroeconomics leads one to be a little less sanguine.  In Minneapolis we looked at 

Beveridge curves in the 1970s, and one of the things you have to do there is to recognize that 

temporary layoffs were a significant part of 1970s unemployment and are essentially irrelevant 

in the current recession.  So we modified the historical curves by subtracting out the temporary 

layoffs.  Once we did that, we found there was about a 2 percentage point shift in the Beveridge 

curve during the 1974–1975 recession, and that shift persisted throughout the recovery. 

What is the impact of this shift for monetary policy?  President Yellen is exactly right—

you have to be thinking about the entire equilibrium structure of the labor market.  You really 

need a full model of labor demand, and you need to think about how monetary policy will impact 

that model of labor demand in a model in which you actually have unemployment.  These kinds 

of models are, at least by my reading of the literature, fairly scarce.  The Shimer model to which 

I referred in my speech last month would imply, unfortunately, a relatively high normal level of 

unemployment.  But again that model doesn’t have money in it.  So how do you think about the 

impact of monetary policy on unemployment in that context?  I’m not sure. 

I will just say that these issues leave me uncertain, and I think households and firms are 

right to be uncertain about the medium-term performance of the United States labor market.  In a 

similar vein, I think they’re right to be uncertain about inflation.  There are upside risks.  The 

fiscal situation in the United States might well lead one to worry about inflation over the next 

five to ten years.  Nonetheless, the Tealbook documents that the five-year inflation expectations 

embedded in TIPS bonds have been drifting downward.  There are at least two possible stories 

September 21, 2010 53 of 151



 

 

 

for this downward drift in expectations.  The first is conventional and may be due to expectations 

of increased resource slack.  The second is the one that President Bullard and I have been 

emphasizing recently.  This argues that if people expect that the nominal interest rate stays low 

for a long period of time, their expectations of inflation will drift downward as the real interest 

rate rises. 

Which story is right?  Well, we’d better get the right answer to this question, because if 

we guess wrong, it has the potential to lead us into many years of low or even negative inflation. 

How can we begin to resolve these uncertainties about labor markets and prices for 

households and firms?  I don’t think we can do so fully, but we can help by being part of the 

solution as opposed to being part of the problem, by providing more clarity about our own future 

choices.  At a minimum, we need to be clear about our preconditions for any future 

accommodation, the form that that accommodation will take, and, most importantly in my view, 

what we expect that accommodation to be likely to accomplish.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy continues to grow, but the pace 

of expansion is inadequate to meaningfully reduce the rolls of the unemployed at anything but a 

glacial pace.  With inflation significantly underrunning price stability, it takes quite a bit of 

fortitude to muster a cheery disposition and discuss this outlook in public. 

At our directors’ meeting last week, my staff had that task.  Our forecast had contours 

much like the Tealbook—weak economic growth in the second half of this year, but an 

inevitable pickup, with stronger growth rates of 3½ and 4½ percent in coming years.  As one 

director said, “If someone presented me with an industrial business plan that was premised on a 

rosy national outlook like this, I would throw him out of the room.”  All heads nodded in unison. 

September 21, 2010 54 of 151



 

 

 

I’m not saying that our captains of industry are right to be skeptical of such a growth 

path, but their pessimism represents a significant headwind.  Despite their gloomy view of the 

outlook, our business contacts do continue to report modest growth of their own businesses—not 

much different from last time—but they have no intention of doing any serious hiring.  At best, 

they are recalling some laid-off workers.  For example, Caterpillar laid off 16,000 U.S. workers 

during the recession.  Even though it reports robust sales since the start of the recovery, it has 

rehired only 3,000.  CDW, a discount computer retailer owned by a private equity firm, laid off 

200 workers during the recession.  Now its sales are at a higher rate than before the crisis, but it 

has hired back only 25 of these workers.  It seems a safe bet that small businesses are doing the 

same.  Businesses continue to fiercely defend their plans and point to substantial gains in 

productivity as vindication.  But much of this is due to aggressive cost-cutting rather than the 

introduction of new technologies.  In other words, they previously had substantial inefficiencies 

in place, and the recession pushed them to get back on the efficient production frontier.  Better 

late than never, but this hardly seems to bode well for further strong future productivity gains. 

I would like to finish up by talking about two important issues.  The first is about the way 

that extreme consumer and business risk aversion have put us in what can be described as a 

liquidity trap; the second is the extent to which so-called structural factors can be thought to 

explain our very high unemployment rate. 

On liquidity traps, as I have noted, businesses appear to be very cautious in their outlook.  

The same is true for households, which are displaying enormous degrees of risk aversion due to 

staggering employment risk, trillions of dollars of lost wealth, and debt levels that were chosen 

when fundamentals appeared better but are burdensome today.  Households have significantly 

raised their saving rates, even though retail interest rates are effectively zero.  Businesses are 

September 21, 2010 55 of 151



 

 

 

content to post hefty profits on the strength of unprecedented cost-cutting rather than growing the 

top line.  Very conservative attitudes reign.  Firms are sitting on their cash, and very few are 

planning to expand workforces. 

Although it is trivial to get business contacts to rail against the uncertainties generated by 

Washington, most that I’ve talked to can easily be coaxed into admitting that stronger demand 

conditions would quickly change their plans.  This is what is meant by a liquidity trap.  Even 

with short-term nominal rates at zero, the supply of savings exceeds the demand for investment.  

The real interest rate needs to be lower to adjust that.  The modern liquidity trap literature 

indicates that aggressive monetary accommodation that lifts inflation expectations and reduces 

real interest rates can stimulate current demand.  I think those are the policies we need to 

consider.  Indeed, in the absence of aggressive actions, the factors driving high risk aversion 

could well stifle a meaningful recovery, keep unemployment high, and reinforce disinflationary 

pressures. 

A second important issue is the extent to which today’s very high rate of unemployment 

merely reflects a substantially higher natural rate that cannot be ameliorated by monetary policy.  

There are several reasons why the natural rate of unemployment has likely risen over the last 

couple of years—for example, extra-long extended UI benefits, lower mobility due to 

homeowners who are under water, and eroded skills due to long spells of unemployment.  These 

factors all suggest at least a temporarily higher natural rate.  On the basis of the recent 

improvements in the job openings data, some have suggested that there is little that monetary 

policy can do about the current level of unemployment.  It is due to skills mismatch.  We have 

already discussed this today.  As noted in a recent Cleveland Fed piece, some of the apparent 

September 21, 2010 56 of 151



 

 

 

conflict between unemployment and vacancy data may just be timing.  We have seen such loops 

in the Beveridge curve before, and that goes to President Yellen’s comments as well. 

But even if you take the job openings data at face value, I don’t think they support the 

conclusion that the natural rate has risen to the vicinity of 9.6 percent.  A simple stable 

Beveridge curve based on a constant-returns Cobb-Douglas matching function—I guess this is 

the geeky stuff, right, Jim?—estimated on pre-crisis data, captures very well the unemployment-

vacancy relationship through the end of last year.  This is consistent with the increase in 

unemployment being primarily due to a cyclical fall in labor demand rather than an increase in 

mismatch or other structural factors.  One might interpret this year’s increase in vacancies 

without a corresponding improvement in unemployment as a shift in the Beveridge curve due to 

a drop in the efficiency parameter and the matching function, but that doesn’t mean we are 

anywhere near the new normal level of unemployment. 

Rather, making some plausible assumptions, my staff estimates that the typical level of 

unemployment associated with a Beveridge curve passing through recent data is likely to be 

about 7 percent.  They can get a little bit higher—I think that’s the University of Chicago 

influence that my staff has there.  This is a figure that incorporates the effect of the temporary UI 

extensions.  I think that’s high, and I’m not suggesting that 7 percent is a good estimate of the 

current natural rate.  As I said, there are reasons to discount some of the improvement in vacancy 

data.  And most other attempts to quantify the current level of the natural rate come out lower, 

like the Board staff’s recent adjustments.  But even if one takes the vacancy data at face value 

and accepts that the natural rate has risen to 7 percent, that still leaves a very large margin of 

slack relative to the unemployment rate.  Given this wide margin of slack, and the fact that we 

September 21, 2010 57 of 151



 

 

 

are substantially underrunning our inflation target, I think it’s important for us to consider what 

additional measures we can take to boost aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy’s forward 

momentum continues to be disappointing relative to both our objectives and forecast.  The boost 

to activity from inventory restocking is mostly over, but the apparent desire of households to 

deleverage further and significant constraints on credit availability remain in place. 

That said, in general, I don’t view the incoming data since the last meeting as changing 

the picture very much.  Earlier in the intermeeting period, the data were very weak, especially 

related to housing, but more recently the activity has been stronger, and this has been mimicked 

by financial markets.  First we had a pretty significant tightening of financial conditions.  Then 

there has been a return of the risk appetite so that financial conditions are broadly unchanged 

since the last meeting.  I do think, though, that the sensitivity of markets to the economic outlook 

is important, because it implies that financial markets are likely to evolve in a way that will 

reinforce the direction of activity either up or down.  So that increases the risk to the outlook. 

In terms of the anecdotal evidence from our business contacts, they follow very similar 

themes.  First, businesspeople are very upset about the Administration, probably as angry as I’ve 

ever seen them.  This reflects both the perception that they’re being demonized and policy 

uncertainty on a wide variety of subjects, such as health care and financial reform.  Second, the 

businesspeople indicate that they will be very quick to batten down the hatches if the economy 

appears to be softening significantly, but, despite this, they indicate that economic conditions are 

improving.  Thus, their complaints do not seem to be matched by their actions.  My view is that 

this frustrating period, in which the recovery is weaker than we would desire, is likely to 

September 21, 2010 58 of 151



 

 

 

continue for a while longer, but a double dip still appears unlikely.  As time passes, the financial 

system’s health should continue to improve, leading to better credit availability. The 

deleveraging of the household sector continues, so this process is probably now closer to the end 

than the beginning.  Finally, it’s hard to have a double dip when the cyclically sensitive sectors, 

such as housing and consumer durables, are already very depressed, monetary and fiscal policy is 

accommodative, and the rest of the world is still growing at a decent pace. 

Despite that, I don’t think we should take too much comfort from this.  It is difficult to 

judge the risk, because we don’t have very much experience with this type of business cycle. 

And, on the other side, every time the unemployment rate has risen by 0.3 percentage points or 

more on a three-month moving-average basis, we’ve actually had a downturn.  So my point is 

that it wouldn’t take a huge shock to set the dynamics in motion that could actually lead to a 

recession. 

It’s difficult to be confident about when a stronger self-sustaining recovery will take hold.  

I expect that when it finally arrives, it will arrive quickly, but until then, we remain in a very 

vulnerable position.  The persistence of such a sluggish economic expansion creates the real risk 

of further disinflation, and this is an outcome to be feared, because further disinflation, of course, 

would raise the real interest rate and, thereby, reduce the degree of monetary policy 

accommodation at the lower bound.  Put simply, we’re not that far from outright deflation, and 

inflation expectations appear to have become less well anchored to the downside since the last 

meeting.  Thus, despite the fact that I believe the risks of a double dip are low, I continue to 

believe that we should give strong consideration to providing additional accommodation.  When 

combined with how far away we are from our twin mandate, the risk of deflation argues for 

doing more. 

September 21, 2010 59 of 151



 

 

 

What types of shocks could push the economy downward?  Well, one risk certainly 

remains Europe.  While economic growth in the second quarter was generally stronger than 

expected, it may prove transient.  Moreover, there is a risk of further market turbulence there.  

Already we have seen a substantial widening of sovereign debt spreads in Ireland because of 

concerns about the cost of recapitalizing the banking system.  Another risk here remains the U.S. 

municipal sector.  Although debt instruments typically get the first call on municipal cash flows, 

there is a risk that voters will start to balk and demand that services be maintained over debt 

service.  Further defaults, such as what took place recently in Harrisburg, could potentially 

destabilize the municipal bond market, which is mainly supported by retail investors. 

In terms of the Basel process in which we recently obtained agreement on capital 

standards, I think the early reading is encouraging.  Investors appear to be confident about the 

ability of large banks to meet the standards as they gradually come into force, mainly through 

retained earnings.  There’s little evidence that the banks are being forced to pull forward meeting 

the requirements, which do not become fully effective until the beginning of 2019.  But there still 

remains some risk.  First, I think market participants don’t fully understand how much risk- 

weighted assets for some banks have actually increased.  This is especially true of banks with 

large trading operations.  So market participants are probably understating these banks’ capital 

needs.  Also, there remains a risk that, if the standards were pulled forward significantly so that 

banks could somehow pay dividends more quickly, the standards could still lead to further 

deleveraging and credit constraint.  Finally, I think that it’s important that there are also going to 

be adjustments from the imposition of Dodd–Frank, and some of those changes may have 

consequences that we do not fully appreciate. Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

September 21, 2010 60 of 151



 

 

 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me begin where Dave Stockton ended, 

which is that we shouldn’t be too surprised by the broad arc of the economy.  The panic and the 

subsequent financial crisis are having and have had persistent effects, effects that, even at the 

time they were occurring, we were going to have a hard time gauging.  In addition, 

macroeconomic policies—some mix of trade, regulatory, and fiscal policies—have not been 

growth-friendly going back a few years.  So we are bearing the consequences of these two 

fundamental factors. 

Demand has certainly been affected by these factors, and there have been a series of 

attempts over the last few years to plug the hole from demand.  But perhaps more consequential, 

in my view, is the harm that’s been done to aggregate supply.  NAIRU has, in fact, moved up 

more, I suspect, than the staff has taken on board, but I certainly share those initial estimates.  

Potential GDP, I think, has most likely fallen, and the path to get to these new targets is likely to 

be quite slow and painful. 

Incoming data continue to be mixed, with real-time indicators, ex housing, surprising to 

the upside in the last few weeks and surprising to the downside in the period before that.  My 

sense is that the very near-term data will continue to be a bit better than staff expectations, but 

that doesn’t fundamentally change my view of the economic outlook in the medium term.  My 

own second-half forecast comes close to, perhaps a bit shy of the Tealbook, with improvement in 

2011 and 2012 also at a slower pace. 

Still, as Bill Dudley just described, I think the prospects of a double dip are quite 

unlikely.  We would need a significant adverse shock, but we should be careful what we’re 

wishing for.  There’s still a lot of dry tinder out there, and I’m thinking in particular about the 

September 21, 2010 61 of 151



 

 

 

risks that are still paramount in the money market mutual fund industry and risks that Europe’s 

problems could resurface. 

I don’t fully subscribe to the recent literature on economic crises, particularly the 

implication that we are inevitably stuck in a low-growth, high-unemployment environment.  This 

doesn’t strike me as inevitable.  It’s a consequence of policy choices, of which monetary policy 

may be, in fact, the least consequential. 

On the inflation front, we’re witnessing cyclical disinflation at about a level that we 

would expect and that’s broadly consistent with model-based outcomes.  I still think deflation 

risks are not significant nor should they weigh importantly on our policy judgments in the next 

round. 

At the same time, I would say it’s not obvious to me that the extra half a point or point of 

inflation and corresponding changes to nominal GDP would have a materially positive impact on 

the real economy.  There’s been some discussion about inflation expectations and what signal we 

should be taking from changes in them, particularly in the TIPS market.  I would add an 

additional dose of caution in trying to divine too much from the changes in the five-year, five-

year forward and associated measures.  It’s not obvious to me that marginal investors understand 

what the Fed’s preferences are for TIPS securities relative to nominal Treasuries.  And unless 

and until we communicate that, I take the indications from these measures with a bigger grain of 

salt than usual. 

Let me turn finally to financial market developments.  I think both Brian and Bill have 

talked about the sensitivity of financial markets to incoming data.  You know, never have such 

little changes in data done so much to change asset values to benefit so few.  High-frequency 

indicators have certainly turned up in the last few weeks.  Industrial commodity prices are up.  

September 21, 2010 62 of 151



 

 

 

Equity prices are up.  Credit spreads continue to be narrow, and, as Brian described, corporate 

issuance continues to be impressive. 

Having said all that, I still don’t think that we have found some new market equilibrium 

for these financial prices.  We still are not in a place where financial market prices are durable 

and we can count on them—and that’s a comment not just on U.S. markets, but on markets 

globally.  I think the consequence of that is important to our policy discussions in the next round.  

The critical question is whether these markets are increasingly integrated or whether these 

markets are, indeed, separate.  Markets appear to be moving back, albeit slowly, to a state in 

which we have a better sense of what they are telling us; that is, markets that can be more readily 

arbitraged between one another.  However, the Fed’s balance sheet strategy relies in part on the 

presumption that different financial assets are imperfect substitutes in investors’ portfolios.  If 

this financial repair process continues, if markets do become more integrated, if the 

improvements do turn out to be more durable, we might find that the salient presumption is less 

true, having some real consequence for our decision on further asset purchases.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke.  

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The trends in banking continue along the same 

lines that I’ve reported before:  delinquencies, nonperformers, and charge-offs remain elevated 

but, with the exception of commercial real estate, are improving.  Within commercial real estate, 

construction and land development loans continue to deteriorate as borrowers run out of cash or 

simply give up.  Loans for income-producing commercial properties and owner-occupied 

properties seem to be bumping along a rocky bottom, but losses are still growing. 

September 21, 2010 63 of 151



 

 

 

All banks are actively seeking loans, but their efforts are directed primarily at taking 

market share from other banks rather than adjusting standards to widen the pool of prospective 

borrowers.  Interestingly, the large banks say that they’re taking market share from the smaller 

banks because weakened condition doesn’t allow them to keep lending.  The small banks say 

they’re taking market share from the large banks with pullback from products or geographies.  

Uncertainty is high among bankers, their regulators, and their customers.  So everyone is willing 

to make decisions based only on what they can see. 

Regulators classify loans that don’t have a documented repayment source.  Loans are 

downgraded in response to potential trouble, but upgraded only after demonstrated performance 

improvement.  Bankers, in response, are making loans only when they are supported by current 

cash flow or collateral.  This makes loans for expansion or to cover cash flow shortfalls hard to 

get, and borrowers are only willing to hire or expand to meet sales that they can see.  I heard the 

same stories others heard about uncertainty about the economy, taxes, regulation, and health care 

costs, but I agree with President Evans that they could get over all these concerns if sales were 

just strong enough. 

It is true the consumers are steadily deleveraging, but a fair amount of the deleveraging is 

involuntary rather than voluntary.  Signs of voluntary deleveraging show up in higher payment 

rates on credit cards and a high volume of mortgage refinancing that involves a reduction in the 

term or the principal balance.  One banker reported that, for the first time in his experience, cash-

in refinances were more prevalent than cash-out refinances.  Involuntary deleveraging can be 

found in charge-offs, foreclosures, repossessions, higher bankruptcies, and continued credit-line 

reductions. 

September 21, 2010 64 of 151



 

 

 

The rate of decline in overall bank lending is slowing as C&I lending and nonrevolving 

consumer credit balances stabilize.  While overall commercial real estate loans continue to 

contract, the 2.3 percent annualized decline in the nonfarm, nonresidential category for the 

second quarter in 2010 is actually the first noticeable decline in loans on existing properties.  All 

of the decline so far has come in construction and land development, with residential 

construction falling at an annual rate of 60 percent in the second quarter, following declines at an 

annual rate of 40 percent in the first quarter and 37 percent for all of 2009.  Similarly, 

commercial construction loans fell at 23 to 26 percent rates in 2010 after falling 17 percent in 

2009, which leads me to my own area of uncertainty, namely, the forecast for residential 

construction. 

Despite all efforts to mitigate foreclosure, there are still five million mortgages more than 

90 days past due, significantly more than the four million single-family units currently listed for 

sale.  There are an estimated 11 million underwater borrowers, and about a million more vacant 

houses than the 2000–2007 average.  At the same time, mortgage servicers report that acceptance 

rates for modification short sales and even principal reductions have plummeted and attendance 

at modification events has fallen off sharply.  The foreclosure process has become so protracted 

that it’s hard to judge what any level of foreclosures actually means, but it seems reasonable to 

project that involuntary dispossessions in bank sales of property are likely to climb through the 

fall and into most of 2011. 

With construction lending falling sharply, increases in existing-home inventory on the 

horizon, and the price declines that would likely result from higher levels of distress sales, it 

seems perfectly plausible to me that residential investment pickup could be postponed well into 

2012 or beyond.  I’ve noticed that a number of the staff’s write-downs to the forecast over the 

September 21, 2010 65 of 151



 

 

 

past year have come from pushing out the recovery in housing starts.  So if residential 

investment doesn’t materialize in 2011, it looks to me as if that would wipe out much of the 

projected improvement in GDP.  Housing may be a smaller part of the overall economy, but it’s 

still a substantial part of the improvement in our forecast.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With the dual attraction of doughnuts and 

an LSAP discussion beckoning [laughter], I’m going to try to truncate my remarks a bit.  So I’ll 

begin with a few summary points.  First, nothing that has happened in the intermeeting period 

has changed my view that we can expect continued lackluster economic growth in the face of 

ongoing balance sheet repairs, business model adjustments, and shaky business and consumer 

confidence.  I don’t regard this as good news. 

Second, nothing that has happened in the intermeeting period has changed my view that 

the only open question is how much the economy will underperform for the foreseeable future.  

Existing upside risks could push us to moderately underperforming status rather than to anything 

like robust economic growth. 

Third, I had prepared some remarks on both structural unemployment and the potential 

effects of regulatory and tax uncertainty on hiring.  With respect to the former, maybe I could 

just incorporate by reference everything that President Yellen and President Evans earlier said.  I 

congratulate them for the careful and thorough analysis they brought to bear on a question on 

which people have a tendency, I think, sometimes to leap to conclusions based on selected data 

or anecdotes.  With respect to the claim that regulatory and tax uncertainty are the major culprits 

inhibiting hiring, this seems to be based principally on complaints voiced by business executives 

themselves.  The well-known social science skepticism of self-reporting of attitudes and 

September 21, 2010 66 of 151



 

 

 

intentions is fully applicable here.  The reason people give for an action or omission is often not 

borne out by third-party observation. 

A little perspective can help, and that perspective is nicely provided by the National 

Federation of Independent Business survey to which Eric alluded earlier in the context of hard-

to-fill jobs.  As always, the latest monthly survey of small business economic trends by the NFIB 

includes the answers of its members to the question “What is the single most important problem 

your business faces.”  And, perhaps more tellingly, the survey contains graphs of the responses 

over the quarter century of the monthly survey.  What does it tell us?  Not surprisingly, lots of 

businesses always complain about taxes, and they always complain about regulatory policy.  

Throughout this period, the percentage of smaller businesses saying that taxes are their biggest 

problem has always been between 15 and 30 percent.  In the August survey, the number was 

21 percent.  Similarly, over the life of the survey the number of businesses reporting regulation 

as their biggest problem has almost always been between 10 and 25 percent.  In the latest survey, 

it stood at 15.  Interestingly, the high-water mark for complaints about both taxes and regulation 

was during the Clinton Administration when, as you recall, jobs were being created in 

unprecedented numbers and the unemployment rate dropped below 5 percent. 

In contrast, until the last few years, sales had never been identified as the biggest problem 

by more than about 18 percent of the respondents.  In the past few years, the number has been 

above 30 percent, where it remains today.  I don’t place enormous stock in any of these numbers 

in any absolute sense, but they do remind us that lots of businesspeople always have this view of 

regulation and of taxes.  They don’t, however, always complain about poor sales, which they’re 

doing in great numbers today.  The absence of actual and expected demand is surely not the only 

factor inhibiting investment and hiring, but such careful and measured empirical work as has 

September 21, 2010 67 of 151



 

 

 

been possible thus far suggests strongly that it has been the most important factor, and, 

regrettably, there is no indication that it will fade any time soon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thanks both for very good contributions and 

for very efficient contributions.  Why don’t we take about a 20 minute break?  We’ll continue 

from there. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence?  Again, thank you for 

very useful insights.  The go-round today was a little more abstract and academic, and I found it 

pretty hard to summarize.  I’ve got all of these footnotes now.  [Laughter]  Let me try to 

summarize what I heard, and then I would like to weigh in a little bit, although a lot of what I 

wanted to say has been said in some context or another. 

Economic growth has slowed moderately further, indicating some additional loss of 

momentum over the summer.  At this pace of growth, progress in reducing the unemployment 

rate is likely to be quite slow.  A range of factors, including economic and policy uncertainty, 

risk aversion, low levels of confidence, and the weak financial conditions of some households 

and firms, continue to be drags on economic growth.  Recoveries after financial crises often tend 

to be quite slow.  During this weak phase, the economy may be more susceptible to shocks, 

including financial shocks.  However, despite all that, the economy is still expanding, with 

moderate increases in consumer spending and modest job creation.  The recovery is expected to 

continue into 2011, accelerating thereafter.  A double dip is a possibility, but most do not 

consider it likely.  Inflation is expected to remain low, reflecting inflation expectations that are 

stable to down and continuing economic slack. 

September 21, 2010 68 of 151



 

 

 

Retail sales were a little stronger than expected recently and are generally seen as mixed, 

although shoppers remain very price-sensitive.  Retailers are increasing inventories for the 

Christmas season.  Households are improving their balance sheets by saving, paying down debt, 

refinancing, and in some cases defaulting. 

The labor market remains weak, having started from a deep hole.  Employment in many 

sectors has fallen significantly.  Firms have increased temporary hiring, but net permanent hires 

remain limited.  Some companies prefer to hire abroad.  Long-term unemployment, along with 

structural factors, such as skills mismatch and labor force participation, as well as extended UI, 

may account for some of the increase in unemployment, but how much is due to these factors 

and how much is due to final demand is difficult to assess.  Firms are generally not finding it 

difficult to find workers with specialized skills.  Wage gains remain very limited. 

Housing has continued to be very weak, in part because of the end of the housing tax 

credit.  Government programs have had only a limited impact on the rate of foreclosures.  

Foreclosures are adding to supply, putting downward pressure on prices and construction. 

Financial conditions have been mixed, generally improving, but responding sensitively to 

economic news.  Banks have been hurt somewhat by worse earnings, concerns about financial 

regulation, weak loan demand, and problems with the economy.  However, credit problems have 

mostly peaked, except in CRE, and banks are looking for qualified borrowers.  There’s 

confidence that banks can meet new capital standards.  In the nonfinancial sector, credit 

conditions are good for larger firms, and cash holdings remain plentiful.  Uncertainty about the 

economy and policy remain important for investment and hiring, although there’s always the 

question of whether firms’ self-reported concerns can be taken at face value.  Final demand is 

certainly an issue for many firms.  Firms with Asian connections are doing well.  As usual, some 

September 21, 2010 69 of 151



 

 

 

sectors are stronger, including agriculture, business travel, and shipping.  Small business 

confidence has been weak, and concerns about both final demand and access to credit for these 

firms continue. 

Inflation remains low, with measures of underlying inflation having fallen since the start 

of the recession.  Analysis of components suggests that disinflation may be abating.  Pricing 

power is perceived as very limited by most firms, although price pressures on some commodities 

and imported goods may be rising.  Inflation expectations seem reasonably stable, though TIPs 

breakevens have fallen over the year, and the far-forward term structure of breakevens is quite 

low.  Deflation risks are still considered low but should not be ignored. 

Monetary policy is quite accommodative, and policy must take into account the costs and 

benefits of further actions.  Policy cannot address all the real-side issues that we see, in part 

because of damage to the transmission mechanism.  On the other hand, the Committee is far 

from meeting its mandated objectives.  It’s missing both in the same direction, and risks may be 

asymmetric, as a liquidity or deflation trap is a possible risk.  We look forward to further 

discussion about the appropriate framework for communicating and executing policy.   

That was my attempt, but there were a lot of subtleties that I’m sure I missed.  Any 

comments?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did you say the transmission mechanism was damaged? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I heard that around the table, yes. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I mean, I didn’t hear those exact words.  What are you trying to 

describe there? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Someone commented that the transmission mechanism 

might not be as effective as it had been in the past. 

September 21, 2010 70 of 151



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Somebody acknowledge saying it? 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, I did. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.  There you go.  [Laughter]  I can always 

count on President Fisher to make a statement. 

MR. LACKER.  I’ll talk later. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you for listening, President Lacker.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, let me try to add a little bit.  As I said, a lot of 

what I would say otherwise has already been very well expressed. 

I think it’s important to note that we’ve had significant markdowns in the outlook since 

April.  Just using the Greenbook as a baseline, in April we expected about 3.5 to 3.7 percent 

GDP growth for 2010 and 4.4 percent for 2011.  Today it’s closer to 2 percent for 2010 and 

3.3 percent for 2011.  So this is very significant.  I think even more significant is the implication 

of this markdown for the path of unemployment.  In April, we said that the Greenbook predicted 

that the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter would be 9.3 percent, and in the fourth quarter 

of 2011 it would be 8.2 percent.  Those numbers are now 9.7 and 9.1.  In other words, we are 

approaching a pace of economic growth at which unemployment will no longer be improving.  

We’re coming very close to that singularity, if you will. 

I also want to point out that a lot of folks around the table said that they were not 

surprised, more or less, by the current weaker outlook.  But I don’t recall that there was much 

disagreement in April about the outlook at that time; therefore, surely, we’ve almost all been 

surprised by the weaker incoming data.  In addition, as someone noted, the changes in the 

outlook for the pace of the recovery are somewhat reliant on the equilibrating properties of our 

September 21, 2010 71 of 151



 

 

 

models, and a particular business plan that would rely on this recovery might not be thought to 

be immune to the potential risks. 

To recap, the economy has slowed considerably, the outlook is weaker, and we are 

approaching the point where unemployment is likely to stay very high for a very long time. 

We had quite an interesting discussion around the table about how much of this is 

unavoidable, how much is cyclical, how much is structural.  I think these are important 

questions, and let me just give a bit of advance notice that the staff is going to present an analysis 

of these issues at the January meeting, so we’re going to have a chance to get into this issue in 

some detail. 

A number of people around the table talked about the Beveridge curve.  I’m not going to 

be able to add too much to what was already said, but, just for your reference, I circulated some 

charts.3  They show Beveridge curves for every recession back to 1973–1975 based on quarterly 

data using help-wanted indexes, because that’s the only measure of vacancies which is available 

all the way back.  I would point out a couple of things.  The first is that every recession has this 

big loop, as you can see from the pictures.  For example, compare the earlier dynamics with what 

you see on the very last page, which shows the current recession.  Given this, I don’t think the 

fact that we’ve risen above the curve in the last couple of quarters is particular informative.  

Rather, it looks to me as if we’re just in the normal recovery dynamics in that respect, although, 

obviously we have a very long way to go, given how far the unemployment rate has increased in 

this episode. 

The other interesting thing—and this is a point a number of people made—has to do with 

both the location and the slope of the Beveridge curve in the most recent episode.  First, if you 

compare the initial vacancy rates—help-wanted indexes as a percentage of employment—they’re 

                                                 
3 The material used by Chairman Bernanke is appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

September 21, 2010 72 of 151



 

 

 

typically around 100, 110; in this recession, they started out at 70.  There seem to be some things 

going on here—some change, perhaps, in the way that help-wanted indexes are constructed or in 

the way that vacancy practices are conducted—which are probably not fundamental to the labor 

market.  The other thing that is very striking about the last picture is how flat the Beveridge 

curve is.  That could be interpreted as consistent with the structural unemployment view, in that 

vacancies haven’t fallen nearly as much as you would expect, given how much unemployment 

has increased.  I think there are also other interpretations, including, first, how the help-wanted 

indexes and these vacancies are measured.  But there’s a kind of zero- bound issue, which I think 

might be worth taking into account.  Presumably there’s always a certain amount of frictional 

vacancies, a certain amount of frictional turnover.  As a result, it may simply be that the curve is 

asymptoting to the horizontal axis, and that’s one reason that it’s flatter.  I don’t mean to 

conclude anything from this; I just give you this information for your reference, and, as I said, 

we’ll have a more detailed discussion in January.  I would just say that, at this point, the question 

is quite open on how much slack there still is.  One piece of evidence in favor of there being 

significant slack, of course, is that wages and compensation have been very soft. 

Again, my first observation, essentially, is that the outlook really has deteriorated fairly 

significantly, and I am concerned about the fact that we are potentially approaching, as I said, the 

level where unemployment may not come down significantly or, as Dave Stockton mentioned, 

we might be approaching a stall speed that might cause the economy to fail to make further 

progress. 

Now, we had a good bit of discussion around the table about how much monetary policy 

can do about the real side of the economy.  I think I am more optimistic than some others are.  I 

do think that there is still some scope to create more aggregate demand and to cause the economy 

September 21, 2010 73 of 151



 

 

 

to strengthen.  But there is, of course, the other side of the mandate, which is nominal quantities, 

and, whatever one might think about the ability of monetary policy to affect unemployment and 

economic growth, I think almost all economists would agree that we can affect nominal 

quantities.  The simple fact is that almost all nominal measures in our economy are at very low 

levels and are expected to remain at low levels.  I talked last time about nominal GDP, which 

was completely flat from the fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2009 and is growing 

now at a rate of about less than 4 percent, hardly consistent with a strong recovery. 

We’ve talked about inflation measures.  There’s a wide variety of inflation measures, 

including some that the Cleveland Fed puts out, and some exclude OER, and some are core 

measures, headline measures, chain-weighted measures, market-based measures, etc.  Based on 

all of these, I think there’s a very strong presumption that inflation is quite low.  I would have to 

argue that, certainly relative to the business cycle peak, there’s been a distinct disinflation over 

the last couple of years, which would be consistent with the paper that Stock and Watson gave in 

Jackson Hole, which suggested that disinflation is very common in deep recessions.  Associated 

with that, of course, is the decline in breakevens, which is about 50 basis points since the 

beginning of the year on almost all horizons.  Also, there are wages, M2 growth—all of these 

nominal variables are very weak. 

President Bullard preemptively and very astutely pointed out that optimal policy doesn’t 

mean that inflation and employment are on opposite sides of the mandate, and you can see that 

by looking at any Tealbook simulation of optimal policy, which will show that inflation and 

unemployment typically approach their targets from the same direction.  So that’s certainly true. 

But I’d just make two comments about that.  One is that not only is current inflation low, 

but also the Tealbook is projecting inflation to be very low for a number of years.  As someone 

September 21, 2010 74 of 151



 

 

 

pointed out, if we were 1 percentage point above our inflation target for two to three years into 

the future, we think we would be a little bit more concerned.  So I think it’s an important issue 

that the projection of inflation remains low.  Another point is that, if you look at the optimal 

policy analyses in the Tealbook, of course, they show optimal interest rates of minus 4 percent; 

in other words, there’s not enough stimulus, based on conventional analysis of the economy. 

So, bottom line, the economy has slowed.  I think we can do something about it.  

Whether we can or not, however, I think we do have a responsibility to make sure that nominal 

quantities are, over time, approaching the appropriate levels, and, at this point, our forecasts do 

not say that.  I note also that, as others, including President Bullard, have mentioned, there is a 

bit of an asymmetry, in that, if inflation gets a little higher, we know how to address that, but if 

inflation gets too low, there is a certain black hole, a kind of trap, that we might get into, and we 

certainly don’t want to do that.  My view, then, is that we need to consider seriously taking 

measures that will move inflation up from 1 percent or a little lower to something closer to what 

I think the majority of the Committee would view as a more appropriate longer-term inflation 

rate, something closer to 2 percent or a little bit below that. 

Based on what I’ve said so far, you could make an argument for taking action today, but 

there are a number of reasons not to do that.  One is that there still is genuine uncertainty about 

the most recent economic data:  Do they, in fact, signal a more persistent decline in the outlook, 

or are the last few weeks more indicative, and will we see strengthening over the next couple of 

months?  We may have legitimate differences about whether we think at this point the data are 

sufficiently clear about the outlook. 

Beyond that, however, I think there are two other reasons not to take action today.  One is 

that our communication has not prepared the public or the markets for significant action today, 

September 21, 2010 75 of 151



 

 

 

for better or worse.  As a result, if we were to take action today, it might be bad for confidence 

rather than good for confidence; we saw some of that in the effects of our statement from the last 

meeting.  The other reason I think we shouldn’t take any explicit action today is that—and I 

think everyone agrees, even if we don’t take action, we should be preparing for the possibility of 

action—if we’re going to be considering going back into additional monetary stimulus, we really 

need to get more agreement of some kind on what our framework is going to be.  President 

Bullard, once again, has made important arguments about a more continuous reaction function.  I 

think that’s an important issue to look at.  I think it’s important to ask whether or not we might 

want to give an explicit number for our inflation objective; those two things could be combined, 

or they could be separate.  President Evans has submitted an interesting paper on price level 

targeting.  All of these things have, I think, important advantages. 

Given this, I have a recommendation—obviously, I am anticipating a bit, and I’m also 

hoping to get reactions from you in the next round.  My recommendation would be that in this 

next round we talk a bit about frameworks and think about whether or not we would like to set a 

process in place, so that, by the next meeting, if we decided that adding further stimulus was 

necessary, we would be able to do so in the context of a framework that we feel comfortable 

staying with for a period of time. 

Again, I think a new framework is potentially very useful.  First, there’s a lot of historical 

experience which suggests that something that looks like a regime break can be very positive for 

expectations.  Examples would be the 1934 Roosevelt change in monetary policy, the 1979 

Volcker change in monetary policy.  If we were to change our approach, it could very well signal 

a change in regime that would have a beneficial effect on expectations and confidence.  Second, 

we do need to give more clarity about our reaction function if we’re going to come back into this 

September 21, 2010 76 of 151



 

 

 

type of activity, and, certainly, having a more explicit framework that could be communicated 

not only through the statement but also through other mechanisms could be very helpful there. 

The alternative statements we circulated, A1 and A2, were just for illustration and 

discussion.  They showed how one could introduce a numerical inflation target and how one 

could introduce a continuous adjustment process that responds to changes in economic 

conditions.  Again, they are meant for discussion.  Obviously, if we decide we want to proceed 

with further development of an approach, we have six or seven weeks until the next meeting.  

Therefore, we have time to get staff input, and we can have an interim discussion, if necessary.  

But I do think we need to make progress on a framework, irrespective of your views on further 

stimulus. 

To tip my hand, as I already have, I think that we are getting very close to the point, 

barring relatively good data coming in in the next six, seven weeks, where we should make good 

our obligation to ensure that nominal quantities, like inflation and nominal GDP, are at levels 

consistent with a healthy recovery. 

Let me stop there and turn to Bill English to introduce the policy round, and then, of 

course, folks can reply to those comments as they wish. 

MR. ENGLISH. 4 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives” that was 

distributed during the break.  The package includes the four draft policy statements 

and the associated draft directives.  You will note that we made some changes to 

alternative B relative to the version that was distributed in the Tealbook; those 

changes are shown in blue. 

The conventional approach to these policy briefings has for some time been to 

take the alternatives in order—A, B, C.  But, given that the alternatives we provided 

in the Tealbook were fairly complicated, starting with alternative A1 seemed like 

jumping in at the deep end, both for me and for all of you, so I thought I’d start 

instead with alternative B, before moving to the A alternatives and then to alternative 

C. 

                                                 
4 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

September 21, 2010 77 of 151



 

 

 

The Committee might choose alternative B, page 4, if it thinks that additional 

policy accommodation is not called for at this meeting but wants to emphasize that it 

will act as needed to achieve its objectives.  Such a stance might be warranted if the 

Committee perceives both resource utilization and inflation to be falling short of their 

mandate-consistent levels by unsatisfactory margins, but still sees economic growth 

as likely to gain speed relatively soon and inflation as likely to stabilize near current 

levels before gradually moving higher.  Indeed, market participants appear to have 

taken some reassurance from the economic news in the last few weeks, and the 

Committee may have done so as well.  Members may also see the outlook as 

particularly uncertain and so choose to wait for additional information before 

deciding whether further policy action is needed.  That said, the Committee may want 

to indicate that its patience with regard to the pace of recovery and the level of 

inflation is limited, and if further progress does not become more evident reasonably 

soon, the Committee will take action. 

The statement under alternative B would note the deceleration in equipment and 

software spending, as well as the reduced rate of contraction in bank lending.  The 

inflation paragraph would emphasize that current levels of underlying inflation are 

below those the Committee judges to be most consistent, over the longer run, with its 

dual mandate, but would also note the expectation that inflation will, after some time, 

return to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate.  With no change 

in policy at this meeting, the third paragraph would repeat the “extended period” 

language, which appears to have clearly communicated the conditional nature of the 

Committee’s policy outlook, and would note the retention of the reinvestment policy 

adopted in August.  The final paragraph would continue to indicate that the 

Committee will monitor the economic outlook and financial developments, but would 

go on to say that it “is prepared to provide additional accommodation as needed to 

support the economic recovery and to return inflation, over time, to levels consistent 

with its mandate,” thereby conveying the sense that the Committee could act if the 

recovery remains weak and inflation stays low. 

The Desk’s survey of primary dealers suggests that market participants do not 

expect significant changes in the statement or additional asset purchases at this 

meeting, although they put about 40 percent probability on an announcement of 

additional asset purchases by year-end.  A statement along the lines of alternative B 

would likely cause market participants to price in higher odds of additional asset 

purchases, perhaps as soon as the November meeting.  As a consequence, longer-term 

interest rates would likely fall some, stock prices would move up, and the foreign 

exchange value of the dollar would probably decline. 

However, if members were inclined to take action now in response to the 

weakness of the recovery and the lower-than-desired level of underlying inflation, the 

Committee could choose to provide additional policy accommodation at this meeting, 

as in alternative A2, page 3.  Such a decision could reflect three judgments: first, that 

the economic situation is not likely to improve sufficiently without further policy 

action; second, that additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities will help 

September 21, 2010 78 of 151



 

 

 

support the recovery; and third, that the possible costs of additional purchases do not 

outweigh the benefits. 

Regarding the first judgment, the Committee, like the staff, may see some 

strengthening in the pace of the recovery next year, but still think that economic 

growth will not be sufficient to work down the current very high margin of resource 

slack particularly soon.  And the Committee might be even more downbeat about the 

outlook.  As Dave noted, the staff forecast has been marked down considerably since 

the spring, with the projected start of a sustained decline in the unemployment rate 

pushed back a few quarters, to the middle of 2011.  In addition, some members may 

be worried that the headwinds that have slowed the recovery will exert greater 

restraint over the next several quarters than is assumed in the staff forecast.  

Moreover, some members might read the decline in TIPS-based inflation 

compensation since spring as a signal that longer-term inflation expectations are at 

risk of coming unmoored in a downward direction and see further disinflation as a 

potentially significant impediment to the economic recovery. 

With regard to the judgment on the benefits of additional securities purchases, in 

the Tealbook we estimated that the purchase of $500 billion of longer-term Treasury 

securities over the next six months would trim long-term interest rates by about 15 to 

20 basis points, though some of that effect already appears to be priced into markets.  

The result would be roughly an additional ¼ percentage point on the growth rate of 

real GDP in 2011 and 2012 and an unemployment rate that would be a couple of 

tenths of a percentage point lower at the end of 2012.  Inflation would be about a 

tenth higher in 2012.  I should note that our estimates of the effects of purchases have 

been marked down somewhat since the August meeting to be consistent with the 

middle of the range of estimated effects of large-scale asset purchases reported in the 

paper by Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack.  Of course, these estimates continue to 

be subject to very considerable uncertainty. 

The third judgment relates to the possible costs of additional securities purchases.  

A key concern that the Committee has expressed in this regard is that increases in the 

size of the balance sheet could undermine the public’s confidence in the FOMC’s 

ability to exit smoothly from the current very accommodative policy stance when it is 

appropriate to do so.  If that confidence were significantly undermined, inflation 

expectations could move higher, and actual inflation could follow suit.  To address 

this concern, the Federal Reserve has developed the term deposit facility and the 

ability to conduct large-scale triparty reverse repurchase agreements with an 

expanded set of counterparties in order to allow policy accommodation to be 

withdrawn even with a very large balance sheet.  I should also note that longer-term 

inflation expectations have not moved higher, on balance, since the announcement of 

the LSAPs in late 2008 and early 2009, although a number of factors may have 

contributed to that development.  Finally, some of you might find a modest increase 

in inflation expectations and inflation in current circumstances to be a benefit, not a 

cost, of the purchases. 

September 21, 2010 79 of 151



 

 

 

The statement under alternative A2 would indicate that the incoming data have 

confirmed that the pace of the recovery has slowed.  Spending on equipment and 

software would simply be described as having “slowed,” and no mention would be 

made of the reduced rate of decline in bank lending.  The inflation paragraph would 

note that underlying inflation has been trending lower, indicate that it is below levels 

most consistent with the dual mandate, and go on to say that, “In the current 

environment, disinflation is an impediment to economic recovery.”  Given concerns 

about a possible decline in expected inflation, the statement would not indicate a 

Committee anticipation that inflation will move back up to acceptable levels over 

time.  The statement would indicate that the federal funds rate target was unchanged 

and retain the “extended period” language.  It would go on to say that “To help foster 

a stronger pace of economic recovery and to move underlying inflation closer, over 

time, to rates consistent with its mandate, the Committee will increase its total 

holdings of securities to approximately $2.5 trillion by purchasing an additional 

$500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months.”  The 

statement would also note that the reinvestment policy adopted in August would be 

retained.  It could end by stating that “The Committee will continue to monitor the 

economic outlook and financial developments and will act as needed to support a 

stronger economic recovery and foster price stability.”  The reference to “stronger 

economic recovery” rather than just “economic recovery,” as in the August statement, 

would suggest a somewhat greater willingness on the part of the Committee to take 

policy action. 

If the Committee wanted to indicate an intention to adjust the size of the SOMA 

portfolio more regularly and in smaller increments going forward, it could instead end 

the statement with the indication that “the Committee will determine, each time it 

meets, whether an adjustment – either upward or downward – to its holdings of 

securities is needed to foster maximum employment and price stability.”  As 

discussed in a box in the Tealbook, such an approach has potential benefits and costs.  

On the benefit side, smaller and more frequent adjustments to the size of the SOMA 

portfolio should allow a closer match between the actual stance of policy and the 

stance called for by the economic outlook.  Such an approach might also allow 

investors to better understand the Committee’s reaction function and so price into 

markets the effects of anticipated future policy decisions, which could help to 

stabilize the economy.  And a gradual approach to purchases might allow the 

Committee to shift to gradual sales without generating an outsized market reaction.  

However, some of you may be concerned that, while relatively rare announcements of 

large purchases could give a substantial boost to consumer and business confidence, 

helping to support the economy, such announcement effects might be less likely to 

accompany smaller and more regular purchases.  In addition, this approach could 

pose significant communications challenges:  Without more information, perhaps 

from speeches or the minutes, the Committee’s reaction function would likely remain 

unclear to investors for some time, limiting the benefits from improved anticipation 

of future policy actions. 

A decision to purchase additional securities at this meeting would come as a 

considerable surprise to market participants; interest rates would likely fall, stock 

September 21, 2010 80 of 151



 

 

 

prices rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar decline.  However, if the 

unexpected decision to provide additional policy accommodation at this meeting led 

investors to conclude that the Committee was more concerned about the economic 

outlook than had been thought, the effect on stock prices could be muted. 

If the Committee wanted to take an even clearer stand against low and declining 

underlying inflation, it could do so by providing explicit information regarding its 

intended level of inflation, as in alternative A1, page 2.  This alternative starts out like 

alternative A2, but in the inflation paragraph it states that “Underlying inflation is 

now running below the level of 2 percent or a bit less, as measured by the price index 

for personal consumption expenditures, that the Committee judges most consistent, 

over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price 

stability.”  This range is consistent with the responses to the June Summary of 

Economic Projections, which showed a central tendency of long-run projections for 

PCE inflation of 1.7 to 2.0 percent.  As in alternative A2, the inflation paragraph 

would end by indicating that “In the current environment, disinflation is an 

impediment to economic recovery.”  In this alternative, the policy paragraphs are 

combined, with the discussion of additional purchases coming immediately after the 

inflation paragraph, thereby giving greater emphasis to the role of asset purchases in 

supporting the desired level of inflation.  Alternative A1 ends with the simpler of the 

two final paragraphs offered for alternative A2. 

As discussed in the Tealbook, providing greater clarity about the Committee’s 

desired level of inflation could, if credible, help anchor inflation expectations more 

firmly.  In the current circumstances, such an effect would help to guard against 

further disinflation.  However, a more explicit focus on the inflation outlook has some 

potential disadvantages.  The Committee would presumably have to explain 

deviations of inflation from the announced range, and at times its policy decisions 

could be constrained if investors’ views of the inflation outlook did not match its 

own.  Moreover, an increased focus on inflation in Committee communications could 

lead some to question the Committee’s commitment to the “maximum employment” 

leg of its dual mandate.  The Committee could counteract such concerns by providing 

more specificity regarding the level of the unemployment rate that it regards as 

sustainable in the longer run, but it might be hesitant to do so, because the sustainable 

unemployment rate depends on factors over which the Committee has no control.  In 

any event, the Committee would need to be clear with the public, as well as with the 

Congress and the Administration, that being more explicit about its intentions for 

inflation did not mean that it would be attaching greater weight to its price stability 

objective relative to its goal for maximum employment. 

The market reaction to alternative A1 would likely be similar to that for 

alternative A2.  However, the explicit indication of the Committee’s intended level of 

inflation could give a small boost to expected inflation while reducing uncertainty 

about inflation over the long run, with potentially offsetting effects on longer-term 

nominal interest rates. 

September 21, 2010 81 of 151



 

 

 

Finally, if the Committee feels that the economic recovery is continuing and will 

pick up pace over time, and it sees the current trajectory for the economy as the best 

that can be expected in current circumstances, then it might be inclined to leave 

policy unchanged at this meeting and signal that it will likely be appropriate to begin 

removing policy accommodation before long, as in alternative C, page 5.  Members 

may believe that much of the current unemployment reflects unavoidable lags in the 

reallocation of labor across sectors and regions and so cannot be effectively addressed 

by additional monetary stimulus.  They may also believe that, with the Committee’s 

intentions with regard to inflation fairly well understood by market participants, 

providing additional information in the statement would not be particularly helpful in 

current circumstances. 

Some members may also be concerned that keeping policy rates at very low levels 

for a long time and providing additional stimulus through large-scale asset purchases 

could lead some investors to take on additional risk to obtain higher yields and that 

the investors may not understand those risks as well as they should.  The result could 

be mounting imbalances in financial markets that could lead to future financial crises. 

The statement for alternative C would revise the forward guidance for the federal 

funds rate to suggest an earlier-than-anticipated increase in short-term interest rates.  

In particular, the statement would indicate that the Committee now anticipates that 

economic conditions would warrant a “low,” rather than “exceptionally low,” target 

range for the federal funds rate for “some time,” rather than for “an extended period.”  

In the first line of the paragraph, the statement would also change “will maintain” to 

“decided to maintain” to indicate that the Committee’s decision to retain the current 

low target funds rate range applied only to this meeting.  In addition, under alternative 

C the Committee would continue its policy of reinvesting principal payments from 

securities held in the SOMA only “for the time being,” which would likely be read by 

investors as suggesting that this policy could be reversed soon. 

An announcement along the lines of alternative C would come as a great surprise 

to market participants.  Interest rates would likely rise significantly across the yield 

curve, although lower long-term inflation expectations might damp the rise in longer-

term nominal rates.  Equity prices would likely decline substantially, and the dollar 

probably would appreciate. 

Draft directives for the four alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 10 of 

your handout.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Bill.  Are there any questions?  [No response.]  

Okay, seeing none, I’ll turn to President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wholeheartedly support your suggestion that 

we make progress on developing a framework to deliver more accommodative monetary policy 

September 21, 2010 82 of 151



 

 

 

if the Committee decides that that’s appropriate.  From my comments in August and earlier 

today, as well as my proposal for a state-contingent price level objective, it should be clear that I 

believe the current situation should be analyzed as an economy that’s stuck in a bona fide 

liquidity trap.  With the federal funds rate approximately zero and the level of excess reserves 

already at $1 trillion, only very special monetary policies are likely to be effective, in my 

judgment.  Consequently, although there is much for me to like in the language of alternatives 

A1 and A2, I worry that another $500 billion of LSAPs, by themselves, won’t be sufficient, but 

I’m happy to study that more and understand it better. 

Let me explain briefly my viewpoints on this.  As I look at the optimal policy response 

generated in the FRB/US charts on page 3 of Tealbook Part B, it looks as if the unemployment 

rate could fall to 6¼ percent by the end of 2012, if the real federal funds rate were headed for 

about minus 4 or minus 5 percent at the end of 2011.  We can’t have negative nominal rates, but 

an increase in short-term inflation expectations to nearly 3 or 4 percent would get us close to 

such a negative real rate.  This is where I can hear coughing and gnashing of teeth and calls for 

the Spanish Inquisition.  Nevertheless, this is the logic of the liquidity trap analysis.  Saving is 

too high, investment of all types, including employment, is too low, and nominal interest rates 

cannot move appreciably lower to correct the excess supply of savings.  Additional purchases of 

Treasuries alone may merely swell excess reserves.  At best, portfolio-balance effects from 

further purchases will lower long rates only modestly, not enough to give a significant boost to 

economic activity, in my opinion.  Studying the liquidity trap literature has convinced me that a 

policy to achieve a state-contingent price level objective is probably the most effective means 

available to us. 

September 21, 2010 83 of 151



 

 

 

I circulated the skeletal framework of a proposal.  For the sake of brevity, I will simply 

point out three attributes of a price level objective as I see it.  First, in announcing a target path 

for which inflation has already underrun the path, markets should begin to price in an expectation 

of higher inflation, and thus real rates will decline.  The larger the price gap is, the larger will be 

the decline in real rates.  If the market response is delayed, the inflation deficit will increase, and 

the eventual decline in real rates will be even larger. 

Second, a firm, resolute, and credible commitment to the state-contingent price level 

objective has big benefits.  If markets believe in our commitment to respond to an increasing 

inflation deficit, they will understand the risks they face if they fail to price these actions sooner 

rather than later.  If markets understand our explicit commitment to exit this policy, future 

inflation expectations will converge to our ultimate price stability objective, which I put at 

2 percent. 

Third, in the context of a price level objective, additional purchases of Treasury securities 

can play an important role in signaling the Committee’s commitment to achieving the price level 

objective.  So I think we should do both.  Also, by clearly laying out the rationale for exiting our 

state-contingent objective, we present the case for why the public should not fear that we may be 

monetizing the debt.  I personally believe that risk is overblown, but this policy is a strong 

mitigant to that risk.  That’s my summary, in brief, of the price level objective proposal.  There’s 

much more in the document that I circulated. 

I recognize that a proper foundation for such a policy action today has not been laid, so 

let me point out some language in the current alternatives that seems challenging to me.  In 

alternative B, we continue to include the phrase, “The Committee anticipates a gradual return to 

higher levels of resource utilization in the context of price stability, although the pace of 

September 21, 2010 84 of 151



 

 

 

economic recovery is likely to be modest in the near term.”  Does “context of price stability” 

mean that we will be within a close neighborhood of 1¾ to 2 percent within a few quarters, a few 

years, or does it mean that we won’t overshoot 2 percent?  I think this sentence has become 

increasingly inoperative.  I don’t really know how to interpret or speak about it in public.  I think 

taking out “in the context of price stability” would help, although I recognize that that probably 

leaves other problems behind. 

I also think it’s clearly time to point out that inflation is underrunning our notion of price 

stability.  To the extent that the Committee is not at a consensus on this price stability, is it 

because our inflation projections differ, or is it our definitions of price stability that differ?  I 

have said 2 percent.  President Lacker earlier said 1½ percent.  That’s consistent with the way 

we’ve talked about this in the past.  In the past, we’ve had the luxury of finessing this issue 

because it didn’t matter too much, but I think today it matters.  So I worry about that. 

The Tealbook discussion of alternative B also says that market participants have 

indicated a strong desire for greater clarity about the threshold for action.  I agree that that’s 

important.  I think we need to be more explicit, and the language here—“additional 

accommodation”—seems kind of vague, so I’m not quite sure what the reaction will be. 

Finally, I have a point on A1.  I’m talking about this because you mentioned this as a 

potential mockup of what we could be looking at.  I’m troubled by the analysis of the language 

in A1 focusing on explicitly mentioning that inflation is running below our mandate of 2 percent 

or a bit less.  I simply don’t believe this could be a game-changer that would reduce real interest 

rates enough.  I think it would be poorly received if our announcement suggested much greater 

emphasis on inflation alone and, thus, diminished our dual mandate focus, which includes 

September 21, 2010 85 of 151



 

 

 

employment.  I know Bill talked about that a little bit.  Communicating that confidently will be 

very important and difficult. 

In sum, I think we need an aggressive monetary policy response that has a real hope of 

reducing real interest rates enough to overcome the excess saving and risk aversion that 

characterizes liquidity-trapped economies.  I strongly agree with your suggestion that we study 

this more.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic case for one of the A 

alternatives is compelling.  We are far below maximum sustainable employment, and inflation is 

too low.  Not only are we failing on both of our legislated mandates now, but, given current 

projections, we will continue to fail on both goals for far too long.  I don’t believe that we are 

following an optimal policy, and I think this dire situation requires us to act.  But we do face a 

difficult challenge in communicating what we’re doing and why, and we do need to prepare the 

ground.  So at this meeting I support alternative B.  It acknowledges the reality that the outlook 

for employment and inflation is unacceptable, and that the situation has on balance gotten worse.  

It sets the stage for future action unless the situation improves markedly. 

Why should we take action now if we did not earlier in the year?  As you laid out clearly 

in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, further action has both benefits and costs.  Since the 

spring, the benefits have gone up as the outlook has deteriorated substantially.  But, even more 

importantly, the costs of acting have come down.  When we were expanding our purchases of 

longer-term assets last year and early this year, there were some fears that the unprecedented 

expansion of our balance sheet might have inflationary consequences or that inflation 

expectations might come unhinged.  Markets have now digested the notion that the Federal 

September 21, 2010 86 of 151



 

 

 

Reserve can expand its balance sheet without dire inflationary consequences.  Indeed, by most 

measures, inflation expectations are lower today than they were in the spring:  Surveys of 

inflation expectations are lower, and inflation compensation from TIPS is lower; even the 

number of searches on Google for the term “inflation” has been trending down for months.  

[Laughter]  “Deflation” is also headed up.  We’ve also done a lot of important work in preparing 

and communicating our eventual exit strategy.  So the case for A is clear:  We’re failing in our 

mandates, and we have the tools to do better. 

It is not that monetary policy is the main problem facing businesses, as many of you have 

pointed out.  But I do think policy can contribute to the solution, even if it isn’t a panacea for 

what ails businesses these days.  And I think that, in addition to lowering the term premium and 

longer-term rates, it is important that there are channels working through, perhaps, a lower dollar 

and higher equity prices. 

In terms of the various A alternatives, there are a number of choices to make.  In 

principle, I understand the advantages of the second option for A2, paragraph 5, where we use 

asset purchases as an additional lever that we can move up or down.  And I would support this 

approach if I thought that a $500 billion initial purchase would put us at neutral, that is, a 

position where the odds were similar that our next move would be to ease or to tighten.  

However, I think that we will still be behind the curve with a $500 billion injection, so that 

purchases beyond that are more likely than sales.  That makes me uncomfortable with the 

alternative language in paragraph 5 of A2.  We might not accomplish much on longer-term rates, 

because our message would be that we might buy $500 billion, but we will reassess at the next 

meeting and might end up buying less.  Such a message could add uncertainty to financial 

markets and gain us little on the term premium.  I’m attracted by the reaction function approach, 

September 21, 2010 87 of 151



 

 

 

but it makes more sense to me to wait to introduce it until we have a truly symmetric bias on our 

desired LSAP stock. 

On paragraph 2 of the A options, I prefer A1, where we’re explicit about our numerical 

objective.  Because it is more explicit, it should be more effective at anchoring inflation 

expectations.  The value of anchoring expectations to keep them from going too low outweighs 

the usual concerns that we’re putting too much quantitative emphasis on just the inflation half of 

our dual mandate. 

Regarding President Evans’ proposal for a state-contingent price level target, I support its 

goal of increasing inflation and inflation expectations to a level more consistent with our 

mandate.  I also support its willingness to entertain aggressive policies to escape the constraints 

of the zero bound.  However, it seems to me to be a challenging policy to communicate.  In 

addition, I am concerned that the policy might not work as the theory says it should if the policy 

is not communicated extremely clearly and if agents in the economy form expectations in a way 

that is not perfectly rational or forward-looking.  One concern I have in particular is that an 

announced increase in our medium-term inflation objective to, say, 3 percent would raise 

nominal mortgage rates, which do matter for liquidity-constrained homebuyers, and, thereby, 

would undermine any rejuvenation in the moribund housing market.  However, I am certainly 

open to further analysis and study of this option. 

On balance, then, my preference would be for alternative A1, where we commit to 

pursuing the dual mandate aggressively, where we state a numerical inflation objective, and 

where we pursue policies that signal the strength of our resolve.  And I think they can achieve 

some of the same benefits as a price level target with fewer potential costs. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

September 21, 2010 88 of 151



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Inflation is low and reasonably stable at this 

level.  There is a modest recovery in place—it’s slower than we’d like it to be, but the economy 

is still expanding.  I think it’s worth noting that inflation is now at a level that characterized most 

of the 14-year period between the Treasury–Fed Accord in 1951 and 1965.  That level is low by 

the standards we have set since then, but I think that provides good evidence that an inflation rate 

between 1 and 1½ percent doesn’t have to imply a high probability of an impending deflationary 

spiral. 

I understand the geekiness provided to us by Presidents Bullard and Kocherlakota on 

liquidity traps.  I understand the logic of that quite fully—I just don’t think it’s a present danger.  

If the prospect of sustained disinflation from where we are now or deflation were to emerge, I 

would strongly support expanding the monetary base, because, as the Chairman rightly 

emphasized, no matter where one stands on the efficacy or potency of monetary policy in the 

present environment for real outcomes, we all agree that we can engineer any arbitrary inflation 

or deflation we want with the tools at our disposal and on the balance sheet.  But I don’t think 

we’re anywhere close to seeing sustained deflation or disinflation break out. 

Now, real growth is disappointingly low.  Unemployment remains stubbornly high.  

That’s true.  I’ve tried to make the case that those outcomes are likely due to an array of real 

factors outside our control and beyond our ability to offset.  So I think if we get something close 

to the Tealbook forecast for growth for the remainder of the year, we should count our blessings 

and stick with our current policy stance. 

I don’t favor moving now, and I don’t think I’m going to favor expanding our balance 

sheet in November unless, as I said, something very unexpected happens on the deflation front.  

And that seems unlikely to me.  I would favor alternative B, but for the language in paragraphs 2 

September 21, 2010 89 of 151



 

 

 

and 4 that strongly signal our openness to moving in November.  I think those are going to act 

like ringing a bell for markets, and they are going to take this as pretty much a signal that action 

is coming in November. 

Now, Mr. English talked about boosting consumer and business confidence.  When we 

took action in August, I think we saw that it had the opposite effect and that it was one of those 

occasions on which our action to provide more stimulus was read as a signal that we’re more 

worried about the economy, and they should be more worried about the economy than they had 

been.  You mentioned, Mr. Chairman, that you didn’t want to move today because you wanted to 

avoid a repeat of that by preparing markets for the move.  I don’t quite see the logic behind the 

notion that preparing markets will make our move any less a negative signal about our views 

about the strength of the recovery going forward.  So I just don’t see this as likely to boost 

confidence or unleash aggregate demand.  None of my contacts are mentioning a lack of 

confidence that our balance sheet is large enough right now. 

More broadly, the language in alternative B heightens the prominence of our mandate in 

the statement.  And I think we ought to be very careful about doing that.  First of all, we haven’t 

talked about what inflation rate we view as consistent with our mandate or price stability in three 

years.  And the way the language in alternative B is worded now, it doesn’t say “Committee 

members judge.”  It says, “The Committee judges.”  It clearly marks this as a collective 

judgment that we stopped short of doing three years ago.  Now, we do report in the Summary of 

Economic Projections our individual forecast for longer-run inflation and what that’s consistent 

with.  But, as I said during our deliberations back then, if the Committee votes on an objective, 

I’ll sign up for that, and I’ll participate in this meeting as if that were my objective as well.  But 

September 21, 2010 90 of 151



 

 

 

we haven’t gotten there yet, so I think this conveys a bit more about our deliberations than we 

have actually engaged in. 

My deeper objection—and here I will add my own geekiness to the conversation—is that 

we really don’t care about unemployment, and we really don’t care about inflation.  These are 

shortcuts.  These are reduced forms.  What we care about is the economic welfare of the 

American public.  That’s what we care about.  In economic models, one can write down policy 

functions that treat the policymakers as if they were maximizing a two-argument objective 

function, and those seem to fit really well.  But I think it’s worth reflecting on two things.  First, 

we were actually given three mandates, the third being moderate long-term interest rates—I think 

that’s the way it reads.  And we’ve apparently used our own discretion to jettison the third 

mandate.  No one comes clamoring and complaining about it, for sure, but certainly that reflected 

a substantive economic judgment that the best contribution we can make to low and moderate 

interest rates is to keep inflation low. 

I think a similar case can be made about unemployment as well, namely, that our tools do 

not have a symmetric relationship to unemployment and inflation.  I think there is a danger in 

elevating the mandate this way, and especially in taking action at this time, both as a general 

matter and in this particular case.  To me, it ties us too closely to having responsibility for 

economic growth.  This reaches beyond the extent to which we should have responsibility for, as 

you put it Mr. Chairman, nominal measures.  I think we need to give that very careful thought 

and avoid the risk of taking responsibility for the rate of GDP growth and the pace at which the 

unemployment rate comes down. 

I’m going to insert a little more geekiness here.  Take the Taylor rule, for example.  This 

and other models frame policy as if it were responding to deviations of inflation and deviations 

September 21, 2010 91 of 151



 

 

 

of unemployment from targets.  In New Keynesian Phillips curves models hit by real shocks, the 

interest rate one needs to keep inflation stable varies in a way that’s correlated with the 

unemployment rate.  So the apparent responsiveness to deviations in the gap emerges just 

because the noninflationary interest rate itself varies with real conditions.  I think there’s a real 

substantive issue here about how we treat the mandates in our communications.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’ll add a small point, which is that we already 

have in B1 the statement, “The Committee anticipates a gradual return.”  So there already is 

some language personalizing the Committee. 

MR. LACKER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand your point as well.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B, though I expect 

that something like alternative A will be necessary unless we get substantially more positive 

economic news over the next two months.  It is quite likely that we will make little or no 

progress on the extremely high unemployment rate or the very low inflation rate this year.  If so, 

an option like that in the A alternatives does seem appropriate. 

Because I expect that more monetary stimulus may be necessary in the future, it may be 

worth considering options beyond the quantitative targets in the current A alternatives.  One 

possibility would be to explore what kind of asset purchases would have the largest economic 

effects.  For example, if MBS purchases would have greater economic effects than Treasury 

purchases of the same magnitude, in the short run that concern would dominate my desire for 

achieving a Treasury-only portfolio in the long run.  It might also be worth considering whether 

targeting a longer-term interest rate might be more effective than targeting a quantity.  Had we 

September 21, 2010 92 of 151



 

 

 

announced we were targeting mortgage rates when we began the LSAP, it is not clear that we 

would have needed to purchase the same quantity that we eventually purchased.  That we could 

credibly enforce a target is unlikely to be doubted, because we have already been willing to 

purchase a very sizable proportion of all newly issued mortgages.  Obviously, we could, 

alternatively, choose to target a longer- or a medium-term Treasury rate.  Exploring a full set of 

options at the next meeting would help us to choose the policy option that generates the largest 

economic impact from further expansion of our balance sheet. 

I would just say that, given the wide range of comments we have already heard and are 

likely to hear over the rest of the go-round, it does seem that we might want to explore using the 

full two days that we have and not just have the first day be quite so abbreviated. I agree with 

you—I think it would be useful to have somewhat of a regime change, but we need to get a 

consensus on actions, we need to get a consensus on intermediate goals, and we need to get a 

consensus on communication strategies.  And that does seem difficult to do unless we have 

enough time to actually do it.  So we might just think about having a more extended two-day 

meeting. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My policy preference today is to introduce 

as few changes as possible in our policy statement.  I think the statement needs to continue to 

convey the underlying theme of watchful waiting.  At the moment, I am not in favor of either 

starting a large-scale LSAP program of Treasury securities or of signaling with the statement that 

the Committee is preparing to do so in the imminent future.  In fact, I would prefer us to back off 

from that. 

September 21, 2010 93 of 151



 

 

 

Like President Lacker, I am of the view that if the state of the economy, and particularly 

deflation, becomes a serious problem, I will be in favor of acting both aggressively and 

appropriately, with all the tools and commitment that we have at our disposal to combat that.  

But I don’t think we’re there yet. 

Like President Lacker, I kind of like the statement in paragraph B1, with paragraph C2 

and C3 from alternative C.  I do not wish to convey the view that a new LSAP program is any 

more likely than markets already believe it’s going to be.  I think alternative B is likely to create 

that perception. 

There are several reasons for my views.  First, as I indicated in the first go-round, I do not 

believe that monetary policy at this juncture is likely to have much effect on the path of the 

unemployment rate going forward.  In fact, even if we were not at the zero lower bound, such 

ineffectiveness may be a legitimate concern.  Moreover, using monetary policy just because 

fiscal policy is frozen is not an appropriate way to conduct policy, in my view, particularly if 

monetary policy is the wrong medicine for the disease.  Following on President Fisher’s 

sometimes useful medical analogies, a doctor that prescribes the wrong medicine can actually 

make a patient worse if he’s got the wrong diagnosis.  We have already stepped up to a pace 

where we have applied extraordinarily large doses of accommodation to attack this disease.  We 

must be careful not to overprescribe. 

But we are not in a usual regime.  Normally, monetary policy acts through marginal 

changes in short-term interest rates intended to increase liquidity and improve the interbank 

lending market.  We have long recognized that monetary policy’s ability to control longer-term 

interest rates is fairly limited.  In fact, I’m not persuaded that there is an easy correspondence 

between the short-term interest rate rule and its transmission process on the economy, and the 

September 21, 2010 94 of 151



 

 

 

transmission mechanism at the zero lower bound of some measure of quantitative easing 

operation that has tended to lower long-term interest rates.  In fact, I think we know very little 

about that transmission mechanism. 

 I think it has been indicated that quantitative easing is operating in a different policy 

space.  Thus, I don’t find it very useful to try to compare it with movements in the short-term 

funds rate, as the staff memo tries to do.  My view is that, in a world where the zero bound is 

binding, quantitative easing is primarily intended, as people have indicated, to raise inflation 

expectations—in other words, to operate on nominal variables, as the Chairman indicated.  In 

this environment, if we are worried about deflation or significantly falling inflation expectations, 

that’s what we would like to do.  If expectations were falling, raising inflation expectations will 

prevent real rates from rising, or maybe enhance their falling, as a side benefit.  Interestingly 

enough, if we are successful in raising inflation expectations, longer-term interest rates are likely 

to increase.  And that would be a good sign.  Bond traders out there currently pushing their book, 

arguing for more quantitative easing to lower long-term rates, would actually end up facing 

losses if that policy were successful.  Indeed, as the Chairman said, this is an action to manage 

nominal rates, not so much real rates.  Thus, if our desire is to engage in a new quantitative 

easing program, we need to be absolutely clear about our communication strategy, about why we 

are doing what we are doing, and what we think the expectations would look like if we are 

successful. 

Continuing to use in our language fine-tuning arguments that we are managing liquidity 

or trying to achieve unemployment rate targets is not useful.  This is about raising inflation 

expectations, and we need to be prepared to say so if that’s what we deem it.  Indeed, if our goal 

is to raise expectations, then we should communicate that that is in fact our goal and do so 

September 21, 2010 95 of 151



 

 

 

explicitly.  Making references to other goals that we may think indirectly benefit can be 

confusing to the public and to the markets, and, in fact, it would undermine our ability to impact 

those expectations in the way that we want.  So, taking steps that don’t refer to our desire to raise 

inflation expectations actually undermines our long-run credibility and the effectiveness of our 

policy.  I think our current language is counterproductive to that ultimate goal, as it is at odds 

with how we are likely to view what we want the Treasury LSAP program to do.  If it works, 

inflation expectations would rise, as I said.  In particular, a successful quantitative easing 

program would raise longer-term rates and, therefore, our continuing to communicate that our 

objective is to lower longer-term rates directly contradicts that. 

In summary, quantitative easing is a policy to use in extraordinary times when inflation 

expectations are falling and we are constrained by the zero lower bound.  The objective is to 

raise inflation expectations.  This will require focused and clear communication strategies that 

explicitly talk about that objective, not confusing with other things that may undermine it.  My 

view is that there is not yet sufficient evidence at this point that expectations have fallen 

sufficiently that we need to undertake such an extraordinary effort.  And, therefore, the more we 

say that we are trying to do other things, the more we undermine our efforts.  Indeed, taking 

small movements and fine-tuning our longer-term interest rate targets is actually 

counterproductive.  I don’t believe we have either the theory or the empirical evidence that 

suggests that by trying to move longer-term interest rates we can achieve our objectives in this 

context.  Perhaps worse, again, as I have just iterated, such an approach to policy actions could 

actually undermine our credibility to achieve effective quantitative easing, if we came to need it.  

As I said, I don’t believe we have reached that juncture.  I am opposed to undertaking that policy 

today, and, actually, any time in the near future.  I appreciate the efforts of the staff in 

September 21, 2010 96 of 151



 

 

 

alternatives A1 and A2 to begin to try to address these communications problems, but I don’t 

think they go far enough, and they remain, I think, confusing. 

I agree with the Chairman that there may come a time where we adopt price level target 

regimes, such as President Evans has suggested, which I am very sympathetic to.  But these 

would constitute a regime shift, and I am concerned that it will take more than one meeting for 

us to arrive at some agreement on what that regime shift ought to be and how we will have to 

communicate it.  I am looking forward to the meeting in January about structural employment 

and the challenges we face in the unemployment rate.  And it seems to me that, until we 

understand that better, it would be premature to undertake actions or regime shifts when we are 

not quite sure what their impact would be or what we want them to achieve.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  I do not 

think the macroeconomic situation has changed sufficiently to warrant further policy action at 

this juncture.  I have a few suggested modifications.  In paragraph 2 of alternative B concerning 

the inflation outlook, I think the language is good, but the language in alternative A1 is better.  

Alternative A1 says that, “Inflation is now running below the level of 2 percent or less,” and then 

continues from there.  I think that language may be very successful in helping to anchor inflation 

expectations more firmly and, thus, to prevent the types of drift to disinflation and eventual 

deflation than I am concerned about.  The language in alternative B, however, is also good in this 

regard, but not quite as explicit. 

In paragraph 3 concerning policy, the sentence on reinvestment, I think, is very 

important, and I just wanted to point out that that statement is itself state-contingent.  I guess it 

September 21, 2010 97 of 151



 

 

 

sort of implies that we are going to revisit this at each meeting.  I’m not sure what to think about 

that.  I just wanted to point that out. 

In paragraph 4 in alternative B, we have the sentence “is prepared to provide additional 

accommodation as needed to support economic recovery and to return inflation over time to 

levels consistent with its mandate.”  I think this sentence will be taken as implying that new 

action is imminent at the next meeting.  I’m not sure I would recommend that for today.  I think 

it might be more prudent for the Committee to keep options open on this dimension.  Stating 

things flatly, as this sentence does, has its disadvantages.  It is basically saying the Committee is 

going to do something, but what?  And the markets will wonder, “Well, what is this action going 

to be?  Is it going to be a large action?  Is it going to be a small action?  Is it going to be some 

kind of quasi-policy rule?”  Also, we may face a situation where the data come in much more 

strongly than expected during the coming weeks and months, at which point we would want to 

pull back a little bit from that type of announcement.  So I’m going to make a suggestion, and I 

am more serious about this one.  I suggest replacing paragraph 4 in alternative B with the 

language from A2 paragraph 5, the alternative.  We would end with the word “developments” 

period, in alternative B paragraph 4, and then we would start with this language from paragraph 

5, the alternative in alternative A2:  “The Committee will determine, each time it meets, whether 

an adjustment—either upward or downward—to its holdings of securities is needed to foster 

maximum employment and price stability.” 

I think that if we use that we will still be taken as basically indicating that policy change 

is very possible and very soon.  But it won’t be quite as one-sided as saying that we are going to 

take action at the next meeting, and it might damp down the market speculation about what that 

action might be.  Doing it this way basically states that balance sheet policy is going to be the 

September 21, 2010 98 of 151



 

 

 

main margin for adjustment going forward, without completely committing, at this point, to 

further action.  I don’t think there will be much mistake in the markets about what this means, 

but, still, I think it is a little bit better than what is in the current alternative B.  It also sets up the 

Committee to withdraw accommodation in this dimension in the future, if necessary.  That isn’t 

where we’re going right now, but it does indicate that it’s not just a one-sided policy where we 

are going to add to the balance sheet, but we wouldn’t adjust the other way on this dimension if 

the time comes and the economy is very robust and things are going swimmingly. 

That’s my main substantive comment.  I have several other smaller comments.  In 

alternatives A1 and A2, we have language like “$500 billion over six months.”  I do not think 

this language is helpful.  Instead, I would prefer to say some smaller amount, say $200 billion, 

and we will review this at the next meeting.  I think that, by doing it this way, we can still set up 

expectations that we will continue to add to the balance sheet at future meetings, but that we will 

review it and that the Committee maintains its prerogative to see how the data come in, to see 

how we are going to adjust policy going forward.  One thing I think we have to keep in mind is 

that we are talking about possible action on top of an already very large quantitative easing 

program and on top of a very large balance sheet, which up to now we have considered as being 

a risky  and unprecedented endeavor.  I would encourage everybody to remember that a sequence 

of smaller moves can in fact add up to a large move, but only if justified by data developments as 

they come in.  One main disadvantage of a flat amount that spans a series of meetings is that it 

effectively takes away the Committee’s ability to react to incoming information going forward 

and, thus, sends signals to the private sector about how our judgments are changing about how 

the economy is improving or not improving.  Of course, you can add bigger amounts going 

forward if you feel that the economy is deteriorating further.  I think that that is suboptimal 

September 21, 2010 99 of 151



 

 

 

policy, no matter how you cut it in any kind of model of monetary policy that I have understood 

in the last 25 years. 

Now, just for contrast, consider this.  Suppose you’re following your normal interest rate 

targeting policy, and you’re going to take this $500 billion approach over several meetings.  If 

that were interest rate targeting, then the analogy would be that we were going to raise the 

federal funds rate 150 basis points over a sequence of meetings.  If you state it that way, it 

doesn’t make any sense.  Of course, we make smaller moves in the interest rate, understanding 

that we might follow that with moves at subsequent meetings.  So it’s the path that matters.  You 

do want to set up the path.  There should be a state-contingent path, and the Committee should 

have the ability to adjust as it goes along. 

I have some other comments.  I do think quantitative easing is effective in altering 

longer-dated yields on Treasury securities.  I think part of the decline in yields we’ve observed 

recently is due to the anticipation of possible Fed action, as Brian Sack discussed this morning.  

And I do want to comment that I agree with others around the table that price level targeting is a 

real possibility.  It would be a game-changer, and it would be difficult.  And I do think it needs 

further study.  I do welcome President Evans’ very next memo on this. 

I think there are some key issues for the Committee—and we have talked about them 

before.  One is whether we could possibly lose credibility on inflation targeting altogether if we 

tried to switch to price level targeting, which is sort of inflation targeting squared or something.  

The markets may wonder whether we’re changing horses in midstream to try to adopt a policy 

like that in a difficult situation.  Those have been some of the considerations that have been 

expressed in the Committee before, and I think they would come up again if we tried to go in this 

direction.  I am sympathetic, though, and this does have a lot of theoretical support.  It’s optimal 

September 21, 2010 100 of 151



 

 

 

in many theories, and, if it really is optimal, and we have a lot of faith in it, then we should find a 

way to get it done.  So this remains a very interesting area for further discussion, and I thank 

President Evans for his memo.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m basically willing to support 

alternative B with some minor changes.  I think that paragraph 4 in B seems to suggest strongly 

that we will provide more accommodation in the next meeting.  I think we should try to weaken 

it slightly to indicate that we might not be willing to act.  So, instead of saying “is prepared to 

provide additional accommodation as needed,” I would prefer to say something like “be prepared 

to act as needed to support the economic recovery.”  But I view that as something of a minor 

issue. 

Why not A?  I have problems with A, and it’s not that I doubt that the unemployment rate 

is above its current dual mandate level.  I would put that figure closer to 8 percent than 7 or 6¾, 

but it’s certainly below 9.6 percent.  My concern with A is credibility.  What will the American 

people think if they hear we’re doing A?  Are they going to expect this move to lead the 

unemployment rate to fall by 1 or 2 percentage points over the next two years?  Do they think of 

this as being the main governmental response to the unemployment problem in the United 

States?  The estimate that Bill mentioned, the FRB/US estimate of the macroeconomic impact of 

the purchases in alternative A1 and A2, is a fall of 0.2 percentage point of unemployment over 

the next two years and an increase of 0.1 percentage point in inflation over that same period.  I 

think we should be clear about what we are hoping to gain by doing A if we go down that path; I 

have a footnote to that effect in our statement that says, “Our best available economic models 

estimate that our purchase will generate an additional fall in the unemployment rate of 

September 21, 2010 101 of 151



 

 

 

approximately 0.2 percentage point over the next two years and an increase in the inflation rate 

of approximately 0.1 percentage point over that same period, if all else remains constant.”  We 

could say “ceteris paribus,” if we wanted to be geeky. And I would go on to say that future 

purchases of a similar magnitude are likely to have smaller effects, but that’s just an option.  But 

I think we should be clear about what we’re actually hoping to achieve by doing this. 

We should do whatever is possible to meet our dual mandate.  Here I disagree a little bit 

with President Lacker in that I don’t think we get to make up our mandate—I think that it’s the 

Congress’s role to tell us what to do.   But we should be clear about what we view as our 

limitations in meeting that mandate.  Without that clarity, I think we can only be exposed to a 

loss of institutional credibility. 

Now, as some others around the table said, I’m worried about the possibility of ongoing 

disinflation.  For me that concern is especially over the next year or 18 months, and I’m 

concerned that simply announcing that we don’t want to have disinflation, saying that we’d like 

to have prices go up, may not be enough to accomplish that goal.  I’m concerned, in other words, 

not about what price level we want to achieve, but rather about the policy instruments that we 

have available to achieve what we want to.  In your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, you 

spelled out three possible tools:  lowering the interest rate on excess reserves, offering stronger 

forward guidance, and purchasing more Treasuries.  I think the first two approaches have their 

problems.  They don’t seem to be on the table at this stage anyway, but they could generate this 

deflationary steady state of the kind that President Bullard’s article, “Seven Faces of ‘The Peril’” 

describes.  So I think the option that’s on the table to try to confront disinflation is buying more 

Treasuries. 

September 21, 2010 102 of 151



 

 

 

In terms of the staff estimates of the effects that Bill discussed, as far as I understand 

them, they’re based on taking this portfolio-balance effect that’s been estimated in earlier work 

and putting it in the FRB/US model.  If we bought $2 trillion of Treasuries, it would generate—

and this is assuming total linearity in the response, which I think is far too extreme—40 basis 

points in inflation.  I don’t view this as a strong dam against significant disinflationary pressures.  

The usual intuition is that having banks hold more reserves—that is, if we put more stuff on the 

balance sheet—it will put upward pressure on the price level and inflation expectations.  But this 

intuition is all about scarcity—that reserves are scarce and their associated liquidity advantages 

are scarce.  Instead, banks are currently holding $1 trillion dollars of excess reserves—reserves 

are not scarce.  I would say that if you look at the staff’s balance sheet forecast, they don’t see 

reserves as being scarce until sometime in 2018.  So trying to play off the scarcity of reserves is 

going to be a very subtle device to work with.  I don’t see these three tools as being highly 

effective ways to combat significant disinflation.  What should we do instead?  President Evans 

talked about the Spanish Inquisition.  Here it comes.  [Laughter] 

MR. EVANS.  I wanted to say Teutonic. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  The problem with open market operations is that they require 

the Fed to give up reserves for assets of equal value, given the current price level.  These kinds 

of exchanges put no pressure on the price level when the system is awash in excess reserves.  

What we need to do is give up the dollars for nothing, to do what Milton Friedman described as a 

helicopter drop of currency.  As the Chairman noted in his famous 2002 speech, this kind of 

handout of nominal wealth has the potential to generate upward pressure on the price level. 

In my view we need to do some “blue sky” thinking about how the FOMC can best 

approximate a helicopter drop.  At the Minneapolis Fed, my research and legal staff have been 

September 21, 2010 103 of 151



 

 

 

combing through the Federal Reserve Act and through a great 2004 working paper by David 

Small and Jim Clouse in order to figure out how to do so.  The outcome of that analysis is that 

the Federal Reserve Act does provide ways for the Fed to approximate a helicopter drop.  For 

example, Section 10(b) puts few strictures on the quality of collateral that is needed to back 

advances made at depository institutions for the discount window.  By making nonrecourse 

advances or advances backed by risky collateral, the Fed can implicitly inject—actually, 

explicitly inject—nominal wealth into the economy.  And by specifying particular kinds of 

collateral, such as residential mortgages or small business loans, the Fed could potentially 

stimulate particular kinds of real activity. 

This sounds radical—let’s get more radical.  Section 14(b) allows the FOMC to purchase 

some kinds of state and local government obligations.  These purchases need not be in an open 

market.  By exploiting this option, the FOMC could pay face value for state and local 

government obligations which, in fact, have credit risk.  People talk about monetization of 

Treasury debt.  This is talking about monetization—serious monetization—of state and local 

government debt.  This, again, could stimulate inflation and, possibly, real activity. 

These ideas are still sketchy.  We need a great deal of staff work to figure out their legal 

and economic ramifications, and they come, obviously, with significant amounts of medium-

term and longer-term institutional risk.  I will stress that I myself might end up opposing them 

[laughter] once I see the initial staff work.  But I would emphasize that, given the risk of 

disinflation that we face and given that the tools we have at our disposal do not overwhelm us by 

their potential, we have to be willing to explore all of these.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I did actually think about the LTROs, the long-

term refinancing operations that the Europeans used.  They basically give longer-term loans at 

September 21, 2010 104 of 151



 

 

 

low interest rates to banks.  That approach isn’t very popular.  But, in principle, you could 

restrict the kind of collateral you’ll accept—to do credit, for example.  There are practical 

problems with that.  And I’m sure a few of our colleagues would worry about credit applications, 

so I’m not sure we’d want to jump right into that.  But let me just say, in general, that we should 

think about whether there are other tools besides purchases of assets.  We’re up to President 

Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must tell you that I do agree with you on 

one thing.  [Laughter]  I think we should have a discussion around regime change, if we’re 

moving that way.  Alternative B strikes me as moving towards a new regime, and some of the 

other discussions seemed to take that direction, and I think it would be healthy to have a 

conversation before we get too far.  I’ll come back to that in just a second. 

In listening to this discussion, it reminds me that we are a central planning organization, 

for monetary policy. We come here; we discuss monetary policy for the nation.  And one of my 

fears is that, as a central planner, we think we can do more than we can.  That really bothers me. 

I know people don’t all agree with this, but, again, I think the crisis we’ve just suffered 

was not caused by high interest rates or accelerating interest rates, but by an extended period of 

exceptionally low interest rates when unemployment was 6.5 percent and we were afraid it was 

too high. 

I think we have to be modest about what we can do.  I am not arguing for high interest 

rates at all—I never have been.  I am arguing for getting off of zero, getting away from thinking 

that if we only added another trillion dollars of high-powered money, everything would be okay.  

It won’t.  There are other things going on in this economy that have to adjust, are adjusting, and 

we want to mitigate the consequences of that, but we can’t solve all of those problems.  For that 

September 21, 2010 105 of 151



 

 

 

reason, as I’ve said in other meetings, I judge that it is not appropriate to indicate that the 

economic and financial conditions warrant basically a zero interest rate and to guarantee that the 

fed funds rate will be zero for an extended period of time.  I think the “extended period” 

language tells the market and businesses that after a year of recovery, it is not sustainable.  I 

think we’re telling them that, and they’re acting accordingly. 

Also, there’s the issue of a commitment to zero rates over time.  Zero rates, like any rates, 

are allocative mechanisms, and they lead to future imbalances and increases in the risks for our 

long-term macroeconomic and financial stability.  That’s part of our mandate—longer-run 

performance, not just performance today.  We need to put bounds around ourselves, so that we 

don’t give in to that temptation to think that if we only do more, everything will be okay.  The 

economy is continuing to recover modestly, as most of us anticipated from the beginning.  

Maybe it’s more modest than we would like, but, still, it’s recovering systematically. 

I believe that we should take a longer-run perspective and allow our balance sheet to 

decline gradually as mortgage-backed securities are redeemed rather than continuing to make 

Treasury purchases to keep the size of our asset holdings constant and encourage banks and 

others to take on the risk of longer-term instruments.  Banks are extending their maturities now, 

because we’ve given them this guarantee of lower rates for an extended period.  There are going 

to be consequences from that.   

Of the statements and the alternatives offered, again, I prefer C.   But, even in this 

instance, I prefer it only as long as it is interpreted, as Bill said, as signaling that we would soon 

end our investment in maturing mortgage-backed assets.  Otherwise I find the statement not 

acceptable.  I realize the implications of that for the markets, and, therefore, I would start with 

September 21, 2010 106 of 151



 

 

 

just removing the “extended period” language—nothing else—because I think it would signal 

that we’re more confident in the economy, and I think that would be helpful. 

I object to alternative B not only because it continues our commitment to zero rates, but 

also because it, in effect, eases policy further by heightening the expectation of additional asset 

purchases in November.  It just signals to the market that’s what we’re going to do, and, 

therefore, it will react accordingly.  I would be especially concerned with a policy statement like 

alternative A1 that elevates our inflation goal and could be seen as establishing the Federal 

Reserve as an inflation targeter when we’ve really not discussed that adequately.  At this point, 

the crisis should have taught us that we need to increase our emphasis on longer-run 

macroeconomic and financial stability and not just on inflation goals.  We have allocative 

effects, and I think we should be very, very mindful of that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to confine my comments to 

the decision at this meeting.  Coming into the meeting, it was my expectation that we would 

pretty much settle on alternative B, so I’m not really set on my opinion yet regarding further 

quantitative easing.  I look forward to the November meeting and the work between now and 

November to harden that decision. 

For now, I favor alternative B, and the language presented is acceptable.  However, I am 

somewhat sympathetic to President Kocherlakota’s suggestion to stop the sentence at “support 

the recovery,” in order to create the sense that we are flexible around that and are not moving 

headlong into more accommodation. 

In support of alternative B, the question in my mind at this meeting is whether the 

situation in the economy has gone awry so convincingly that the Committee should take action, 

September 21, 2010 107 of 151



 

 

 

and I don’t think that is the case.  I don’t think the accumulated data and the anecdotal evidence 

that I get calls for action at this meeting.  I do accept that there are some risks in not taking action 

and that we could get behind the proverbial curve if the situation deteriorates rapidly. But, in the 

absence of a shock, I don’t see that happening, so I think the risk of being late by not taking 

action in this meeting, but waiting until November or later, is acceptable. 

I also want to thank President Evans for his memo.  I think raising the question of an 

explicit price level objective is an appropriate thing to discuss at the next meeting, so I certainly 

hope that will be on the agenda. 

As regards the language in alternative B, I think that, if there is any debate at all, it’s 

around paragraph 4.  As I said a second ago, I support it and could support President 

Kocherlakota’s suggestion.  I think it signals the capacity to act and the willingness to act if 

conditions require it.  I think we can explain this to the market in subsequent communications.  I 

hope this is not too naïve; that is, I hope that it’s simply signaling capacity and willingness under 

certain conditions to act, as opposed to actually heading in that direction. 

You asked earlier, Mr. Chairman, for some thoughts on a framework.  This would be a 

decision framework, I presume, for action at a later meeting, and some have described this as 

essentially moving toward a new regime.  Obviously, at this meeting, I don’t have definitive 

answers, but I do have some thoughts regarding what I think the requirements of a discussion of 

the framework should be.  There are a lot of open questions, to my mind, and, therefore, the 

meeting that we have in November should focus on four requirements.    

First, let’s get a consensus on the nature of the problem.  Are we principally talking about 

an inflation expectations problem and the potential for deflation, or are we talking about a “gap” 

way of thinking about the problem, which focuses more on unemployment?  Second, what 

September 21, 2010 108 of 151



 

 

 

conditions would call for action?  The basic question—and I think President Yellen actually 

raised this in the economy round—is whether a persistence of current conditions would call for 

action or whether we’d be looking for deteriorating data in order to pull the trigger.  Also, as has 

been raised earlier, there’s the question of whether a rule-like reaction or a more judgmental 

approach is appropriate.  Third would be the estimates of the likely effect of specific policy 

actions.  Would rate reductions result in credit expansion?  Some have raised doubts about that.  

Or would a price level targeting policy raise inflation expectations?  Or could we estimate the 

effects on unemployment?  I do think there’s enough ambiguity around the effectiveness of 

monetary policy in these times that we should do our best analytical work to arrive at some 

measure of what we should expect.  Finally, there are communications tradeoffs.  As I perceive 

it, there’s a tradeoff between clarity, reducing uncertainty, very explicit programs, and expected 

policy outcomes on the one hand, and the more incremental approach in which we adjust policy 

as developments unfold, on the other hand.  I think that needs to be debated. 

With all of these questions about a framework, I support President Rosengren’s idea—

let’s make sure we take enough time at the next meeting, and, that may mean extending it to two 

full days, because there is simply a lot to discuss.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I expect to see the 

economy expand at a rate of about 3.5 percent next year and for inflation to stabilize at about 

1 percent.  My projection is that it will take several more years for the economy to reach full 

resource utilization and for inflation to move back to near 2 percent. 

The question is whether this rate of progress towards our longer-term objectives is 

acceptable.  My outlook is certainly acceptable to me, in the sense that I put low probability on 

September 21, 2010 109 of 151



 

 

 

either entering another recession or experiencing a bout of deflation.  However, I would certainly 

prefer the economy to be on a path that achieves our longer-term objectives for price stability 

and employment much more quickly than the path that I am forecasting.  I recognize that, in 

theory, there are monetary policy strategies that can put the economy on a faster growth path, but 

any strategy or framework that we choose will need to cope with the fact that central banks have 

very limited practical experience in dealing with the circumstances that we face.  In addition, we 

need to recognize the potential adverse consequences from unconventional policies.  So with 

these reservations in mind, Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that a new framework would be 

useful, and I support your recommendation that we work on developing that framework. 

President Lockhart just laid out four elements that he would like to see in that framework.  

I have some similar thoughts just using some different wording.  I think a new framework is far 

more likely to be successful if it has a clear target, an operating procedure, a feedback 

mechanism for guiding policy adjustments, and a communications plan.  Clearly, it’s going to be 

challenging to identify a satisfactory framework that contains all of these elements, but I think 

that it is critical that we work on developing such a framework. 

Adopting alternative B today has several advantages.  First, it provides some continuity 

with the decision we agreed on at our last meeting; also, the language in alternative B is 

consistent with the language, Mr. Chairman, that you used in your Jackson Hole speech a few 

weeks ago.  Second, alternative B opens the door to further stimulus.  Third, choosing alternative 

B at this meeting also gives us additional time to develop the framework that I would find more 

suitable for deploying even if the outlook continues to be for moderate but still suboptimal 

economic growth.  Finally, I also am open to President Kocherlakota’s language in paragraph 4, 

September 21, 2010 110 of 151



 

 

 

which would say that we are prepared to act as needed to support economic recovery, and then 

the rest of the statement.  Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I enjoy an unconstrained discussion as 

much as the next guy [laughter], I will confine myself to what seems to be in the realm of the 

reasonable, Mr. Chairman, for the purposes of advancing towards our deadline here.  Let me 

make four points about the framework and then turn to the alternatives. 

First, the portfolio-balance sheet channel that you described in Jackson Hole is operative 

and effective even if no new policy announcements are made at any meeting. 

Second, it strikes me that it’s not the size or composition of the balance sheet that 

matters.  It’s the effects of that balance sheet on markets and the resulting accommodation.  On 

that point, the effects of any given balance sheet in markets that are as sensitive as we described 

earlier are well worth continuing to understand as we go forward.  So it’s not a bigger balance 

sheet that’s necessary to provide more accommodation in these markets. 

Third, I think that the benefit-cost framework of the new regime that we’ve discussed is 

critical not only to the judgments we form, but also to our communication about the regime.  To 

have a meaningful chance of being effective, the new regime must be built, communicated, and 

understood.  So, like many others here, I think it would be prudent to give this another six weeks, 

at least, to take shape.  The staff estimates of the gross benefits of an extra $500 billion are now 

much closer to what my estimates have been since we began this process, and they can’t help but 

make us feel underwhelmed.  On the cost side of the framework, I would say that estimates of 

the uncertainty and associated risks should not be assumed away, even if they’re difficult for us 

to ascertain.  If we’ve learned anything in the last few years, it’s that policy should be highly 

September 21, 2010 111 of 151



 

 

 

attuned to low-probability high-impact events.  Given the fear that I have, and that I think many 

of you have, there is a nontrivial chance of further shocks to global economic systems.  My sense 

is that policymakers would want to use their tools at times of maximum efficacy, and I don’t 

believe that is the case today. 

A fourth point on the framework and balance sheet is that the weighing of benefits and 

cost should take account of the circumstances.  I think of this as situational awareness.  If the 

fiscal trajectory were going in a different direction, it would give us, in my view, more degrees 

of freedom in thinking about how aggressive we can be on balance sheets.  I would say an 

objective assessment of prices and the risks around inflation is hard for us to pin down.  If 

deflation risks were more significant than I currently judge, my own assessment towards balance 

sheet expansion would be materially different.  If markets were in disarray, I would also measure 

the likely benefits higher.  Our policy efficacy in periods of extraordinary times is quite different, 

it strikes me, from the policy efficacy during benign periods, even if the benign periods involve a 

suboptimal recovery. 

Let me turn now to alternative B.  I think the alternative B handed around the table now 

is an improvement over the alternative B in the Tealbook.  My concern with the earlier version is 

that it basically said that “the conditions precedent for further action have now been established.”  

But it did not ultimately announce the decision to deploy those assets.  It’s as if the missiles are 

ready, but we’re still waiting for the launch codes, and I think that would have been confusing to 

markets.  The current version of alternative B does a bit better job of saying that we remain 

open-minded on the data, both on the inflation front and on the employment front, and it does 

preserve optionality for us and does not overpromise to markets that this judgment is, in fact, 

locked and loaded. 

September 21, 2010 112 of 151



 

 

 

I would consider it an improvement of this version of alternative B if we were to soften 

paragraph 4 modestly.  While President Kocherlakota and others have offered some ideas about 

how to do that in a way that doesn’t defeat the purpose of our discussion today, my suggestion 

would simply be to change the word “as” to “if.”  So paragraph 4 would read, “The Committee 

will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and is prepared to 

provide additional accommodation if needed to support economic recovery,” etc.  That adds 

some conditionality that I think a large majority of folks around here want, and, by using the 

word “prepared,” I still think it does show that we have made some progress in comparison to 

where we were some weeks ago, but, again, it’s not locked and loaded.  That’s just a suggestion, 

but in either version, I could support alternative B with that suggestion.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have come around to the opinion that further 

purchases of Treasury securities are warranted.  I’m concerned that a delay in the recovery of the 

housing market beyond what’s assumed in the Tealbook is possible and, perhaps, likely.  And 

while I’m quite skeptical that lower longer-term rates will have a significant effect on overall 

borrowing, lower rates are the key to success for modifications and restructures of residential and 

commercial mortgages.  So, to the extent that lower rates result in faster, stronger credit 

recovery, they could on the margins contribute to easier credit terms.  But beyond that, I went 

back to the transcript from the last meeting and was persuaded by two arguments made then:  

first, that missing both parts of our dual mandate on the same side was hard to defend; second, 

that the possibility of its not working was not a reason not to try.  So, on those points, I concede. 

Where I don’t concede is on our need to communicate clearly what we’re doing if we’re 

establishing a new regime with implied thresholds, reaction functions, and limits.  I would be 

September 21, 2010 113 of 151



 

 

 

prepared to vote for alternative A1 or A2 today if I had some idea of the framework we were 

establishing.  But if it’s not clear inside this room, I don’t see any possibility that it will be clear 

outside this room.  We seem to have ruled out going all-in at once, the “shock and awe” 

alternative, but in alternative A we are still expressing ourselves in the same way:  purchase of X 

dollars in Y time frame.  If we need to adjust this, will we adjust the amount, or will we adjust 

the time frame?  And what will be the trigger for adjustment?  If the action doesn’t have much 

impact and the forecast remains the same, will we add more?  If it does start to work and the 

outlook improves for some other reason, will we pull back or will we stop?  Or are we prepared 

to use both purchases and sales and target our balance sheet, as President Bullard suggests?  And 

where does the $500 billion in alternative A come from, anyway?  If our decision at the last 

meeting was roughly equivalent to $400 billion by year-end 2011, how do those two compare?  

And do we have too many regimes going on all at once?  Would it make sense to combine all 

Treasury purchases into one action and say something like, “We will purchase Treasury 

securities in amounts necessary to replace all maturities and principal repayments, plus 

$100 billion per month”? 

So I favor alternative B.  I’m fully prepared to take action at our next meeting if 

conditions remain the same or deteriorate, as long as I understand the strategy we’re following.  I 

hope that we can once again ask staff to do the heavy lifting of further developing a memo 

defining the alternative approaches and the methods of communicating them so we can use the 

two-day meeting to agree on a regime, if not on the precise thresholds.  I understand the concern 

about losing the effects of additional purchases in the intermeeting period, but I, frankly, believe 

that the accommodation language in paragraph 4, combined with the clarity of our views about 

inflation in paragraph 2, will do as much good as the $100 billion or so in securities we might 

September 21, 2010 114 of 151



 

 

 

buy between now and the November meeting.  The November meeting has the additional benefit 

of our published projections, which should tamp down the impression that some had after our 

last meeting that we knew something bad about the economy that no one else did.  In fact, I 

would suggest that, in addition to announcing a new regime, we consider releasing our 

projections with the statement rather than waiting for the publication of the minutes. 

Finally, it’s my hope that we can come out of the November meeting with a common 

understanding of the regime we are using and a strong communication of that regime.  We might 

still disagree over the action, but it will be clear to me, at least, what it is that we disagree about.  

It’s all well and good to have these geeky conversations as we debate policy, and, in fact, at this 

end of the table, the three geeks who are here have demonstrated that there is no dearth of ideas.  

But if our ultimate goal is to effect the day-to-day decisions of non-geeks and folks like me, then 

we must be able to explain it. 

President Lacker suggested that our actions in August damaged confidence.  I believe that 

it was not our actions, but, as I feared at the time, it was the bobbling of the communication that 

actually damaged confidence.  If we are going to get the full potential confidence benefit of a 

regime change outside of the mechanics of what we do, I would suggest that we consider 

releasing an additional or expanded statement explaining our new regime, along the lines of the 

one that President Evans suggested in his memo.  I’m not sure that I necessarily prefer his 

approach, but I’m pleased to report that I could understand it in my own non-geeky way. 

Finally, in addition to a statement of regime in our projections, I would suggest that the 

Chairman find a way to take questions either on or off the record.  In this environment, I think 

we’re much better served by having the Chairman and our statements answer the questions than 

September 21, 2010 115 of 151



 

 

 

to have our views, objectives, and disagreements channeled through speculation by reporters and 

media commentators.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  For the reasons that the Chairman and 

many of you have already stated, I think that alternative B is the best course of action for today.  

I’m comfortable with the language as drafted in the package that Bill English distributed a little 

bit earlier this morning.  I would be open to modifications of that language that could engender 

stronger consensus around the table, particularly if that consensus were to be translated into a 

stronger perceived consensus by markets and the public. 

Mr. Chairman, after listening to the conversation this morning and a lot of the questions 

and ideas that were raised, I wonder whether it might be useful to try to do a briefing sometime 

between now and the November meeting—maybe midway through, after Columbus day—in 

which at least some of the issues that were raised today could be developed a bit and presented 

so that we wouldn’t have to try to pack everything into even an elongated two-day meeting. 

That’s just an idea that occurred to me as I heard so many people evince the desire for a fuller 

discussion.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just to take things sort of backwards, first, I’m encouraged 

by the desire at this table to discuss a regime change.  I think it’s timely.  It might be 

significantly effective.  Some proposals have been put on the table.  I read very carefully 

President Evans’ paper on price level targeting, although to my knowledge, other than Sweden in 

1930, it has never been successfully employed, but I think it is worth discussing.  My own staff 

seems eager to put together a paper on the possibility of targeting nominal income or nominal 

September 21, 2010 116 of 151



 

 

 

spending.  I’m not sure I’m convinced that that’s the right approach, but we would be happy to 

add to the discussion. 

I think it’s necessary because these statements that we’re providing are becoming more 

and more convoluted and, I think, run the risk of painting us into a corner or of further confusing 

the market.  So I’m all in favor of your very thoughtful recommendation, and I like Governor 

Tarullo’s suggestion that we may not do this only at meetings, but that we may have some 

interim stages where we develop this further so that we can do it efficiently. 

I want to go back very quickly to the implied debate we had earlier in the go-round about 

final demand and whether or not government regulations and random refereeing are inhibiting 

investment.  One factor that is clearly not inhibiting businesses is access to liquidity or the cost 

of money.  The other thing that is clear is that you can’t have final demand unless you have 

consumption, and in a period of high unemployment, you can’t have consumption unless you 

have job creation.  So I think our objectives are all the same on that front, and I don’t find much 

distinction among them. 

I am concerned that, as we pursue the business of, in essence, subsidizing risk—trying to 

lower the premiums by providing accommodation—in the globalized community, we may be, in 

fact, subsidizing job creation elsewhere rather than here in the United States.  That’s what I’m 

hearing from those who hire and those who are utilizing their resources in terms of finding an 

ROI elsewhere that is superior, not available in the United States.  It’s not clear to me that further 

accommodation is going to change that equation.  I just wanted to put those points on the table. 

With regard to the statements, I find myself lining up, not surprisingly, with President 

Lacker and President Plosser.  I thought that Governor Warsh made a very good suggestion.  But 

I want to go back to a point that President Lacker made, which is very important, and also pick 

September 21, 2010 117 of 151



 

 

 

up on the statement Governor Duke made.  Governor Duke said if it’s not clear inside this room, 

it won’t be clear outside this room.  President Lacker correctly pointed out we have not discussed 

what the inflation levels that we agree to at this table in three years.  I’m very uncomfortable 

with the sentences in paragraph 2 in alternative B where we refer to levels twice even though we 

do not have agreement internally as to what they might be.  We talk about 1 to 2 percent, around 

1½, 1.7 to 2 percent.  We have never had a thorough discussion of that, and I believe we should.  

I would be uncomfortable with alternative B if we were to reference those levels that the 

Committee considers consistent with its mandate.  If we haven’t agreed to it internally, I don’t 

know how we can convince people externally as to what they might be. 

I would suggest especially dropping it in paragraph 4.  If we were to go in the direction of 

alternative B, I would suggest we take into consideration Governor Warsh’s point of substituting 

“if” for the word “as,” and I would drop the rest of the sentence and include President 

Kocherlakota’s editorial suggestion.  Actually, my preference would be just to issue a one-

sentence statement if you want to set up your regime change.  “The Committee met and decided 

not to change the policy articulated at the last meeting.”  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I can go one better.  We used not to issue any statement at 

all. [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  I agree. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe we should provide 

additional monetary policy accommodation.  The economy is too weak, inflation is too low, and 

we are too far away from our full employment objective.  But I believe that there are several 

competing options for action on the table that are open to us, and we haven’t reached consensus 

September 21, 2010 118 of 151



 

 

 

on them.  I also think each option does have some risks associated with it, so I agree that we do 

need more time, especially for the staff to do the necessary work, for us to reach a consensus, 

and for us to prepare market participants for what we are ultimately going to do.  I support 

alternative B at this meeting, and, unless the economy improves markedly soon, I would expect 

to prefer a statement like alternative A at the November FOMC meeting. 

With any policy move there are both costs and benefits, and the Chairman made that clear 

very nicely, I thought, in his speech at Jackson Hole.  In this regard, there are several things we 

can do to reduce the cost of further monetary policy accommodation.  First, I think one of the 

most important ones is that we can be a lot more disciplined in terms of how we communicate to 

markets.  I was very unhappy about the press stories that came out after the last FOMC meeting, 

because some of the stories delved all too accurately into the specifics of the meeting—who said 

what and what the staff briefings were—and I think that is completely privileged information.  

It’s completely inappropriate for any of that to be disclosed to market participants.  If it’s going 

to be disclosed, that should only happen in the minutes, after all of us have had a chance to 

comment on the draft—that’s the way that should get out.  I think it’s noteworthy in that regard 

that in our survey of primary dealers we got the lowest grade in terms of the quality of our 

communications since we began asking the dealers that question in early 2009, and I think that 

was in spite of the Chairman’s efforts.  At Jackson Hole I think he gave a very good, clear 

speech that was on target, and despite that we got a very low grade.  So I think the leaks very 

much hurt us in that regard. 

Second, I think we can do a better job in providing more clarity to market participants 

about the framework we’re using to shape policy.  People around the table laid out a number of 

choices.  We can keep the current framework, continue to emphasize our dual mandate, and 

September 21, 2010 119 of 151



 

 

 

explain a little bit better how further disinflation is inconsistent with achieving full employment. 

We also can shift the framework a bit, if we decide that that adjustment would make it easier for 

us to achieve our dual mandate.  The only reason to shift it is if we think that’s going to make it 

more likely that we’re going to accomplish our objective.  In this regard, I would strongly 

encourage the staff to investigate a lot of the things that have been raised today, such as moving 

to an explicit inflation targeting regime per alternative A1 or using the price-level regime that 

President Evans laid out.  My own opinion is that exploring a price-level target regime is 

worthwhile, because such a regime does have advantages relative to an inflation targeting 

regime.  It’s more powerful in keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, because 

shortfalls in inflation have to be made up in future periods.  It also may have a potential 

advantage in terms of credibility, because by introducing it you’re admitting the prospect that 

you will miss your inflation objective over the short run, while having an inflation target and 

then missing it does have potential risks for credibility.  On the disadvantage side for price-level 

targets, as President Yellen laid out, they’re a lot more complicated, there are a lot more moving 

parts, a lot of communication challenges.  The devil is in the details on this one.  So I’d like the 

staff to work on the details so we can see how big a devil it is. 

Third, I think we can do more to reduce the risk that market participants will be unsettled 

by further balance sheet expansion.  That means we need to explain more clearly how it would 

work.  For example, if we decide to do it on a continuous basis, what does that mean?  What are 

the units of change that we might like to use?  That is, we don’t move the funds rate 7 basis 

points, and then 12 basis points, then 18 basis points—we move in increments of 25 basis points.  

So presumably there has to be some sort of analogue to that in terms of how we adjust the 

balance sheet.  I think that doing all of these things, so that market participants understand why 

September 21, 2010 120 of 151



 

 

 

we’re doing what we’re doing and how the process will unfold over the longer term—not just 

between this meeting and next meeting—should help improve the probability that inflation 

expectations will be well anchored and that policy will achieve the desired results. 

Regarding the language for today’s statement, I think the key issue is:  What are we 

trying to shoot for in terms of what the markets think about what’s going to happen in 

November?  I’m sure everyone around the table has a different view of what they’re shooting 

for.  In my own opinion, I want to have the markets view us as likely to move at the next meeting 

if we don’t get an acceleration, a meaningful improvement, in economic activity.  So I want 

language that is consistent with that.  If, after this meeting, the market thought there was a 

60 percent probability that we were going to move at the next meeting, I think that would be 

about right.  I don’t want it to be much higher than that, because I don’t want it to be a foregone 

conclusion, where we’re sort of locked in.  But I don’t want it to be much lower than that.  I 

think it’s really important to remember that policy isn’t symmetric now—being late is far worse 

than being early.  I don’t want us to get in a position where we just temporize from meeting to 

meeting, saying that things are a little stronger, so we can wait another meeting.  Then we’d get 

further and further behind, and, if a shock arose, we’d actually have a deflation problem.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thanks, everyone, for your input.  

This is very, very difficult.  We don’t have good options.  It feels safer not to do anything, but 

then, on the other side, we have an economy which is underperforming very severely—we have 

very high unemployment.  So there’s no safe option.  Whatever we do, we’re going to have to 

make our best judgment and hope for the best. 

September 21, 2010 121 of 151



 

 

 

I certainly appreciate the comments that President Hoenig and Governor Warsh and 

others have made about the risks and uncertainties associated with these monetary policies that 

we’re using.  At the same time, as I said, I’m concerned about the state of the economy, and I 

don’t think that these policies are necessarily marginal in their impact.  There’s more to the 

effects than just the portfolio-balance effects, for example.  Inflation expectation effects, for 

example, could be very powerful if they took us back up to, say, 2 percent.  I do think we should 

be moving in this direction, and I’m glad to hear that there’s broad support for trying to develop 

a framework that will give more certainty and more clarity to the public about what we’re doing.  

With respect to that, I’m certainly open to a longer meeting next time, and I also was going to 

suggest the possibility of a video meeting sometime in between, if the staff were ready to go over 

some preliminary discussion points—we certainly can consider that. 

I have one final comment on the substance.  I just disagree with the view that we should 

not do anything until deflation is upon us.  First of all, zero is only a number.  Low inflation is 

also costly, because it creates low inflation expectations, higher real interest rates, higher debt 

burdens, and has, therefore, negative effects on the real economy as well as being not at the level 

of inflation that I think most of us consider consistent with our mandate.  Moreover, of course, 

these things have a lot of momentum, and, if you wait too long, then you may find yourself 

seriously behind the curve.  So I feel comfortable with moving in this direction.  I think, broadly 

speaking, it’s the right direction. 

Sorry, I have a couple of additional things.  There were a lot of interesting specific points 

on the framework, and I think the main thing is that we need to keep working at it.  President 

Bullard suggested we undertake a few things today.  I understand his point, but I take his 

comments as being input to the discussion we need to have during the intermeeting period and at 

September 21, 2010 122 of 151



 

 

 

the next meeting.  Some of the issues were about whether or not the appropriate measure is the 

flow of new purchases or the stock size of the balance sheet; I think those are good questions that 

we need to think through. 

The statement is also a little risky, because it changes quite a bit.  The reaction to our last 

statement wasn’t very good.  I, obviously, have to take some responsibility for that.  I think 

partly it was bad luck, but partly it was that we didn’t convey exactly the appropriate tone in 

terms of our outlook for the economy.  I think a risk in this statement is that, by talking about 

inflation below our preferred levels, we may convey a greater fear of deflation than we want.  I 

thought about a very small change in paragraph B2 where it says “Measures of underlying 

inflation have declined.” Maybe we could change that to “have come down over time”—

something like that that’s a bit less dramatic?  “Decline” sounds as if it happened since the last 

meeting.  So it would read, “Measures of underlying inflation have come down over time and are 

currently at levels…”  My hope, therefore, is to mitigate that risk.  As we communicate, we 

should be clear that we are looking at an inflation level that is not yet deflation, of course, and 

that we don’t necessarily anticipate it to be deflation, but, nevertheless, it is too low for the best 

performance that we can achieve. 

By the way, on this issue of what rate the Committee judges to be appropriate, I realize 

that we haven’t discussed it for a few years, but this Committee has discussed these issues three 

or four times in the last decade, I think, and the conclusions have been pretty much the same in 

each case:  PCE inflation is the right measure, and the level is something around 2 percent, or a 

little less than 2 percent.  Certainly this is something we want to clarify at the next meeting if we 

decide to go in this direction.  But it’s also true that the current inflation rates are below virtually 

September 21, 2010 123 of 151



 

 

 

everybody’s estimate of what the appropriate longer-run inflation rate is in your projections, so I 

don’t think we are going, really, too far from what’s appropriate. 

Finally, I heard the comments on the last paragraph, B4.  It’s a very delicate calculation.  

Like the Vice Chairman, I’d like to be sure to leave some optionality.  Since we circulated the 

first version of this a week ago, we have tried to tone it down twice.  The Tealbook was 

substantially moderated, and then we made changes yesterday that were intended to make the 

future action less certain.  I guess I’m open to a groundswell, but my recommendation would be 

to stay with the language we currently have.  Vice Chairman? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.   Can we just ask Brian and Bill their view of how the 

market would take this?  Obviously, it’s just an opinion, but I think it would be useful to hear it. 

MR. ENGLISH.   My sense would be that just changing the paragraph will get people’s 

attention, for sure.  They will notice, and they will assume that the thought is that further easing 

is going to be more likely.  You suggested 60 percent.  I think it could be higher—I was guessing 

two-thirds.  I think last night as I was messing around with stuff in preparation for my briefing, 

some number like that came up—probably less than 80 percent but more than 60 percent, I 

would guess. 

MR. SACK.  Yes.  We discussed this last night, and I think that’s the range.  With 

optionality, I think it would adjust as the data come in.  But your starting point is probably 

around 70 percent. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  So, after all that discussion, my recommendation is 

to stick with alternative B as written, with the change I suggested:  “Measures of underlying 

inflation have come down over time.”  Do you have any concern about deflation fear, Michelle, 

Bill, Brian, anyone? 

September 21, 2010 124 of 151



 

 

 

MR. ENGLISH.  One thing we discussed is whether the “trended lower” phrase gave a 

sense that maybe there was an ongoing process, that is, that it gave a greater sense of the risk of 

getting to deflation, and “have come down over time” maybe has a little of that flavor.  I guess 

the question is what the Committee thinks.  I could live with either. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I don’t want to be too much of a squeaky wheel here, but I notice that 

paragraph 2 focuses on it twice.  First we’re saying it’s below that which we judge consistent 

with our longer-run mandate, and, second, we say “before rising to levels the Committee 

considers consistent with its mandate,” even though I don’t believe we have agreed on the levels; 

but, ceding that, I think that probably says enough.  What bothers me is adding it at the end of 

that sentence in paragraph 4.  I think that may be overkill, because it is implicit that we’re not 

satisfied.  But, by having it at the end of paragraph 4, I think it becomes a little bit too explicit.  

After all, we are saying “is prepared to provide additional accommodation.”  I assume we’re 

going to substitute the word “if,” which I would recommend, as Governor Warsh did: “if needed 

to support economic recovery.”  We’ve already talked about inflation twice in paragraph 2.  And 

that’s a change. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  But the purpose of introducing it there is to say that 

that’s one of our policy objectives. 

MR. FISHER.  I think that’s clearly understood by just mentioning it in paragraph 2.  It’s 

less than subtle in paragraph 2—we mention it twice. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You could put a period after “subdued for some time.” 

MR. FISHER.  Well, I just wanted to make that point. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

September 21, 2010 125 of 151



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  At a minimum, I would at least put the word “if.”  President Bullard 

mentioned the idea of having two-way conditionality.  I think that’s not important.  I don’t think 

we can quite do it in the way he wanted to, but at least the word “if” indicates that it may not 

happen, rather than the confidence that’s expressed with the word “as.”  So that would be my 

ultimate fallback, if I were negotiating, but I’m not negotiating.  I’m just saying that it’s a little 

bit too much to add it in all three places, twice in paragraph 2 and once in paragraph 4. 

I think the jury is still out on us.  We have worked very hard to restore confidence.  This 

may offend people at the table, but I think we’re probably the only government entity that has 

any public confidence right now, and I’m just a little bit worried that this confidence is thin and 

that, if we press this argument too much, we might send a shiver up the spine of the marketplace.  

That’s solely my judgment, but I wanted to put it on the table. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I appreciate it.  In the spirit of President Bullard, “as 

needed” suggests that we will calibrate our response to the need of the economy. 

MR. FISHER. “As and if needed.”  

MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, let me see if I can get a groundswell going for “if.”  I 

think it would help soften it a little bit.  I think estimates of the probabilities that we’re going to 

take action at the next meeting with this statement are a little low.  I think they’re going to go to 

0.9 or 0.95 or something.  Maybe that’s okay, but the Committee sounds a little more tentative 

than that—I think President Dudley was about right, in that we’re thinking two-thirds or 

something.   So I do think it’s still a little too strong.  Maybe “if” would help mitigate it a little 

bit—it probably doesn’t make too much difference—but I’d support that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments?  President Yellen, do you have a 

comment?  Are you okay? 

September 21, 2010 126 of 151



 

 

 

MS. YELLEN.  Sure.  Whatever you want. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes, I support what President Bullard said.  I’d also point out that this 

statement is going to be read in the context of reports last week of economists predicting 

essentially what this does and what we plan.  And I support fully, of course, what Vice Chairman 

Dudley said about the communications after the last meeting. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman, are you okay with it?  

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  The two changes are “if needed” and “come down 

over time.”  If no one else has any comments, President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  It does improve dramatically, I think, from “decline,” which suggests 

that it occurred in the intermeeting period.  But I wonder if you can drop the whole thing and just 

have it read this way: “Measures of underlying inflation are currently at levels somewhat below 

the Committee…” and don’t make it subject to interpretation. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I like that. “Measures of underlying inflation are currently 

at levels somewhat below.”  By the way, putting the word “levels” in the plural is meant to 

capture the notion that people may have somewhat different estimates. 

Okay, I think we are going to run into hard constraints.  Anything else?  [No response]  

All right.  Matt, would you please read where we are now? 

MR. LUECKE.   Yes.  The vote will encompass both alternative B, as on page 4 of Bill 

English’s handout, as well as the directive on page 9 of the handout.  There are two changes to 

alternative B on page 4.  In paragraph 2, it would read, “Measures of underlying inflation are 

September 21, 2010 127 of 151



 

 

 

currently at levels somewhat below,” and continuing as written.  In paragraph 4, the word “as” 

would be changed to “if.”  Otherwise, the statement would be as indicated on page 4. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Would you call the roll? 

MR. LUECKE. 

 Chairman Bernanke  Yes 

 Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 

 President Bullard   Yes 

 Governor Duke   Yes 

 President Hoenig   No 

 President Pianalto  Yes 

 President Rosengren  Yes 

 Governor Tarullo   Yes 

 Governor Warsh   Yes 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  The next meeting is November 2 

and 3.  We will be in touch with you about appropriate scheduling.  Lunch is available.  At 

3:00 p.m. we will reconvene for the System conference on implementation of financial reform in 

Dining Rooms E and F.  Is that right, President Lacker? 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  It’s on the terrace in the Martin Building. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay, thank you very much. 

END OF MEETING 

September 21, 2010 128 of 151




