











































FOMC Conference Call Transcript, May 9, 2010


 

 

 

Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

May 9, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Sunday, May 9, 

2010, at 11:20 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Donald L. Kohn 

Sandra Pianalto 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

Kevin Warsh 

Charles L. Evans, Richard Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, 

Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist 

David J. Stockton, Economist 

Alan D. Barkema, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. 

Wilcox, Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 

Governors 

Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

May 9, 2010 1 of 42



 

 

 

Harvey Rosenblum and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 

Banks of Dallas and San Francisco, respectively 

 

 

 

  

David Altig, Patricia C. Mosser, Arthur J. Rolnick, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John A. 

Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, 

Minneapolis, Chicago, and Richmond, respectively 

Anna Nordstrom, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

May 9, 2010 2 of 42



 

 

 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on 

May 9, 2010 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  I’m sorry to interrupt your 

Mother’s Day.  I hope this won’t be too lengthy a meeting.  The topic for today is the request that 

we now have to activate the foreign currency swaps—when we spoke on Friday, we had not 

received any formal request.  Yesterday Jean-Claude Trichet called me and made what I would 

characterize as a personal appeal to reopen the swaps that we had before.  This morning I have 

gotten, again, personal calls from Mervyn King, of the Bank of England, and Masaaki 

Shirakawa, of the Bank of Japan, also asking us to reopen the swaps.  I’m also informed—and 

later we can ask Nathan Sheets to talk about this—that the Bank of Canada and the Swiss 

National Bank are also interested in joining a multilateral swaps arrangement among the G-7 

plus Switzerland. 

Let me give you general background on the discussions that I have been having, and then 

we can have a couple of comments from staff.  After that, we’ll want to have a go-round or an 

open discussion session, so that I can hear your views on how we should proceed with this. 

First of all, as you know, there has been a lot of activity over the weekend in Europe.  

There’s a great deal of concern there about what’s going to happen tomorrow and this week in 

financial markets.  Friday evening, Ecofin, which is the leadership of the EU for economic 

matters, met and, as you probably read in the paper, announced some plans to set up a financing 

mechanism in Europe that would ultimately be used to guarantee the debt of sovereign nations in 

the euro zone.  Ecofin is meeting today, beginning around 9:00 a.m. our time, and they expect to 

be done around noon or 12:30 p.m. our time.  They will be prepared to announce additional 

measures.  I have a call with the G-7 ministers and governors at 2:00 p.m. our time, where we 

will hear in detail what Ecofin is planning.  Again, I think the basic proposals will be some kind 

May 9, 2010 3 of 42



 

 

 

of guarantee mechanism for euro debt, plus, we hope—although we’re not certain—that there 

will be new austerity measures from Portugal and Spain, and additional mechanisms or steps 

may be taken as well.  We know that things are being discussed, but nothing concrete has been 

agreed upon. 

Very importantly, the European Central Bank this morning had a meeting of its Executive 

Board and came to some very significant decisions.  Jean-Claude Trichet shared them with me 

this morning on a highly confidential basis.  Of course, I want to tell you about them, but this is 

extremely confidential, so please take that into account.  The ECB is very concerned about the 

situation, and you will be able to see that in terms of the actions that they have decided to take. 

First, they will be restoring their three-month and six-month fixed-rate tenders, which 

essentially provide an unlimited supply of funding to their banking system at fixed rates over 

three and six months; from their perspective, this amounts to reopening the unusual liquidity 

measures that they had shut down before.  That is important, but it’s not the most important 

thing.  The novel intervention, and one that will be highly controversial in Europe, and probably 

here as well, is that the ECB is preparing to have an open-ended intervention policy in any 

market that they deem dysfunctional or illiquid.  That means that they will stand ready to buy 

any public or private security, denominated in euros, that’s traded in a market in which there is 

dysfunction or disorderly movement.  There will be no limit to the amount that they are going to 

be prepared to buy. 

The philosophy underlying this is, I think, analogous to foreign exchange rate 

intervention; that is, they’re not setting up a fixed amount that they are going to buy, as we did 

with our securities purchases, and they are not setting up a facility that will buy bonds as offered 

at a fixed rate.  Rather, they are going to enter markets tactically and randomly in ways that will 

May 9, 2010 4 of 42



 

 

 

try to make it expensive for speculators to bet against European bonds or even against private 

securities like the debt of European banks.  They intend to sterilize their purchases, so that the 

net effect of these purchases on the monetary base will be nil or small.  By doing so, they hope to 

protect the euro and to avoid any spillover into inflation expectations.  So, to summarize, this 

will be a market-oriented intervention, with the goal of stabilizing markets and preventing 

momentum-driven speculation from creating problems beyond the fundamental problems.  It’s 

worth asking whether or not this will be effective.  It’s certainly an interesting approach, and I 

suspect it will have at least some short-term effects.  But it cannot solve the longer-term problem 

without fiscal support and fiscal action. 

The ECB is waiting to hear the outcome of the Ecofin meeting.  The ECB has not yet 

taken legal steps, and it will not announce anything until tonight—Jean-Claude assures me that 

they will not take these actions unless they are persuaded that there is real help coming on the 

fiscal side.  They view themselves as kind of “holding the fort” for a short period until the 

fiscal/political side can take the necessary action.  So we will see—as I said, I have a call at 

2:00 p.m., and I’m sure I will get all of the Ecofin news at that time. 

I just want to emphasize—and I think it’s obvious to everybody—what an extraordinary 

step this is, particularly for the ECB, which has been relatively conservative on market 

interventions.  It shows that they are very, very concerned about the situation.  As I said, I would 

also characterize Trichet’s call to me as being a personal appeal.  He feels it is very important for 

us to support him, and he understands our concerns, which, I will, of course, discuss.  I got very 

much some of the same tone from Mervyn King, and, to a lesser extent, even from Shirakawa, 

who says that Japan is also facing pressure, and they are very concerned about contagion. 

May 9, 2010 5 of 42



 

 

 

Turning to the swaps, in a moment, I’m going to give Brian Sack a chance to comment in 

more detail on interbank markets and on the foreign exchange markets, and give us some more 

analysis of the market implications of this, so that we can all make our own assessments.  My 

own view is that the swaps would be substantively helpful in addressing some of the interbank 

flows and certain other problems there.  Moreover, everybody I’ve talked to about this in the 

central banking world thinks that at least as important as the direct effect on the dollar funding 

problems would be the psychological effects of an international coordinated effort in size that 

supplements the main actions, which have to be in Europe.  I think we all agree that this is not 

going to work unless the Europeans are taking the lead and are taking strong steps towards 

addressing the fiscal actions.  My own view is that, absent any political considerations, this 

would be a pretty easy call, in that it would support financial markets, both globally and in 

Europe, and would be an important indicator of solidarity.  I noted this morning that Vice 

President Biden is in Europe and said that the United States would do everything possible to 

assist the Europeans; I think that that symbolism is also very important. 

That being said, as you know, we can’t ignore the politics of this by any means.  I think 

the Sanders amendment is now in a good place in terms of providing independence to monetary 

policy and to other activities, including the discount window and international transactions.  The 

vote on that is currently planned for Tuesday.  Clearly, there’s some risk that action of the sort 

that we’re contemplating would be portrayed as a bailout or another Federal Reserve unilateral 

action.  I think that, to be responsible, we really do have to take into account those kinds of risks, 

because they could affect the integrity of the Federal Reserve going forward.  So I think it is an 

appropriate consideration as we discuss the substance of this issue. 

May 9, 2010 6 of 42



 

 

 

Let me talk about that a bit, and I’ll also give Linda Robertson a chance to make her 

comments.  I have had discussions primarily with the Administration—not only the Secretary, 

but also with Rahm Emanuel.  The Administration’s position is as follows:  The Federal Reserve 

needs to make this decision based on its economic merits; the Federal Reserve should do what it 

thinks is right for the world economy; and, whatever that decision may be, the Administration 

will support us 100 percent.  “Support” means:  first, that the President will support the action; 

second, that the President will make clear that he will not accept—that is, perhaps, if necessary, 

he will veto—any bill that circumscribes the Federal Reserve’s independence or its ability to 

function as lender of last resort; and, third, that the Administration will do all that it can to 

communicate these views to the Congress and the congressional leadership, including not just 

folks like Senator Reid and Congresswoman Pelosi, but also people like Senator Sanders and 

others, because we need to make sure they understand what we’re doing and why we’re doing it.  

For what it’s worth, Emanuel’s view was that this was a manageable situation; that, while it was 

not without risks, the Congress would appreciate the severity of the financial risks; that, in any 

case, we should do what’s right from an economic point of view; and that at least the 

Administration would be fully behind us in dealing with any ramifications in the Congress. 

Now, whether to proceed is, of course, going to be a judgment call.  Certainly, if we 

decide to go ahead with this, I will be talking to some Republicans, because I assume the 

Administration will talk to Democrats, and we’ll just try to make sure, within the bounds of 

keeping this quiet—and, obviously, that’s a potential issue—that we get a broad understanding 

of what we’re doing, namely, that it’s part of a U.S. and international effort to stabilize global 

financial markets and not just European financial markets.  But I think we all recognize that this 

May 9, 2010 7 of 42



 

 

 

is a concern.  Given the importance of maintaining an independent Federal Reserve, I don’t think 

it is inappropriate that that be part of our discussion. 

I’d like to hear your views.  My inclination would be to ask you to consider giving me 

approval to proceed with swap arrangements with all of these other central banks, to be 

announced either this evening or tomorrow morning, in time for market openings, contingent on 

two things.  The primary one is that the Europeans, the Ecofin and the ECB, come through with 

strong and effective measures, at least as strong as those that have already been described to me.  

The second one is that there not be any pushback from the political side that leads us to become 

particularly concerned; if that were to happen, I think it would be important to come back to you 

and let you understand what risks there are.  So that would be where I am, but I would very much 

like to have your advice and counsel.  Before I turn to a go-round, let me just check in with a few 

staff.  Brian Sack, you’re in Basel, correct?  Are you on the line? 

MR. SACK.  Yes, I am. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have not discussed this with you over the weekend.  Could 

you just comment on what you see now and on anything you want to report on your discussions 

in Basel about the state of financial markets in general or swaps markets and the interbank 

market in particular? 

MR. SACK.  Sure.  Let me make a few comments about markets broadly, but I’ll focus 

primarily on the funding markets.  The situation is largely the same as it was when we discussed 

it previously.  Obviously, investors’ concerns about sovereign risk have spilled beyond Greece 

and into other European countries, including Portugal, Spain, Ireland, and Italy.  Investors have 

attempted to reduce exposures to sovereign risk in those countries.  That movement has become 

more widespread and indiscriminate, resulting in a significant increase in the yield spreads for 

May 9, 2010 8 of 42



 

 

 

the debt of all of those countries.  The pressures in sovereign debt have created concerns about 

European financial institutions and a general flight to liquidity.  In particular, we’ve seen 

substantial pressure in dollar funding markets for European institutions. 

Let me review in more detail where we stand on that.  I think that, at this point, unsecured 

dollar funding in European markets has essentially collapsed to overnight lending, or at least to 

very short-term lending, particularly over the past couple of days.  So term funding is either very 

expensive or simply not available.  You see this in some measures, such as a rise in LIBOR, but 

LIBOR doesn’t really capture the rate at which these institutions are borrowing.  You see it more 

strongly in other measures, such as implied dollar funding rates through FX swaps—of course, a 

lot of these institutions borrow in euros and swap into dollars.  The FX swaps market has come 

under a lot of pressure, and we’ve seen liquidity dry up considerably in that market.  On the repo 

side, repo markets are still functioning, but we are seeing a large degree of tiering across both the 

types of collateral and types of counterparties, and, in general, I think the investor pullback from 

financing European institutions has become wider.  Certainly, the banks that are providers of 

funds are participating in that, but now the money market mutual funds as well seem to be 

pulling back.  It’s not necessarily that they’re actively selling and trying to get out of positions, 

but they’re certainly not willing to roll over investments the way they were.  So they’re basically 

rolling into overnight investments and being much more discriminating, that is, making much 

more differentiation across borrowers. 

There is widespread focus on the potential for government actions this weekend.  I would 

say that the chances of implementing something like FX swaps or liquidity swap lines across the 

central banks are perceived as very likely, and there’s a lot of discussion of other policy 

measures that might be taken over the weekend.  So I do believe that, if the government actions 

May 9, 2010 9 of 42



 

 

 

are seen as inadequate or incomplete, then funding markets would be under considerable 

pressure early next week. 

Many also say they’re worried about funding conditions for U.S. institutions and U.S. 

markets.  However, the U.S. situation has held up relatively well.  Most anecdotes suggest that 

there hasn’t been much change in haircuts or rates of maturity.  So U.S. institutions are still 

having success at funding themselves in U.S. markets.  I think a lot of funding desks had 

expected to see some pressure on Friday—they were kind of braced for that—but it didn’t 

materialize to the degree they expected.  I think there has been a bit of widening in bid–ask 

spreads and maybe a bit of loss of liquidity, but that’s about it.  We do hear a few exceptions to 

that, such as one or two anecdotes of institutions having to pay up through different vehicles, and 

there was one commentary suggesting there has been a bit more cutback in haircuts and rate 

effects than we see.  I think there’s discussion of, but not evidence of, widespread pressure on 

domestic markets.  So, for now, this is a story of European institutions’ ability to fund 

themselves in dollars.  But I think we’re very cognizant of the risk of spillovers into funding 

markets for U.S. institutions. 

Moving away from money markets, it’s also worth noting that the concerns about 

European sovereign debt and the associated liquidity pressures have prompted a broader flight 

from risk in recent days.  Equity prices have tumbled around the world, and corporate bonds and 

other private debt instruments have suffered.  This response in part reflects worries about the 

economic consequences of the pressures in Europe, but it also simply represents a shift in 

investor sentiment and a flight to safety.  That flight to safety has benefited U.S. Treasuries—

we’ve seen 10-year Treasury yields fall 30 basis points since the FOMC meeting. 

May 9, 2010 10 of 42



 

 

 

Lastly, the euro has weakened notably against the dollar.  It’s down nearly 4 percent 

since the last FOMC meeting, which is an acceleration of the depreciation trend that had been 

seen over previous months. 

Overall, there has been a strong shift in sentiment in the markets.  The situation remains 

fragile, with considerable focus on what government actions might be taken to stem these 

negative dynamics.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Are there any questions for Brian, or does 

anybody else want to add any color?  [No response.]  I see no questions.  Let me turn then to 

Nathan Sheets.  Are you there? 

MR. SHEETS.  I am indeed. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, could you just comment on the technicalities of 

getting this together?  I assume that we would not be able actually to implement anything for a 

few days and that we would just want to go with a statement today.  Is that your understanding? 

MR. SHEETS.  That is.  We are having consultations with staff at the foreign central 

banks and essentially dusting off the technical apparatus that we used when the swap lines were 

functioning.  Our sense is that we could certainly do an announcement tonight and that we can 

agree on some common language with them.  That would allow them to do auctions probably by 

Tuesday, and then the disbursement of any auction funds would probably be by Wednesday or 

Thursday of next week.  So if it’s the will of the Committee, our sense on the technical side is 

that we can move pretty quickly with this. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  I didn’t warn you about this, Nathan, but do you 

have commentary from what you have picked up in Basel about the state of the economy or the 

state of the markets in Europe or anything about sentiment? 

May 9, 2010 11 of 42



 

 

 

MR. SHEETS.  People are very, very nervous.  In terms of specific policy 

announcements, people are waiting for the press release from Ecofin.  Nobody had as much 

information as you just articulated to us.  One point that came up several times in the meetings 

was that European participants noted that the real risks to their banking systems are tied into this 

sovereign stress:  Their banks are holding sovereign instruments; the increased funding costs for 

the sovereigns are passed through in the increased funding costs to the banking system; and, 

perhaps most importantly, the stressed sovereigns are reducing the capacity of governments to 

provide a backstop for the banking system.  So they see the heart and soul of the stresses on the 

banking system as reflecting these sovereign stresses rather than some sort of previously existing 

balance sheet problems. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, I have a technical question.  If there’s risk that the 

euro might depreciate further, will that affect our security in our swaps?  How can we be sure 

that we have a secure position?  

MR. SHEETS.  My feeling is that our primary source of surety is the goodwill guarantee 

that these major central banks give us that they will make good on unwinding the swap.  Now, if 

the euro were to fall substantially, that would result in our euro holdings being worth less than 

the swap value of the dollars.  One protection we have against that is that these are relatively 

short-term transactions.  In the past, we have not taken steps like trying to do margins or mark to 

market or that sort of thing. 

MR. SACK.  Just to be clear, all we’re talking about here, though, is affecting the value 

of the collateral, not the return of the funds. 

MR. SHEETS.  Yes. 

MR. SACK.  But they still have promised to repay the full amount. 

May 9, 2010 12 of 42



 

 

 

MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.  That’s the primary source of surety.  Even if the euro falls 

and becomes worth less than the dollar, the ECB is still contractually obligated to repay us.  So 

the decline in the value of the euro would be important only in the state of nature where the ECB 

had defaulted, and we would put essentially zero possibility on that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Trish, did you have something to add to that?   

MS. MOSSER.  I was going to make the same point, namely, that the contracts are such 

that, absent the ECB or one of the central banks defaulting to us, we will get all of our dollars 

back.  The contracts are not dependent on future exchange rate levels. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions?  I see President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a quick question.  Can you 

review for us, Nathan or Brian, the terms of these swaps and the maturities that we’re 

considering? 

MR. SHEETS.  I think that that would be at the discretion of the Committee.  But in the 

past these maturities have ranged from overnight, to one week, to one month, out to three 

months.  And we’ve tailored the maturity of various auctions to meet the perceived liquidity 

strains that existed in the markets.  Ideally, we’d continue to have that kind of flexibility to 

determine the tenor of the swap funds based on market conditions. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Mr. Chairman, this is Bill Dudley.  I think in our 

discussions here, the general view has probably been to replicate as nearly as possible what we 

had before, because the market has comfort and knowledge of that, and we also have a good 

experience with it.  If we followed what we had before, we would have a penalty of 1 percentage 

point.  And the real decision I think we would have to make is:  Do we want to make it 

unlimited, that is, a fixed-rate tender swap, or do we want to cap the amount?  I would favor a 

May 9, 2010 13 of 42



 

 

 

fixed-rate tender, with the market taking as much as it wanted at the penalty rate, as we did the 

last time. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What was the maturity distribution last time, Bill?  Do you 

remember? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  Different countries had different auction cycles.  

They followed the TAF, so there was a 28-day TAF and an 84-day TAF, obviously.  In addition 

to that, they had weekly cycles. 

I think that that’s really a second-order consideration, because they have to decide what 

the appropriate maturity would be, what would work best from their perspective.  Of course, 

what would be different this time is that we wouldn’t be reintroducing the TAF.  Instead, they 

would just be conducting TAF-like auctions independent from us. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Thank you.  Other questions for Nathan?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  You didn’t state this, but I’m assuming that the intended use of the swap 

lines is for liquidity auctions, as we had last time, and not for intervention in foreign exchange 

markets.  Is that correct?  On a related note, have you been asked to intervene in foreign 

exchange markets? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, we have not been asked to do it.  Go ahead, Nathan. 

MR. SHEETS.  In response to the first question, it would be the case that these funds 

would be restricted to be used for liquidity purposes.  They wouldn’t be available for foreign 

exchange market intervention, as was the case with similar kinds of contracts that prevailed 

when we had the swap lines in place before, with similar kinds of safeguards to keep the funds 

from being used for that purpose. 

MR. LACKER.  Will we sterilize these ourselves? 

May 9, 2010 14 of 42



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a very good question.  Go ahead, Brian. 

MR. SACK.  At the moment, it’s not clear that we have a need to sterilize them.  We are 

operating with a target band for the funds rate.  We are drifting up to the upper end of that band.  

So we could, but I think it’s not obvious that we need to. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We also don’t know what the take-up of these swap lines 

will be in practice. So it would seem to me that it would be premature to consider whether 

sterilization was appropriate when you don’t even know the magnitude of the swaps that will be 

outstanding. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s a very important question for us to discuss, but 

I don’t think we have to decide that today, fortunately.  We may want to discuss it, particularly in 

the context of our reserve-draining tools.  President Lockhart.  

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we put the swap lines in place last 

year or the year before, there were questions at that time about what the status of the dollar 

reserves was in the ECB countries, and why would they not use those reserves.  As I recall, the 

answer was that they simply wanted a supplemental capability and that they were protective of 

their reserve positions.  Do we know the status of their reserve positions today?  And what 

likelihood is there that they would actually draw down their reserves to provide some of this 

liquidity? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll let Nathan respond to that.  But let me say—just going 

back to our previous discussions—that they saw value and we saw value in segregating the 

reserves, which could be used for exchange rate intervention, and the swaps, which were 

designated and dedicated to providing bank liquidity.  The other aspect of it is that confidence 

May 9, 2010 15 of 42



 

 

 

and symbolism are important parts of the benefits of this, I think.  Nathan, do you have anything 

to add to that? 

MR. SHEETS.  Brian actually has these data.  

MR. SACK.  We have an estimate of the amount of reserves for the euro area, so that 

would be the ECB and all of the member central banks.  It looks as if it’s somewhere just above 

$150 billion.  About half of that is actually held in custody at the New York Fed, so that gives us 

a chance to have a glimpse at its composition.  In general terms, a lot of it is in Treasuries and 

agencies, not surprisingly.  I think that gives you a sense of the status of their reserves.  But, 

again, for them to use those reserves introduces a couple of complications.  It would require them 

to go out and sell dollar assets, which we might not want to encourage in this market 

environment.  Or, if they’re not going to sell dollar assets, they have to use those securities as 

collateral in dollar repo funding transactions.  And, of course, if they’re taking dollar funding, 

they could be taking it from other market participants.  The FX swaps, in a way, are an addition 

in terms of the amount of dollar funding, whereas using the reserves are not necessarily. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Two-hander from President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  If we don’t sterilize swap draws, we’re going to be taking dollar funding 

from market participants in the U.S. and passing it on through the ECB.  I’m not quite sure I get 

that.  Plus, there’s the issue of selling U.S. Treasuries.  Treasuries are getting scarce.  Their price 

is going up because of the flight to quality.  So I’m not quite sure I understand your line of 

argument, Brian. 

MR. SACK.  I agree with your second point.  I was just pointing out that it will require 

dollar asset sales.  You’re right that it’s in an asset class where there is demand.  But, relative to 

the case of using swaps, it’s an incremental source of selling. 

May 9, 2010 16 of 42



 

 

 

I didn’t fully follow the first part.  I think if we sterilize the operations, then, yes, we 

would be removing short-term dollar funding from the market, just as would be the case if the 

euro area countries had to use their holdings as collateral.  But that’s if we sterilize it.  If we 

don’t sterilize, then I think it’s this net addition of dollar funding that I talked about. 

MR. LACKER.  But if we don’t sterilize, we’re adding to bank reserves, we’re 

essentially taking the funding from banks and lending it on through the ECB.  If we do sterilize 

with reserve draining, then what are we doing?  We’re taking it from money market mutual 

funds and handing it on. 

MR. SACK.  If we don’t sterilize, I don’t see how we’re taking funding from anyone.  

We’re just introducing new funding into the market. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s creating a monetary base.  President Fisher, do you 

have a question? 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  The last time we 

activated our swap lines, of course, others piled on—we had Singapore, Chile, Mexico, and so 

on.  My question is:  What’s the risk of other countries that are going to want to pile on? 

As for my second question, maybe this isn’t the right time to ask it, but I’ll ask it anyway.  

Let’s say Ecofin does come forward and we announce these swap lines.  I agree with you, Mr. 

Chairman, that doing so would serve not only substantive purposes, but it also has a 

psychological impact.  But let’s assume that it doesn’t work.  What are the next steps that we 

might be asked to engage in?  I just want to have us think through a little bit, without taking too 

much time, a decision tree going forward. 

May 9, 2010 17 of 42



 

 

 

I think my first question presents a different set of political risks from the ones you’ve 

already highlighted, Mr. Chairman.  So I’d be interested in Brian’s and Nathan’s judgment on 

that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We haven’t heard from anybody other than the G-7.  I think 

that there’s a whole new level of political risk if we go to emerging markets.  I would never say 

“never”—it depends on how market conditions evolve, and so on.  But my strong inclination 

would not be to go beyond the G-7. 

In terms of what we do next, I’m not sure there’s a whole lot more that the Federal 

Reserve can do.  The fundamental issues have to do with fiscal stability in Europe, and that’s 

something only they themselves can solve.  I think our additional actions would be along the 

lines of making sure that our banks are stable.  If we had to do some kind of—I’m extrapolating 

wildly here—new SCAP or something in the future, we could consider it.  But, quite honestly, I 

can’t see what else we could do, other than, as I mentioned on Friday, respond to the 

macroeconomic conditions of the United States, as necessary.  But that’s all I can think of. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to go back to Jeff’s point about 

sterilization for a minute.  I’m wondering about the optics.  If the ECB announces that its 

interventions in these markets are going to be sterilized, and we, on the other hand, say we’re not 

going to sterilize, in effect we’re doing quantitative easing in the United States, whereas they are, 

in fact, resisting by sterilizing their own intervention in the other markets.  So I’m a little bit 

curious about the imbalance in how we’re going to treat that.  It sort of goes back to Jeff’s 

May 9, 2010 18 of 42



 

 

 

original question.  I think it’s a difficult question.  Do we want to be easing here on behalf of the 

Europeans in that case? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You have to understand that our buying U.S. Treasuries and 

the ECB’s buying Greek bonds are very different matters.  They’re taking very significant risks 

with their credibility, with their political standing, and with the value of the euro.  I think what 

they’re trying to do with the sterilization is to ensure that this decision doesn’t bleed over into a 

major run on the euro.  I think that’s why they’re doing what they’re doing.  I don’t think we 

have quite the same risks.  Having said that—and I take Brian Sack’s point that, in terms of 

market conditions, given where we are, we’re probably talking about only a few basis points in 

market conditions—I’m embarrassed that I haven’t brought a proposal on sterilization.  I think 

we do need to talk about it. 

But from the ECB’s point of view, particularly given their relatively more conservative 

approach to this point, they’re the ones who are crossing an important line by expressing a 

willingness to buy any asset, including Greek bank debt or whatever it might be that they deem 

to be part of a disorderly market. 

I don’t think the dollar is going to suffer vis-à-vis the euro on these announcements.  But, 

again, your point about sterilization is important.  We should continue to think about that.  

President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  I have a couple of questions, and, if the timing isn’t right, we can defer 

the discussion.  One is in reference to what Bill Dudley said, if I understood it correctly.  Were 

you saying that these swaps would be kind of open-ended, subject to the demand for them?  Is 

that correct? 

May 9, 2010 19 of 42



 

 

 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it depends on how they’re structured.  They could 

be structured as a fixed size, or they could be structured as a fixed-rate unlimited tender.  In the 

last rounds after Lehman, we did them as fixed-rate unlimited size.  The reason for that, of 

course, is that we’re not making a statement about what amount of liquidity the market demands.  

We’re just saying that we’ll supply whatever liquidity, at a penalty interest rate.  That worked 

pretty well, because, as markets normalized, the amount outstanding went down, and it wound 

down very smoothly as the process unfolded. 

Actually, I would argue that if we were to propose a fixed size, we probably would get 

more demand than if we did an unlimited tender, because with a fixed size, people would be 

worried that it will run out.  But if it’s unlimited, there’s less anxiety—it serves as more of a 

backstop to the market than as something the market has to use.  I would think, from a balance 

sheet perspective, that a fixed-rate tender would result in less demand relative to a large FX swap 

program. 

MR. HOENIG.  That leads to my second question and kind of comes back to the political 

challenge we have, Mr. Chairman.  I think it’s important to have a discussion on how we would 

announce this, because the misinformation or the misinterpretations of our actions could 

multiply, given the history that we’ve just suffered through.  I think it’s very important that we 

be very forthcoming.  If we’ve given any thought to how this announcement would look, it 

would be of interest to me at this point, or before we get off the call. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, do you want to comment? 

MS. SMITH.  Sure.  I had a few sort of unorganized thoughts about this.  One thing that I 

think would be important is that our announcement should follow Ecofin’s announcement, and 

that it should be as international as possible—so it would be the Federal Reserve, the Bank of 

May 9, 2010 20 of 42



 

 

 

Japan, the Bank of Canada, and so on.  In other words, it should be some sort of broader G-7 

effort. 

I would also make a few other points.  This is safe—we have never lost a penny, either in 

the recent crisis experience or in the ongoing swap situations we’ve had with Mexico and 

Canada.  This is not novel—this is what central banks do.  It is not a bailout, it’s not altruism—

this is in our interest.  We have a recovery just getting going here in the United States, and this 

helps keep European problems—and we wouldn’t say this in a statement—in Europe.  

I have a question about whether there’s anything new we can do on transparency in this 

arena.  If we could somehow say that we’re doing this in some newer, more transparent, quicker 

way, I think that would help us to mitigate some of the political risk.  I don’t know if we can do 

that, but if we could, I think that would be helpful. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We can publish the amounts of the auction sizes for each 

of the counterparties that we have.  They’re doing an auction, they’re announcing the results, and 

we could just aggregate that information and publish it as it happens.  Each time they have an 

auction, we could publish the individual counterparties and total results. 

MR. KOHN.  We could publish the amounts for each counterparty each week at the same 

time the H.4.1 comes out, so everybody knows everything on a weekly basis. 

MS. SMITH.  The thing I would really try to underscore is that what the central banks are 

doing is not a response to Europe’s problems.  Europe’s problems are being responded to with 

real measures in Europe.  What we’re doing is helping to facilitate—structural plumbing, flows, 

and so on—and protecting ourselves and our interests.  So I’d emphasize that this isn’t about the 

Fed responding, doing a bailout, or anything like that. 

May 9, 2010 21 of 42



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there contracts with the other central banks, or 

agreements, or something similar that we could release?  Nathan?  Brian? 

MR. SHEETS.  We have never released swap agreements to the public.  It could be done, 

but we’d probably want to look them over very carefully first, just for the sake of transparency 

and clarity. 

MS. SMITH.  I would say that it would be better if we could release those.  You saw the 

kinds of things that members of the Congress said in some of the hearings.  Anything that we’re 

keeping secret is just going to fuel their speculation. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, and maybe Scott, as well, assuming we proceed 

with this, it would help if we could look at those agreements and ask if there’s anything there 

that would prevent a release.  If there is, is it possible to rewrite new agreements that would be 

publicly disclosable?  I can’t see fundamentally why there would be any problem with that. 

MR. ALVAREZ.  I can’t either.  We’ve given out the contracts in our other facilities.  I 

don’t see anything off the top of my head that we couldn’t sterilize if we had to.  I think the 

agreements are actually very simple, very straightforward, and could be made available. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all we would have to say today would be that we will be 

releasing those contracts.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  These are international agreements, so you would have to get 

agreement from the foreign central bank. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we can ask them.  They are, in this case, the ones who 

are asking for the swap lines—they want them very badly.  I think they would let us let us 

characterize the situation—for example, who asked for the swap, or whatever—any way that we 

May 9, 2010 22 of 42



 

 

 

think is beneficial from a communications point of view.  But your point is correct.  President 

Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to underscore that I think all of Michelle’s 

points were spot on, and we need additional efforts, particularly because it’s our money, such as 

releasing the contracts, so that we better inform those who feel we’re conspiring against them.  

Mr. Chairman, I’d also like to talk a bit offline with you—I noticed you were looking at your 

watch, and I’m conscious of that—about certain people I think should be spoken to in a timely 

way, so that there’s no confusion. 

I’d also say—and I’m sure Michelle has already thought this through—that we need to be 

able to state this in the simplest possible English, so that it’s clearly understood that this is 

something where we don’t bear a risk of loss, that it’s in our own best interest to do this, that 

taking this step is a very cheap way to provide insurance against further contagion, and that it’s 

certainly a better option than what might ensue if this were to infect our own system.  So I’m 

basically underscoring the points that Michelle made.  They may have been unorganized 

thoughts, but I think they touched all the right bases. 

I also want to ask that we consider—and, again, this is a question of timing, because we 

can’t run any risk of leaks—broadening our base a little bit in terms of key senators.  I have one, 

as you know, particularly in mind that we have worked with very closely—hand-in-glove—and I 

don’t want to undermine their sense of confidence in, and I want to enhance their understanding, 

which is limited, of these rather esoteric but essential tools.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I was looking at my watch because I have a 

2:00 p.m. G-7 call, but that leaves us plenty of time, so there’s no concern about that. 

President Hoenig. 

May 9, 2010 23 of 42



 

 

 

MR. HOENIG.   Thank you.  Just to carry this a bit further, I agree with what you said, 

Michelle.  In terms of the reaction of some members of the Congress, I think their concern is that 

we might be exposing the taxpayer to the risk of having to pick up the tab to save organizations 

in Europe.  I agree with you, and with President Fisher, that it’s important to explain in simple 

language that these are liquidity facilities, that we’re not risking taxpayer money, and that we’re 

willing to show the contracts to verify that we will get paid back in full dollars.  I think doing so 

would go a long ways not to ending the criticism but to mitigating the sense of concern.  So I 

think you’re on the right track.  And I hope that as soon as we hang up here you start drafting 

that, because it’s going to take multiple drafts to get it as simple and yet as thorough as possible.  

That’s my suggestion and an admonition on that.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Just to come in with an unpleasant comment—the probability of the 

ECB not surviving has probably moved off of zero to some small positive probability that it 

would actually unravel.  So, in the debate about this, I think people will not be hesitant to 

speculate on the future of the euro and the future of the ECB.  I think it’s something to consider 

when we’re trying to present this.  I think our best point is to say that we’ve been through this 

before, that it worked great before, so we can do it again, and we expect it to work well again 

this time.  But I don’t want to be naïve about the idea that the ECB is forever, because that’s 

exactly what this crisis is about. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good point.  Linda, do you want to add anything?  

Oh, I’m sorry.  Narayana? 

May 9, 2010 24 of 42



 

 

 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a quick question for you.  

In terms of these broad-scale interventions the ECB is contemplating, they are going to be 

restricting themselves to euro-denominated assets.  Is that your understanding? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, that’s my understanding. 

If you have nothing further, I’ll give Linda a chance to comment on the politics.  I guess 

she’s comfortable with what we’ve described up to now. 

MR. HOENIG.  I have a question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, sorry.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Would there be pushback on this in the political context, where someone 

might say, “Well, shouldn’t you collateralize this with their reserves?”  Is that going to come up?  

And if it is, how do we answer that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it is collateralized with euros. 

MR. HOENIG.  I mean, with the reserves they have denominated in dollars that they 

could then collateralize, so if it did go into default we would— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Oh, I see. 

MR. HOENIG.  It’s a question that I fear someone will ask, so I’ll ask it now, so we can 

anticipate it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nathan, maybe you can jump in here.  I think we have done 

that in the past, but we have given the major central banks the courtesy of taking their signature. 

MR. SHEETS.  Yes, that’s right.  We had what was called offset rights with the emerging 

market economies.  That meant that we could attach anything that they were holding at the New 

York Fed in the event that they failed to unwind the swap that had been contractually agreed 

upon.  We haven’t had that with the advanced economies, with the ECB and the like. 

May 9, 2010 25 of 42



 

 

 

MR. KOHN.  It would look like a vote of no confidence. 

MR. SHEETS.  Yes. 

MR. KOHN.  And it would be at a time when that would be pretty counterproductive. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Particularly if we were not releasing the contract. 

MR. HOENIG.  I agree with you.  But someone is going to ask you that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The answer is that we have both the euros and the ECB’s 

commitment, and the ECB will be effectively backed up by Ecofin and the European Union.  If 

the continent of Europe is bankrupt, we all have problems.  But it seems relatively unlikely, to 

put it mildly. 

MR. HOENIG.  Agreed. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We still have a chance for a go-round.  Let me just make 

sure everyone is getting a chance to speak.  Is there anyone else who has a question for any staff 

member or for me?  I’m happy to respond if you have questions.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes, I have just one more question.  The fundamental issue these are 

addressing is dollar-denominated maturity transformation by European banking institutions that 

are exposed to euro-denominated sovereign credit risk, which has led some to have trouble 

funding.  I’m familiar with the change in liquidity management by some large active U.S. 

institutions over the last three years.  This maturity transformation by European institutions was 

obviously a problem very early on, in late 2007.  I wonder if anyone on the call has some insight 

into or would be able to characterize the relative progress made by European institutions in 

reducing the riskiness of their dollar-denominated maturity transformation activities since late 

2007.  If that progress has lagged notably behind the progress of U.S. institutions, I wonder 

whether this would be a good opportunity, as part of the conversations around this service we’re 

May 9, 2010 26 of 42



 

 

 

offering the Europeans, to urge them to take stronger action to assure that they make progress in 

reducing the riskiness of their dollar portfolios. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s a good question.   

MR. KOHN.  We’ve been asking that question in Basel this weekend.  President Lacker 

is absolutely right in the way he characterized it.  But the euro area banks have taken some pretty 

strong actions; they’ve reduced their dollar exposures by about half from the peak.  Like U.S. 

banks, they have lots of legacy dollar assets that they’re trying to get rid of that are slowing 

running off, but they still have some left.  From the chart I’m looking at, it’s down by about 50 

percent. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Jeff, there are two things I’d say.  One, while Don has given the 

aggregate statistics, my impression is that some of the institutions have made a good deal more 

progress than others in changing their maturity structures, so the problems are acute in some of 

the European institutions and significant but less acute in others. 

With respect to your question about whether to use this opportunity for lecturing them on 

the need to make more progress, my instinct would be that, at this juncture, right when we’re 

activating the swap lines, it’s probably not the moment to say that and to kind of offer a quid pro 

quo, namely, that we want you to do more.  But I do think that, as we go back to Basel on both 

capital and liquidity reforms, this is going to strengthen our hand for making some of the 

arguments we want to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Any other questions?  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to ask a slightly different question 

about the outlook in Europe.  With all of the austerity measures for Southern Europe, it looks as 

May 9, 2010 27 of 42



 

 

 

if it would be very difficult for Europe to avoid a recession.  For example, what’s the chance that 

Germany can avoid a recession, given that they export so much to the rest of Europe?  And if 

we’re going to talk about the ECB sterilizing, which short-term interest rates are going to be 

driven up in Europe?  I’d say it’s probably the stronger sovereign debt.  If anybody on the staff 

could give us an idea of what our increasing risk is there, and how it affects the U.S., that would 

be appreciated.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll go to Nathan in just a second, but let me comment that, 

in all of these calls, the Germans keep saying what a great example they’re going to set by 

consolidating their own fiscal position.  And we keep trying to point out to them that it may not 

necessarily be in the overall interest of the continent—it’s a strange mind-set. 

Nathan, or anyone, do you have a view on the outlook for Europe?  

MR. SHEETS.  The recent data for Europe, particularly for Germany, have been 

surprisingly strong.  I think the characterization by President Evans is right on.  For the Germans, 

particularly, their export machine is getting cranked up, and they’re doing a lot of exporting to 

emerging Asia and to some of the oil-producing countries. 

I very much share your view that there are risks to all of them moving together to do 

fiscal consolidation and that this would ideally be a time when the Germans were taking steps to 

strengthen their domestic demand and provide a buffer for the necessary, unavoidable fiscal 

consolidation that has to go on elsewhere in the euro area. 

All in all, I would say there’s a reasonable chance that the Germans would be able to 

avoid recession, but, if everybody moves together on fiscal consolidation, I would expect to see 

some not very good growth numbers coming out of Europe over the next number of quarters. 

May 9, 2010 28 of 42



 

 

 

MR. KOHN.  I would add to that, Mr. Chairman, that I think that the ECB monetary base 

will rise quite substantially, because they’re not going to sterilize the term lending that they’re 

doing to the banks—the sterilization is very limited, and their base will be rising quite a lot. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions?  [No response.]  Let’s 

have a quick go-round.  A lot of the issues have already been discussed, but I certainly want 

everybody to have a chance to give a view.  Governor Tarullo had a few comments on banking, 

so let’s start with you, Dan. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Actually, I managed to get my comments 

in in response to some of the questions.  Just to rehearse a bit of what we discussed on Friday 

afternoon, to this point we haven’t seen an impact in our financial system of any substantial 

magnitude.  But, as everybody recalls, such an impact isn’t seen until the moment it occurs. 

None of us is happy with where we are.  I think I would have done things differently 

from the Europeans three months ago.  I would have done things differently from the Europeans 

two months ago.  And I probably would have done things differently two weeks ago.  But we’re 

in this position now, and, although optimally we could use the contribution of the swaps as a way 

to leverage a better package from Ecofin, I just don’t see that as a realistic possibility right now.  

There will likely be a lot of unpleasantness in markets tomorrow no matter what all this looks 

like, and I don’t think we are in a position to calibrate whether it would be better to wait one day, 

two days, three days, or four days.  I think it’s something that we’re just going to have to make a 

judgment on.  To the degree that we can stop this unpleasant spiral from getting going with any 

more speed than it will already assume tomorrow, I think that a reestablishment of swap lines is 

probably the best thing we can do for our own financial system.  Therefore, I would support the 

May 9, 2010 29 of 42



 

 

 

Chairman’s request that we give him authority to activate the swap lines at such time as he 

deems prudent. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I’m now going to go around the Reserve Banks 

by order of District, so I will start with President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m supportive of having the swap line.  I think we should do things 

for economic reasons, not political reasons.  And I think the economics, given that we’re in the 

middle of a crisis, indicate that it’s appropriate to have a swap line with the other central banks 

that are in the G-7.  So I support the move to open up the swap lines.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I support doing this.  Obviously, it would be better if we 

could get greater concessions and fiscal consolidation in Europe.  But the reality is that the swaps 

will mitigate the bad feedback loop that’s occurring because of the intersection of the sovereign 

risk problems with the state of the European banks.  If we weren’t to do this now, I think things 

would just get worse, and we would be forced into doing it later.  The reality is that doing it 

earlier will actually mitigate the extent of the problems to some degree.  But we shouldn’t fool 

ourselves.  The swaps are addressing a symptom of the problem.  The underlying problem is the 

European fiscal situation, the credibility of their fiscal plans, and the health of the European 

banks.  This just will mitigate how that spreads.  Still, I think it’s worth doing, because, as we’ve 

seen, the propagation mechanisms and these amplifying dynamics that we’ve seen in the earlier 

parts of the crisis can be pretty important.  So I think anything we can do to get out in front of 

that is a good thing rather than a bad thing. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

May 9, 2010 30 of 42



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m broadly supportive as well.  I think this 

is something that we need to do.  I would just stress two points.  I think the discussion we’ve had 

up to now about transparency is incredibly important.  I agree that we should make the contracts 

available, if we can.  Explaining this as carefully as we can is in our own best interest at this 

point and helps protect us not only on the political side but on other sides as well.  I also hope 

that we will continue to have further discussion at some point about the issue of sterilization—

where we stand and how we want to think about that as we go forward.  We don’t know what the 

amounts are going to end up being, and it may partly depend on how we think about that.  With 

those two stipulations, I agree mostly with what President Dudley said, namely that we’re 

attacking a symptom, not a root cause of the problem—Europe has to deal with that—but we 

need to cooperate where we can.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Again, I take your point on sterilization.  It 

interacts with our tools one way or another—we’d have to do something specific to sterilize, and 

we need to talk very soon about the availability of the reserve-draining tools as well as what 

we’re going to do about potential asset sales.  I understand that. 

Again, Michelle, Nathan, and Scott, we want to be sure to work towards as much 

transparency as possible.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am supportive of giving you 

approval to proceed with the swap lines, contingent upon Ecofin coming up with strong 

measures, as well as some follow-up that you’re going to do to control some of the political 

fallout.  Like others, I believe it’s critical that we take these actions based on the economic 

merits, so I’m supportive of your moving forward.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Don Kohn wanted to come in. 

May 9, 2010 31 of 42



 

 

 

MR. KOHN.  I think I can be brief.  I also support authorizing you to reinstate these swap 

lines.  I think we’re in a very dangerous situation.  We saw on Thursday and Friday the 

beginnings of a generalized flight from risk, and the United States will not be immune from the 

effects of that if it gathers any kind of momentum.  My understanding from talking to some 

Japanese central bankers is that it’s not only European banks that are beginning to encounter 

trouble, but other banks as well.  So extending the swap lines, say, to the Bank of Japan makes 

some sense. 

I think there are a lot of reasons why it’s so dangerous.  Dan cited one, namely, the 

halting, insufficient response of the Europeans at first, and the fact that the governments are 

involved, so there’s no backstop.  When the sovereigns are involved, it’s as dangerous a situation 

as you could ever get into.  I also think the private sector remembers September and October of 

2008, and they’re going to that adverse equilibrium as fast as they can.  They are protecting 

themselves very, very rapidly.  So I think that, as sort of an addendum to a basically European 

package, we need to be there if we can.  

I agree with everything that has been said about transparency, releasing the contracts, 

instantaneous or nearly instantaneous publishing of which central banks are drawing on the lines, 

and so on.  I also think, unfortunately, from your perspective, Mr. Chairman, that you shouldn’t 

leave the Democrats to the Administration while you do the Republicans.  I think you ought to be 

contacting both sides of the aisle as the central banker.  And we can talk about sterilization later.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sure I will be.  Sorry—back to the go-around order.   

President Lacker. 

May 9, 2010 32 of 42



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the past, I’ve generally opposed swaps as 

a matter of regime choice.  I still oppose them, but this is not the time to take a gigantic bold leap 

towards a regime I’d like.  So I won’t oppose this now, and I’ll support giving you the discretion 

to enter into these, as you said.  I think the political risks are tremendous.  I think there’s a good 

chance we will dodge them with expert communication, and I think the comments of President 

Fisher and others about needing to manage those aggressively are worthwhile.  I think the 

confluence of those risks with this environment and what we’re doing here isn’t an accident.  

This is one of a set of essentially fiscal policy actions we’ve taken in the last three years that 

have generated this firestorm around us.  The continuing fallout of that generates the 

environment that makes this fiscal policy action more politically risky for us. 

On sterilization, I’d love to use this as an opportunity to argue for selling an equivalent 

amount of MBS, but we can wait until another date for that.  Those are my comments.  I support 

your decision. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support giving you the authority to 

agree with the Europeans to reinstate the swap lines.  Michelle Smith actually captured one of 

my sentiments, and that is that we should do what’s necessary to combat this within the 

European banking sector, trying to keep it from having a contagion effect and hitting us here in 

the United States.  I think the contagion risk is real, and it is, as Don said, not inconceivable that 

it beats a path to the United States, and we all know that the result would be a possibly severe 

adjustment in the United States at a very delicate time.  So, in weighing the political risks versus 

doing the right thing economically, I think we should subordinate the political considerations to 

the economic intervention. 

May 9, 2010 33 of 42



 

 

 

I agree with all the commentary on transparency.  This is a situation where we should lay 

out all the information necessary in order to try to keep the discussion of it at a serious level as 

opposed to the kind of discussion we’ve seen in the last year or so in the political circles.  Those 

are my thoughts.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support giving you the authority for the 

swap lines.  I’m really concerned that Europe is likely to be on fire by our June meeting.  I’m 

worried that the Asian response is not going to be as helpful as everybody would like and that we 

might have more serious trade discussions about what the appropriate exchange rate values will 

be for some of those trading partners.  I’m not sure if I heard it correctly, but if we’re talking 

about swaps on the order of $150 billion or so, and if that’s feasible and it would have a 

beneficial effect, then that seems to be an extremely reasonable and acceptable degree of risk, 

and I clearly support that.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We didn’t specify a maximum.  My proposal, at this point, 

would be uncapped.  But we’ll certainly monitor that very carefully. 

MR. EVANS.  I only mentioned that because I think somebody mentioned a number like 

that, but that’s fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the amount of reserves that the ECB has.  President 

Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m generally supportive of reactivating 

the swap lines with major central banks around the world to respond to this crisis.  When I heard 

Jean-Claude Trichet talking a few months ago about the recent crisis, he called the swaps 

“decisive” in dealing with it. 

May 9, 2010 34 of 42



 

 

 

I think there will possibly be heavy political pushback.  I would caution everyone that the 

bailout debate is not really a rational debate about what has actually happened—people are 

confusing the Treasury and the Fed, they’re confusing everything with everything else.  So the 

political environment may be very difficult.  It may require all of us to talk to whomever we can 

to try to get information out.  If we do not get information out, other people define us and take 

over the debate.  I think that’s an important consideration. 

Our best point is that the swaps worked quite well the last time around with the penalty 

rate, and that they are a backstop mechanism.  I agree with the unlimited size idea.  I would 

expect that, if the crisis worsens, we would see a swelling of this similar to the one we saw last 

time—probably not as bad as the last time—but then that would eventually go away as the 

situation improved. 

I think we can also make some progress on this by emphasizing that there are still a lot of 

government guarantees in place at major financial institutions around the world.  It’s a little bit 

irrational at this point for markets to be worried about the backing of financial institutions, when 

countries around the world have said repeatedly that they’re going to back these institutions, 

come hell or high water.  I think if we can emphasize that, it will get some of the irrational 

expectations out of the market. 

I do think there is a non-zero risk of euro disintegration in this process and that we have 

to track that very carefully.  I don’t think it’s very likely at this point, but the probability has 

clearly moved off zero, and sometimes, in a crisis like this, things can happen very rapidly.  You 

may get a country that unilaterally, say, decides to withdraw and the entire agreement falls apart. 

I’m not actually that big a fan of announcing a lot of coordinated actions all at once.  I 

think that that confuses markets.  I would prefer to dribble out good news one bit at a time, but I 

May 9, 2010 35 of 42



 

 

 

know I’m probably in the minority on that.  For that reason, I think that it may be that 

reactivation of the swap lines is not the main news story, and that actually might be helpful in 

this case.  But my preference would be to announce various actions one a time as they happen.  

Those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support giving you the authority 

to enter into swap line agreements with the G-7.  At times I’m a little confused by which central 

banks you’re talking about, but I would be supportive of the central banks of the G-7 plus 

Switzerland. 

I agree totally with President Rosengren’s opening remarks that we should be doing this 

based on economics, not based on politics.  However, the main political demand I’ve heard over 

and over again is for more transparency.  I’m delighted to hear that we’re contemplating being as 

transparent as possible about these agreements, and I counsel you to follow up on that as much as 

you can.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Just to be clear, you’re right.  It’s the G-7, plus 

Switzerland—the ECB, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and the 

Swiss National Bank.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, I support reengaging these swaps.  We are the most 

important central bank.  For liquidity, we need to provide the dollars to make sure this doesn’t 

unwind on us into a global disaster.  To reemphasize, I think the quality of our statement 

announcing this is probably the most important challenge we have, because we are going to get 

pushback.  We are going to get some off-the-wall questions, and I think we need to anticipate 

them, including the point about our being in an economic recovery.  We want to maintain that, 

May 9, 2010 36 of 42



 

 

 

both for ourselves and for the globe.  And then, how transparent we are should be described.  

With that encouragement, I’m supportive of this action, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I’m supportive, Mr. Chairman.  I think we should do what’s right for the 

sake of the economy, and yet we should be wary of the politics, which have been discussed at 

great length. 

I think we should not just issue a statement, but we should have Michelle draft an FAQ.  

We want to answer the questions we want to have asked, anticipate them, state very clearly and 

in simple English what our answers are.  I was asking myself earlier if it might be worth your 

actually doing a press conference.  There are risks to doing so, but, in this atmosphere now, all of 

us are being asked different questions, and I want to make sure we have clarity and a 

straightforward explanation coming from one source, which, of course, has to be you, as 

Chairman.  So consider either a press conference or, in addition to a statement, in some other 

format answering questions that we know will be asked of us in the most direct fashion. 

I would urge you, as Don mentioned, not just to reach out to Republicans, but also to 

Democrats.  And, again, I want to have an offline discussion, if I can, with Linda and you 

quickly about one particular senator who I think needs to be included in that group.  But, 

obviously, I’d recommend front-running to the degree you can, with regard to sensitive time and 

risk of leakage, as well as contact with key Ds and Rs from you directly before the 

announcement is made, or simultaneously, or however it can be done. 

In sum, I’m supportive and continue to be worried about the politics of this, but I think 

they can be handled.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

May 9, 2010 37 of 42



 

 

 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m very strongly supportive of giving you 

the discretion to enter into these swap arrangements.  I think this is an incredibly perilous 

moment and that it’s essential that we participate in a forceful, coordinated global effort to 

contain the risks to the global financial system and economy at this point.  I think it’s clearly the 

right thing for us to do for the sake of the global economy and the U.S. economy.   

We’ve had a very good discussion, I think, and very helpful suggestions in this go-around 

about the political and communications challenges.  And I’m very supportive of the comments 

that you’ve heard about the need to manage the communications and the potential political 

fallout. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have just a few comments.  First, to state 

what everyone has been saying, this is a mess.  I would say this is as fundamental a weekend for 

the global financial architecture as any we have had over the last few years.  I think for some 

difficult risks to the system we need systemic risk councils and triangles, and the like, to get to 

the bottom of them.  This wasn’t one of them.  So it’s disappointing that we find ourselves 

collectively in a global economic mire at this point.  I would say that policymakers, particularly 

in Europe, have underestimated the risks of spending by those who can ill afford it, have been 

made complacent by low sovereign costs of credit, and did not take advantage of the window of 

opportunity that our firms did to recapitalize.  So I think the banking system in Europe will now 

get asked the hardest questions.  And I think that, unlike the U.S. experience, the question in 

markets will be whether the sovereigns have the ability, the financial wherewithal, to write the 

kinds of checks that the United States at least underwrote some time ago.  I think the risks in the 

near term are probably mostly about a disorderly move in the euro and a walk-back from 

May 9, 2010 38 of 42



 

 

 

exposure to European financial institutions, even those that were thought to be tiered into a 

stronger category. 

With respect to the moves by the European Central Bank, if they come about as Jean-

Claude said to Ben earlier today, then they bring to my mind the well-known bazooka that we 

heard about a couple of years ago at the end of the last Administration.  I would be surprised if 

this bazooka isn’t tested, and that’s a huge challenge.  That the ECB is willing to do this, I think, 

shows how seriously they assess the risks. 

I think talk will quickly turn to the “malicious shorts” that brought this on Europe, and 

they will likely look to U.S. financial institutions that had the gall to hedge themselves over the 

last weeks and months as somehow precipitating this.  So I think our financial institutions will be 

part of this narrative, even if from a prudential perspective we would think that for them to pare 

back their exposures as risks mounted was perfectly appropriate. 

The ECB is putting itself in a position of having to be a transitional authority; but I think 

markets will wonder, “As a transitional authority to what?”  These sovereigns are going to have 

very tough questions, and I would tend to think that the political challenges among many of these 

member states will be massive. 

On the swaps themselves, I think what we’ve all said is that we’re making this decision 

based on what is in the best interest of the U.S. economy.  We’re certainly sensitive to the 

integrated nature of our financial markets and global economies, but I think I’d put myself in the 

category of thinking that this is important to do for our own sake. 

With respect to the communications of this, I think it’s important to describe our role as 

supportive but secondary.  This is not the antidote to problems in Europe or the U.S., and I think 

we ought not to oversell its relative import.  The half-life of policy initiatives out of Europe in 

May 9, 2010 39 of 42



 

 

 

this cycle has been falling.  I wouldn’t expect that to change with dramatic speed, so we should 

be in the business here of under-promising, but being as supportive as we can in the interests of 

the U.S.  Finally, I think we’re going to see massive flows into U.S. safe-haven securities, for 

liquidity at least as much as for safety, but we should not be lulled into that false sense of 

complacency that others have. 

I think this is a very tough period in front of us, and I regret to say that I suspect we will 

have another videoconference before our next regularly scheduled FOMC meeting.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Your forecasting has been good on that so far. 

MR. WARSH.  Regrettably. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I fully support giving you the authority to open 

the swap lines, subject to the conditions you outlined.  I think we have to take the right actions 

for the economy, and, frankly, the fact that we have to discuss the political risk underscores the 

seriousness of the GAO audit provision.  I do have a little bit of a faint hope—there are some 

lawmakers that were supporting the GAO audit issue, not so much because they thought it was a 

great idea but because they didn’t see the harm in it.  And, while it can’t go in Michelle’s 

statement, I think that this is an opportunity for some one-on-one conversations to use this as an 

illustration of how important it is that we be able to take the right action and to take it quickly, 

without concern about political interference.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We will have a formal vote in a 

second.  Brian, are you going to read this?  Before we take the vote, I’ll ask if there are any final 

questions or comments.  Brian. 

May 9, 2010 40 of 42



 

 

 

MR. MADIGAN.  The Committee would be asked to vote on the following resolution.  

The Committee authorizes the Chairman to agree to establish swap lines with the European 

Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of 

Canada, as discussed by the Committee today. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any comments on the statement?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  On the Bank of Canada, it just occurred to me that we, of course, have 

a swap line with Canada already, and we also have one with Mexico, and I wonder if there would 

be any considerations about that situation. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We doubled up before, right, Nathan? 

MR. SHEETS.  That’s right.  We had temporary liquidity swap lines with both of them at 

the same time that we had the NAFA lines.  And it didn’t create any operational or 

communication or other kinds of problems. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anything else? 

MR. BULLARD.  So we’re intentionally leaving Mexico out of this list, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m sorry?  No, Mexico is not on this list. 

MR. BULLARD.  Intentionally?  Should you say something like, “The existing swap 

lines will remain in place,” or something like that?  I don’t know. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  I don’t think so. 

MS. SMITH.  We’ll answer that question if we get it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle says we’ll answer that question if we get it.  

Maybe that is a better way to handle it.  Anything else?  [No response.]  All right.  Matt, could 

you call the roll? 

MR. LUECKE.   Yes.  This vote will encompass the text that Brian Madigan has read. 

May 9, 2010 41 of 42



 

 

 

Chairman Bernanke  Yes 

Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 

President Bullard   Yes 

Governor Duke   Yes 

President Hoenig   Yes 

Governor Kohn   Yes 

President Pianalto   Yes 

President Rosengren  Yes 

Governor Tarullo   Yes 

Governor Warsh   Yes  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did you get Governor Duke?  Yes—okay.  Thank you very 

much.  This was an extremely helpful conversation with many good ideas.  I will proceed as 

directed, and we will keep in close communication as the day and the weekend progress.  

Thanks, and I hope you enjoy the rest of your Mother’s Day. 

END OF MEETING 

May 9, 2010 42 of 42




