











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, June 22-23, 2010


 

 

 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

June 22–23, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

_______________ 
¹Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of 

the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, 

D.C., on Tuesday, June 22, 2010, at 2:00 p.m., and continued on Wednesday, June 23, 2010, at 

9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Donald L. Kohn 

Sandra Pianalto 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

Kevin Warsh 

Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, 

Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Thomas Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist 

David J. Stockton, Economist 

Thomas A. Connors, William B. English, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, 

Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists  

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 

Robert deV. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

June 22–23, 2010 1 of 213



 

 

 

Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for 

Management, Board of Governors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

_______________ 
² Attended Wednesday’s session only. 

James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson,² Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Nellie Liang, Dave Reifschneider, and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, 

Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; William Nelson, Senior 

Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors; Michael G. Palumbo and Joyce K. Zickler, Deputy Associate 

Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 

Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 

Governors 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Beth Anne Wilson, Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 

John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors; Andrea L. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of Research 

and Statistics, Board of Governors; John W. Schindler, Senior Economist, Division of 

International Finance, Board of Governors 

Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 

Governors 

Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Patrick K. Barron and John F. Moore, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Atlanta and San Francisco, respectively 

Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and John C. Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, 

Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and San Francisco, respectively 

June 22–23, 2010 2 of 213



 

 

 

David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Arthur Rolnick, and Mark E. Schweitzer, Senior Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Minneapolis, and Cleveland, 

respectively 

 

 

 

 

Daniel Aaronson, Todd E. Clark, and Andreas L. Hornstein, Vice Presidents, Federal 

Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and Richmond, respectively 

Joshua L. Frost, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

June 22–23, 2010 3 of 213



 

 

 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

June 22–23, 2010 

June 22—Afternoon Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good afternoon, everybody.  Let me update you on our 

Board nominees.  With some luck, we expect to have hearings before the Senate Banking 

Committee in the next three weeks or so.  And with some skill and luck, we might have our 

additional members here for the August meeting.  However, because we remain without 

reinforcements—[laughter]—I took the liberty of asking Governor Kohn to hang around for 

another meeting, and he very kindly agreed.  That will not stop us from honoring you tomorrow 

at lunch, but we appreciate your willingness to stay on for a bit longer. 

As usual, this is a joint Board–FOMC meeting, so I need a motion to close the meeting.  

MR. KOHN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  The first item is our briefing on financial 

developments, open market operations, and System facilities.  Brian, you have a lot of work to 

do today.  Let me turn to you first for open market developments. 

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The evolving fiscal situation in Europe 

and worries about global economic growth prospects dominated the attention of 

financial market participants over the intermeeting period. 

 

Investors have remained concerned about the fiscal positions of some European 

countries, despite the austerity measures and other policy efforts announced to date.  

Those concerns have been reflected in the pricing of sovereign risk for countries in 

the so-called European periphery, as indicated by the yield spreads shown in the 

upper left panel of the first exhibit.  The policy steps announced by the European 

Commission and the European Central Bank on May 10 led to an immediate and 

significant improvement in those spreads, but they have widened since then as 

investors have questioned whether the steps taken are sufficient to mitigate the risks 

involved. 

 

1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

The developments surrounding sovereign debt have also amplified investors’ 

concerns about the health of European financial institutions perceived to have 

                                                 

June 22–23, 2010 4 of 213



 

 

 

significant exposures to these countries.  The pressures on these institutions arise 

from their direct exposures to sovereign debt, from questions about the ability of their 

respective governments to backstop them, and from the contractionary effects of the 

fiscal adjustments required in some countries.  In response, share prices of euro-area 

banks have fallen significantly since the beginning of the year, and CDS spreads, 

shown in the upper right, have moved up notably. 

 

 

 

 

 

These developments have generated strains in short-term funding markets, 

including those for dollars.  Many European financial institutions still hold large 

amounts of dollar-denominated assets and finance a sizable portion of those holdings 

in short-term dollar-denominated funding markets.  In the presence of concerns about 

the status of these institutions, investors have become more reluctant to extend term 

funding to many of them. 

This reluctance has pushed term funding rates higher, with the spread of the three-

month U.S. dollar LIBOR relative to OIS moving above 30 basis points, as shown in 

the middle left panel.  Moreover, forward rates suggest that the LIBOR-OIS spread is 

expected to continue widening in coming months to near 50 basis points.  That is a 

significant improvement relative to late May, when the LIBOR-OIS spread was 

expected to surpass 70 basis points, but it is still indicative of a market under 

pressure. 

As shown to the right, the amount of commercial paper issued in U.S. markets by 

foreign financial institutions has been falling, a further sign of the pullback by 

investors.  Moreover, many European institutions have had to shift their funding into 

shorter tenors, with some institutions limited to maturities of a week or less.  The 

market has had a somewhat more favorable tone over the past several weeks, with 

some core European firms reportedly able to obtain longer-term funding on better 

terms, but such funding remains unavailable for many European institutions. 

One factor that has likely influenced the dynamics of funding conditions is the 

presence of the liquidity swap arrangements that the Federal Reserve established with 

the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Swiss 

National Bank, and the Bank of Japan.  There is currently only a very small amount 

of credit extended through the liquidity swap arrangements, as shown in the bottom 

left panel.  The limited usage of the swaps reflects the fact that their pricing is still 

unattractive relative to the funding rates available in the market.  Nevertheless, the 

presence of the swaps has provided a backstop for dollar funding markets and has 

likely helped to prevent a more significant deterioration. 

In contrast to the limited activity in its dollar operations, the ECB has been 

actively providing euro-denominated funding to the markets.  Indeed, to address the 

demand for euros, the ECB decided to return to a fixed-rate, full-allotment offering at 

its three-month open market operations, and it added a six-month operation as well.  

As shown in the bottom right panel, the amount of euros injected by open market 

operations has risen from already high levels.  At the same time, the amount of funds 

June 22–23, 2010 5 of 213



 

 

 

on deposit at the ECB has been increasing rapidly.  These patterns indicate that the 

ECB has increasingly acted as an intermediary, providing funds to those 

counterparties who cannot find them on favorable terms in the market and taking in 

funds from other counterparties. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In an attempt to provide more confidence to investors, European Union leaders 

announced late last week that they would release the results of stress tests for some of 

the largest European financial institutions, although further details remain limited at 

this time. 

The developments in Europe have had implications for broader financial 

conditions in the United States.  As shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 2, the 

euro has depreciated notably against the dollar since early this year, with the 

movement becoming more rapid over the intermeeting period.  On net, the dollar has 

gained 6 percent against the euro since the last FOMC meeting. 

At the same time, investors have become more wary of holding risky assets over 

the past two months, causing broad equity indexes to fall sharply, as shown in the 

upper right panel.  This flight from risk has been driven in large part by the deepening 

concerns about the European fiscal situation and its potential consequences for global 

growth.  However, some weak domestic data releases and considerable uncertainties 

surrounding regulatory reform efforts have likely contributed to this movement as 

well.  On balance, the S&P 500 index has declined more than 5 percent since the last 

FOMC meeting. 

As shown in the middle left panel, those same factors have led to some widening 

of corporate bond spreads, a notable shift from the steady rally since early 2009.  

Similarly, some backtracking has been observed in the spreads on other private credit 

instruments, such as commercial mortgage-backed securities and, to a much lesser 

extent, consumer-related asset-backed securities.  

The greater concerns about growth prospects, along with the uncertainties 

associated with regulatory reform efforts, have weighed on U.S. financial institutions.  

Share prices of those institutions have modestly underperformed the broader market, 

and CDS spreads for these institutions have risen some on average, as shown to the 

right.  Note that U.S. financial institutions have not been strongly affected by the 

pressures in dollar funding markets, in part because they are seen by investors as 

more creditworthy and are not as reliant as some European institution on unsecured 

term funding.   

Going forward, the evolution of the fiscal situation in Europe will continue to 

pose risks across global financial markets.  Our recent survey of primary dealers 

provides a snapshot into how the situation may evolve, with the range of outcomes 

considered listed in the bottom left panel.  Even though respondents put significant 

odds on the possibility that meaningful fiscal austerity measures would be 

implemented, they still saw a sizable chance that one or more credit events would 

June 22–23, 2010 6 of 213



 

 

 

take place in the euro area.  Moreover, a nontrivial probability was even placed on a 

country leaving the euro zone altogether.  Thus, market participants are not ruling out 

outcomes that could be quite disruptive to financial markets. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The survey question reported to the right focused on the extent to which these 

sovereign risk concerns could spill over to the U.S. economy going forward.  In 

March, the last time we asked this question, nearly 80 percent of the respondents saw 

the effect as minimal.  However, most respondents now see the European situation as 

having a moderate effect on the U.S. economy. 

Your final exhibit focuses on developments in U.S. interest rate markets.  Given 

the volatility in financial markets and increasing concerns about growth prospects, 

investors have pushed out the expected timing of monetary policy tightening, as 

shown in the upper left panel.  Current futures prices do not price in policy tightening 

until well into 2011.  Moreover, the Desk’s primary dealer survey indicates that the 

median expectation is for policy tightening to begin in the second quarter of next 

year, about a quarter later than what was expected in the last survey. 

Given the shift in policy expectations and the elevated demand for safe assets, 

Treasury yields have fallen sharply, as shown in the right panel.  The two- and ten-

year yields have declined 24 and 44 basis points, respectively, since the last FOMC 

meeting. 

Some of the movement in Treasury yields reflected a drop in breakeven inflation 

rates, shown in the middle left panel.  Investors may have lowered their expectations 

of future inflation or reduced the odds that they are placing on upside inflation 

outcomes in response to the increased concerns about growth prospects and the 

benign incoming data on inflation itself.  The mode of the distribution of long-term 

inflation expectations from our dealer survey has edged down as well. 

Rates on agency mortgage-backed securities moved roughly in line with those on 

Treasury securities.  Indeed, as shown in the middle right panel, option-adjusted MBS 

spreads have remained relatively low since the end of our large-scale asset purchases, 

despite edging higher from late last year.  The narrow level of spreads, along with the 

sizable rally in Treasuries, has brought conforming mortgage rates back to near their 

lowest levels observed in recent years. 

Trading activity in the agency MBS market has remained intact, but market 

functioning has suffered in other dimensions.  Specifically, settlement fails, shown in 

the bottom left panel, have risen sharply in recent months.  This pattern stems from 

the low level of short-term interest rates, which reduces the cost of failing, and from a 

lack of available supply.  The supply shortage has been exacerbated by the Federal 

Reserve’s sizable holdings of MBS. 

While fails have occurred across a range of securities, the situation is most 

problematic in higher coupon securities.  In those issues, there is a backlog of trades 

June 22–23, 2010 7 of 213



 

 

 

that are having difficulty reaching settlement, and there is no new production of 

securities to alleviate those shortages since mortgage rates have moved to lower 

levels.  As can be seen to the right, the net supply of Fannie Mae 5.5 percent coupon 

mortgage-backed securities (or “FNMA 5.5s”) has been declining, as prepayments 

have outpaced new origination.  New origination has instead moved to lower 

coupons, such as FNMA 4.5s, increasing their supply. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The settlement issues in the market have affected the Federal Reserve’s 

operations as well.  Specifically, the Desk has encountered difficulty reaching 

settlement of all of its purchases of FNMA 5.5s.  About $9 billion of these bonds 

have proven difficult to settle, and it is unlikely that primary dealers will deliver these 

securities anytime soon, given the supply shortage in the market.  Accordingly, if the 

FOMC is intent on achieving settlement of its MBS purchases in a timely manner, 

further actions by the Desk will be required. 

Given those circumstances, the FOMC may want to give the Desk the authority to 

conduct coupon swap transactions.  These transactions would allow the Desk to 

effectively exchange our unsettled holdings of FNMA 5.5s for other agency MBS that 

are more readily available for settlement.  Further details on this recommendation 

were provided to the FOMC in a memo in advance of this meeting.  Here I will 

review some of the key points. 

A coupon swap is a trade with a single counterparty in which the Desk would 

agree to simultaneously sell one coupon, in this case the FNMA 5.5s, and buy an 

equal amount of a different coupon, say the FNMA 4.5.  This operation would 

effectively net the Desk out of the outstanding transaction in which we are owed the 

FNMA 5.5s.  We would still be left with an outstanding transaction in which we were 

owed the FNMA 4.5, but we see a much greater chance of delivery of that security, 

given its more ample supply. 

Coupon swaps are very common transactions in the MBS market.  The trade is 

quoted at a single price, reflecting the spread between the prices of the two coupons, 

and can be transacted with primary dealers over the same Tradeweb system that we 

have used to conduct outright purchases and dollar roll transactions.  We would be 

transacting at market prices, ensuring that we are adequately compensated for the 

shift in portfolio composition.  

Note that it is the sell leg of the coupon swap that alleviates the Desk’s settlement 

problems.  The Desk could have a similar effect on settlement if it were simply to sell 

$9 billion of FNMA 5.5s on an outright basis.  Addressing the situation through a 

coupon swap, rather than an outright sale, is intended to avoid any confusion in the 

market about whether the Fed is entering a sales regime. 

If the Committee agrees to move in this direction, it will require a change in the 

policy directive from the FOMC.  The Tealbook presented one possible option for 

amending the language of the directive to allow for coupon swaps. 

June 22–23, 2010 8 of 213



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In addition, it would be desirable for such a change in strategy to be accompanied 

by a more extensive explanation of the scope and intent of the coupon swaps in order 

to avoid confusion among market participants.  One possibility is to have the Desk 

release an operating statement that would specify the details and rationale for the 

coupon swaps.  The message could be that these operations are technical in nature 

and are being undertaken to facilitate settlement of a specific amount of our previous 

agency MBS purchases.  To begin applying the approach for the July settlement 

period, the Desk would need to release the statement and to begin transacting before 

the release of the minutes from the June FOMC meeting. 

Thus, I am asking the Committee both if it is comfortable moving forward with 

coupon swaps and if it is willing to have this direction communicated by the Desk 

ahead of the release of the minutes. 

Before closing my briefing, I will offer a brief update on the development of our 

reserve-draining tools.  As noted in the Tealbook, the term deposit facility has 

attracted interest from a number of depository institutions.  Nearly 400 institutions 

have now registered for the TDF, and these institutions in aggregate hold well over 

$500 billion in reserve balances at this time.  The first small-value TDF auction, a 

$1 billion offering of 14-day deposits, was held on Monday, June 14.  The auction 

proceeded smoothly, and the automated systems supporting it performed well.  A 

total of 71 institutions submitted 156 competitive bids at the auction, resulting in a 

bid-cover ratio of over 6.  Of those, 13 institutions were awarded term deposits at the 

auction stop-out rate of 27 basis points.  In addition, 38 institutions submitted 

noncompetitive tenders that totaled $152 million, which were awarded in full at the 

auction stop-out rate. 

The second small-value auction will offer 28-day term deposits and will be held 

next Monday.  The staff has recommended to the Chairman that the amount offered at 

this auction be raised to $2 billion.  The somewhat larger offering amount may allow 

for a greater number of institutions to win awards and, judging by the high bid-cover 

ratio at the first auction and the tone of our conversations with large institutions, 

should be readily taken up.  A third small-scale operation is scheduled for July, which 

will be an 84-day operation. 

The staff has also made further progress on developing our large-scale reverse 

repo capabilities.  We continue to work on the legal arrangements to conduct 

transactions with primary dealers using agency MBS as collateral.  As a reminder, we 

are already fully operational in our ability to do such transactions using Treasury and 

agency debt as collateral. 

We have also moved closer to bringing the first wave of expanded counterparties 

online.  Recall that we received applications to join the program from 26 different 

money market mutual funds.  Our credit, legal, and compliance teams have finished 

their reviews of these applications, and we are now working towards completing and 

June 22–23, 2010 9 of 213



 

 

 

executing the relevant legal documentation. The Desk expects to be able to announce 

the first wave of expanded counterparties by August, which would then be followed 

by small-scale transactions with those firms. 

 

 

Overall, the staff has made decent progress in readying both draining tools and 

will continue to work towards expanding the capacity of those tools to remove 

reserves when needed.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian, either on market 

developments or on these two operational issues—the coupon swap or the draining tools?  Any 

questions for Brian?  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  You mentioned in your comments, Brian, the possibility of selling MBS 

and indicated that this coupon swap might be a better alternative.  Given the demand there is for 

MBSs, and the lack of supply, do you think selling our MBSs would be disruptive to the market?  

Or, with the right explanation, would it be helpful to the market?  My own view is that it might 

be helpful, given some of the conversations that I have been in with bankers. 

MR. SACK.  Strictly in terms of market functioning, I think selling a small amount of 

MBS would be helpful.  As I mentioned in the briefing, it’s the sell leg of the coupon swap that 

alleviates some of the pressures that we see in the market.  Of course, the decision of whether we 

want to enter into a regime of selling assets doesn’t depend just on the market functioning, but it 

also depends on how it would affect financial conditions.  Depending on the size of that 

approach, the risk is that it could lead to a rise in long-term interest rates.  But in terms of a pure 

market functioning perspective, the market is very tight right now, and some more supply, 

particularly of these higher coupon securities, would probably be helpful. 

MR. HOENIG.  Mr. Chairman, the reason I ask is that I’ve had some—not many, but 

some—bankers of the $10 billion size saying, “We can’t get these.  These are things we would 

like.  Why don’t you sell some of them?” And I thought it was a very fair question to ask us. 

June 22–23, 2010 10 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to follow up on that point, and then I have another 

set of questions.  We could potentially alleviate the supply issues by doing other swaps if we 

wanted to, as opposed to actually selling assets outright, right?  We have other 5.5 percent 

coupons in our portfolio, so, in principle, if we wanted to address the market functioning, we 

could think about doing other swaps.  Is that correct? 

MR. SACK.  That’s correct.  The proposal here is only to do the coupon swaps for the 

$9 billion of unsettled transactions.  There is a broader question about whether there could be 

some swap program that would be broader to address market function.  I think your point is 

right. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So, on the market function issue, that might be worth 

evaluating, in order to see if it’s a good idea or not. 

The second thing I wanted to ask is about reserve-draining tools. 

MR. HOENIG.  May I? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Sure.  

MR. HOENIG.  But part of my goal would be to shrink our balance sheet as well, without 

disrupting the market.  So I don’t want to get confused in terms of where my objective is relative 

to that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand.  The question I want to ask is on the 

reserve-draining tools.  As I see it, we have four of them, right?  We can run off maturing assets, 

we can do asset sales, we can do term deposit accounts, we can do reverse repos.  My question 

is:  Have we really evaluated what our preferences are among those four things?  Do we pull 

each lever equally, or do we prefer one lever over another? 

June 22–23, 2010 11 of 213



 

 

 

A related issue is:  How do we think about our preferences in terms of the cost?  

Presumably the costs of all of these things are not going to be quite the same—either the interest 

expense that we’re paying to borrow the money or the forgone interest in letting the maturities 

run off.  Has the staff started to do any work on this? 

MR. SACK.  Well, certainly, a distinction has been drawn between selling assets or 

letting the balance sheet run down on the one hand, and using the reserve-draining tools on the 

other.  I think the staff has pointed out that the former tools, including asset sales, have additional 

effects, because they put duration back out into the markets and presumably put upward pressure 

on long-term interest rates.  In contrast, the draining tools don’t do that—they simply get 

reserves out and improve our control of short-term interest rates.  I think that distinction has been 

made pretty clearly in the staff memos.  We haven’t gone a further step and asked the question 

about which draining tools would be more costly, for example, comparing term deposits and 

reverse repos.  I think it’s hard to judge right now which one might be more costly, but it’s 

something we can certainly continue to think about. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I presume that, once you do the test, you’ll get some 

evidence about where the market wants to clear, at least for small quantities. 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But you still won’t know exactly what the supply curve 

is for bigger quantities. 

MR. SACK.  Right.  And, of course, there’s always the possibility of having a very 

dynamic strategy and making adjustments over time, because we certainly will learn a lot about 

the effects of the tools as we start to use them in greater size. 

June 22–23, 2010 12 of 213



 

 

 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I just want to suggest that the cost should be one of 

the parameters, because there is an effect on the taxpayer in terms of how we do this, namely, 

what the net amount of money that we rebate to the Treasury is.  So I think that should be one of 

the criteria, though certainly not to the exclusion of all the other criteria.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to come back to President Hoenig’s 

point.  I’m a little uncomfortable with the idea of swaps on the FNMA 5.5s.  I’m intrigued by the 

idea of actually making outright sales, assuming the market would accommodate them without 

backing up significantly.  We bought them for a purpose; the purpose was achieved; your own 

charts show the accomplishment that took place in terms of their present levels.  But your 

chart 17 on MBS fails tell us there’s an imbalance in the marketplace.  I would imagine, although 

I’m guessing, that we probably would have a profit on these instruments.  I’m not sure. 

You also gave some other pretty compelling arguments:  the flight from risk that you 

noted—these are absolutely government-guaranteed securities, and, not unimportantly, the 

extension of expectations as to when we are going to tighten, which ought to provide any buyer 

of these securities, assuming they’re available at a decent price, some comfort that it will be 

some time before we tighten and might push up yields on the longer end.  My guess is, given 

what I used to do for a living, that sales would go well.  Let me give you an example of how 

things worked—it’s an exaggeration, but it illustrates the point.  We would go to a large group, 

Fidelity or anybody else, and say, “We’re willing to give you a portfolio, a very large one, of 

these mortgage-backed securities.”  They would have no trouble finding investors to take down 

these coupons as they now are, because otherwise their yield on cash is negligible. 

June 22–23, 2010 13 of 213



 

 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I would like to suggest, if we’re going to talk about coupon swaps, 

that we broaden the discussion to talk about selling outright, and perhaps buying short-term 

Treasury bills.  The objective would be to affect our portfolio, assuming this could be done 

without sending a signal that we’re tightening monetary policy. 

We have experimented with demand deposits, with repos, and so on.  I’m wondering, Mr. 

Chairman, if there’s not a way we could do this and send a signal to the marketplace that this 

doesn’t have implications for monetary policy, but that we do have an imbalance in the 

marketplace, and we’re seeking to solve that imbalance, rather than getting into the business of 

swaps, which, I think, just prolongs the issue. 

So here’s my bottom-line question:  Would we consider outright sales, taking advantage 

of the fact that we will probably book a slight profit, take the proceeds, buy shorter-term 

Treasuries that help shorten the duration of the portfolio, and sell into a market that seems to be 

eager to buy this kind of paper?  That would be my question.  I suppose it’s a Committee 

question.  I’m not putting pressure on Brian, but Brian gave us a partial answer and indicated that 

there was a market appetite for these securities. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, your conditional clause there was very 

important, that we would have to do this in a way that didn’t signal broader monetary tightening, 

and our ability to do that is at least debatable. 

MR. FISHER.  Exactly. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can certainly debate it.  After the next round, where 

Brian is going to talk about redemptions, we have an open discussion period, and at that time we 

could talk about the broader policy issue, if you would like.  Let me suggest that, at this point, 

we consider the Desk’s proposals—assuming for the moment that we don’t go into a broader 

June 22–23, 2010 14 of 213



 

 

 

selling regime—with the understanding that, if we were to begin to sell, that would then 

dominate these kinds of strategies.  So let’s assume for the purpose of this discussion that we’re 

not going to be selling, but then we can discuss that broader policy issue—it’s really not a 

technical issue; it is a broader policy issue—in the discussion period in just a few minutes.  

Okay? 

MR. FISHER.  As long as it doesn’t preclude our having that discussion. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Absolutely not. 

MR. FISHER.  I think that’s totally fair.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions for Brian?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In chart 17, the MBS fails, there’s a 

pretty big number, $700 or $800 billion.  How much of that is in the 5.5 coupons?  Actually, I 

don’t care how much is in the 5.5s.  How much is in the 4.5s?  Are there fails in the 4.5s now? 

MR. SACK.  We don’t have complete data on the distribution of fails across coupons.  

We believe that more than half the fails are in the 5s and the 5.5s.  I highlighted the 5.5s.  There 

are fails as well in the 5s.  And there are fails across the coupon stack.  But it’s certainly 

concentrated in higher coupons. 

MR. LACKER.  But there are fails in the 4.5s, you suspect? 

MR. SACK.  I think there are, but they’re much more limited, and we are, as I said in the 

briefing, much less worried about delivery of the 4.5s, and even the 5s, because there is still 

production in those coupons.  Actually, there are other market dynamics that are somewhat 

complicated that are increasing the supply of deliverable securities into the TBA market.  Some 

of the older vintages of those coupons are cheapening up enough to come into the TBA market.  

June 22–23, 2010 15 of 213



 

 

 

So, as I said, we’re particularly worried about the 5.5s, and much less worried about the 5s, and 

much, much less worried about the 4.5s. 

MR. LACKER.  In our purchase agreement, if our counterparty is failing to us, what 

obligation do we have?  Can we cancel it?  Can we unwind it?  Can we renege? 

MR. SACK.  We can do any of those things.  The question is:  What obligation do they 

have?  They owe us the security and aren’t delivering it.  They have an obligation to deliver.  

There’s an ability to fail, essentially without penalty now, because the short-term interest rates 

are close to zero.  And after several months, we have the right to initiate buy-in procedures, 

which would essentially force a negotiation with the counterparty for terms at which the 

transaction would be canceled. 

Our view is that going down the road of forcing delivery, whether just through 

communications with the primary dealers or eventually through initiating buy-in procedures, 

would be even more disruptive to market functioning.  We’re seeing all of these pressures in the 

market right now under a strategy where we’re allowing the counterparties to fail and where 

we’re actually doing dollar rolls to postpone their settlement.  So our view is that, if we turned 

around and forced delivery of that final $9 billion, it would tighten that coupon significantly and 

be very disruptive to the market. 

MR. LACKER.  You described the transaction as a sale. To some extent, it’s just like 

saying you have an option, and you engage in the opposite option, and that cancels the first 

option contract—right?—and any sort of forward thing.  You could use the word “unwind” for 

that, right? 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

June 22–23, 2010 16 of 213



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  So you could describe it any way we want.  We could say we dumped 

$9 billion on the market, or we could say we’ve unwound a transaction that had failed.  And you 

could describe it in sort of antiseptic terms, couldn’t you? 

MR. SACK.  That’s right.  Whether we sell outright or do the coupon swap, what we’re 

doing is we’re unwinding that transaction, but we’re doing it at market prices, as opposed to the 

other procedures. 

MR. LACKER.  Forcing through, right. 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

MR. LACKER.  Do you really think that if we said we were doing this one time because 

of the fails, then markets would believe we were sneakily taking the first step down the road to 

an asset sales program?  You really don’t think we can convey to markets that this is a one-time 

deal? 

MR. SACK.  I think you probably could effectively communicate that.  We just thought 

the coupon swap was a simple, elegant solution to it, because it’s a common transaction in the 

market, and because it provides 100 percent clarity that the Fed is not starting a sales regime. 

MR. LACKER.  But, to some extent, you’re just shifting the problem to the 4.5s, where 

the problem isn’t as strong.  But, on net, there are all of these fails in MBS.  Ironically we 

entered this market to improve functioning of financial markets, and now we seem to be a force 

for bad in this market rather than a force for good. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s important to understand that fails can occur for two 

reasons.  One is a shortage of security.  The other is because the interest rate is so low and there’s 

no penalty for not delivering.  In the Treasury market, of course, there are penalties for not 

delivering, and there are essentially no fails in that market.  There is under way, I understand—

June 22–23, 2010 17 of 213



 

 

 

Brian, you can correct me—a process now to have an analogous penalty in the MBS market.  

Presumably, at least for the 4.5s, that must be the principal source of the fails. 

MR. SACK.  Right.  That effort is under way.  It is a complicated issue that the Treasury 

Market Practices Group is studying.  But let me make one point clear:  Market conditions in the 

5.5s are extremely different from those in the 4.5s or the 4s—extremely different.  So we think 

it’s highly unlikely that we would do the coupon swap and then find ourselves in such a difficult 

situation with the new coupon we enter into. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Shifting to the time deposit trial, do you have a sense, when we 

really do this at scale, of what will happen to the rate that clears the market? 

MR. SACK.  I would say that we don’t have a strong sense.  There are reasons to think 

that the capacity of the facility should be pretty high at relatively low rates.  As mentioned, the 

institutions that have signed up for the TDF hold a large amount of excess reserves currently—

over $500 billion.  They’re holding those earning, obviously, the interest rate on excess reserves, 

so we think that’s a situation that will lead to significant demand—that is, they’re able to pick up 

some yield by entering into the term deposits.  But I don’t have a more precise answer than that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’d just like to emphasize that I kind of agree with President Lacker and 

President Hoenig here.  I don’t see any reason why we cannot just unwind this position, sell our 

claims to these 5.5s to somebody else, and get out from it, and explain that given the short supply 

of these securities and the demands out there for them, that this is a technical operation.  I think 

we can do this without aggravating the situation or engendering the belief that this is the 

beginning of a more aggressive selling campaign.  Given the number of fails, $800 billion—I 

June 22–23, 2010 18 of 213



 

 

 

think I remember we’ve got about $9 billion in these securities, so it’s a relatively small volume 

here. 

MR. SACK.  $9 billion that has not settled. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Yes, right. That’s what I meant, the $9 billion that hasn’t settled.  My 

understanding is that we’ve got an awful lot of the 5s and 5.5s on our balance sheet already.  So I 

would really be in favor of not doing the swaps but of unwinding the position and putting them 

back out in the market.  That’s my view.  Thank you.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there a way to cancel the transaction without loss, as 

opposed to having to go out and actually sell to a third party?   

MR. SACK.  Yes.  We can negotiate with the counterparties and cancel the transaction at 

a negotiated price.  We thought there was an advantage to doing what effectively cancels the 

transaction, but doing so at market prices. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  As an arm’s-length transaction.  

MR. SACK.  Exactly. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Excuse me, I don’t quite understand.  There are two sides to that 

transaction.  You’re doing a swap to get rid of those 5.5s in exchange for the 4.5s. 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

MR. PLOSSER.  What we’re saying is, why don’t we just do one side of that transaction? 

MR. SACK.  Yes.  I understand your point. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I guess what I’m saying is:  Why isn’t there a market price for that as 

well?  

MR. SACK.  Yes, I am sorry.  Whether you do it as a pure sale or a coupon swap, you are 

using market prices to essentially cancel the 5.5s, that’s correct. 

June 22–23, 2010 19 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I understand Tom Hoenig’s position, 

which is very straightforward and consistent with what Tom has said before, namely, that he’d 

like to begin to reduce the size of the balance sheet.  That’s why, when presented with Brian’s 

issue, he responds accordingly.  But I’m, maybe not bemused, but a bit interested in, Charlie and 

Jeff, how you are parsing this.  On the one hand, you say, “Couldn’t we explain it in a purely 

technical fashion?”  On the other hand—this may be the equivalent of taking judicial notice—

I’m aware of your views on asset sales as well.  So I’m wondering:  Aren’t you, in all honesty, 

sort of motivated by some of the same things that are motivating Tom?  And if that’s true, isn’t 

this saying, “Well, couldn’t we convince people that it’s really technical?” even though it may 

not be the sole motivation that we would have for doing it? 

MR. LACKER.  I’ll start.  It’s true.  I’ll admit it.  There’s this third option, but let’s focus 

on the choice between selling $9 billion and swapping $9 billion of 4.5s.  Let’s suppose we sell 

$9 billion, and then we decide whether to buy 4.5s.  At this point, I look at financial conditions, I 

look at the market, and I ask, “Why buy 4.5s?”  Would I like to start selling assets?  Sure.  But, 

to me, that’s separate, that’s not on the table today. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’ll stand by his answer.  That’s a good one. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Just to clarify, if you think in terms of a general market observer:  If 

you do the swaps, the balance sheet stays the same; if you follow Jeff’s provision, the balance 

sheet shrinks.  And the interpretation of that is what we are debating, right? 

MR. SACK.  Correct.  I think the coupon swaps are a very simple technical adjustment.  

It’s as if, along the way to buying $1¼ trillion of assets, we had just bought $9 billion less of the 

June 22–23, 2010 20 of 213



 

 

 

5.5s and bought $9 billion more of the 4.5s.  If we had done it along the way, I don’t think 

anyone would be sitting here talking about it.  Unfortunately, we got caught with the settlement 

problem.  But I think there’s a very simple, commonly used solution in the market, which is the 

coupon swaps.  Of course, we’re doing transactions already to facilitate settlement: We’re doing 

dollar rolls, where we’re willing to swap settlement across delivery days.  And this is just another 

variant of that, except that it gives us some range to swap across coupons. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I can see that this question is not as separable from the 

broader ones, as I had hoped.  We will have an opportunity discuss the broader issues in just a 

minute, if that’s okay.  Does anyone else have any questions for Brian on either this issue or the 

broader market concerns?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Just for clarity here, in following up on President Lockhart’s question:  If 

we were to sell these and buy Treasury bills, we don’t shrink our balance sheet, is that correct?  

MR. SACK.  That’s correct. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll just say briefly now that in a few minutes I will speak in 

favor of selling in general.  But I think that’s a distinct policy decision we should contemplate 

and discuss.  Speaking for myself, I think this is a perfectly reasonable way to address this 

particular problem. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Anyone else?  [No response.]  As I said, we’ll 

come back to this issue.  We now turn to Brian Sack for a briefing on the Treasury redemption 

issue.  This was—like the first issue—also supported by a memo last week.  Brian. 

June 22–23, 2010 21 of 213



 

 

 

MR. SACK. 2 The Committee at its last meeting requested further analysis of options 

related to the reinvestment of SOMA Treasury holdings.  In response, the staff circulated a 

memo ahead of this meeting that presented a few options, which I will now review. 

Under the current strategy, the Federal Reserve fully reinvests its maturing 

holdings of Treasuries into newly issued Treasury securities under the following 

procedure.  For Treasury bills, the Desk exchanges the proceeds received from all 

bills maturing on a given day for an equal quantity of the new four-week bill issued 

that day.  For coupon-bearing securities, the Desk takes the proceeds received from 

all coupon securities maturing on a given day and allocates them across all new 

coupon securities being issued that day, such that the SOMA acquires an equal 

percentage of each new offering. 

This strategy implies that decisions about the tenor of these reinvestments are not 

driven by portfolio considerations, such as the duration or liquidity of the SOMA.  

Instead, this reinvestment policy maintains a constant allocation between bill and 

coupon holdings and allows the composition of coupon holdings to be driven by 

Treasury debt issuance decisions. 

This strategy will not actively reverse some of the portfolio changes that took 

place amid the extraordinary policy efforts beginning in 2007.  Two major changes 

should be noted.  First, over 2007 and 2008, the Federal Reserve reduced its Treasury 

bill holdings dramatically by allowing bills to mature without reinvestment and by 

conducting outright sales in order to sterilize its lending operations.  Indeed, SOMA 

holdings of Treasury bills declined from $277 billion in mid-2007 to just $18 billion 

at the end of 2008.  Second, the FOMC decided to purchase $300 billion of longer-

term Treasury securities in 2009. 

The effects of these two changes can be seen in the upper panels of your handout.  

As shown to the left, the total size of the Treasury portfolio is not far from where it 

would have otherwise been, since the large-scale purchases essentially offset the 

rundown in bills and other securities.  Nevertheless, as shown to the right, the change 

in the composition of the portfolio has resulted in a sharp increase in the duration of 

those holdings. 

More details about these changes can be found in the table in the bottom panel by 

comparing pre-crisis readings (the first column) to current readings (the second 

column).  The size of the Treasury portfolio is currently $772 billion, compared with 

$786 billion before the crisis.  However, the duration of the portfolio has increased 

from 2.6 years to 5.5 years.  Moreover, the portfolio now has very little maturity 

liquidity, with only $85 billion of securities maturing within a year, compared with 

$402 billion before the crisis.   

                                                 
2 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

June 22–23, 2010 22 of 213



 

 

 

Going forward, the current reinvestment policy for Treasury holdings could be 

altered in two broad directions.  The first direction is to shorten the maturity of our 

Treasury reinvestments, even if we continue to roll over the full amount of maturing 

securities.  This possibility was covered by two specific options discussed in the 

memo, labeled options 2 and 3, which differ only in terms of whether the 

reinvestments include short-term coupon securities in addition to bills.  These two 

options leave the overall size of the Treasury portfolio unchanged but shorten its 

duration over time.  The second direction is to redeem maturing holdings of Treasury 

securities.  This approach, labeled option 4, shrinks the size of the Treasury portfolio 

but leaves its duration about unchanged. 

The characteristics of the Treasury portfolio in mid-2013 that are realized under 

each of these options are shown in the table. 

Let me begin with the effects of maintaining the current reinvestment strategy, or 

option 1.  The primary advantages of this choice are that it avoids any 

communications challenges surrounding a change in policy and eliminates any risk of 

prompting an increase in long-term interest rates.  As can be seen in the table, this 

approach leaves the duration of the portfolio about unchanged from current levels, at 

5.3 years, and it only slightly improves the degree of liquidity maturity of the SOMA, 

with about $127 billion of securities maturing within one year. 

Reinvesting in shorter-term securities, options 2 and 3, instead offers the 

advantage of returning the Treasury portfolio towards its previous characteristics of 

having lower interest rate risk and more maturity liquidity.  As shown in the table, the 

duration of the portfolio declines to below four years in each case, and the amount of 

securities maturing within one year jumps to $211 billion for option 2 and to $379 

billion for option 3.  However, this approach could lead to a modest increase in 

longer-term interest rates, as the SOMA would be removing less duration from the 

market over time.  It would also involve a communications challenge, as the FOMC 

would have to explain the reasons for the change in policy. 

Redeeming maturing Treasury securities, option 4, is the only option that shrinks 

the size of the balance sheet, with Treasury holdings falling to $477 billion by mid-

2013.  This approach removes reserves from the banking system, thereby reducing the 

potential need to drain reserves using other tools.  It could also reduce upside risks to 

inflation expectations under the assumption that the size of the balance sheet 

influences those expectations.  The duration of the portfolio remains about unchanged 

from its current level, but the smaller size of the portfolio means that the SOMA 

holds less interest rate risk. 

One concern with this approach is that it would come as a considerable surprise to 

financial markets.  According to our dealer survey, the odds placed on full 

redemptions at this time are less than 1 percent.  A decision to move in this direction, 

therefore, would likely produce an increase in long-term interest rates as portfolio 

balance effects unwind.  If the change were seen as suggesting a stronger inclination 

June 22–23, 2010 23 of 213



 

 

 

of the FOMC to exit more quickly from its accommodative policy stance, the market 

reaction could be more sizable.  As noted earlier, the risk of such a market response is 

also present, though to a lesser degree, under options 2 and 3. 

Let me close by making one last point.  Under each of the options discussed here, 

the Desk will likely end up engaging in secondary market purchases of Treasury 

securities by 2014 or 2015.  These purchases will be fairly substantial in size, in order 

to meet the regular growth of the overall portfolio and to offset any sales or 

redemptions of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities that are occurring at that 

time.  Accordingly, those purchases will provide the FOMC with another opportunity 

to shape the maturity structure of the Treasury portfolio.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think we’re going to end up having a go-

round, so everyone is going to get a chance to give their views.  For the moment, let’s just 

restrict ourselves to questions for Brian.  Does anyone have questions?  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Brian, I have a couple of questions about market effect in the 

last row of Table 3.  One is that I couldn’t understand why the effect under option 4 was twice as 

large as the effect under option 3.  And, relatedly, I guess, what’s the source of those estimates? 

MR. SACK.  Let me start with the second question.  The source of the estimates is the 

same set of staff analysis that we’ve used in the past.  I think the staff has argued that the full 

asset-purchase program of $1.7 trillion would, perhaps, lower longer-term interest rates 50 to 

80 basis points.  If we scale that down to $300 billion, which is the change discussed here, you’ll 

get something on the order of 10 to 15 basis points, which is actually the lower end of this range. 

As for the first question of why the effects are so much smaller under options 2 or 3, 

there’s implicit in that an assumption that the Treasury will be willing to shift more issuance to 

shorter-term securities given our participation there.  So, actually, the amount of duration that 

ends up being pushed into the market is greater under option 4 than under options 2 and 3. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Oh.  That’s what I couldn’t figure out, right. 

June 22–23, 2010 24 of 213



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  Now, just to be clear, the Treasury I think has some concern about rollover 

risk even regarding our holdings.  It’s much less concern than with the public, but not zero 

concern.  So under any of these options, given that we’re holding less duration, there will be 

more duration pushed out into the markets.  At this time, Treasury is quite interested in extending 

its debt maturity for this particular reason.  So I think all of these options produce some upward 

pressure on long rates, but it’s more severe under option 4. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren, a question? 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, a technical question.  It seemed that some of the options were 

based just on when things would be redeemed versus when an auction would occur so that you 

could put the funds back to work.  Once something matures, is there any problem with just doing 

repos until a Treasury bill auction occurs?  Is there something I don’t understand about the 

mechanics that would make it difficult to have a bridge between the maturity of a longer-term 

security and rolling into a Treasury bill auction? 

MR. SACK.  The problem with that is that there’s a legal interpretation that we can only 

acquire securities at an auction when we have securities maturing that day.  We are required to 

obtain securities in the open market in general, but the interpretation has been that we can roll 

securities over when their maturity date matches the settlement date of a new issue.  The problem 

with your outcome is that, as soon as we start to do repos, we’ve lost the option to jump back 

into the new auction in the primary market.  We have explored other options—such as whether 

Treasury could issue a bridging security to us, and so on—but we’ve been able to come up with a 

solution that circumvents the problem. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you. 

June 22–23, 2010 25 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  My question is related to that as well.  I was looking at options 2 and 3 

and trying to figure something out.  From the memo, it looked as if the way you got the volume 

of bills that you held in 2 was driven exactly by the matching up of the auction dates, and that’s 

how you got to the mix of bills and lower coupons in 2 versus 3, or in 2. 

MR. SACK.  That’s exactly right.  It may help to understand that there are three different 

settlement structures in play in the Treasury market.  There are Treasury bills, which settle every 

Thursday; and then there are the coupons, which are either on a mid-month cycle or an end-of-

month cycle.  Given the restriction that we can roll securities over in the primary market only 

when the maturity of one security matches the issue date of the new security, we’re left 

constrained in terms of how we can reallocate across coupons. 

That’s actually one advantage of option 2—by including Treasury bills, two-year notes, 

and three-year notes, we cover that full range of settlement days, because the two-year notes 

settle at the end of the month, and the three-year notes settle mid-month.  So that’s a solution that 

allows us to be present on every single Treasury issuance day, while still achieving a shortening 

of the portfolio. 

MR. PLOSSER.  So, under option 2, the $68 billion of bills is likely to be the maximum 

amount of bills that you could purchase under that strategy? 

MR. SACK.  That’s correct.  And just to be clear to everyone, in option 3, to go to a bills-

only portfolio would, therefore, require sizable secondary market purchases of bills.  That could 

present communication difficulties, because with one hand, we’d be trying to pull reserves out of 

the system through term deposits and reverse repos, and with the other hand, we’d be making 

short-term investments. 

June 22–23, 2010 26 of 213



 

 

 

MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I think you implied that this will be a 

change in policy and it would be a surprise in financial markets.  Could you discuss a little bit 

more how markets have formed expectations regarding how we will deal with our Treasury 

holdings and that they will be rolled over?  I don’t believe we’ve really discussed this explicitly 

in our FOMC statements.  It’s an element of our policy decisions, and the discussion seems a bit 

incomplete relative to our previous decisions.  This is something that we’re going to be grappling 

with for some time. 

MR. SACK.  Right.  The past several sets of FOMC minutes have stated, I believe, that 

the Committee has discussed the reinvestment strategy and that the current reinvestment strategy 

will be continued, which suggests that it is a policy decision in play.  Yet the financial markets 

still see it as very unlikely to change it in the short term.  You can see from our dealer survey that 

over, say, a two-year horizon the chance of some type of Treasury redemptions actually moves 

up to about a third, but, in the short term, redemptions are seen as very unlikely.  I think there 

hasn’t been a broad enough discussion of the other options that we’re entertaining—options 2 

and 3, where we reinvest in the shorter coupons—for market participants to have caught on and 

be considering that as a possible outcome. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for Brian?  [No response]  I think the most 

efficient thing is to have a go-round and to have some discussion of both the sales issue and the 

redemptions issue.  I assume that, once we determine what we’re doing on those two, the 

question about the MBS swaps will kind of fall out of that.  We went through this at great length 

in the last meeting.  To try to minimize the repetition, I happen to have with me, by coincidence, 

June 22–23, 2010 27 of 213



 

 

 

the minutes, and I thought I could just remind you of what we agreed to when we voted on the 

minutes and what the public has heard from us. 

First of all, there were four principles on which we had essentially uniform agreement.  

First, whatever strategy we adopt, we should be consistent with our objectives of maximum 

employment and price stability; in other words, we have to take into account the financial and 

economic conditions when we think about this.  Second, we are looking to normalize the balance 

sheet, both its size and composition, over time.  Third, doing number two would eventually entail 

sales of agency debt and MBS; in other words, we’re in agreement that we’re not going to go 

strictly through a redemptions strategy.  And, fourth, any sales would be communicated in 

advance, conducted at a gradual pace, and potentially adjusted in response to changes in 

economic and financial conditions.  So those are the four principles that I think we all agree on:  

macro objectives, normalize the balance sheet, sell at some point, but do it in a way that’s 

gradual and well-communicated. 

The next portion of the minutes talked about areas where there was diversity of views.  

I’ll quote: “Most participants favored deferring asset sales for some time.”  So, at this point, the 

market does not expect a near-term sale.  It doesn’t mean we can’t do it.  We also communicated 

that a majority preferred beginning asset sales some time after the first increase in the FOMC’s 

target for short-term interest rates.  That was option 2, you recall, when we looked at the various 

issues.  Again, it was a majority, not everyone.  The rationale given was that such an approach 

would postpone any asset sales until the economic recovery was well established and would 

maintain short-term interest rates as the Committee’s key monetary policy tool. 

Given the four conditions on which we agree, I think the question at hand is whether we 

should reverse the communication we’ve already made, namely, that assets sales would be 

June 22–23, 2010 28 of 213



 

 

 

deferred for some time and that asset sales would come after interest rate moves, and 

communicate a different strategy that would involve at least announcing very soon what our 

schedule of asset sales would be. 

Let me make two additional points, if I could.  First, while I think it is important to 

discuss issues of market functioning and so on, I think we all should recognize that the key issue 

here is the signal that we give in terms of policy:  What is the market going to infer from the 

announcement that we make?  In particular, when we talked about sales in the scenarios that the 

staff did in the last meeting, we talked about situations, for example, where sales would be 

combined with a more extended period of low interest rates rather than a less extended period.  

Can we do that communication?  I think that’s a very important issue. 

The second and final comment I’d like to make is sort of a request.  As we’ll discuss later 

on, it seems to me, at least, that the economic and financial outlook is somewhat weaker today 

than it was in April.  Therefore, if the Committee instructs me to undertake either a significant 

redemptions policy or a sales policy, I would ask you to allow me to use the Humphrey-Hawkins 

testimony to provide additional warning and preparation for such a change, given what we’ve 

communicated—if, in fact, that’s what we decide to do.  But, of course, again, that’s your option.  

With those background comments in the hope of trying to make this an efficient and 

effective discussion, why don’t we begin a go-round?  Before we do that, Matt reminds me that 

we need to vote to approve domestic open market operations.  If there are no objections to doing 

that—[no response] I see no objection.  Okay.  Who would like to go first?  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ll try to be brief.  Let me just 

cut to the chase about what I’m thinking about this.  I think one of the things that we did learn 

June 22–23, 2010 29 of 213



 

 

 

last time from the memos was that the process of sales in terms of its macroeconomic impact was 

going to be modest, particularly if the sales were gradual and at a measured pace. 

Consistent with those four principles, one of the things that we haven’t emphasized in our 

communication, though, is a pre-commitment to the mix of what the balance sheet looks like.  

We’ve done something, but we haven’t committed to the observation that that mix is going to 

remain fixed over time.  In fact, it obviously is changing some because of our redemption 

policies on MBS.  When I look at these two proposals on the MBS swap, as President Lacker 

suggested, the MBS swap amounts to a sale of the 5.5s and a purchase of the 4.5s, in effect.  So 

that is a sale and it is a purchase, in effect.  I’m thinking, though, that maybe to help normalize 

our balance sheet in terms of the mix, selling the 5.5s and purchasing Treasuries would keep the 

balance sheet the same, but just says we’re buying Treasuries instead of buying MBS to replace 

those. 

That leads me to thinking about the Treasury redemption strategy, and I am comfortable 

with option 2.  I think that’s a sensible strategy and it’s consistent with our goal to normalize our 

balance sheet and get the maturity structure down.  My preference would be to have a little more 

shorter-term assets in the mix than what option 2 offers, but, given the constraints that we face 

for the foreseeable future, at least, maybe that’s not feasible, and trying to match what’s available 

in the marketplace would be best.  Because we haven’t made a commitment to the public or 

talked much about what the mix of the portfolio looks like, I think my preference is to forgo the 

opportunity to purchase extra MBS or purchase the 4.5s instead of the 5.5s, let the 5.5s go, take 

that resource and invest it in short-term Treasuries in line with option 2 of the staff’s memo.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

June 22–23, 2010 30 of 213



 

 

 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At the last meeting, a majority of us 

thought that sales should occur after tightening.  I don’t think we should be revisiting this at each 

meeting.  I think we should come to a conclusion and stand by it.  I think the reason that a 

majority of us thought that sales should go after a tightening is because sales are a tightening.  

They may be of a small magnitude, but the direction is clear—it’s a tightening. 

The reason mortgage rates have fallen is not because the economy is so strong, it’s 

because the economy is weaker than it was before.  What was striking in Brian’s first memo was 

a 20 percent chance that somebody falls off the euro.  Well, I think the reason mortgage rates are 

so low is that the possibility of a tail event has gone up substantially, and that wasn’t the case at 

the previous meeting.  So I think it would be particularly puzzling right now—in this 

environment, with the inflation rate forecast lower, the unemployment rate forecast higher, the 

market as a whole thinking that interest rates are lower because a bad outcome is more likely, 

and the stock market down—if we said we’ve decided to do a tightening.  I find it quite 

inconsistent that we would do a tightening at this meeting, even if it is of a small magnitude.  So 

I don’t think that we should take back what we had agreed to and what we represented in the 

minutes at the last meeting. 

On the Treasuries, my preference spills over a little into our forecast discussion in the 

next two parts of the meeting, but I don’t think this is the time to make any changes at all.  My 

preference would be to make no change in what we’re doing for the Treasury portfolio.  Over 

time, I can see some logic in shortening the maturity, but I don’t think this is the time to do it.  If 

anything, the probability of having to do more purchases has gone up rather than down.  We’re 

closer to a deflationary scenario, and we’re closer to an environment in which we could have a 

really bad outcome, and we don’t have many tools to deal with a really bad outcome.  Interest 

June 22–23, 2010 31 of 213



 

 

 

rates are already bound by zero, so our only option is sales or purchases of other assets.  In that 

environment, this is a particularly good time not to do anything and see if we might actually have 

to do more purchases rather than more sales as time goes on.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The more I think about this, the 

harder it is for me to shake this idea that the size and the composition of our asset holdings are 

two distinct things that we can vary differently.  I’m struck by the extent to which, at the last 

meeting, some earlier meetings, and the discussion now, asset sales are viewed as synonymous 

with reducing the size of our asset holdings.  I read over the minutes of the last meeting.  

Everyone who spoke against asset sales was speaking against reducing the size of our asset 

holdings.  No one opposing asset sales said anything about the composition of our balance sheet.  

The minutes accurately reflect that a majority were in that camp.  I think it’s misleading—and I 

wish I had brought this up when we had a chance to edit the minutes—to refer to that as asset 

sales.  In fact, a majority favored not taking steps to reduce our asset holdings. 

We all want to normalize our balance sheet and return to Treasuries-only—it’s one of our 

principles.  It looks to me as if we can have both.  We have these four principles here.  There’s a 

Pareto improvement available to us, where we can normalize our balance sheet more rapidly 

without sacrificing anything on the other dimensions.  So I’d advocate selling.  We’re talking 

about taking the proceeds of maturing Treasuries and buying assets with them.  Not only is this 

the status quo, but we’re buying new assets as we go along.  I don’t see why we can’t embark on 

a program of selling mortgage-backed securities.  And if the majority of the Committee believes 

we shouldn’t reduce the size of our asset holdings until after the first interest rate increase, well, 

then, so be it—we’ll put the proceeds into short-term Treasuries.  As for the narrow question, I 

June 22–23, 2010 32 of 213



 

 

 

favor option 2, because I don’t want to reduce our Treasury holdings—we’re only going to 

increase them later as we roll off MBS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, if we were to go in a particular 

direction, I would totally agree with giving you all the time you need to explain it in terms of the 

Humphrey-Hawkins.  I certainly understand that, and it needs to be explained.  The reason I 

raised the question is partly because we did say circumstances had changed, and I looked at it as 

an opportunity to reduce our balance sheet without necessarily disrupting the markets or our 

longer-run objectives, provided we give the right explanation.  I still feel that we can do that.  

We’re already experimenting with term auction facilities to bring excess reserves down.  This is 

a favorable selling into a favorable market that would further allow us to reduce those holdings.  

It seemed like a reasonable thing to do, in my opinion. 

In terms of what President Lacker was saying, if we have that opportunity and the goal is 

not to shrink the balance sheet, I would just as soon put shorter-term Treasuries on as other 

mortgage-backed securities.  So that’s where I am.  On the narrow question, I suppose I could go 

with option 2 as well, so we would move towards Treasuries.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see, President Lacker, selling mortgage-

backed securities and buying short-term Treasury securities as a tightening action—we would be 

putting more duration in the market and reducing the duration on our balance sheet.  I agree that 

we want to go there at some point, and the question I think that’s confronting us is at what point.  

Compared with you, perhaps, I put less emphasis on the total level of the balance sheet.  I don’t 

think all of those excess reserves are having much of an effect on economic activity, bank credit, 

June 22–23, 2010 33 of 213



 

 

 

or anything else, and I put much more emphasis on the composition of the balance sheet.  So I 

would be somewhat hesitant at this point to take what I would see as even a slight tightening 

action. 

Let me go through the various options.  On MBS sales, I’m where I was last time and 

where the majority of the Committee was last time.  Selling MBS or even exchanging them for 

Treasury bills would be a tightening action.  I would like to keep the Committee’s attention and 

the public’s attention on short-term interest rates as the most active and the least confusing 

instrument we have for affecting monetary policy.  I think the communication challenges of 

doing what you suggested, or just selling MBS outright as President Hoenig suggested, without 

triggering an expectation that this was the first step in tightening would be very, very 

considerable. 

If we do this and it does have even a small tightening effect, it does imply that short-term 

rates are lower for longer, so the “extended period” is extended.  I’m not sure that the distortions 

of extending that carry trade issue—raising long-term rates and keeping short-term rates lower 

for longer—aren’t greater than any distortions we’re causing by having a bunch of MBS in our 

portfolio.  So I would still favor waiting for the MBS sales. 

On the redemptions, or the exchange of Treasuries in any size for Treasury bills, I, too, 

was drawn to some extent to option 2—reinvest in shorter maturities.  I saw it as a way 

eventually of reducing a duration risk, giving Brian more options to absorb reserves when the 

time comes to do that, moving back towards a more traditional Treasury portfolio.  But I think, 

as I indicated in my opening comments, even option 2 would be a slight tightening of policy.  

Whether these basis points are right, no one has any idea, right?  But it is a move in that 

direction, and, like you, Mr. Chairman, and President Rosengren, I see the economic outlook as 

June 22–23, 2010 34 of 213



 

 

 

having weakened just a little bit over the intermeeting period, and I don’t think this is the 

appropriate time to take even a potentially slight tightening alternative.  So I think at some point 

the Committee should look at option 2, but I wouldn’t do it right now. 

As for the swaps, $9 billion isn’t a big deal.  I certainly agree with that.  I guess what 

worries me about selling the $9 billion or rolling it into Treasuries is that it’s unusual, and we 

ought to be doing kind of what the markets do to facilitate this fails situation and not set 

ourselves communications challenges by doing something that’s inconsistent with regular market 

practice.  So I guess I have a slight preference for the swap alternative as opposed to some of 

these others.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  Can I respectfully pose a question to Governor Kohn? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly. 

MR. KOHN.  A long as it’s respectful.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Two hundred twenty-two FOMC meetings—it had better be 

respectful.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER.  How would Governor Kohn feel about selling MBS and buying 

equivalent duration Treasuries? 

MR. KOHN.  Obviously, less concerned.  I think if we had a good reason for doing that, 

and if it were well advertised ahead of time, and if I could be pretty sure it wouldn’t upend the 

mortgage market, obviously I’d be a little bit less concerned. 

June 22–23, 2010 35 of 213



 

 

 

I’m a little surprised, to tell the truth, about this discussion about buying Treasuries.  For 

example, when we talked about buying Treasuries, President Fisher, you were really concerned 

about its implications for perceptions of our independence.  I’m glad to hear you’re less 

concerned now. 

MR. LACKER.  It’s eroded on so many other fronts. 

MR. FISHER.  First of all, I wasn’t the only member—Governor Warsh also had some 

interesting arguments on that.  But I think it threatens our independence more to have skewed 

our holdings toward longer-term mortgage-backed securities.  But we can talk about that when I 

get my chance in the round. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Where are we?  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I line up with President Rosengren and 

with the gist of what Governor Kohn said.  First, I think we have two questions:  a direction of 

policy question, and a timing question.  I think there has been quite remarkable change since the 

last meeting—risk is higher, and uncertainty is a whole lot greater.  So, from a timing point of 

view, I would do nothing at this meeting that risks misinterpretation. 

I tend to look at these questions in a risk–reward sense.  I do not see the great reward in 

acting at this meeting on any of the moving parts of the policy direction.  I do see a risk not only 

of market misinterpretation, but, depending on the compounding effects of conditions that 

develop over the next few weeks, also of conceivably a policy error of some kind.  Directionally, 

then, I line up pretty much with what Governor Kohn just said—to shorten the maturities using 

option 2 or, conceivably, option 3.  I think that decision can be made at a later date.  Because it is 

a relatively small sum and it, in effect, will be interpreted as preserving the status quo, I would 

favor the coupon swaps idea.  I continue to favor sales after tightening.  And finally, at least as 

June 22–23, 2010 36 of 213



 

 

 

I’m thinking of it at this point, I see tightening as multi-modal.  We’ve talked about the 

tightening effects of a number of different possible actions, but I see it as one decision that 

comes at a particular time, and I would not want to risk the possibility that something that we do 

not think is tightening is interpreted by the market as tightening. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Can I just ask one clarifying question of Brian?  If we were to hold the 

5.5s, given that they have large prepayment risks, what’s the anticipated duration of those 

securities?  In other words, if you replaced them with Treasuries of similar duration—this goes 

back to what President Lacker said—what would they be?  Five years, seven years, four years? 

MR. SACK.  Oh, no.  It would be much shorter.  The duration of our agency MBS 

holdings broadly is between three and three and a half years, and presumably the duration of the 

5.5s would be less than that on average. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Because of prepayment? 

MR. SACK.  Right.  I don’t have the exact reading for that coupon, but— 

MR. PLOSSER.  So if you replaced those with Treasuries, you’d be looking at Treasury 

durations of three to five years, presumably.  Thank you. 

MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, can I follow up on this? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  Three to three and a half is the duration of our MBS holdings? 

MR. SACK.  Correct. 

MR. LACKER.  And the duration of our overall Treasury portfolio is five and a half 

years? 

MR. SACK.  Right.  Treasuries are our longest-duration asset right now in aggregate. 

June 22–23, 2010 37 of 213



 

 

 

MR. LACKER.  So our MBS are less than average duration. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it’s because of the level of interest rates.  It’s very 

sensitive to the level of interest rates. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  That’s because interest rates are so low that it means that the 

prepayment will be very rapid, and as a result, our balance sheet will shrink quite rapidly if 

interest rates stay this low. 

MR. LACKER.  So what’s the duration of the public’s portfolio?  I’m trying to think, 

with respect to what Governor Kohn said—if we sold the MBS, that would increase the average 

duration of our portfolio, wouldn’t it? 

PARTICIPANT.  It depends on what you buy. 

MR. LACKER.  Because it’s below the Treasury duration, right? 

MR. SACK.  Right, but if we just sold MBS and didn’t do anything else, it would be 

putting more dollar amounts of duration into the market. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You are absolutely right.  If you swap for long-duration 

Treasuries, you increase the duration.  President Rosengren, you had a comment? 

MR. ROSENGREN.  But it would also presumably change the mortgage rate relative to 

the Treasury rate.  So if the housing sector is one of the sectors that you think is particularly 

weak, it would be relatively unusual.  Even though it’s a change in duration, it’s also a change in 

composition that does have potential compositional effects, particularly on a sector that may be 

weak otherwise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If it weren’t for the communication issues 

about what it might signal for monetary policy, I’d tend to think that redeeming Treasuries alone 

June 22–23, 2010 38 of 213



 

 

 

would have relatively small effects, and I’d tend to favor doing something like that to get our 

balance sheet down.  But that’s not the case—there are communication issues. 

I think it would have been nice if, along the way, we had known that it was okay to make 

technical adjustments in the size of our balance sheet—in some of these components, in 

relatively small dollar amounts—over, say, a six-month period; we’re obviously struggling with 

a whole number of these issues.  You know, I’m the kind of person where, within certain bands, 

small adjustments don’t bother me.  The markets apparently are going after nickels and so on, so 

that a small change matters a lot to them.  But we’re going to struggle with this with the term 

deposit facilities, the $9 billion of coupon swaps, and other things that are going to come along, 

and it’s always going to have an effect of a couple of basis points.  It would be nice if we could 

have somehow communicated that there’s a range of noisy adjustments that are going to be 

natural for us to do. 

However, it does have implications about what it means for tightening, and so I don’t 

think there’s much of a reward here.  As President Lockhart mentioned, the risk is larger than I 

would like, and the dual mandate issues say to me that we need to maintain accommodation.  So 

I tend to favor option 1—roll over the Treasuries and keep the monetary policy accommodation.  

I certainly would not object to reinvesting in shorter-maturity Treasuries.  But I would go ahead 

and roll them over.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And on the asset sales, the MBS sales? 

MR. EVANS.  Yes, I wouldn’t do that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Three questions, I think, have been raised.  

One, on the coupon swaps, let me just underscore what Brian said, which is that this is very 

June 22–23, 2010 39 of 213



 

 

 

ordinary, customary, boring, not very exciting or surprising news to people in markets—these 

things do happen all the time.  So in that way I’m in total agreement with him and the New York 

folks.  I would just point out that I don’t think that this is a one-off problem.  If only we had 

bought one class of securities instead of another, then things would be fine.  This is symptomatic.  

This is indicative of a very messed up mortgage finance system and of extraordinary efforts by 

all sorts of government actors, including the Federal Reserve, to intervene in it.  So, while we’re 

clearing up this symptom, and I think that we should, I wouldn’t be dismissive of this problem, 

and I’d suggest that we’ll see different strings of it manifest themselves in different ways over 

the course of the next couple of years. 

Second, on the redemption policy, I favor option 2 in substance.  I think that gives to 

Brian, who has to deal with all of us, a little bit more flexibility than option 1 does, so I think 

that’s necessary to ensure that we can functionally provide what he and the Desk need to 

provide.  So option 2 is fine.  In terms of the communication of option 2, I would add that to the 

burdens we are going to put on the Chairman for Humphrey-Hawkins.  I think that if the 

Chairman can lay out at a high level what the music is, then Brian and the New York Desk can 

play out the lyrics as to the technical issue of what’s going on and do that in a way which is not 

scary.  I think all of us around this table, myself included, do tend to make a lot out of the 

communications challenges and what markets want and need, but these markets can be led, and 

they can be led ably to good places, so we ought not be intimidated by that prospect. 

On the subject of asset sales, Mr. Chairman, I think I’m going to take your counsel and 

not re-litigate the discussion we had last time.  I’ll just make two points in light of more recent 

events coming out of Europe.  First, I think Europe should remind us of the need to have 

optionality associated with all that we’re going to do under a narrative that is playing out with 

June 22–23, 2010 40 of 213



 

 

 

markets.  The downside risks that are now obvious in Europe, which were feared and understood 

six weeks ago, should remind us of the multiple policy tools that we now have, and, speaking for 

myself, I think that we should keep plenty of flexibility about the deployment of those tools.  

Some of those are little water pistols, and some of those are nuclear weapons, and I wouldn’t 

want to confuse them and say we’ve got this big closet and it’s just filled with a bunch of guns.  

So my own view would be that, when we think about the size and composition of our balance 

sheet, we would be well served to keep that separate from, but certainly related to, our decision 

on policy rates.  I think the minutes accurately reflected where we were last time.  I think that 

optionality would be a good thing for us to get back to in future discussions, but we’re probably 

not going to be able to accomplish that today.   

The second new news, it strikes me, out of Europe that informs this decision is that the 

problems there, which are very significant, have had a far more material impact on risk-free 

rates—on the Treasury curve and on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages for folks that are buying a first 

house—than a trillion dollars of assets that this Committee has undertaken.  I just want to put 

that which we’re debating in the broader context:  Europe should remind us that what we’re 

contemplating is relatively small.  I have great confidence that it can be properly communicated 

both in the forthcoming discussions the Chairman has in Humphrey-Hawkins and beyond.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On asset sales, I am where the majority of 

the Committee was at our last meeting, and I prefer to wait on asset sales until we start raising 

interest rates.  I support giving the Desk the authority to conduct the coupon swaps to facilitate 

the settlement of our MBS purchases. 

June 22–23, 2010 41 of 213



 

 

 

Regarding Treasury redemptions, given my outlook, which I’ll talk about in the next go-

round, I prefer option 1.  I, too, would like to reduce the duration of our Treasury holdings as 

presented in option 2, but, given the communications risk that we’ve talked about and also 

Brian’s comment that option 2 could put some modest upward pressure on long-term interest 

rate, I prefer to stay with option 1 at this meeting.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Who’s next?  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to associate myself particularly with 

the comments of President Rosengren and Governor Kohn.  I agree with everything they’ve said.  

To me, a key issue is that the macroeconomic outlook is weak, and, since our last meeting, I 

think it has deteriorated.  So I think macroeconomic considerations continue to call for 

accommodative policy and, ideally, even more accommodative policy than we have now.  I 

wouldn’t do anything now that could be interpreted in any way as a tightening of policy or 

undertake anything that could, because of the communications difficulties associated with it, lead 

markets to believe that we are likely to tighten policy any sooner than they now think. 

On asset sales, I feel we’ve had an excellent discussion.  I think every possible issue has 

surfaced.  I was certainly in the majority at the last meeting.  My views on this haven’t changed 

at all.  I think it is a sound decision to sell assets, but to do so only after we’ve made a decision to 

tighten monetary policy, and to start that off with an increase in our target for a short-term 

interest rate. 

On issues like President Lacker’s suggestion—selling off MBS and replacing them with 

Treasuries within a constant size balance sheet—I certainly agree that eventually we want to get 

back to a portfolio that’s Treasury-only.  That’s a principle I don’t have any trouble endorsing.  

But I don’t see a compelling reason to get out of MBS and to get into Treasuries at a very rapid 

June 22–23, 2010 42 of 213



 

 

 

rate that would necessitate the kind of strategy that President Lacker has proposed.  I don’t see 

any enormous distortion that the composition of our portfolio is causing at this point that makes 

me see a compelling reason for doing this quickly. 

On Treasuries, I would see anything other than option 1 today as some tightening in 

policy, and certainly there are communications challenges associated especially with option 4, 

but also even with option 2.  I do, like others, see a good reason to proceed eventually to shorten 

the maturity of our portfolio, to reduce interest rate risk.  So option 2 is attractive, but I wouldn’t 

move on that today. 

With respect to the coupon swap issue, I would proceed precisely as Brian proposed and 

replace the 5.5s with 4.5s. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, would you like to comment? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Sure.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll talk about the three 

issues that are on the table.  I’ll talk first about the coupon swap issue.  On that, I think President 

Lacker phrased it exactly right.  We would be talking about whether or not we should be selling.  

The transaction is twofold—we’re selling and then buying.  I think we basically committed to a 

particular amount of MBS that we wanted to buy, and we should just stick to that.  I think Brian 

has outlined a way to get around what I see as a largely technical problem, so I’m happy to go 

along with that.  I think doing otherwise, as some have suggested, is essentially to undo the 

commitment we made to get to the level that we were talking about.  If the amount of money 

involved were $100 billion as opposed to $9 billion, suddenly it wouldn’t be viewed as largely 

technical. 

Let me move to President Hoenig’s memo, which I thought was excellent.  In general, 

I’m in favor of trying to put a cap on the amount of reserves that are out there, that is, the size of 

June 22–23, 2010 43 of 213



 

 

 

the monetary base.  I think this cap on the size of the monetary base coming out of the reserve 

requirement puts a cap on the size of M1.  That cap is a backstop that keeps the price level in 

check, even if we, for some reason, fail to use our interest rate tools in a sufficiently aggressive 

fashion.  Maintaining a large monetary base essentially means that we’ve discarded this backstop 

against the consequences of our own mistakes; I think experiences, for example, the Gulf of 

Mexico, show the value of having good backstops, ones that actually work.  

We’ve talked about asset sales at great length, as President Yellen said.  I’ll just say one 

argument that occurred to me recently that I had not thought of before, which is about 

communication.  I think it’s going to be a lot more difficult to separate the communication about 

interest rates and balance sheets when we’re actually starting to move interest rates.  Right now, 

we’ve got this commitment on the table—this “extended period” language—and I think it quite 

rightly, I will add, given the economic conditions, says to markets that we’re at zero for a long 

time to come.  In those circumstances, it’s much easier to say, “Okay, we’re going to start to 

reduce our balance sheet, but that’s not going to be spilling over into our management of short-

term interest rates.”  That’s the main thing you have to worry about here—that spillover.  These 

5 to 10 basis point estimates—yes, it’s tightening.  The term deposit facility test itself offered 

people 27 basis points as opposed to 25—that was 2 basis points of tightening.  Everything we 

do to take out reserves in some sense will have some amount of tightening. 

I don’t think it’s this 5 to 10 basis points we’re talking about.  It’s the spillover into short-

term interest rates that we’re worrying about.  I think it will be much easier to control that 

communication now, when we’ve got this strong commitment on the table.  So I’d be very 

comfortable with the gradual five-year program that President Hoenig suggested starting in mid-

2011.  We’ve moved expectations about when we were going to start sales tremendously.  If you 

June 22–23, 2010 44 of 213



 

 

 

look at the June dealer survey that the New York Fed did, now I think about 50 percent the 

respondents think we’re going to sell within the next two years.  That’s a big change relative to 

where we were in January of this year.  So I think moving to starting to sell by mid-2011 would 

have very little impact on long-term interest rates. 

Finally, consistent with my vision that we should have a smaller balance sheet, I like the 

idea of holding only Treasuries in the long run, but I want to get our balance sheet down fast.  

Zero reinvestment, full redemption policy is consistent with that.  I think communication is 

critical to this.  This is a Committee that has done wonders over the last two and a half years with 

communication.  I don’t view this as being a huge obstacle for us to overcome.  I’ll sketch some 

language tomorrow about how I’d like to proceed on that.  I think we could use the minutes now, 

Humphrey-Hawkins testimony along the way, and make a formal statement in the statement 

about going to zero reinvestment in August.  I think I’ve touched on all three issues.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, would you like to comment? 

MR. FISHER.  May I first ask two questions?  The first is:  Are we indemnified from 

losses on MBS? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Indemnified? 

MR. FISHER.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No. 

MR. FISHER.  Not by the Treasury.  Second: When is the Humphrey-Hawkins 

testimony? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The third week in July. 

June 22–23, 2010 45 of 213



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, you went back to the last meeting and the four principles 

agreed upon, which reminded me that I had forgotten my manners.  I just wanted to thank 

everybody for the support they’ve given me during a very difficult period. 

Setting aside sentiments—and central bankers are not supposed to have any feelings 

whatsoever and are supposed to be objective—the one thing about taking a month off is this:  

When you read these materials and think about the things that we have discussed and look at 

them with fairly fresh eyes, at least to me—and Narayana touched on this—the issue of whether 

we wait to tighten before we sell assets is interesting.  I can envision circumstances where we 

might tighten, and the impact would be such that, at the longer end of the yield curve—at least in 

the middle section of the yield curve—we might shift from gains to losses on our holdings.  

We’re not indemnified against those losses, and I could see where the political costs—I know 

we’re not supposed to think about politics just like we’re not supposed to be emotional—could 

be great, and we could be criticized for having pursued a bad strategy ex post.  I would note that 

we pursued this strategy deliberately, and Governor Kohn and I supported the purchase of 

mortgage-backed securities for a specific purpose, and I think we have achieved our goal. 

As you, Mr. Chairman, and President Yellen and others have correctly pointed out, the 

macroeconomic situation has deteriorated, but it hasn’t disintegrated.  It’s not as bad as it was, 

and the financial conditions now are much better than they were when we implemented this 

program.  So I think we need to take that into account. 

The reality is that there is a demand for this product in the marketplace.  What people are 

being offered for cash is negligible.  I would be willing to submit that we could sell a decent 

portion of our mortgage-backed securities to hungry buyers.  However, I would agree that this is 

not the time now to reduce our balance sheet size, and in fact, if you do worry about some of the 

June 22–23, 2010 46 of 213



 

 

 

tail risks of a weaker economy because of the trip wire of Europe or whatever it may be, I’d like 

to have a little dry powder in my pocket.  I think we could achieve this by taking advantage of 

market conditions.  I’m not going to go as far as Governor Warsh—actually rooting for further 

weakness in Europe and disintegration of Europe—but we are the beneficiary of the misfortune 

of others.  Whatever the reason, it gives us an opportunity at least to consider the subject of 

whether or not we can sell some of this portfolio, which we all agree is disproportionate to our 

long-term goals; that is, we could take advantage of that and at least test the possibility.  I would 

be in favor of reinvesting it in Treasuries.  I think President Lacker raised a good point, which is 

that we might even, if we wanted to—and I’m not sure that’s the objective of the exercise—

extend the duration of the portfolio by doing so. 

So I’m uncomfortable with taking it off the table, Mr. Chairman.  I think it is a question 

of communication.  I don’t think it necessarily leads to tightening, Governor Kohn.  I’m not 

necessarily in favor of tightening right now, but I am concerned that this is a tool that we used.  It 

worked.  It may no longer be entirely appropriate to carry this in our portfolio, if we can shed it 

without taking losses and without necessarily impacting the current duration of the portfolio or 

even shrinking our balance sheet. 

That would be my perspective on this issue.  It sounds like there are many people at the 

table who disagree, but whatever we decide, I would be in favor of your doing this through the 

Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, because, I hope, by then, we will have gotten through all of the 

deregulation and re-regulation and all of that political argument that’s taking place on the Hill 

and get back to discussing monetary policy. 

June 22–23, 2010 47 of 213



 

 

 

As to the options laid out by Brian, my favorite, although I don’t view it as optimal, 

would be option 2.  It reduces the duration.  It keeps the balance sheet roughly the same size for 

now.  It gives us a bigger chunk of securities with maturities a year or less to work with. 

But I’m a little concerned, Mr. Chairman, that we’re just ruling out taking an opportunity 

here when the market is very strong, and I think we can do it in a way that isn’t disruptive.  The 

question is:  How do you communicate it?  That’s a tough one.  I think we can come up with 

answers.  We can talk about that later.  I think you could communicate in Humphrey-Hawkins, 

and we can do so without damaging our obligation to live up to the dual mandate that we are 

governed by.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard, would you like to comment? 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On the Treasury redemption and 

reinvestment policy, I just wanted to say I found the memo on this topic from Brian Madigan and 

Brian Sack very helpful.  So thanks a lot to you and to everyone who worked on that. 

I prefer the status quo policy for today, which is to continue to reinvest according to long-

standing practice without any additional attempt to shorten the maturity structure.  Mainly I 

agree with many others here that we probably should not try to send a signal on monetary policy 

today.  We could move to that policy later.  I don’t think it would have a big effect at the time 

that we decide to do that. 

On the full redemption policy, while I have some sympathy for that, I think that would 

move the Committee away from the desired ultimate asset composition, which is Treasuries-

only.  I think that would send a confusing signal and might be confusing to us as well about what 

we’re trying to do here.  We can achieve much more by simply selling agency MBS at the 

appropriate pace and at the appropriate time so as to reassure markets that the FOMC remains 

June 22–23, 2010 48 of 213



 

 

 

committed to achieving low and stable inflation outcomes.  I think there’s some good news, 

namely, that the MBS are actually in demand—that’s encouraging.  I’m also fine with the swaps 

for the 5.5 fails.  The main concern I’d have there is whether we’re doing anything unusual or 

anything that would look like a favor to those that have failed to deliver.  As I understand it, I 

don’t think that we’re doing that—we’re using normal market procedures here.  But I would be 

concerned about anything that would smack of somehow letting people out of a contract or 

something.  But I don’t get the sense that that’s what we’re doing here. 

On asset sales, I still advocate the LIFO policy—last in, first out—which would put asset 

sales before the first increase in short-term interest rates.  I think it makes sense to take back the 

quantitative easing at the appropriate time—not today, but at the appropriate time—without tying 

it to short-term interest rate increases. I actually am quite concerned about the policy that seems 

to be gelling around the table here—raising short-term interest rates and simultaneously 

signaling the end of the quantitative easing policy—because that is an “everything at once” 

policy, and we’re not taking advantage of the fact that we have two instruments.  One could 

interpret the policy of raising rates, or even hinting that we’re going to raise rates by changing 

the language, as simultaneously signaling two things:  that we’re going to raise rates and that, 

within some short period of time, we’ll start to end the quantitative easing policy.  That might be 

more tightening than is desired at that moment. 

I think the better way to play this is to say that we would take back the quantitative 

easing, which is the last thing we did, without necessarily signaling anything about what we’re 

going to do with interest rates; we even could extend the “extended period” language and say we 

might wait on interest rate policy, and we’ll get the balance sheet back to a more normal size and 

a more normal composition in a reasonable amount of time. 

June 22–23, 2010 49 of 213



 

 

 

I am very concerned about this “everything at once” policy, and I think I’ll remain an 

advocate for the LIFO policy for now.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m where many others have 

already expressed themselves.  I would not want to do anything that would be or could be 

construed as a monetary policy tightening in light of the fact that the economic outlook has 

deteriorated since the last meeting.  Financial conditions have tightened, and tail risks have 

increased.  I thought it was interesting that, in the submissions of the participants’ forecasts, 

there’s a big shift in the Committee’s view about risks lying to the downside now in terms of 

their growth outlook. 

With that in mind, while I don’t like the composition of our Treasury portfolio—I would 

prefer it to be shorter-dated—I don’t think this is the time to make any changes.  At some point I 

might favor option 2, but not today. 

In terms of asset sales, I’m very much where I was at the last meeting, and that was with 

the majority.  I thought the majority of the Committee had come out pretty clearly that first it’s 

language, then it’s interest on excess reserves, and then it’s asset sales.  I would, if anything, 

want to reinforce that, if we could, because there’s too much confusion in the marketplace about 

whether the Committee has decided this or not. 

Regarding the swap, I think what Brian has proposed is very straightforward, completely 

technical, standard operating procedure, and involves the least drama.  So I very much favor 

doing the swap. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

June 22–23, 2010 50 of 213



 

 

 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I think we run the risk of getting a 

little too cute in what we’re trying to do.  It’s my belief that, in execution, consistency is a 

strength.  Given the communication challenges that we face, I think consistency is even more 

important for us than would normally be the case. 

Starting with asset sales, I think we should have a reason to revisit the conversation we 

had last time rather than having this constant tug of war with one side or the other making 

marginal progress at any given meeting. 

With that said, in terms of the swap, I think our policy decision was to purchase MBS.  It 

wasn’t to purchase specific coupons, and risking a communication problem for $9 billion just 

doesn’t make any sense to me. 

On the Treasury redemptions, I strongly favor option 2, with the caveat that there be 

enough time for it to be well communicated.  We have said that we want to return to a more 

normal portfolio composition, and I think that should also apply to the maturity structure and the 

duration within the Treasury portfolio.  Option 1 basically never exits from the $300 billion 

Treasury LSAP—it mainly exits from our old position.  Option 3 presented challenges of 

execution in the secondary market.  So I particularly like option 2.  I view option 2 as sort of the 

equivalent of gradually letting MBS roll off, in that it’s a gradual and incremental type of 

strategy.  It would give us future flexibility at a time when we might really need it, and it would 

reduce the political risk of large, unrealized, or potentially realized losses as rates increase.  I 

don’t think this is a sudden decision.  We’ve had the discussion of what to do about Treasuries at 

least three times, by my count, and we’ve been talking about it just as long as we’ve been talking 

about the exit.  I think if we wait for the perfect time to address the duration in the portfolio, then 

the actions that are required to do so might be even more disruptive to markets.  Option 2 seems 

June 22–23, 2010 51 of 213



 

 

 

to me the easiest strategy to communicate, and while markets might not be expecting it now, it 

would be easy to change that expectation.  As Brian points out, one reason that markets might 

not expect options 2 or 3 is that they just haven’t thought about it, so if we gave them a chance to 

think about it, it might make sense. 

Finally, to the independence question, it seems to me that option 1 totally relinquishes our 

independence, because we’re buying whatever Treasury wants to sell.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What about the asset sales, the MBS sales? 

MS. DUKE.  No—I think we ought to stay with what we did last time. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was looking for one of what is now a 

fleeting number of opportunities just to agree with everything that Don says.  The problem is 

that, he said so many wise things, I can’t remember them all, so I’m going to have to go one by 

one, but I think I agree with virtually everything that he said. 

I would just add one thought.  Classic risk–reward calculus suggests to me that now is not 

the time to be taking any action on asset sales or anything that looks unusual to the markets at all.  

I am mindful of what Kevin said and agree with him that we should be prepared as a Committee 

and through the voice of the Chairman to lead market expectations rather than just feel as though 

we’re slaves to those expectations, but I guess I would say, Kevin, that I don’t think this is one of 

those moments for two reasons.  First, with the deterioration of real economic conditions and the 

big potential problems in Europe, it seems to me that markets are likely to regard as particularly 

curious and perplexing any indication of a shift in policy by the Committee right now.  Second, 

the Chairman doesn’t testify until the third week in July.  We’re just barely into the fourth week 

June 22–23, 2010 52 of 213



 

 

 

of June right now, and a lot can change between now and then.  So I would be inclined, as 

Dennis said, to stand pat across the board. 

With respect to asset sales, what Jim and Kevin have said is something that we may want 

to think about at some point in the future, although my default position is still the majority one 

that the Chairman read. 

With respect to the Treasuries, I’m with a substantial majority of the Committee, in that 

option 2 strikes me as the right one eventually.  But, for the reasons I just stated, now is not the 

moment.  I guess this next point is almost anticlimactic, but in light of all of that, I obviously 

endorse the proposal that Brian made on the swaps.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think everyone has spoken.  I recognize that 

we have not been completely efficient in our discussions, but I found this very useful, and I think 

positions are at least gelling.  [Laughter] 

MR. TARULLO.  The refrigerator’s not cold but it’s gelling. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me try to make a couple of points, which I took from 

this discussion, and then we’ll be able to enjoy a cup of coffee. 

First of all, Brian, I think that most people think that the coupon swaps idea is worth 

doing, and we’ll put that into the directive tomorrow. 

On the Treasury redemptions—it was a very interesting discussion.  We’ll discuss these 

issues further in the policy go-round tomorrow.  I think that many people were motivated today 

by concerns about not rocking the boat or conveying any change in policy at this juncture and, 

therefore, the preference was clearly for no change, for option 1, for this meeting.  However, 

there was a lot of interesting discussion not so much about the size of the balance sheet, but 

about the composition of the balance sheet; in particular, the change that got the most attention 

June 22–23, 2010 53 of 213



 

 

 

was shortening the Treasury maturities, option 2.  I heard quite a bit of interest in the possibility 

that, if conditions warrant, if the outlook strengthens, we might prepare the ground for a 

shortening of maturities in that way—I thought there was considerable interest in that.  We may 

try to clarify a bit tomorrow exactly what conditions would warrant it, but I think it’s entirely 

possible that something about the composition of the balance sheet could be in my testimony, for 

example. 

The other issue of composition involves MBS versus Treasuries, and President Lacker 

was, I guess, the strongest advocate.  I think that’s certainly worth considering.  Not too many 

people picked it up at this juncture, but it certainly is true that, if communicated adequately, we 

could change the composition of our balance sheet without changing the overall thrust of the 

duration, at least.  As President Rosengren pointed out, there would be some implications for 

mortgage markets versus other markets, but I think that that is an interesting alternative. 

I didn’t hear much support at this juncture for reducing the size of the balance sheet at 

this time.  I think it should be noted, and the minutes should continue to note, that the absolute 

majority of people who spoke still prefer the notion of sales after increased interest rates.  But 

what I took from that is that we shouldn’t be selling until we believe that we are close to the 

point where policy needs to be tightened, that is, where macroeconomic and financial conditions 

are such that tightening looks to be in the offing.  I could imagine, for example that, at a point at 

which tightening is beginning to look necessary, we might start with an announcement that in six 

months we will begin sales, and then be able to observe that effect, and then make an 

announcement on interest rates subsequently.  Then, temporally, the interest rate would still be in 

front of the sales, but the announcement might come first.  So I think there are variants that we 

could talk about, but, for the time being, I did hear very little interest in immediate sales, and, in 

June 22–23, 2010 54 of 213



 

 

 

particular, I heard a preference for holding sales as a part of the tightening process once we are 

convinced that financial and economic conditions warrant it. 

Are there any comments?  [No response]  Well, again, I thank you for a very frank and 

very useful discussion.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes for coffee?  We’ll come back for the 

chart show. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we reconvene?  Item 2.  We’ll have the 

presentation on the economic and financial situation by Bill Wascher, Chris Erceg, and Nellie 

Liang.  Bill. 

MR. WASCHER.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My colleagues and I will be 

referring to the exhibits in the packet labeled “Material for Staff Presentation on the 

Economic Outlook.” 

 

 

 

Turning to the first exhibit, recent data on spending and production have been 

broadly in line with our expectation for a moderate recovery in economic activity.  

Starting with the labor market, private payroll employment (the black line in the 

upper left panel) has continued to rise in recent months.  Although the increase in 

May was smaller than we were expecting, that followed larger-than-expected 

increases in April and March, and the level of payrolls in May turned out to be close 

to what we were projecting in April.  Moreover, employers have continued to 

lengthen workweeks, and aggregate employee hours (the purple line) moved up at an 

annual rate of 5 percent over the past three months.  On a less positive note, the 

unemployment rate came in above our expectations in both April and May, and initial 

UI claims remain elevated. 

The industrial sector has been a notable source of strength.  Manufacturing IP—

shown in the upper right panel—rose 0.9 percent in May, bringing the latest three-

month change to an annual rate of 12½ percent.  The recent gains have been 

widespread across industries, with the three-month diffusion index of production 

changes currently at its highest level since 1987. 

The middle left panel presents our latest estimates of real PCE based on the 

available data on retail sales and light motor vehicle sales in May.  As we were 

anticipating, increases in consumer spending appear to have moderated from their 

robust first-quarter pace.  However, the level of spending in April and May was still a 

little above what we were expecting, and, on a quarterly average basis, we now 

                                                 
3 The materials used by Messrs. Wascher and Erceg and Ms. Liang are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

June 22–23, 2010 55 of 213



 

 

 

expect real PCE to rise at an annual rate of 2.9 percent this quarter, about 

¾ percentage point more than our forecast in April. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As shown to the right, home sales have also risen noticeably in recent months.  

However, we think that this upturn largely reflects another pull-forward of sales in 

advance of the expiration of the homebuyers’ tax credit rather than an improvement 

in the underlying pace of housing activity.  Indeed, single-family starts (not shown) 

were revised down noticeably in April and fell further in May, leaving their level well 

below what we had been expecting.  In addition, today’s report on existing home 

sales in May was somewhat weaker than we were expecting.  Accordingly, we have 

scaled back our near-term forecast for starts and sales in coming months. 

In the business sector, orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods (shown 

in the lower left panel) have continued to trend up in recent months.  And, with the 

level of orders above shipments, we anticipate further near-term gains in spending.  In 

addition, while activity in the nonresidential construction sector (not shown) remains 

very weak, there are hints in the recent data that the steep declines in this sector may 

be abating. 

All told, as shown in the lower right, we now estimate that real GDP rose at an 

annual rate of 3.1 percent in the first quarter, and we are looking for an increase of 

3.6 percent in the second quarter.  Both figures are a shade higher than in the April 

projection. 

Your next exhibit focuses on the medium-term outlook.  The available data on 

spending and production largely pertain to April and May and, thus, are probably 

mostly unaffected by the recent turmoil in Europe.  In contrast, recent events have 

had a noticeable influence on financial markets, with significant consequences for the 

medium-term projection.  As indicated in the upper left panel, the most important of 

these changes were the sizable decline in the stock market and the marked 

appreciation of the dollar since the time of the April Greenbook; in addition, we 

revised down our outlook for foreign growth.  Lower oil prices and mortgage rates 

provide only a partial offset to these negative influences. 

As shown to the right, we accordingly marked down our forecast for real GDP 

growth to an annual rate of 3 percent in the second half of this year and to 3¾ percent 

in 2011, about ¾ percentage point lower in both periods than in our April projection.  

Part of the revision is in net exports, line 6, but most is accounted for by a downward 

revision to domestic final sales. 

The bottom four panels provide some additional detail on the outlook for private 

domestic final demand.  Scanning through the panels, you can see that our projections 

for each of the major components have been revised down.  However, the basic story 

of the projection is similar to that in recent projections.  The accommodative stance of 

monetary policy, improving financial conditions, and rising household and business 

confidence contribute to a further strengthening in consumer spending and business 

June 22–23, 2010 56 of 213



 

 

 

investment in equipment and software (the middle two panels).  Activity in the 

housing sector, the lower left, is also expected to turn up, albeit only modestly.  In 

contrast, as indicated in the lower right, we do not expect to see a meaningful 

recovery in nonresidential construction for some time. 

 

 

 

 

 

Turning to exhibit 3, gains in private payroll employment (the black dotted line in 

top left panel) are expected to average about 200,000 per month over the second half 

of this year and 275,000 per month in 2011.  This puts our employment projection 

between the jobless recoveries that followed the past two recessions (the bottom two 

lines) and the more robust expansions following the 1974 and 1982 recessions (the 

upper two lines).  The deviation of our forecast from those more robust expansions is 

explained both by the more modest pace of recovery in our projection and by the 

slower assumed pace of trend labor force growth.  As shown to the right, the 

relatively tepid growth of labor demand leaves the unemployment rate above 

8½ percent at the end of 2011, about ½ percentage point higher than in the April 

projection. 

As shown in the middle left panel, inflation continues to be subdued.  As seen in 

the inset box, core PCE prices rose only 0.1 percent in April, and, based on the latest 

CPI and PPI readings, we expect another 0.1 percent increase in May; meanwhile, 

total PCE prices are expected to edge down in May.  Looking ahead, the greater slack 

in this projection, coupled with lower core nonfuel import prices (the middle right 

panel) and lower energy prices, add to the downward pressure on inflation relative to 

the April forecast.  However, with longer-run inflation expectations (the lower left 

panel) apparently holding steady, we made only a small downward adjustment to core 

inflation (line 5 in the lower right panel) to about ¾ percent both this year and next; 

total PCE prices, line 1, are projected to rise at a pace close to core in both years. 

Returning to the top right panel, we continue to assume that the availability of 

extended and emergency UI benefits has pushed the short-term “effective” NAIRU 

(the red line) above 6 percent this year and that this influence will fade as these UI 

programs expire.  Our assumed longer-run NAIRU remains at 5¼ percent.  This 

assumption reflects our assessment that the rise in structural unemployment 

associated with the recession has been modest.  Your next two exhibits provide an 

update of some of the labor market indicators we’ve relied on in making this 

judgment. 

Turning to the next exhibit, as we have noted previously, one potential source of 

higher structural unemployment is the need to reallocate labor across sectors of the 

economy.  Because it typically takes longer for workers to become reemployed if they 

have to change industries, occupations, or location, an unusual amount of labor 

reallocation may raise structural unemployment for a time. 

The panel in the upper left presents a measure of the extent of reallocation across 

industries.  This figure presents a decomposition of the variance in the percent 

changes in employment into two pieces: the part associated with typical cyclical 

June 22–23, 2010 57 of 213



 

 

 

dynamics (the black line) and the part associated with unusual—or excess—

dispersion (the red line).  The small degree of excess dispersion at present suggests 

that the amount of reallocation in employment across industries that needs to take 

place is not especially large, given the depth of the recession.  A similar exercise for 

employment changes across states (the upper right panel) comes to much the same 

conclusion.  These results are not suggestive of long-lasting increases in structural 

unemployment. 

 

 

 

 

However, these measures may be too crude to capture fully all of the reallocation 

in the labor market that may be in train.  An alternative way to assess reallocation is 

to focus on permanent job loss, because it may be associated with substantial costs in 

terms of relocation and lost human capital that could slow the pace at which workers 

find new jobs.  In this regard, the middle left panel indicates that, while the rate of 

permanent job loss (the red line) was only briefly at an unusually high level and has 

fallen considerably this year, the stock of permanent job losers (the black line) 

remains very high.  This suggests that many permanent job losers are experiencing 

difficulties in finding a new job, raising the possibility of an increase in structural 

unemployment. 

In the past, one mechanism that has been important in helping the labor market re-

equilibrate is the migration of workers from locations with weak labor markets to 

locations with stronger ones.  In this regard, there have been claims that migration is 

being impeded by the substantial number of homeowners with underwater mortgages, 

and, indeed, migration rates have fallen noticeably in recent years.  Whether this is 

due to house-lock is debatable; for example, as shown in the middle right panel, 

migration does not appear to have fallen more in states where the proportion of 

homeowners with negative equity is relatively high (the black line) than in other 

states (the green line).  Regardless of its source, the decline in migration raises the 

possibility that the equilibration of labor markets across locations will occur more 

slowly than in the past. 

Another relationship we use to assess the extent of structural unemployment in the 

economy is the one between the unemployment rate and job vacancies shown in the 

lower left panel and often referred to as the Beveridge curve.  All else equal, the 

unemployment rate (the horizontal axis) and job vacancies (the vertical axis) should 

move inversely over the course of the business cycle.  Thus, movements along a 

curve running from the upper left of the panel toward the lower right can be 

interpreted as cyclical movements in labor demand.  In contrast, shifts in the 

Beveridge curve—increases or decreases in unemployment for a given level of 

vacancies—can be interpreted as changes in structural and frictional unemployment.  

The latest observations are given by the red square and the green circle in the lower 

right corner of the panel.  It seems clear at this point that the curve has shifted out. 

The Beveridge curve can shift out for several reasons, not all of which are 

indicative of higher structural unemployment.  For example, we think that one factor 

that has contributed to the outward shift has been the availability of extended and 

June 22–23, 2010 58 of 213



 

 

 

emergency UI benefits.  However, staff analysis that decomposes the shift in the 

Beveridge curve into its various components also points to some increase in structural 

unemployment.  This is illustrated in the chart to the right.  The black line shows the 

percentage of the unemployed who find a job in the next month, that is, move from 

unemployment (U) to employment (E).  The red line plots an estimated value from a 

regression of the rate of unemployment to employment flows on the ratio of 

vacancies to unemployment.  An actual value that is close to the estimated value 

suggests that the job-matching process is operating normally.  Recently, however, the 

actual job-finding rate has fallen below the red line, suggesting that some of the 

outward shift in the Beveridge curve may be due to a deterioration in the efficiency of 

job-matching, consistent with a modest increase in the level of structural 

unemployment.  

 

 

 

In all, we view the various indicators in this exhibit as broadly consistent with our 

assumption that higher structural unemployment has boosted the NAIRU by about 

½ percentage point since late 2008.  However, we recognize that this is very inexact 

science, and one important risk to our NAIRU assumption is illustrated in the next 

exhibit.  As shown in the upper left panel, the extent of long-term unemployment—

expressed here as a percent of the labor force—has risen to extraordinary levels.  

While, to date, this increase seems well explained by the factors shown in the box to 

the right—high rates of permanent job loss, continued weak labor demand, and 

extended and emergency unemployment insurance benefits—a key question going 

forward is whether this high level of long-term unemployment will lead to a further 

increase in the NAIRU through hysteresis-type effects. 

As shown in the middle left panel, hysteresis in unemployment seems to have 

been more a feature of the European economic landscape than of ours in the past few 

decades.  In particular, the recessions in the 1970s and 1980s appear to have 

contributed to persistently higher levels of European unemployment subsequent to 

those recessions.  In contrast, in the United States, the unemployment rate has tended 

to fall back to previous levels within a few years following recessions.  Econometric 

research on this issue, summarized in the box to the right, suggests that this difference 

in unemployment dynamics reflects a differential effect of recessions on structural 

unemployment in the two regions.  For example, unemployment shocks have not led 

to persistently high levels of long-term unemployment in the U.S. in the past, whereas 

they have in European countries.  In addition, and in contrast to some evidence for 

Europe, the long-term unemployed appear to put downward pressure on wage and 

price inflation in the U.S., an indication that long-term unemployment has not 

contributed to a higher NAIRU in the U.S. in the past.  These differences between the 

U.S. and European experiences are often attributed to differences in labor market 

policies and institutions in the two regions. 

Although the U.S. historical experience gives us some reason to be optimistic, the 

unusually high level of long-term unemployment that we are now seeing suggests 

caution in extrapolating these results to the current situation.  The lower left panel 

provides one reason to be concerned.  Job-finding rates tend to fall as the duration of 

June 22–23, 2010 59 of 213



 

 

 

unemployment spells lengthen, so that only a little more than 10 percent of 

individuals unemployed for more than 26 weeks find a job in the following month.  

Research suggests that much of this pattern reflects worker heterogeneity—the long-

term unemployed tend to be those with lower job-finding rates more generally.  

However, we should not rule out the possibility that the factors shown to the right will 

come more into play this time around, leading to a higher rate of structural 

unemployment in the future, especially in light of the slow pace of improvement in 

the labor market that we are projecting.  At present, we do not see enough evidence to 

warrant putting a further rise in the NAIRU into our baseline projection.  However, 

we do see that possibility as a risk and so will continue to reassess our assumptions 

about structural unemployment and the NAIRU as the economy evolves.  Chris will 

now continue our presentation. 

 

MR. ERCEG.  As evidenced by the turbulence in sovereign bond spreads shown 

in the upper panel of exhibit 6, financial stresses in Europe have intensified, on net, 

since April.  Faced with a deepening crisis, the European Union announced a 

European financial rescue plan on May 10, with details summarized in the middle left 

panel.  In addition to €110 billion previously committed to Greece, the package 

includes €60 billion in lending from the European Union, a special purpose vehicle, 

which could issue up to €440 billion in debt guaranteed by euro area countries, and 

bilateral programs with the IMF.  The ECB simultaneously announced and began 

implementing a program to purchase European sovereign debt and modified its short-

term refinancing operations to provide markets access to additional term funding.  

Along with several other foreign central banks, the ECB also reinstated dollar swap 

arrangements with the Federal Reserve. 

As shown to the right, many European countries have announced aggressive fiscal 

consolidation plans.  The fiscal consolidation measures planned by periphery 

countries are drastic in both magnitude and speed.  Moreover, they are expected to be 

implemented against the backdrop of very weak economic conditions.  As shown in 

the lower left panel, we estimate that these measures will enable Spain and Italy to 

turn the corner in stabilizing their debt-to-GDP ratios.  Greece and Portugal, however, 

face greater challenges. 

Broadly, we think that the European financial rescue plan and strenuous efforts at 

fiscal consolidation will eventually succeed in restoring financial market confidence.  

Spain and Italy should be able to differentiate themselves progressively from other 

countries whose prospects are more uncertain, such as Greece and Portugal, and the 

possibility of a systemic European crisis will wane.  Financial market conditions are 

likely to remain unsettled through early next year, weighing on the global outlook, 

but thereafter we expect some easing of financial stresses. 

The table in your next exhibit presents the details of our outlook for the euro area.  

We project that euro-area GDP will rise only 1 percent in the second half of this year 

and 1.2 percent next year.  This forecast is about 1½ percentage points weaker 

through 2011 than we projected last winter at the time of the January chart show.  As 

shown in the upper right, domestic demand (the blue solid bars) is expected to barely 

June 22–23, 2010 60 of 213



 

 

 

expand the remainder of this year and next, in contrast to our projection in January 

(shown by the blue striped bars), before the Greek crisis intensified.  Budget cutting 

will restrain growth next year for all major countries in the euro area, and private 

demand—which has shown little improvement in the past year, as suggested by the 

retail sales data in the middle left panel—is likely to be restrained by weak 

confidence and tight credit conditions.  We now expect net exports, the red bars in the 

upper right panel, to account for most of the euro area’s growth through the end of 

next year, spurred by a 15 percent depreciation of the trade-weighted euro, the middle 

center panel.  Given the weak outlook for overall economic growth, monetary 

conditions, the middle right panel, are likely to stay highly accommodative, and 

inflation, the bottom left, to remain subdued. 

Returning to the table, we see “core” European countries, especially Germany, 

line 2, as likely to outperform the periphery substantially.  German industrial 

production, the black line in the lower center panel, expanded solidly in the first few 

months of this year, and the unemployment rate, the lower right, has declined.  Going 

forward, we expect that Germany will benefit relatively more from euro depreciation, 

given the importance of manufacturing in its economy, and will be less impacted by 

financial fallout than most other European countries.  In contrast, real GDP in Spain, 

line 5 in the table, is likely to remain nearly flat, which will keep unemployment near 

20 percent. 

Turning to your next exhibit, we project that total foreign growth will average 

about 3¼ percent through the end of next year.  Recent data have generally surprised 

us on the upside, especially for emerging Asia.  But in light of the European situation, 

we have marked down our aggregate growth forecast by ½ percentage point through 

the end of next year relative to your last meeting.  Indicators for Canada, including 

buoyant retail sales (the middle left panel) support our outlook for continued domestic 

demand-led growth in that country, though growth is expected to slow as monetary 

policy (the middle center panel) is tightened and as European problems weigh on 

confidence and exports.  Although consumption has expanded steadily in Japan (the 

middle left panel) recent strong GDP growth has mainly been underpinned by 

exports.  With the fiscal impulse turning negative next year, we see GDP growth in 

Japan (line 6) as likely to decelerate markedly going forward. 

Emerging market economies (line 7 of the table) continued to grow briskly in the 

first half of this year.  China’s economy roared ahead, with real GDP (line 9) 

estimated to have expanded 9.5 percent in the second quarter.  Industrial production 

has risen markedly across the Asian EMEs, especially in China (the green line in the 

middle right panel), but also elsewhere in the region (the blue line).  GDP growth in 

Latin America (line 10), appeared to have stalled in the first quarter, but this reflected 

a contraction in Mexican GDP that probably understates that economy’s actual 

strength, and we see growth rebounding in the second quarter.  EME imports (the 

lower left panel) have continued to surge, helping to support global growth.  Going 

forward, we expect EME growth to hold up relatively well and expect these 

economies to continue raising policy rates in concert with other steps, such as 

imposing higher reserve requirements.  Even so, we have marked down our outlook 

June 22–23, 2010 61 of 213



 

 

 

for the EMEs by about ½ percentage point on average since your last meeting to take 

account of euro depreciation against EME currencies and other adverse spillovers 

from Europe’s crisis.  Substantial outflows in May from funds that invest in EME 

equities (the lower right) suggest some risks of deeper contagion, though most of 

these countries appear to have scope to respond to such shocks through monetary and 

fiscal policy.  China’s recent announcement to allow more flexibility of the renminbi 

was largely anticipated by staff, and we continue to forecast a modest appreciation of 

the renminbi against the dollar this year.   

Your next exhibit considers the U.S. external outlook.  Europe’s difficulties 

prompted flight-to-safety flows that pushed up the broad real dollar by about 3½ 

percent since our last forecast in April.  We expect that the dollar’s path will remain 

well higher than we envisioned in April even as the gradual projected improvement in 

European financial conditions causes safe-haven flows to begin reversing early next 

year.  Oil prices and nonfuel commodity prices (the upper right panel) have declined 

noticeably in the intermeeting period, and we expect most of this decline to persist 

through next year. 

We have revised down our path for growth in real exports (the middle left panel) 

based on weaker growth abroad and a stronger dollar.  Our forecast for real import 

growth (the middle right panel) has also been marked down, as the effect of weaker 

U.S. activity more than offsets the boost from a stronger dollar.  Real net exports (line 

3 of the table) are expected to make a negative contribution of less than ¼ percent of 

GDP over the forecast period, compared with the neutral contribution projected at 

your last meeting.  This apparently small revision does not represent the entirety of 

the European crisis effect on U.S. trade; were it not for the markdown in U.S. GDP 

growth, we would have predicted a larger shortfall in U.S. net exports. 

Your next exhibit examines vulnerabilities in the European banking system.  As 

noted in the upper left, European banks experienced substantial losses on their loans 

and securities in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.  In its April Global 

Financial Stability Report, the IMF estimated that euro-area and U.K. banks faced 

about $350 billion in additional write-downs on top of the roughly $750 billion in 

write-downs they have recognized since 2007.  From a systemwide perspective, 

capital and loan loss reserves (the upper right panel), together with retained earnings, 

are generally regarded as providing an ample cushion to cover remaining expected 

losses, including by the IMF and ECB.  Even so, the capital levels of major European 

banks are generally lower than their U.S. counterparts.  Moreover, the distribution of 

problem loans falls unevenly across financial institutions.  As information about the 

financial condition of particular institutions is often sparse, uncertainty about 

counterparty risk is likely to burden the financial sector until more aggressive steps 

are taken to differentiate strong and weak institutions. 

Europe could experience even more formidable challenges if sovereign debt 

problems intensify in major European economies, such as Spain and Italy, rather than 

gradually abate, as in our baseline.  As seen in the middle left, European governments 

took strong actions in the fall of 2008 to boost confidence in their banks, including 

June 22–23, 2010 62 of 213



 

 

 

through expanding deposit insurance, guaranteeing nondeposit liabilities, and making 

capital injections.  These efforts helped to limit the rise in five-year CDS premiums 

for highly rated European financial institutions (the middle right) to less than 200 

basis points through 2008 and 2009.  Europe’s current fiscal crisis appears to have 

reduced market confidence in the ability of sovereigns to backstop their banks.  As 

seen in the lower left panel, the ratcheting up in Spain’s sovereign CDS premium has 

driven a similar run-up in the CDS premiums of highly rated and well-capitalized 

Spanish banks, including Santander and BBVA, to levels well above previous peaks 

reached during the financial crisis. 

We see elevated sovereign spreads and higher associated borrowing costs as a 

major drag on Europe’s near-term growth prospects.  But, as noted in the lower right, 

there is still some chance that Europe’s sovereign debt problems could ratchet up 

even more, perhaps due to the failure of some countries to implement fiscal 

consolidation measures or to a weaker economy causing banking sector problems to 

become more severe.  In such an event, private borrowing spreads would also rise, 

risk aversion would increase, and government budget positions would deteriorate 

further, creating a potentially severe adverse feedback loop to Europe and the global 

economy. 

Turning to exhibit 11, in a memo circulated to the Committee earlier this month, 

the staff attempted to gauge the potential quantitative impact of a full-blown 

European sovereign debt crisis using simulations of the multicountry SIGMA model.  

We developed a scenario in which:  higher sovereign spreads boost euro-area 

corporate borrowing costs about 275 basis points, somewhat less than occurred in the 

United States in the fall of 2008; the euro declines an additional 30 percent against 

the dollar; and European governments are pushed into additional fiscal consolidation 

amounting to 2 percent of GDP on average.  Finally, the United States and major U.S. 

trading partners outside the euro area are hit by somewhat smaller financial and 

confidence shocks that are associated with a 100 basis point rise in U.S. corporate 

yields. 

The middle left panel shows that the shocks depress European real GDP (the blue 

line) by about 9 percent relative to baseline after two years.  Domestic demand 

contracts substantially due to higher borrowing costs, weakened confidence, and 

fiscal consolidation.  European net exports rise due to euro depreciation, providing 

some offset.  The constellation of shocks sharply depresses U.S. real GDP (the red 

line) as dollar appreciation restrains net exports, and because domestic demand 

contracts as credit conditions tighten and confidence wanes; roughly ¾ of the U.S. 

output decline in the simulation is attributable to financial market spillovers to the 

United States and our non-European trading partners.  The rest of the world (the 

green line) experiences a much smaller GDP contraction, as policy rates are reduced 

substantially and their currencies depreciate sharply against the dollar. 

We regard the foregoing as a “tail risk” scenario, and our sense is that European 

policymakers and governments have taken substantial action that will help financial 

conditions eventually normalize.  As noted in the bottom panel, it is entirely possible 

June 22–23, 2010 63 of 213



 

 

 

that conditions in Europe may improve more quickly than envisioned in our baseline, 

as highlighted in an alternative scenario in the June Tealbook.  Even so, the weak 

condition of Europe’s economy, limited scope for monetary or fiscal policy action, 

and diminished ability of sovereigns to backstop their banks make it desirable to take 

additional steps to help avoid a crisis.  These steps should involve facilitating the 

efforts of cash-strapped sovereign governments to clean up and recapitalize their 

banks, as well improving transparency to help markets more easily differentiate sound 

banks from problem banks.  In that regard, the recent announcement that the 

European Union will perform stress tests of major banks, and that some national 

governments will follow suit, is a positive development. 

We are skeptical that some countries, including Greece and Portugal, will adhere 

to a strict diet of austerity, and they may eventually default.  But even delaying a 

crisis—including by taking the steps mentioned above—to a time when larger 

countries have regained market confidence, macroeconomic conditions have 

improved, and there is some scope to adjust policy rates can have a high payoff.  In 

this vein, the middle right panel shows an alternative to our crisis scenario in which 

the emergence of the crisis, which involves the same shocks as in the benchmark, is 

delayed by six quarters to 2012:Q1.  At this point, the European economy has more 

underlying momentum, and the expected path of the policy rate is sufficiently above 

its lower bound to provide greater scope for cutting policy rates in the near term after 

the crisis actually occurs.  The contraction in European GDP is reduced by nearly half 

relative to the benchmark crisis scenario just discussed, revealing the value of 

“buying time” to avert a crisis when underlying conditions are especially weak.  

Nellie Liang will continue with the chart show. 

 

 

 

MS. LIANG.  Domestic financial conditions have tightened on net since the April 

FOMC meeting largely on concerns about the implications of the European debt crisis 

for the U.S. economy.  As shown in the top left panel of exhibit 12, although Treasury 

yields and mortgage rates have fallen substantially, broad stock prices, shown to the 

right, fell notably as well, and those for banking firms (the purple line) dropped a bit 

more, perhaps also reflecting uncertainties about regulatory reform.  As shown in the 

middle left, the implied volatility of equities (VIX) shot up.  While it has receded in 

the weeks following the announcement of the EU and IMF actions and other policy 

measures, it remains somewhat elevated. 

Financial market participants and economic forecasters appear to view recent 

developments in Europe as increasing the downside risks for the U.S. economy.  As 

noted in the panel to the right, respondents to the Blue Chip survey in early June saw 

spillover effects from Europe’s debt crisis as the largest risk to the U.S. economy in 

the next 12 months, and most believed that the primary channel would be tighter 

financial conditions rather than weaker exports.  In addition, responses to the primary 

dealer survey conducted last week point to significantly greater downside risks to 

GDP than in the April survey. 

The bottom two panels present measures of financial market participants’ views 

about risks to stock returns—both inferred from options on the S&P 500 index.  The 

June 22–23, 2010 64 of 213



 

 

 

black line in the lower left panel plots the distribution of stock returns over the next 

30 days as implied by options from yesterday, and the green line plots the distribution 

for the day before the April FOMC meeting.  The distribution of returns from 

yesterday’s option prices is a bit wider than the distribution from the April FOMC 

meeting, after having been substantially wider in May, the gold line, when the VIX 

was higher. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The panel to the right shows a measure of the downside skewness of the return 

distribution over time, defined by the distance between the 5th and 50th percentiles as 

a share of the distance from the 5th and 95th percentiles.  The downside skewness 

moved up early in the intermeeting period, suggesting a higher perceived probability 

of a significant decline in the stock market and increased risk aversion for a given 

level of volatility.  As the most recent flare-up in the VIX has subsided, this measure 

has declined somewhat, but it remains relatively elevated. 

The next exhibit focuses on real estate and banking, two sectors that appear 

particularly vulnerable to weaker economic growth.  

As shown in the top left panel, the number of distressed mortgages has climbed 

sharply in the past few years.  Mortgages in foreclosure, the red shaded region, 

reached 2.4 million in the first quarter of this year, and, as shown by the gold region, 

another 2.6 million are 90 days or more delinquent but not yet in foreclosure; all told, 

almost one in ten mortgages are seriously distressed.  Our forecast assumes that, as 

the economy continues to recover, new delinquencies will continue to decline and 

successful mortgage modifications will help work off the overhang of distressed 

properties.  The sales associated with this process are expected to keep exerting 

downward pressure on house prices.   

As shown to the right, after their sharp drop since 2006, prices of single-family 

homes seem to have decreased enough relative to rents to erase the apparent 

overvaluation in 2006.  We project that house prices will fall a few percentage points 

more this year and then remain about flat in 2011; combined with a small increase in 

rents, valuations in 2011 will be about 10 percent undervalued.  However, were 

employment gains to stall, new delinquencies might not decline and modified loans 

could re-default at an even higher rate than we have assumed.  The resulting lower 

house prices and valuations would further erode household wealth and the 

profitability of the banking sector. 

The next panels focus on the financial condition of the banking sector.  As shown 

in the middle left, the liquidity positions of banks have been improving.  The ratio of 

short-term noncore-deposit liabilities to assets (the green line) has come down in part 

as banks have reduced foreign and large time deposits, and the liquid assets ratio, the 

black line, has risen as cash, mostly reserve balances, has increased. 

The return on assets for the sector, shown to the right by the gold line, eked out 

another gain in the first quarter.  The increase came as loan loss provisions (the 

June 22–23, 2010 65 of 213



 

 

 

shaded blue area) edged down, though they remained quite sizable.  A measure of 

gross returns, the sum of the return on assets and loan loss provisions, shown by the 

dashed black line, has been relatively robust, suggesting that gains going forward will 

depend importantly on further improvements in asset quality. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

However, as shown in the bottom left panel, in our baseline forecast, we project 

that loss rates on major types of bank loans, the first column, will ease only a bit from 

current levels through next year.  Losses on commercial real estate loans (column 2) 

are expected to increase as property values continue to fall through this year, but the 

performance of other loan categories (column 3) is expected to improve as the 

economy strengthens. 

The expected continued weak performance is reflected in supervisors’ ratings of 

commercial banks.  As shown to the right, assets held by banks with ratings of 3, 4, 

and 5 have soared since 2007; the $4.5 trillion in assets held by these banks represents 

about 40 percent of the industry. 

The next exhibit focuses on how further adverse events from Europe could affect 

U.S. financial institutions and markets. 

The top left panel presents estimates from regulatory reports of banking system 

credit exposures to the peripheral European countries.  U.S. banks are estimated to 

have had $24 billion in exposures to Greece and Portugal at the end of 2009, but 

another $208 billion to Spain, Ireland, and Italy.  Combined, these claims represent 

29 percent of industry tier 1 capital.  Banks in France and in Germany have 

substantially greater exposures, which has raised concerns among investors about the 

risks of some of the large banks in these countries. 

As noted to the right, bank supervisors began collecting information in February 

from the largest U.S. banks about their most significant credit exposures to peripheral 

Europe and about how the banks were managing their risks.  Data reported by the 

firms show smaller exposures than the regulatory data, largely, we believe, because of 

differences in scope and reporting conventions.  Based on these data, supervisors 

have roughly estimated the losses that would be generated if the riskiest sovereigns 

were to default, and the trading losses if asset prices were to deteriorate a bit more.  A 

preliminary assessment is that direct losses to U.S. banks from defaults in Greece and 

Portugal, assuming minimal financial spillovers, would not be substantial.  But 

supervisors have a number of concerns, including discrepancies in the data, the 

potential for further spillovers from defaults to financial asset prices, and indirect 

exposures of U.S. firms, such as to large European banks or to prime money market 

funds.  The latter concern is heightened by the magnitude of the potential 

commitments, since the largest U.S. banks sponsor more than $500 billion of prime 

money funds. 

The middle panel elaborates on the exposure of prime money funds to Europe.  

Confidential data from a biweekly survey by ICI of the largest fund families show 

June 22–23, 2010 66 of 213



 

 

 

that the exposure of prime money funds to peripheral Europe (Ireland, Italy, and 

Spain), column 1, is only 4½ percent of assets.  But exposures to France and 

Germany total 20 percent of assets, and to other Europe, another 26 percent.  The 

large exposure at prime money funds raises the potential for sufficiently adverse news 

from Europe to spark a run, which could disrupt short-term funding and damage 

market sentiment. 

 

 

 

 

 

To date, money fund managers appear to be winding down positions and 

shortening tenors in an orderly fashion.  As shown in the second column, the share of 

assets accounted for by entities of the peripheral European countries and in France 

and Germany fell a total of 2 percentage points over the two weeks ending June 2.  

Moreover, as shown in the right-hand column, the share of outstanding paper issued 

by such entities maturing in more than seven days fell, consistent with managers 

being less willing to provide funds at longer tenors. 

In the U.S. commercial paper market, the outstanding amount of CP issued by 

financial institutions with parents in the peripheral European countries (the gold line 

in the lower left panel) and in France and Germany (the green line) has been falling 

steadily, while the amount of CP of firms of other Europe or the U.S. has held steady 

or risen.  As shown to the right, spreads for all issuers of unsecured CP have risen 

since early May, with conditions especially volatile for some peripheral European 

countries. 

Your next exhibit reviews the effects on the U.S. economy of the European debt 

crisis scenario that was just presented by Chris Erceg, in which increased concerns 

about the solvency of some European governments push Europe back into a 

recession.  As noted in the top left panel, the reemergence of recession and the 

associated appreciation of the dollar would, through traditional trade linkages, be 

enough to slow the pace of recovery in the U.S.  But we also assume financial market 

spillovers that would likely accompany such a “tail risk” event. 

As shown by the red line in the right panel, U.S. stock prices are assumed to start 

about 20 percent lower relative to the baseline forecast, the black line, and the BBB-

rated corporate bond rate, shown in the middle left, is 1 percentage point higher than 

the baseline.  In addition, banks are assumed to tighten lending terms and standards in 

response to higher loan losses and the deterioration in the balance sheets of 

households and businesses.  These shocks are calibrated to the fallout that Europe 

experienced during the U.S.-centered crisis in late 2008. 

With financial conditions significantly more restrictive, the U.S. economy falls 

back into recession, and, as shown in the middle right panel, the unemployment rate 

rises substantially through 2011 rather than moderating.  Moreover, the persistent 

level of slack leads to a temporary period of deflation, shown in the bottom left.  

Beyond 2011, the economy recovers gradually as the crisis abates, and the federal 

funds rate (bottom right), following a standard policy rule, remains at extremely low 

levels relative to the baseline for at least another year. 

June 22–23, 2010 67 of 213



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Your final exhibit focuses on valuations and leverage.  By some measures, 

corporate bond valuations are somewhat rich.  Far-term risk spreads, shown in the top 

left panel, which reflect investors’ appetite for risk, have risen somewhat in response 

to the European debt problems, but they remain relatively low.  As shown to the right, 

repo haircuts on corporate securities have come down this year and are just above 

levels prior to the financial crisis. 

However, other valuations appear less rich.  A measure of the equity premium, 

shown by the shaded area in the middle left panel as the gap between the expected 

return on equity and the real Treasury yield, widened in May from an already 

elevated level.  In addition, overall leverage in financial markets from funding 

markets does not appear to have increased appreciably.  For example, as shown in the 

middle right, triparty repo market activity has risen some since late last year but 

remains well below levels before the crisis.  Reduced leverage suggests that declines 

in asset prices are less likely to be reinforced by asset sales of investors who might 

have to unwind their positions.  

Finally, as shown in the bottom panel, debt growth of households (the black line) 

and nonfinancial businesses (the green line) remained negative in the first quarter.  

Business debt is on track to decline again this quarter, as robust profits and large cash 

positions limit demand for external funds and lending standards remain tight for some 

firms.  In addition, we estimate that households have continued to delever this quarter 

as sluggish demand, tight lending standards, and substantial charge-offs limit growth 

in mortgage debt and consumer credit.  Bill English will continue with our 

presentation. 

MR. ENGLISH.4  Thank you, Nellie.  I will be referring to the package labeled 

“Material for Briefing on FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.”  Exhibit 1 

depicts the broad contours of your current projections for 2010 through 2012 and over 

the longer run.  Almost all of you continue to project a gradual economic recovery, 

with GDP growth (the top panel) picking up a bit, the unemployment rate (the second 

panel) slowly trending lower, and inflation (the third and fourth panels) remaining 

subdued over the next few years. 

Exhibit 2 reports the central tendencies and ranges of your projections for 

calendar years 2010 through 2012 and over the longer run; the corresponding 

information about your April projections is indicated in italics, and the current and 

previous staff projections are included as memo items.  On balance, your forecasts for 

this meeting generally suggest a slightly weaker path for the real economy and a bit 

less inflation than you projected at the time of the April meeting.  In your forecast 

narratives, a number of you noted that these changes were the result of incoming data 

and the expected effects on the U.S. economy of the European fiscal crisis.  As shown 

in the top panel, the central tendency of your growth projections for this year is 

slightly lower than in April; most of you now anticipate that real GDP will increase 

                                                 
4 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

June 22–23, 2010 68 of 213



 

 

 

3 to 3½ percent in 2010, versus 3¼ to 3¾ percent in the previous forecast.  You see 

growth stepping up to 3½ to 4¼ percent in 2011 and remaining near those rates in 

2012.  The downward revisions to your growth forecasts for this year are similar to 

those in the staff forecast, but the Tealbook projection for growth for next year has 

been revised down more substantially than the central tendency of your projections, 

from 4.4 percent in April to 3.7 percent in the current round.  Both the central 

tendency and the range of your estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of GDP 

growth, the right-hand column, are the same as in April. 

 

 

 

 

Your unemployment rate projections are summarized in the second panel.  The 

central tendency for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year 

is 9¼ to 9½ percent, little changed from April.  But, consistent with your expectations 

of only a gradual economic recovery, all but one of you anticipate that the 

unemployment rate will remain above 8 percent at the end of next year.  Moreover, 

most of you project that the unemployment rate will be about 7 to 7½ percent even in 

late 2012—well above the unchanged 5 to 5¼ percent central tendency of your 

estimates of the unemployment rate that would prevail over the longer run in the 

absence of further shocks, which is shown in the right-hand column.  It appears that 

most of you, like the staff, continue to anticipate that the long-run performance of the 

labor market will not be significantly undermined by the substantial economic 

downturn and the slow recovery. 

You generally project that inflation will remain subdued, and the dispersion of 

your inflation projections has narrowed somewhat since April, particularly for this 

year and next.  The central tendencies of your projections for core PCE inflation for 

2010 and 2011, shown in the fourth panel, have shifted down a bit and now run ¾ to 

1 percent this year and about 1 to 1¼ percent next year before rising to 1 to 

1½ percent in 2012.  The central tendencies for headline inflation, shown in the third 

panel, follow a broadly similar path.  Most of you project that headline inflation will 

stay at or below the 1¾ to 2 percent central tendency for the “mandate-consistent” 

inflation rate, shown in the right-hand column, throughout the projection period. 

Your views on the outlook for inflation continue to differ somewhat from the 

staff’s. In each of the three years, the Tealbook forecasts for total and core inflation 

are generally at or below the lower limits of the central tendencies of your 

projections.  This difference in views helps explain why a sizable majority of you 

anticipate that it will be appropriate to begin increasing the federal funds rate earlier 

than is assumed in the Tealbook. 

As shown in exhibit 3, three-quarters or more of you continue to be more 

uncertain than usual about your projections for growth and PCE inflation, the solid 

bars in the two left-hand panels.  As shown in the top right panel, about half of you 

now judge that the risks to output growth are tilted to the downside, a significant 

change from your assessments in April.  Most of you continue to view the risks to the 

inflation outlook, the bottom right panel, as balanced, though there has been a small 

June 22–23, 2010 69 of 213



 

 

 

shift toward downside risks here as well.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  

We’d be happy to take your questions. 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me thank the staff for a very comprehensive 

presentation.  I want to take special note of the section on financial stability, which reflects 

requests that we had at the last meeting.  Besides the presentation, of course, some memos were 

also circulated.  If you have additional requests for future presentations, or you have metrics or 

data that you’d like to submit for inclusion in a presentation, please don’t hesitate to do so.  Also, 

I think it would also be remiss of me not to take note of the Tealbook [laughter], which, of 

course, is a perfect combination of blue and green, which I found very convenient.  Again, if 

anyone has any suggestions, I’m sure the staff would be happy to hear them.  Are there questions 

for our colleagues?  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I found the financial stability memos and briefing very, very 

helpful, and I just wanted to follow up on your comment on Greece and Portugal and the notion 

that, while a default isn’t imminent, it may occur over time.  My reading of the Reinhart and 

Rogoff book was that they highlighted sovereign defaults that were often accompanied by very 

large exchange rate movements as well, and I take it that that’s not embedded in your longer-run 

forecast.  I was wondering if you could talk about how you would see the Greeks making a 

choice in the situation that default is likely to occur.  Would they choose to restructure or would 

they pull out of the euro and revalue their exchange rate, which would give them a terms of trade 

advantage to offset some of their unemployment problems? 

MR. ERCEG.  Just to reiterate, certainly it’s not our expectation that Greece or Portugal 

would leave the euro area.  We think that, given the financial aid package to Greece, they have a 

strong incentive to continue with their program to try to reduce the primary deficit over the next 

couple of years, and we think it’s very unlikely that they would want to default.  At some point 

June 22–23, 2010 70 of 213



 

 

 

down the road, when their primary balance actually shifts back towards zero, then it’s quite 

possible that they would consider a strategic default.  It’s probably more likely under those 

circumstances that they would seek a restructuring, and we don’t think it’s very likely that they 

would actually attempt to leave the euro area.  Perhaps Nathan wants to add something. 

MR. SHEETS.  This is a really, really tough question—it throws us into a truly Knightian 

world, and I’m not quite sure how to parse out all the pros and cons.  My gut instinct is that, at 

some point over the next three to five years, the Greeks are going to have to restructure their 

debt.  I don’t expect them to leave the euro area, and my intuition for that is that leaving the euro 

area would be even more disruptive for them and for their economic relationships than the debt 

default would be.  I think that they’ve seen over the last decade that they benefit from deeper 

integration into Europe and the backstop that that provides.  I don’t think that it’s in their interest 

to leave, even if it would provide a temporary boost to their competitiveness.  Now, one can also 

argue that maybe Europe is going to decide they don’t want them anymore, and they’re going to 

develop new institutions to give them the capacity to eject a member—again, we’re in kind of a 

Knightian world of all sorts of different options.  But I would put a fairly high probability on an 

eventual restructuring—at some point beyond the end of the forecast period, as Chris said.  They 

have enough money committed now to get them into 2012, but I really would not put a lot of 

weight on a country leaving the euro area—probably less than the 20 percent weight that Brian’s 

survey yielded. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, Mr. Chairman, on the Tealbook, I thought it was great, and I’ll add 

a little historical footnote.  The first use of the word “teal” as a color description was 1917. So it 

goes back in our history.  But it’s also forward-looking, because the Unitarian hymnal, which is 

June 22–23, 2010 71 of 213



 

 

 

gray, by the way, was translated into Spanish, and all of the hymns in Spanish are in what they 

call the Tealbook.  So thank you for looking forward to our universal language here in the United 

States. 

MR. ERCEG.  Thank you for that. 

MR. FISHER.  I have a couple of questions on the international section.  One inflationary 

impulse that I hear countering a tremendous amount of deflationary impulses relates to 

transportation.  The HARPEX Index and the Hamburg Index, which measure container 

transportation, have come up dramatically since mid-June, and you hear retailers complain about 

that.  Second, of course, is the expectation that Chinese prices are pretty stiff, given wage 

settlements and given what they’re asking for during the post-Christmas buying season in terms 

of clothing, shoes, and other things.  In your presentation for global economic growth, we have 

reduced our expectations, including for China, and I’m wondering how you account for these 

transportation pressures.  Is it slow steaming, or is it something else, a dynamic that’s in place? 

My second question is:  Are we likely to see the Chinese back off from some of these 

price demands?  The reason I ask is that I don’t believe there’s much likelihood that it will work 

its way through to consumption here, but it does impact retailers’ margins.  I’m curious as to 

what your views on those two issues are. 

MR. ERCEG.  Certainly, Chinese trade has continued to boom in both directions:  

Imports have been extremely strong and exports were extremely robust in the May data, which 

are the most recent.  Presumably, that has put upward pressure on transport prices.  Regarding 

those relative price changes, I’d be happy to defer to anyone who knows more about these 

particular markets, but, certainly, I think that Chinese demand really has steamed ahead.  It’s 

worth noting that in marking down our forecasts, it really is primarily in the expectation that 

June 22–23, 2010 72 of 213



 

 

 

Europe’s woes will damp confidence.  If we look just at the incoming data, these economies look 

like they’re roaring ahead.  So, in formulating our forecast, there’s some tension between 

extremely strong economic growth numbers that are surprising us, as I mentioned, on the upside 

and concerns about how developments in Europe are likely to affect business confidence and 

what the effects through asset prices might be on financial markets, for instance. 

Regarding your second question about whether the somewhat weaker global outlook 

might mitigate these pressures boosting prices, certainly it stands to reason that the weak 

domestic demand in Europe could serve to diminish upward pressures on prices of traded goods.  

Now, some of the price pressures could reflect secular developments in the Chinese economy, 

where they’re moving towards increasingly specialized goods and moving out of the low-tech 

areas, so those sorts of relative price changes could well be more enduring.  I would think of it as 

part of the transformation of the Chinese economy that we have seen in many of the emerging 

market economies that are further up the growth ladder, such as Korea; so some of that is 

probably enduring. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Looking at exhibit 14, I want to ask a 

sort of qualitative question, and that is:  In summary, how would you characterize our grasp of 

our system’s exposure, and I mean not only direct exposure, which is pretty well measured here, 

but also indirect, counterparty kinds of exposures, which, I guess, as of now we don’t fully 

understand because the stress test results are not known.  Contrast that, if you would, to the run-

up to the seizing up of markets in September 2008. 

June 22–23, 2010 73 of 213



 

 

 

MS. LIANG.  Supervisors have information they collected from the largest firms on the 

largest significant exposures, which include sovereigns, corporates, financial institutions; and, 

for a set of the largest firms, they have been collecting counterparty exposures on similar types 

of things for quite a while.  Again, these are the most significant exposures.  If you’re worried 

about the entire Greek economy and the whole retail exposure, they don’t have that totally.  I’m 

going to wrap that up into spillover effects.  It’s not financial spillover, but it’s spillover to the 

economy. 

There’s a little comfort, but we tried to emphasize how much concern there is about the 

quality of the data they have.  For example, there’s quite a bit of netting of things that goes on—

there are certain conventions you follow to net for the regulatory reforms, and then there are 

different netting conventions firms might use for their own risk-management systems, which 

supervisors need to get into to see if they’re comfortable with them.  These don’t include 

contingent exposures, such as undrawn commitment lines or CDS written, those kinds of things.  

I think there’s definitely a “next step” concerning what else they’re going to go in and get a little 

more information on, and conversations with the chief risk officers are ongoing right now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for our colleagues?  [No response]  Seeing 

none, I think it would behoove us to get started on the go-around, if that’s okay.  We won’t take 

too long because we have, of course, our June dinner at the embassy this evening.  President 

Lockhart, would you like to kick it off? 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, I’ll talk about feedback from 

contacts in the Sixth District.  They have become more reserved in their optimism, less 

unambiguously confident that the recovery will continue, as the events and risk factors that 

accumulated since the last meeting have made business contacts “more pensive,” as described by 

June 22–23, 2010 74 of 213



 

 

 

one of our directors.  Among the accumulated events causing this reaction is the Gulf oil spill.  

Because its direct effects are most felt in my District, I’d like to spend a couple of minutes 

commenting on the oil spill.  The direct effects of the spill on the Sixth District economy are, so 

far, quite modest.  About 130,000 jobs, not including those in exploration and drilling, are 

directly at risk, mostly in areas connected with commercial fishing, recreation, and tourism; then, 

ultimately, there will be some at risk in drilling and exploration.  In many instances, direct costs 

have been temporarily offset by cleanup spending and compensation by British Petroleum.  

We’re closely watching port activity, but to date the effect on ports in the northwest Gulf area 

has been negligible. 

Aside from the angst that results from the environmental effects of the spill and the 

modest economic effect so far, there is concern that hurricane season will bring a storm that 

spreads the physical problem in unpredictable ways.  For example, contacts in the power industry 

are concerned about potential problems for upstream power-generating facilities that use near-

coast river water for cooling.  So far, however, there have been no power disruptions. 

Deepwater drilling will be affected so long as the moratorium continues.  The estimates 

of job losses directly resulting from the moratorium range from 20,000 to 50,000 over the next 

12 months.  Contacts in Louisiana expressed concern in recent board meetings about the longer-

term costs of reduced drilling activity.  Given that the physical capital—rigs and associated 

equipment—that’s used in drilling operations is mobile and scarce, there is much concern that it 

will be deployed elsewhere in the world and that the energy industry and the region will be 

permanently affected. 

Although the measurable economic impact so far is limited, this episode is weighing 

heavily on the attitudes of households and businesses in the Gulf region and, I would suspect, 

June 22–23, 2010 75 of 213



 

 

 

with the American public more broadly.  I think uncertainty about the duration and extent of this 

growing environmental tragedy is contributing to what one of my directors called “an attitude of 

cautious pessimism.”  We have a team in our research department that’s dedicated to following 

the oil spill and its effects, and, if it’s appropriate, in future meetings I’ll report to the Committee 

on their findings. 

Before turning to the national economy and forecast, let me add a few other pieces of 

feedback from our recent soundings in the District.  The transportation and logistics sector is 

seeing exceptionally strong demand.  Because of large reductions of capacity during the 

recession, the increased demand is causing transport bottlenecks and giving service providers 

pricing power.  One contact believes wholesalers and retailers are using transport as a substitute 

for building inventories—that is, requiring more frequent and smaller lot shipments.  The CEO 

of a commercial airline reported a very strong resurgence of business travel, up an estimated 

60 percent from a year ago.  Almost all our corporate directors reported strong cash 

accumulation, and this was confirmed by bank directors.  Loan demand, however, remains very 

weak.  Finally, at the May meeting of our Real Estate Advisory Council, members warned 

against becoming complacent about problems in the commercial real estate sector.  They felt the 

problem is not receiving sufficient attention, because the bulk of property loans has not yet come 

due. 

Turning to the national economy and the outlook, my reading of the national economic 

situation is that recovery continues, but incoming data are quite mixed, and potentially transitory 

sources of strength have not yet evolved to broad-based and sustainable final demand.  My sense 

is that the economy is moving through an ambiguous phase, and visibility has shortened due to 

the sovereign debt problems and the banking situation in Europe, softer consumer numbers, and 

June 22–23, 2010 76 of 213



 

 

 

a stall—admittedly, only one month’s data—in private job creation.  My previous forecasts have 

been somewhat less optimistic than the then-Greenbook and the central tendency of the 

Committee.  I’ve pushed up my estimate for second quarter growth, but otherwise have not 

changed my outlook from the last meeting.  My forecast now is close to the recent Tealbook for 

this year and next. 

Finally, as regards the balance of risks at this juncture, I have shifted from one of the one 

or two of us who weighted the risk to the upside at the last meeting and now I see it as balanced, 

so I’m directionally similar to the majority of the Committee.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since our last meeting, economic activity 

continued to show modest gains in the Third District across most of our sectors.  Residential real 

estate is the exception.  Our contacts say there has been a distinct softening in activity since the 

end of the tax credits, and builders report that they do not expect construction activity to pick up 

much this summer.  However, the tax credit clearly pulls sales forward, so it may take several 

months before we will be able to make a more informed assessment of the housing market.  On a 

positive note, foreclosures and mortgage delinquency rates in our states are showing signs of 

moderating and are considerably below those of many other states that enjoyed bigger booms 

and are now suffering sharper busts. 

Payroll employment in the three-state region increased during the three-month period 

ending in April, and the region’s unemployment rate remained unchanged at 9.3 percent for the 

third consecutive month.  However, the number of unemployed people fell in April for the first 

time since the start of the recession.  Temporary Census workers have contributed to payroll 

employment growth in the District since February.  One contact, however, from a large national 

June 22–23, 2010 77 of 213



 

 

 

placement company, said that orders for temporary workers were up sharply, perhaps reflecting 

some substitution from temporary private sector jobs into the Census jobs.  However, 

employment gains are likely to be slow.  The employment index in our business outlook survey 

of manufacturers turned negative in June for the first time in seven months.  In May, we asked a 

special question about hiring plans.  Nearly 59 percent of the firms said they expect to increase 

production in the next six months, but only 30 percent expected to hire additional workers to do 

it.  The others plan to increase hours worked of current staff.  Important reasons cited by firms 

for not hiring were concerns about future employment costs, including health care and taxes, and 

uncertainty about future product demand. 

Manufacturing activity remained positive in June.  However, our index of general activity 

fell from 21.4 in May to 8 in June.  That is its lowest level since turning positive in September of 

2009.  However, underlying that, new orders and shipments remained strongly positive, at levels 

consistent with typical economic recoveries.  Prices remained subdued.  For manufacturers, the 

index of prices received fell but remained positive in June, while the prices paid index actually 

turned negative for this month.  In addition, manufacturing firms’ expectations for price 

increases over the next six months have fallen for the last two months.  Retailers report mostly 

flat selling prices. 

Overall, the optimistic tone from my District contacts has moderated somewhat since our 

last meeting.  However, the general outlook continues to be for modest gains in most sectors, and 

our leading indicators constructed for our remaining states have remained positive for the last 

five months. 

My view of the national economy is similar to what we see in the District.  The troubles 

in the euro zone have raised the risk around my forecast, and I have shaved my forecast for 

June 22–23, 2010 78 of 213



 

 

 

economic growth for this year by a tenth or two and raised my unemployment path somewhat 

over the horizon.  I have also shaded down my inflation forecast for this year, reflecting weak 

numbers that we have seen so far.  However, I expect inflation to increase gradually over the 

forecast horizon. 

I believe that we do have a sustainable economic recovery, and that that remains the most 

likely outcome, while acknowledging that the troubles in Europe represent a cloud for that 

forecast.  I am projecting GDP growth of around 3½ percent over the next two years, 

employment growth picking up over the rest of this year, and the unemployment rate falling 

gradually over the forecast horizon.  Data on hours worked are strong, are improving, and private 

demand for temporary workers remains an encouraging sign for future employment gains.  My 

baseline forecast already incorporates weaker growth than what the historical correlations in the 

data would suggest, given the depth of this recession.  The upside risk that I had in the last 

forecast is now balanced by the downside risk to growth from the fiscal strains in Europe.  So, 

though at the last meeting I thought the risks were tilted to the upside, now they’re balanced from 

my perspective. 

My inflation forecast continues to differ from the Tealbook.  In the near term, I expect 

underlying inflation rates to remain subdued, but I expect inflation to drift up gradually over the 

next couple of years, especially if we make no move to raise rates until the summer of 2012, as 

in the Tealbook.  I continue to believe that we will need to begin raising the fed funds rate in the 

second half of this year, as the growth rate of the economy, and, therefore, the underlying real 

rate of interest, begin to pick up, if we are to keep inflation and inflation expectations well 

anchored.  My underlying assumption of appropriate monetary policy in my forecast is that the 

June 22–23, 2010 79 of 213



 

 

 

funds rates will reach about 1 percent by the end of this year, still very low by historical 

standards, and rise slowly thereafter.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At my directors meeting last week, 

several directors made an analogy to a turtle that had bravely stuck its head out in the first 

quarter, but quickly retreated to its shell in May.  [Laughter]  Most of the data we’ve seen 

reflects the period when the turtle was out of its shell, but, in the coming weeks, I’m afraid we’ll 

get confirmation detailing why the turtle’s courage was short-lived.  Many of my contacts 

highlighted that the headlines from Europe have caused them to reevaluate hiring and investment 

decisions, presumably linked in large part to the expectation of declining export demand as the 

dollar strengthens and many countries undertake fiscal tightening. 

My forecasts have been predicated on a fragile job market, partly offset by moderate 

growth in business fixed investment.  If my business contacts’ pullback in these key areas in the 

face of European problems is representative, then the risk of slower growth than I had previously 

forecast has increased.  And my concern over the outlook extends beyond the effects of 

European troubles, with state and local spending clearly in retreat, and with the housing sector 

likely faltering.  In sum, I am worried that the Tealbook may be too optimistic. 

In terms of financial markets, I am concerned about the effects of a gradual but 

cumulatively significant withdrawal from European exposures.  U.S. money market funds have 

been an important source of funding for European banks. My contacts with money market funds 

indicate that they are becoming increasingly concerned about exposure in Europe.  In particular, 

the money market funds are concerned that investors in their funds will flee if they see large 

exposures to Europe and cannot differentiate between sound and weak European names.  In 

June 22–23, 2010 80 of 213



 

 

 

general, there’s a lack of confidence in the political will to make adequate adjustments in 

Europe.  If my contacts are right, the problems emanating from Europe will gradually worsen.  I 

share many of their concerns, and I am more concerned about Europe being able to muddle 

through than is reflected in many of our briefing documents. 

Even if Europe is able to avoid a severe contraction and more significant financial 

problems, my outlook in the near term for the U.S. economy entails a heightened risk of 

deflation.  Spain and Ireland are experiencing deflation even before the full effect of fiscal 

austerity has been felt.  Japan remains in deflation and has shown little ability to pull out.  I am 

worried that we may be underestimating the risk of deflation and that we are placing too much 

weight on well-anchored expectations at a time when we are seeing disinflation in wages and 

declines in a surprising number of components of the CPI.  While I’m confident that we have the 

tools to offset inflation, the Japanese experience makes me less confident about the tools 

available to offset deflation.  Should the European problems cause an economic stall, the 

deflation risks would become even greater. 

Given the move towards fiscal austerity in the United States that is likely to be even more 

pronounced after the election, and given that alternative monetary policies have shown to be of 

only limited help, both here and abroad, it is not clear how forceful our response would or could 

be if the economy slows and we experience deflation.  This is a risk we should be seeking to 

minimize and is something we should take seriously as we think about adverse economic 

scenarios. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto.  

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The incoming data since our last meeting 

were on balance largely consistent with my outlook for growth, although recent price and wage 

June 22–23, 2010 81 of 213



 

 

 

data have caused me to revise my inflation projection downward slightly.  What has changed the 

most over the intermeeting period is my assessment of the risks to my outlook, and I want to 

focus on two key risks—the European debt crisis and the downward momentum in the inflation 

process. 

The sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the consequent financial turbulence has 

dominated financial market behaviors over the past several weeks.  Although this is troubling, 

my outlook assumes that European policymakers will prevent the crisis from escalating further.  

In my forecast, the effects of the crisis on output are modest and result only from diminished 

export demand and a weaker euro.  Overall, I didn’t revise my forecast for output very much 

since our last meeting.  And with the Tealbook’s downward revision to output, our projections 

now are very close—both have moderate and unspectacular economic growth this year and next.  

This outlook for growth is consistent with what I am hearing from my business contacts, who 

generally are reporting gradual growth  

At the same time, many of my contacts are reporting concerns about the potential scope 

of the European debt crisis.  For example, a manufacturer of capital equipment used in steel 

production reported that his order backlog has already been reduced by a combination of weaker 

growth in southern Europe and exchange rate movements.  The effects on his output have been 

limited to date, but going forward he is concerned about a potential for further depreciation of 

the euro, which would likely turn his business sharply downward.  The European debt crisis is 

also having an effect on business sentiment.  Some of my contacts are quite concerned about the 

prospect of more trouble in financial markets, and they are saying that, if these concerns become 

realized, then we could see a slowing of projects that might otherwise be funded. 

June 22–23, 2010 82 of 213



 

 

 

Reports like these lead me to believe that the European debt crisis poses a substantial risk 

to my outlook.  My staff considered some alternative scenarios to the European sovereign debt 

crisis that were less dire than those in the Tealbook’s tail risk scenario but still substantial 

enough to create a risk to my outlook.  I don’t think these scenarios are very likely, but I do think 

that the European debt crisis merits close monitoring, and it is the main reason that I have shifted 

my risk to output from balanced to weighted to the downside. 

On the inflation front, most of the incoming evidence supports further disinflation.  With 

respect to the price data themselves, there is simply no momentum to signal an imminent upturn.  

Core inflation, as measured by the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI, continues to drift lower.  It 

dropped to 0.5 percent on a year-over-year basis in May, and that’s an all-time low.  

Compensation growth also continues to weaken, pushing unit labor costs lower.  Furthermore, 

some of this downward momentum in inflation may be spilling over to inflation expectations.  In 

the past month, the Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations model, which limits the effect of 

flight-to-quality issues, shows a drop of over 15 basis points at all horizons less than 10 years.  

These developments have caused me to revise down my inflation forecast, and it’s now more like 

that in the Tealbook in the medium term. 

Given that I have repeatedly revised down my inflation outlook, I am concerned that 

there may be downward momentum in the inflation process that I am not incorporating in my 

outlook.  And the European debt crisis also presents further downside risk to inflation through 

the exchange rate and weaker foreign growth.  In summary, the risks to my outlook for growth 

have shifted to the downside, and the risks to my outlook for inflation continue to be to the 

downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

June 22–23, 2010 83 of 213



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My colleague to my left, President Bullard, 

talked about LIFO accounting regarding our balance sheet.  In my District’s economy, we’re 

basically are fortunate to have been last into the recession, and we appear to be one of the first 

coming out.  There is some dissonance between what I’m seeing locally and what I’m hearing 

from the CEOs that I survey around the country.  So let me give you a brief report. 

As far as our District is concerned, we just received the May payroll employment figures, 

and our private sector payroll is up 4.7 percent year over year at an annual rate.  The 

unemployment rate stays steady.  We have a lot of people coming into our workforce.  There are 

some awfully good things happening in the Eleventh District from the standpoint of 

manufacturing employment--our index indicates it has risen to the highest level in three years. 

Our construction employment soared in April and continued to do so in May.  Interestingly, if 

you talk to the small retailers, particularly the convenience stores, they’re seeing a new influx of 

Mexican workers.  We’re not sure if they are coming from Mexico or from Arizona. 

Our housing inventory fell to a total of 6.9 months after a slight increase in February.  

The leading index has risen now for the third consecutive month, and we find a modest pickup in 

input prices reported by our manufacturers, but there’s very little pass-through to consumer 

prices.  So our region is enjoying a robust emergence from the recession, which we went into 

very late.  

As far as the national economy is concerned, I will just share the anecdotal evidence that 

I have picked up from the list that I gave you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to use a term only to 

flatter my colleague from Minnesota, because I doubt the Minnesota Gophers have been talked 

about—it was a football team for many, many years.  [Laughter] 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks for the flattery. 

June 22–23, 2010 84 of 213



 

 

 

MR. FISHER.  That’s as much as you’re going to get.  And I warned you, Mr. Chairman, 

I would probably talk about a “Bronko Nagurski” economy.  Now, I’m probably the only person 

here old enough to remember who Bronko Nagurski was—maybe Governor Kohn also 

remembers [laughter].  Basically, you gave him the ball— 

MR. KOHN.  I taught him everything he knows.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, I know.  You gave him the ball if you wanted to run right up the 

middle and gain short yardage, which he was consistently good at doing, and for that he was 

named three times, at three different positions, as an All-Pro.  No one has broken that record. 

Why do I mention that?  Because what brought us out of the end zone was inventory 

correction.  That player’s legs are tired, and I think that has basically run its course.  I’m hearing 

that from almost every sector that I talked to.  The second yardage was gained by equipment and 

software, and again, even though that continues if you talk to computer manufacturers and 

others, you’re beginning to see a slowdown or a tempering of that activity.  The game has 

basically become a short yardage game, running up the middle, a cloud of dust, but still making 

forward progress on the field.  It’s standard blocking and tackling, and I think the pace has 

slowed down, and, therefore, I have revised down my expectations for the second half. 

Every single businesswoman or man I speak to that is in a position of leadership 

describes the following circumstances.  They have gone back to basic blocking and tackling.  

They are beset not just by concerns about demands for products, say, in weakening areas like 

Europe, but also by something we have not mentioned, which I will refer to as random 

refereeing—that is, they beg for the huddle.  They say they’re going to give Bronko Nagurski the 

ball, and the ref comes up and says, “By the way, this time the first down is 15 yards.”  In other 

words, there is enormous uncertainty, which we discussed before, about the impact of 

June 22–23, 2010 85 of 213



 

 

 

government programs and regulation.  For example, one CEO reports that in the new health care 

bill there are 1,100 instances that are “to be determined” by the Secretary of Health and Human 

Services.  There is no way you can cost out this random refereeing.  In the case of the casual 

dining sector, they estimate it will triple their personnel costs, or in the case of a large company 

like Exxon or AT&T, which has all the legal power in the world, they still cannot figure what the 

impact is going to be on the cost structure, which inhibits planning.  That is point number one. 

Point number two is that enormous cash build-up has taken place in the corporate sector.  

According to the Wall Street Journal, which may or may not be reliable, the S&P 500 has built 

up $1.8 trillion in excess cash over the cash flow needs.  Every CEO or CFO I talk to has excess 

cash.  What are they doing with the excess cash?  They’re either buying their own stock—for 

example, Texas Instruments has bought 30 percent of its own stock—or they’re going to increase 

their dividend payments.  I’m having a hard time finding people who are willing to add to their 

workforce until the random refereeing stops, until there is greater certainty.  I am also deeply 

disturbed by a phenomenon that I have reported before regarding cap-ex intentions—if my 

contacts are going to expand plant and equipment, they don’t plan to do it here. 

So, Mr. Chairman, I would say we still have inhibiting factors, including uncertainty, 

which stems from external developments and the lack of clarity as to rules and regulations that 

are likely to impact those who hire, especially the small business sector that doesn’t have the 

resources that large corporations do to try to decipher what’s coming out.  These factors are 

going to inhibit employment growth; at the same time, they will hold inflation at bay. 

In concluding, I’d like to follow up on Sandy’s comment on her staff’s median CPI index 

and say that our trimmed mean index is, again, continuing to diminish and show less inflationary 

pressure.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

June 22–23, 2010 86 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’d like to add my compliments to the staff on 

the Tealbook and the financial stability memos.  I thought they were really terrific, and I think 

they’ll help sharpen the focus of our discussions going forward. 

The data in my business reports indicate that the recovery is continuing at the moderate 

pace we’ve expected for some time now.  To me, it seems likely that the unevenness in some of 

the recent monthly data is symptomatic of this moderate pace.  I think it’s too early to infer much 

more than that, but the uncertainty is high.  Labor market improvements will be gradual for the 

foreseeable future, and the continued weakness in the jobs picture could weigh on household and 

business sentiment for some time. 

Regarding inflation, the data currently suggest that the pull from disinflationary forces is 

somewhat stronger than the anchor from stable inflation expectations—that’s a slight change in 

my perspective.  Because inflation is projected to underrun my 2 percent inflation goal over the 

medium term, according to FOMC central tendencies, it’s difficult for me to imagine altering our 

current accommodative policy stance over the next six months or so, and certainly not in a 

material fashion. 

Turning to my business reports, and in line with my assessment of the economic outlook, 

most comments fit into a “more of the same” theme.  Ford and GM both reported good results 

recently.  Incentives are not high.  Inventories are lean, and the current 11.5 million unit sales 

pace appears to be profitable.  The steel industry continues to bring more capacity back on line.  

Smaller industrial segments that are indicative of future activity, like industrial packaging and 

strapping materials, continue to improve at a strong rate, but, while capital equipment is selling 

well, business sentiment about cap-ex spending remains weak. 

June 22–23, 2010 87 of 213



 

 

 

I will just pause and mention that I asked all of my manufacturing contacts whether they 

saw something in Europe that was materially different recently, and it just seems as if it’s much 

too early to tell, not surprisingly.  But I did get from them a sense that there’s still good 

momentum in their business activity in Europe.  So it might take several months before we see 

anything in the data. 

The pace of employment growth continues to be slow, and I didn’t hear any particularly 

interesting new news about labor markets this round.  I was going to stop there, but I just want to 

point out that a lot of people have mentioned already that they talked to businesspeople who say 

that they’re nervous about Europe and they’re not going to hire.  They’ve been saying they 

weren’t going to hire for some time.  So we’re already at the zero bound, it seems, for hiring—

it’s hard for that to get worse. 

The financial reports from our Chicago market contacts seem roughly consistent with the 

financial stability memos.  Funding availability is increased for the better quality borrowers and 

market segments.  One contact noted having maybe a dozen bidders for CRE deals he was 

putting together, whereas, four or five months ago, investors would have laughed his proposals 

out of the room.  Most of these deals are on conservative terms for properties with stable cash 

flows.  New construction loans, in contrast, are very difficult to obtain.  We did hear a number of 

comments regarding some pullback on risk and leverage since May.  For example, some dealers 

are unwilling to buy for inventory in their marketmaking capacity, and some hedge funds are 

buying CDS protection and put options as a way of limiting downside risks.  However, on the 

plus side, obligations of nonfinancial firms were not particularly stressed in May. 

Turning to the international situation, the increasing emphasis on austerity programs in 

Europe presents some unique challenges for the U.S. outlook and policymaking.  I thought the 

June 22–23, 2010 88 of 213



 

 

 

international memos and risk scenarios were very helpful for thinking through that this time.  

When you consider straight import–export multipliers, it’s hard to come up with major effects on 

U.S. growth.  But, at conferences I attended recently overseas, the European and other foreign 

central bankers I spoke with seemed pretty complacent about the prospects of demand from the 

U.S. providing important support for continued export growth worldwide.  I’d tell them it seems 

hard to imagine that the American consumer will return to its 15-year run of stimulating world 

growth, but their reaction was either puzzlement or denial of such prospects.  So I am concerned 

that foreign policymakers are underestimating the effects that their belt tightening will have on 

their domestic economies.  Of course, the larger risk would be a further deterioration in 

international financial markets, as the chart show and financial stability memos discussed.  But, 

for the moment, these are mostly just tail risks.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the staff for the 

excellent financial stability memos—they were very helpful.  I also want to say how much I like 

the Tealbook.  I don’t know about the name—it’s hard to get used to—but I liked the book.  

MR. TARULLO.  Particularly when it’s not teal. 

MS. YELLEN.  That’s true.  Economic data releases since our April meeting have been 

consistent with the moderate recovery, but the turmoil in Europe with resulting deterioration in 

financial conditions during the intermeeting period pose substantial risks to economic growth 

and global financial stability going forward.  The timing could hardly be worse.  Monetary 

accommodation is stretched to the limit.  Fiscal policy is likely to turn more restrictive in many 

countries, and inflation is undesirably low and trending lower.  Like the Tealbook, I’ve lowered 

my projection for economic growth.  The most recent data suggest some slowdown in consumer 

June 22–23, 2010 89 of 213



 

 

 

spending, and the moderation evident in the aggregate data accords with reports I’m receiving 

from my business contacts.  Major retailers with whom we have spoken during the past month 

typically report that spending is flat or growing at only a very modest pace.  They hypothesize 

that the spending spurt that occurred earlier in the year reflected catch-up purchases by 

individuals who deferred buying discretionary items in 2009 due to uncertainty about their 

employment prospects.  With layoffs abating, those who are still employed apparently are less 

fearful about job loss. 

Looking ahead, both the deterioration in domestic financial conditions and the reduction 

in the outlook for foreign growth have caused me to trim my forecast for the second half of this 

year and next year.  I now expect real GDP to increase about 3½ percent this year and a touch 

under 4 percent next year.  The prospect of subpar growth is likely to make the labor market 

recovery even more agonizingly slow that I previously expected.  I now anticipate that the 

unemployment rate will end this year at about 9½ percent, declining only to 8½ percent at the 

end of 2011 and will take a couple of additional years to return to full employment.  As Bill 

Wascher emphasized, long-term unemployment has now risen from its pre-recession level of 

about 1 percent to over 4 percent, and, as of May, 46 percent of the unemployed had been 

without a job for at least 27 weeks.  This is an extremely disconcerting situation, one that 

translates into tremendous hardship for families and that has potentially serious adverse long-

term consequences. 

Turning to inflation, the very low recent readings on core consumer price inflation are 

worrisome.  I expect core PCE prices to rise about ¾ percent this year and a little below 

1 percent next year.  Both figures are a touch below my April forecasts, reflecting the greater 

slack in labor and product markets I now expect and the effects of the stronger dollar.  Labor 

June 22–23, 2010 90 of 213



 

 

 

compensation growth remains anemic.  Indeed, my business contacts report no sign of labor cost 

pressures outside of health and unemployment insurance.  The economy’s substantial slack will 

continue to weigh on inflation, and the recent appreciation of the dollar should put some further 

downward pressure on prices.  Nonetheless, inflation expectations remain well anchored, which 

should put a floor on disinflation. 

Recent events in Europe have put to rest any thought I had that the risks to the outlook 

were diminishing to normal levels.  The very scary Tealbook simulation of the severe European 

sovereign debt crisis illustrates the scope of the potential downside dangers.  Another risk that 

concerns me, albeit a far less dramatic one, is that the underlying trend in productivity growth 

may be significantly stronger than either the Board staff or I have assumed.  The Tealbook 

forecast assumes that labor productivity growth will slow sharply from its recent rapid pace to a 

little above 1 percent this year and next.  This is well below the Board staff’s estimate of 

structural productivity growth of 2 percent, and it reflects some payback from the extraordinary 

productivity gains of 2009 and early this year resulting from the reversal of strains on workers—

strains that will not prove sustainable. 

But such a productivity slowdown would represent a marked departure from the pattern 

of past recoveries.  Historically, labor productivity nearly always grows rapidly during the first 

two years of an expansion.  This is because measured productivity typically rises as firms 

increase the intensity with which they use capital and labor.  The sharply rising rate of capacity 

utilization expected over the next few years should, if anything, boost productivity growth, in 

contrast to the forecast in the Tealbook.  The prediction of slow productivity growth also appears 

inconsistent with what I have been hearing from my business contacts.  They tell me that recent 

productivity improvements, although born out of necessity, have become the new normal and 

June 22–23, 2010 91 of 213



 

 

 

reflect permanent changes in the way they do business.  To the extent that they’re right, the level 

of structural productivity may be significantly higher than assumed in the Tealbook, and 

productivity growth over the next few years may be higher as well.  Such a situation is illustrated 

by the jobless recovery alternative simulation in the Tealbook that assumes that productivity 

growth will be about 2½ percent this year and next, rather than 1 percent.  Of course, faster 

productivity growth is a good thing to the extent that it implies greater capacity to produce goods 

and services.  But the alternative simulation also shows that a stronger productivity trend would 

lead to significantly higher unemployment and lower inflation, outcomes that move us further 

away from our dual mandate goals. 

In summary, I still ascribe to the view that the economy is on a recovery path of moderate 

growth and very low inflation, but significant downside risks to the outlook have once again 

materialized and that implies that we should avoid altering policy in any way that could impede a 

fragile recovery. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 6:00 p.m.  Why don’t we adjourn for 

today?  Of course, we have dinner at 7:30, I believe, at the British Embassy, and we’ll begin 

tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.  Thank you very much. 

[Meeting recessed] 

June 22–23, 2010 92 of 213



 

 

 

June 23—Morning Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.   Good morning.  Why don’t we resume our economic go-

around?  President Bullard, are you ready? 

MR. BULLARD.  I am, indeed, ready.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On balance, 

economic conditions in the Eighth District have improved modestly since the previous FOMC 

meeting.  Eighth District employment growth has been slightly stronger than that of the nation as 

a whole.  Manufacturing activity in the District has increased.  Retail sales, including autos, have 

improved.  In addition, retailers are optimistic about summer sales.  Most housing markets in the 

District have experienced an increase in home sales.  All report a significant increase in new 

private building permits.  Commercial and industrial real estate markets continue to be weak, and 

contacts report that commercial and industrial construction is not expected to pick up until 2011.  

Leading transportation firms in the District continue to report that business activity is improving, 

and, in some cases, the improvement is very robust. 

The U.S. economy as a whole appears to have expanded modestly over the intermeeting 

period.  Although the May employment report was unexpectedly weak, it was still positive in 

some respects.  This certainly bears careful monitoring, but this report is just one month’s 

number.  Readings from outside the labor market have generally been stronger. 

One of the key risks to the U.S. and global economic recovery is the sovereign debt crisis 

in Europe.  My contacts in Europe during the intermeeting period were as nervous and 

pessimistic as I’ve ever experienced.  In order for the sovereign debt crisis to derail the global 

recovery, it would have to morph into a global uncertainty shock on the order of the Lehman-

AIG episode during the fall of 2008.  A scenario like this is described on page 70 of the 

Tealbook.  This could certainly happen.  For example, countries could unilaterally withdraw 

June 22–23, 2010 93 of 213



 

 

 

from the euro on the grounds that the Maastricht Treaty has been badly violated.  This would be 

a major event with unpredictable consequences globally.  In particular, if enough uncertainty 

were generated globally, the Asian recovery, which has been very strong, could be derailed, 

sending the global economy back into recession as it was in 2009. 

I do not think this scenario will play out.  The Europeans, despite the politics, remain 

firmly committed to the euro project. They have bought time for fiscal consolidation through the 

creation of new lending facilities.  They also remain committed to backstopping their largest 

financial institutions, so contagion through that channel seems unlikely.  For these reasons, I 

expect the effects on the U.S. to be more benign than the Tealbook baseline forecast.  There are 

four key factors:  U.S. equity prices, longer-dated Treasury yields, oil prices, and the dollar.  U.S. 

equity prices declined precipitously during the intermeeting period, but I see this as temporary 

and subject to reversal if it becomes clear during the summer that the European sovereign debt 

crisis will remain in Europe.  The flight-to-safety effect on U.S. Treasury yields, on the other 

hand, may be more persistent, as worries about the euro as a safe haven have increased 

dramatically and will subside only very slowly—so I see the positive effect through this channel 

as being more persistent.  The dollar has strengthened against the euro, and this will also be a 

persistent effect, but I see the European trade channel as weaker and more uncertain for U.S. 

GDP.  Oil prices will likely retrace somewhat, but may be subdued because of slower growth in 

parts of Europe.   

Altogether I see muted downside risk for the U.S. outlook, barring a global uncertainty 

shock.  The U.S. may even benefit as a bystander to the crisis, as it did during the Asian currency 

crisis, through the safe-haven effect.  I would not count the crisis in Europe as a good reason to 

alter the course of monetary policy at this time, especially by suggesting that the Committee 

June 22–23, 2010 94 of 213



 

 

 

might be more patient in moving policy away from its current extraordinarily easy stance.  The 

more prudent course is to wait to see what the effects are in the U.S. during the summer and 

make a decision later in the year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Tenth District economy continues to 

expand at a steady, modest pace.  According to reports on our retail sales, spending is continuing 

to grow modestly, although our auto dealers are reporting some pretty strong increases in sales.  

Our energy activity is expanding, and there has been a pretty significant oil play found in 

southeastern Wyoming that’s creating a little bit of activity—we’ll see how that develops as we 

go forward.  Obviously, commercial real estate remains weak around the District, although 

we’ve seen some stability on the residential side, that is, some less negative news. 

The manufacturing survey in our region shows continued expansion, but at a moderate 

pace.  I have reported to you in the past some activity in farmland, and that continues.  I will tell 

you that I’ve become a little more concerned—we  got a call from one of our contacts who had 

gotten a call from another part of the country asking if there were any real good deals around 

”Wi-CHEE-tah,” Kansas.  Don, you and I know that is Wichita, Kansas.  When they do that, I 

get real worried about where they’re coming from. [Laughter]. 

On the whole, our District actually went into the recession a bit after the nation did, but 

it’s coming out at about the same pace.  So as I look at us and compare us to the nation, I’m 

pretty comfortable with the outlook.  We’ve had almost a year of growth, and I expect that to 

continue over the course of the rest of this year and, I hope, into 2011.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

June 22–23, 2010 95 of 213



 

 

 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic conditions in the Ninth 

District continue to improve.  Earlier in 2010, I reported to you that the prevailing attitude was 

one of waiting to see whether recent increases in demand were sustainable.  There is much more 

confidence now that demand is back, especially among high-end consumers.  Our business 

contracts reported that they had enjoyed outstanding months in March and April, including a 

large company that specializes in temporary hiring.  However, there was some pullback in May.  

Shipping out of our main port, Duluth, is proceeding at a rapid pace.  At the same time, 

inflationary pressures in the District seem minimal.  Firms report only modest or limited 

movements in import prices. 

In terms of the national economy, my point forecast has changed little since April.  I 

expect GDP to grow at roughly 3½ percent over the next two years and inflation to remain low—

around 1 percent during the coming year—but then to bump up to average around 2 percent in 

2011 and 2012.  However, the level of uncertainty around my forecast has increased since the 

last FOMC meeting.  In terms of output, as the Tealbook points out, a European financial crisis 

could adversely affect growth outcomes in the United States.  Along those lines, I was glad to 

see reports of a planned stress test of the large European financial institutions.  I believe that this 

exercise will do much to reduce the likelihood and severity of a European financial crisis if the 

exercise is performed in an appropriate fashion. 

In terms of inflation, I remain concerned about the upside risks associated with increases 

in the United States debt and deficit.  But the recent low realizations of inflation have also led me 

to be concerned about downside risk.  As is conventional, the forecast in Tealbook. Book A, 

assumes that the FOMC responds to undesirably low realizations of inflation by keeping the fed 

funds rate at zero for an even longer period of time. 

June 22–23, 2010 96 of 213



 

 

 

Both in our models and in the data, inflation and interest rates are actually tightly 

positively related over the longer run.  So the Tealbook’s policy rule has the potential to generate 

a multiyear deflation, or liquidity trap, in which inflation is low or even negative for many years 

and the fed funds rate is stuck at zero.  This idea that conventional monetary policy can generate 

self-fulfilling inflations at the zero lower bound goes back to the work of Benhabib, Schmitt-

Grohé, and Uribe about a decade ago.  President Bullard referred specifically to this risk in the 

two-headed dragon speech that he gave to the AEA in early 2009.  As he pointed out there, the 

history of Japan since the 1990s indicates that this possibility may be more than a purely 

theoretical one.  Now, at this point, these are just risks, and I think these risks seem to be under 

control, as longer-term inflationary expectations basically remain in a range consist with our 

mandate. 

In May, national unemployment was 9.7 percent, and private sector employment growth 

was small.  Like that of the Tealbook, my outlook for national employment/unemployment is 

bleak.  I do not see unemployment falling below 8 percent until after the end of 2011.  

Undoubtedly, some amount of unemployment corresponds to the existence of an output gap 

created by wage and price rigidities.  However, I see at least two other important sources of high 

unemployment.  Small businesses are typically an important source of job growth during 

recoveries, but limitations of their access to bank credit are constraining their ability to create 

jobs.  In addition, businesses remain highly uncertain about the ultimate impact of health care 

reform and taxation on employee costs. 

To summarize, over the next two years I anticipate a moderate recovery in output along 

with low but positive inflation.  The European situation and the recent near-zero realizations of 

inflation have generated more uncertainty in my outlook.  Unemployment is likely to be 

June 22–23, 2010 97 of 213



 

 

 

unacceptably high for at least two to three years.  My assessment of the root causes of 

unemployment implies that it may well continue to be high as the output gap associated with 

price and wage rigidities closes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The flow of data since the last meeting has 

been mixed at best, and, like the Tealbook and most forecasters, we’ve marked down our outlook 

for real activity a bit.  But the changes in our projections haven’t been as quite substantial as the 

Tealbook’s.  The case for a large slowdown in consumption—to below 3 percent for the rest of 

this year and barely over 3 percent next year—appears to lean heavily on the effects of credit 

constraints.  My sense is that fluctuations in the degree to which consumers or small businesses 

feel credit constrained is driven predominantly by fluctuations in their own prospects rather than 

by variations in bank capital or other supply-side factors right now.  So, while European 

developments have certainly heightened real and financial uncertainty and should not be taken 

lightly, it doesn’t seem that likely to me that these developments will impinge much on the 

gradual improvement in credit conditions for U.S. households that seems to be under way. 

Because, in my outlook, consumption growth doesn’t slow quite as much as in the 

Tealbook, the accelerator mechanism implies stronger business investment growth.  In addition, I 

think replacing and upgrading equipment in IT systems seems to be playing a very important 

role—investments driven by depreciation rather than by output, in a sense.  So I see decent 

prospects for firms returning to investment plans that were put on hold before the recession. 

Finally, I see a faster return of inflation to a trend between 1½ and 2 percent.  

Expectations have remained remarkably stable during the recession, despite the weighty burden 

June 22–23, 2010 98 of 213



 

 

 

of a large output gap.  If the recovery continues and becomes better established, I think expected 

trend inflation will exert a more powerful force on overall and core inflation. 

My guarded optimism on the national economy is buttressed by the largely favorable 

information we’ve received lately about the Fifth District.  Our manufacturing survey’s overall 

index was down just slightly in June—from 26 to 23, still a very strong positive reading—and 

we’ve received reports from manufacturers in a wide array of sectors in the Fifth District noting 

rising orders, and port activity has been on a very distinct rise.  Our services survey remained in 

positive territory as well, although retail remains a bit soft, and respondents to all of our surveys 

appear to be fairly upbeat on balance about the next six months.  Government contractors in the 

D.C. area are showing particular strength—you can take that as a good sign or a bad sign, it’s up 

to you.  We’ve received anecdotal reports from around the District that are positive, including 

positive comments about labor markets.  And, as summer gets under way, tourist numbers on the 

Carolina coast are up year over year.  Most of the less sunny reports we’ve received involve 

commercial real estate in our District, which isn’t doing so hot. 

Overall the picture that emerges from the District is of broadening areas of positive 

momentum with some lingering weak patches.  So my bottom line is that the recovery is likely to 

be sustained at about its current pace, even though the downside risks have increased somewhat.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  From my perspective, the 

major new development is that the risks to the outlook for economic growth are now skewed to 

the downside rather than the upside.  In my mind this reflects two issues.  First, the upside risk to 

growth that seemed somewhat possible a month or two ago seemed to have diminished.  Much 

June 22–23, 2010 99 of 213



 

 

 

faster growth would presumably have involved more rapid employment growth that would then 

boost incomes, leading to ever stronger consumption growth, which in turn would sustain greater 

payroll employment gains.  However, the soft employment and consumption figures indicate that 

this positive multiplier story hasn’t taken hold with any vigor.  In addition, the boost from 

inventory restocking is getting a bit long in the tooth, and, hence, manufacturing output is likely 

not to keep rising much faster than final demand for much longer.  So the upside risks that 

certainly seemed real even a month or two ago now seem to have faded. 

Second, the European situation will likely depress U.S. economic activity through at least 

three channels:  weaker final demand in Europe due to earlier fiscal consolidation; more trade 

drag for the U.S., given the depreciation of the euro versus the dollar; and tighter financial 

conditions due to greater risk aversion and worries about the European banking system.  The 

good news, of course, is that the Europeans do seem to be muddling through.  There is a large 

SPV in train that will backstop European government debt issuance, and, in the meantime, the 

ECB is buying the debt of peripheral countries to prevent sovereign interest rates from rising 

sharply, and the euro zone has announced a bank stress test for their largest banking institutions.  

The bad news is that there’s still considerable room for things to go wrong.  This could range 

from further market disruptions to political problems— for example, some governments could 

balk at the fiscal consolidation demanded by markets, or other governments could balk at the 

level of assistance that they need to provide to keep the euro zone intact. 

Although I’m generally heartened by the decision of the Europeans to do a bank stress 

test, as we know all too well, the devil is in the details.  The test has to be sufficiently stressful 

and the results need to be disclosed in a sufficiently transparent fashion to allow market 

June 22–23, 2010 100 of 213



 

 

 

participants to assess and judge the credibility of the exercise.  So the proof of the pudding will 

be in what the results are and how they’re disclosed to the market. 

The bottom line for me is that growth is likely to be moderate, with substantial risk to the 

downside at a time that inflation is already too low rather than too high.  Given that outlook, I 

believe that our policy discussions need to become a bit more balanced than they have been over 

the last few months.  We have spent a lot of time discussing how we might want to adjust policy 

in one direction, namely, exiting from our accommodative policy stance.  It seems to me that we 

should be thinking just as hard about how to adjust in the other direction, that is, how we might 

want to escalate in terms of applying additional monetary policy stimulus.  If downside risks to 

economic growth were to materialize, the risk of a debt deflation trap would become more 

serious.  In that circumstance, what would we do to ease financial conditions?  One option would 

be to reinvest maturing agency MBS proceeds.  Another would be to engage in additional 

purchases of Treasury debt and/or agency MBS.  I think the bar to the former should be 

relatively low, just reinvesting what matures, and the bar to further balance sheet expansion is 

probably pretty high, but I wouldn’t rule that out as an option, either. 

Let me end with two final thoughts that involve risk to the financial sector over time.  At 

the last meeting I talked about the risk that passage of the regulatory reform bill could lead the 

rating agencies to cut their ratings for some of our major banks.  As you may recall, the credit 

rating agencies were arguing that, by constraining the ability of the government to aid troubled 

banks, the legislation might lower the amount of support the banks get in their ratings from the 

government backstop.  Well, fortunately there has been some welcome news on this front.  Since 

the last meeting, Moody’s and S&P have indicated that they do not plan to do anything quickly.  

It doesn’t mean that it might not happen over time, but it’s not going to happen right away.  So 

June 22–23, 2010 101 of 213



 

 

 

the risk that, once the legislation is signed into law, it will be immediately followed by credit 

rating cuts of major U.S. financial institutions has diminished sharply since the last meeting. 

The second thing I think worth mentioning is what is happening in Basel regarding the 

capital adequacy requirements for banks.  This is going to play out over the next six months, I 

hope, if we can actually get an international agreement.  Our very early analysis here is that 

making U.S. financial institutions sufficiently robust could require considerably more capital and 

higher quality capital for some of them.  If such requirements were phased in over a long period 

of time, say, five years or so, it probably wouldn’t be a big problem for the large U.S. banks, 

assuming we had a sustained economic recovery.  Retained earnings should allow most 

institutions to build capital so they can reach the new requirements at the end of a relatively long 

transition period without great difficulty.  However, there’s a risk, because market participants 

think that the U.S. banks already have plenty of capital.  So there’s a potential announcement 

effect if all of a sudden people hear that the large U.S. financial institutions need to raise quite a 

bit more capital—it could be a bit of a shock to the market.  So I’d say we should keep that in 

mind as another potential risk.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ironically, if we’re serious about too-big-to-fail, at some 

point we hope that some institutions do get downgraded, right?  So that shows that it’s a 

market— 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s like St. Augustine—“…but not just now.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I understand that.  Okay.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In what I trust really is my final FOMC 

meeting [laughter], I find myself situated pretty much in the central tendency of the Committee’s 

projections and in agreement with the general tone and assessment I’ve heard around the table 

June 22–23, 2010 102 of 213



 

 

 

yesterday and today.  The incoming data continue to be consistent with moderate expansion in 

the 3 to 4 percent range that we’ve averaged since the middle of 2009.  There are no real signs of 

substantial strengthening or weakening from that pace, and the story of private final demand 

taking over from the inventory cycle and fiscal impetus still appears to be intact in the most 

recent data. 

The gradual pace of recovery from the very deep recession is quite striking, given the 

degree of fiscal and monetary stimulus that has been applied.  I think that, to date, there’s no sign 

that the impediments to more rapid growth that we’ve been citing over the past months and 

quarters are abating any faster than we had been expecting.  Confidence is rising slowly from a 

low level.  Uncertainty about sales and about tax and regulatory environment are holding back 

business spending.  Balance sheet repair in the household sector is dampening borrowing and 

spending.  Bank credit continues to be extraordinarily weak.  While bank credit supply is no 

longer tightening, it is likely to ease slowly as bank capital is rebuilt, loan losses top out, and 

banks begin to adapt to those much more stringent capital and liquidity requirements Bill was 

just talking about.  The housing market continues to face an overhang of available supply.  But 

with the gradual easing in these restraints, I have economic growth picking up to 4½ percent by 

2012 with a 7¼ percent unemployment rate at the end of that year.  Regarding inflation, 

substantial margins of slack and associated highly competitive conditions in labor and product 

markets have meant that, even as the economy has begun to recover, inflation has continued to 

decline, with deceleration across a broad array of categories. 

As many of you have remarked, the important change over the intermeeting period is the 

deteriorating situation in Europe.  In response, I marked down my expected GDP growth a 

June 22–23, 2010 103 of 213



 

 

 

little—not as much as the staff did—and  raised my projection of the path of the unemployment 

rate, which now falls even more slowly than it did in my April projection. 

Importantly, the intermeeting developments led me, like many of you, to perceive greater 

uncertainty and downside risks even to this very gradual upturn in activity.  I think we’ve had a 

demonstration that financial markets remain very volatile and sensitive, with a bias toward rapid 

and marked flight from risk.  I think this partly reflects fresh memories of the fall of 2008.  

We’ve also seen a demonstration that, in an integrated economic and financial environment, we 

are vulnerable to problems abroad.  In this respect, I differ a bit from President Bullard’s analysis 

that they might, in some sense, benefit us.  I think we’re especially vulnerable and tend to be 

more impacted by negative shocks from abroad because the flight to safety raises the dollar 

exchange rate, but it hasn’t really damped the cost of capital for many private borrowers outside 

the mortgage market—corporations are paying more, LIBOR goes up, and a lot of rates on bank 

loans go up.  So the weaker outlook and greater uncertainty have increased the cost of capital and 

appreciated the dollar.  And, Jim, I remember that that’s what happened in the fall of 1998—I 

don’t recall that we benefited from the Asian crisis; we actually had to ease policy a bit when 

that happened.  In addition, pressures for fiscal consolidation have increased globally, with 

greater near-term downside implications for activity.  And, most dangerous, as a number of you, 

the Vice Chairman, in particular, have pointed out, are the risks of a spillover from sovereign 

risk to the banking sector in Europe and the rather substantial exposure of U.S. lenders, including 

money market funds, to those banks.  There have been some constructive steps in the past few 

days, including a commitment to transparent stress tests in Europe—provided that they’re carried 

out, as President Kocherlakota said, in a reasonable way—and a more flexible yuan, which, I 

think, is a positive development.  So my forecast is based on the Europeans finding a way 

June 22–23, 2010 104 of 213



 

 

 

through this situation that maintains stability and rebuilds confidence, but the vulnerabilities all 

seem tilted in one direction. 

Like many of you, I also marked down my inflation forecasts based on incoming data 

confirming a downward trend to core, lower energy prices that will feed through to headline 

inflation, the rise in the dollar and its effect on import prices, and slightly greater slack in my 

forecast.  I have assumed that expectations remain anchored, but I suspect I’m putting a little 

more emphasis on slack than some other participants, because my inflation forecasts are at the 

lower end of or even a smidge below the central tendencies, while my activity forecast is at the 

upper end of the central tendencies.  This weight on slack seems consistent with the marked 

deceleration in compensation inflation on balance over the past year, even as inflation 

expectations remain anchored.  I had headline inflation staying at about 1 percent for the next 

three years. 

I see downside risks on the inflation front as well.  The main risk is that expectations will 

begin to adjust down after what will be several years—three, four years—of very low headline 

inflation, if I’m right.  An unanchoring of inflation expectations on the downside would threaten 

a potentially adverse dynamic of rising real interest rates and declining inflation at levels well 

below the Committee members’ long-term objectives. 

So, like most of you, I see a long, slow climb out of a very deep hole, with inflation 

running well below our objectives for a number of years and downside risks around that forecast.  

We will be falling well short of our dual mandate for the foreseeable future.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

June 22–23, 2010 105 of 213



 

 

 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m glad Governor Kohn can end on such a 

gleeful note.  [Laughter] 

MR. KOHN.  It’s your problem now.  Over to you. 

MR. WARSH.  Amid these bouts of financial turmoil, mixed data, and new questions 

about the future of the European project, there are two questions that seem to rise above all 

others.  First, is the real economy in the U.S. going to deliver on the promise of an effective 

handoff from government stimulus to self-sustaining private demand?  Second, and no less 

consequential, as previewed yesterday, why isn’t the Tealbook teal?  [Laughter]  One of these 

questions is unanswerable; the other merely unanswered.  The trick will be deciding from the 

balance of my comments which is which. 

First, on the economic forecast, at every FOMC meeting since last September, I’ve been 

saying that I feel a lot better about the next few quarters than the next few years.  I’m afraid to 

report today that those few quarters are now over—we’re now in the next few years.  I am quite 

cautious about the path outlined even in the Tealbook.  My own projections continue to be below 

the central tendency on GDP growth—I project a very moderate rate of growth, with a low level 

of output and very, very slow job creation.  We have seen encouraging data on industrial 

production, but the idea of a “hockey stick” shape on our GDP forecast seems overly hopeful to 

me.  Let me highlight three concerns on the real side of the economy. 

The first is business spending.  I am less confident that anticipated double-digit growth in 

equipment and software spending will make the necessary contributions to GDP to make the 

Tealbook forecast a reality.  It strikes me that this business spending is a critical linchpin to these 

forecasts, and I worry that large corporations will not readily redeploy their large excess cash 

cushions into new cap-ex.  For whatever reason, whether it be the new volatility in financial 

June 22–23, 2010 106 of 213



 

 

 

markets, memories of what’s transpired in the last couple of years, or concerns about uncertainty 

in the rules of the game, there’s very little impetus for these guys to get on their front foot and to 

step up their cap-ex budgets.  I think that that would be great news if it happened, but it’s not 

obvious to me it will. 

Second, on the employment front, the growth in average hourly earnings and hours 

worked could well be an indicator that job creation is “on the come,” but it could indicate instead 

that structural unemployment will prove more persistent and that those who are not gainfully 

employed might find themselves in the wrong bucket here for quite some time.  I’m concerned 

that small companies without access to the capital markets will not get into the game with any 

kind of force and will not help drive an employment rebound.  I think the divergence between the 

ISM surveys and the NFIB surveys are as pronounced as I have ever witnessed, and I think they 

are capturing something real about the differences in views between large and small businesses. 

Third, as raised quite, quite well by the alternative simulation in the Tealbook, I’m 

concerned that potential growth is lower and the NAIRU is higher than the staff’s forecast. 

Let me turn now to the financial markets, which, I think, pose further downside risks.  

The Tealbook, like many forecasts in the financial markets, suggests that the financial repair 

process steadily continues. It strikes me that this is a large and uncertain assumption over the 

course of the next few quarters.  If the financial market repair process is halting, it could have 

significant implications for global economic growth. 

Let me highlight some of the risks within the financial markets.  The first is institutional 

investors—they strike me as lurching, not searching, for a new equilibrium.  I think Don rightly 

pointed out that, on any given day on any given week, we see institutional investors risking and 

de-risking at the faintest sign of news.  This is not an encouraging development, and I think the 

June 22–23, 2010 107 of 213



 

 

 

remarkably high correlations we’re seeing across asset classes globally should give us pause 

about how durably the financial market repair process continues. 

Second, retail investors appear to be stepping back from the equity markets with even 

greater force than during the panic of 2008.  They’re showing fear of getting back into these 

markets.  This might be fleeting—it may be that they are scared now, but when the equity 

markets turn again, they won’t be able to help themselves and will just say, “if there’s only one 

more bubble, let me ride it.”  But I think that the retail investor behavior over the course of the 

last month is striking, even more so than we saw in the darkest days of the crisis.  Because asset 

prices haven’t moved in aggregate much from their peaks—perhaps down 10 percent from their 

peaks of four or six weeks ago—I think many of those retail investors have just decided this is 

not a fair game, and they are going to exit these markets.  That is a disturbing trend that I think 

has some very real consequences if it plays out. 

The third concern regarding the financial markets are U.S. financial firms themselves.  I 

think they are likely to report second-quarter profits that are below expectations and 

meaningfully so.  If you look over the course of the last couple of weeks as we get to the end of 

the second quarter, analysts’ estimates for big banks’ profits have come down, but I don’t think 

they’ve come down as far as will be realized.  I think we will see big banks trying to talk down 

their numbers before they announce second-quarter profits in the third week of this upcoming 

month.  That could well be a surprise, and I think the implications for bank capital and for bank 

businesses could be quite discomforting.  Even our relatively strong banks have had a reasonably 

tough time funding themselves on an unsecured basis in three-, five-, and ten-year terms, and 

that’s a development that should give us all some concern, reminding us of some pretty tough 

periods behind us. 

June 22–23, 2010 108 of 213



 

 

 

Fourth, I think we’re seeing volatility of volatility—a second derivative phenomenon.  

Tying the financial markets back to the real economy, this volatility makes me concerned about 

the resilience of the production improvements we’ve seen and the hoped for improvements in 

business fixed investment over the course of the next year. 

Finally, I’ll mention the financial architecture.  I think there’s this expectation, however 

misplaced, that, once the regulatory reform bill gets to the Rose Garden, there will be clarity in 

the financial architecture, and, in particular, clarity on the rules of the road.  But that’s not even 

the end of the beginning.  Many of these questions are going to be punted to us and other 

regulators, both in the U.S. and across the globe, and I’m not sure markets fully anticipate how 

much uncertainty will remain. 

So, while I’ve been of the view that the financial market improvements over the last year 

have been helping the real side of the economy, I suspect that they will no longer be as 

convincingly useful to get the real economy to go forward. 

Let me turn finally to the euro zone.  Many of us reasonably anticipated the problems in 

Europe for several months, and I think the situation there remains very, very unsettled.  Even if 

Europe can muddle through the summer, it is still an open question whether the politics in 

Europe will allow the political leaders to “double down” on the commitments that they have 

made over the course of the last month.  European leaders are going to have probably their most 

consequential meeting in October, at which they’re going to revisit commitments and evaluate 

financial markets.  In September, before they go into those October meetings of the European 

Council members, they’ll all be putting out their proposals.  I don’t know whether the politics in 

the stronger countries in Europe will permit their leaders in very uneasy coalitions to say as 

robustly and squarely as many markets would wish that they stand completely behind their 

June 22–23, 2010 109 of 213



 

 

 

commitments; that is, their taxpayers will be bailing out those who, in the eyes of the political 

masters, are less deserving.  It’s possible that, as the economies in Europe diverge in the forecast 

period, countries like Germany will be able to export their way into some GDP successes and 

bring down their unemployment rates a bit, and this could lead to tensions within the euro zone 

where some of the competitors look at that and say, “I’m not getting any of those 

improvements.”  Does that delta in their real economies make coherence and convergence on 

policy more difficult or less?  I think the European problems are very serious.  Markets appear to 

me willing to continue to test perceived weakness, to test ambiguity.  Going through the summer 

and into the fall, I think markets are going to be parsing the words of politicians across the 

continent and will be wondering whether the commitments they’ve made are going to hold true. 

Finally, just a brief word on inflation prospects as measured.  Near-term indicators, as 

everyone has discussed, appear quite benign—there’s a little risk of near-term price increases.  

Import prices appear to be tame.  But, unlike some who are now more concerned about deflation 

risks, I do see differences in prices across countries and across particular commodities, as an 

example.  It doesn’t seem to me as though we are all that close to a downward price spiral, with 

falling prices begetting further price falls and constituting anything like deflation.  It looks to me 

as though many of these prices are responding to real developments.  Inflation expectations 

continue to be anchored, and that’s a subject that still bears careful watching, but I haven’t 

changed my views on inflation prospects dramatically.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Interestingly, while conditions in financial 

markets deteriorated, conditions in the banking system and, specifically, the outlook for credit 

continued to improve.  Delinquency rates appear to have peaked in all loan categories except 

June 22–23, 2010 110 of 213



 

 

 

commercial real estate, and even there the rate of growth is slowing.  The growth in classified 

assets is leveling off, both in the shared national credit portfolio and in the top 50 banks.  Growth 

in the number of banks and of bank assets on the FDIC problem list is also slowing.  Banks are 

also reporting that credit performance is both better than in the recent past and better than they 

expected, and they report fewer questions on asset quality in their investor presentations. 

There’s still plenty to be done to work through the remaining problem credits, but, at the 

highest levels, bank management has moved on to other concerns, specifically, loan growth.  

Every banker I spoke with talked about the difficulty of finding enough quality credits.  They’re 

worried about having enough earning assets to sustain their earnings going forward, and a 

number reported strong emphasis on developing programs and products to stimulate demand.  

They’re especially interested in high-quality C&I loans and consumer loans.  Most are reporting 

that the new lending that they are doing is more likely to be a loan taken from somebody else 

than a new credit request.  They’re very high quality, but as competition heats up, the spreads are 

not as wide as they were, and terms are easing a bit.  Indeed, the unusually high spreads for C&I 

loans seem to have peaked even for smaller loans. 

The exception in terms of competition for new loans is in commercial real estate loans.  

Banks that have room for additional real estate lending report that they are able to cherry-pick 

higher-quality deals at good profitability from banks that have pulled back completely from the 

product.  With respect to real estate lending, I am more and more convinced that we will see 

recovery in the commercial mortgage market faster and maybe even sooner than recovery in the 

residential mortgage market.  Moreover, even though delinquency rates are still rising on 

commercial mortgages, I expect that the ultimate charge-off rate will be considerably lower on 

commercial mortgages than on residential mortgages. 

June 22–23, 2010 111 of 213



 

 

 

When talking about CRE credit, it’s important to distinguish between commercial 

mortgages (or nonfarm, nonresidential properties for existing owner-occupied or income-

producing real estate) and construction loans.  So far, the charge-off rates in 2009 on nonfarm, 

nonresidential mortgages ran about 1 percent, which is actually just half of the 2 percent charge-

off rate on residential mortgages or C&I loans and a fraction of the more than 5 percent charge-

off rate on construction loans. 

Guidance covering CRE workout seems to be helping as restructurings are taking place.  

Pools of money that were raised in anticipation of an RTC-like dumping of commercial assets 

are coming to the point where they have to buy something or return the money. So banks report 

good liquidity and multiple offers for stressed assets, with pricing at or better than their marks.  

At the same time, commercial real estate fundamentals are improving as capitalization rates 

come down and occupancy and rental rates stabilize.  Bankers expect conditions to continue to 

improve slowly as long as we don’t have either another leg up in unemployment or a spike in 

interest rates.  

In contrast, after more than two years of trying to modify delinquent residential 

mortgages through HOPE NOW, HOPE for Homeowners, and HAMP, we are still faced with a 

growing pile of delinquent mortgages.  The flow of new mortgages into early-stage buckets is 

slowing, but the rate of exit through pure successful modification or foreclosure is painfully 

slow.  According to the April HAMP report, roughly 6 million mortgages are 60 days or more 

past due.  Of these, 1.7 million are estimated to be eligible for HAMP modification, and there are 

only 340,000 active mortgage modifications.  Furthermore, one large servicer reported a 

40 percent re-default rate after four months on permanent modifications.  There are only so many 

times you can go to the same delinquent borrowers with a new offer, and each offer seems to 

June 22–23, 2010 112 of 213



 

 

 

find a lower success rate.  Therefore, many are just going to have to be resolved through 

foreclosure.  Average foreclosure time lines are running a year and a half to get the property and 

another six months to sell it.  Combining the high loss rates on residential construction loans and 

this backlog of delinquent mortgages, it looks like recovery in the housing and mortgage market 

could be measured in years, especially in places like Florida and Arizona, where the delinquency 

rate is now higher than 20 percent. 

I asked staff to look at the length of time it took for the level of credit outstanding to 

recover after other recessions.  They found that this cycle is currently tracking the 1990-1991 

recession.  In that one, measuring from trough to trough on an inflation-adjusted basis, it took 

five and a half years for residential and nearly nine years for commercial to recover. 

Also on the minds of bankers are regulatory reform, capital and liquidity proposals 

coming out of work on the Basel III accord, and the recent FASB exposure draft on mark-to-

market accounting.  The FASB proposal is viewed by all as the biggest threat.  From the largest 

to the smallest banks, they uniformly felt that it spelled the end of commercial banking or, at the 

very least, the end of fixed-rate lending and small business lending.  One bank likened the FASB 

proposal to a terrorist with a nuclear bomb saying, “You knew how bad it would be, but you 

didn’t really think he was going to use it.” 

The Basel III work and the Collins amendment have most banks focused on the allowable 

elements of capital as well as on their capital levels.  Most of the bankers already believe that 

they have more than enough capital to weather the losses in their portfolios, and many of the 

smallest banks are unshakable in their belief that capital standards have already been raised.  

Those that are raising capital are trying to keep as much optionality in it as possible.  I asked 

bankers what sort of returns they would expect to have in the future and what they would need to 

June 22–23, 2010 113 of 213



 

 

 

attract investors.  They thought that returns on assets would settle out in the 1 to 1.2 percent 

range, and that 12½ percent was the minimum return on equity it would take to attract capital, 

which means they would need leverage of at least 10 to 12 times equity to continue to attract the 

capital. 

All found something to worry about in the regulatory reform bill, but what that was 

depended on the bank and the business model.  Larger banks talked about operational issues, loss 

of income, and service reductions, as they adjusted to new rules, but it was mostly transitional; 

over the longer term, they seemed confident they could deal with any of the proposed changes.  

For many of the smaller banks, the proposals seemed quite overwhelming.  Many predicted that 

significantly more community banks would disappear as a result of regulatory reform than would 

be lost in bank failures.  And some were planning to be either buyers or sellers in the eventual 

rollout.  For the smaller banks, the problem has several dimensions.  First of all, some don’t have 

enough employees to deal with the sheer complexity of reading and implementing the new 

regulations.  My memory is that FDICIA had 63 implementing regulations, and at the time I had 

64 employees, so that sort of sizes the problem. 

MR. TARULLO.  A surplus of one. 

MS. DUKE.  And that was if the courier did a good job on his side. 

In addition, there’s complete reliance on vendors to make the changes that are needed for 

compliance.  Community banks view their advantage as the ability to customize products, while 

larger bankers stay inside the box, and the new regulations just seemed to tighten the box.  One 

fourth generation CEO of a $50 million family-owned bank said she described it to her father as 

trying to make it on an 80-acre family farm—just not enough scale or resources. 

June 22–23, 2010 114 of 213



 

 

 

In summary, we seem to be beyond the point where credit quality concerns will restrict 

recovery, but uncertainty about regulation and capital requirements is taking its place.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you.  For me, the intermeeting period has largely been a tale of 

the tail.  A look at real economic data suggests some slowing, though not a sharp break with the 

pattern of recovery whose pace continues to be limited by the housing problems and balance 

sheet repairs that are the legacy of the financial crisis.  But as many of you have already 

suggested, a glance at financial indicators and conversations with market participants tell a 

different story, one of sharply renewed vulnerabilities and an associated flight to quality arising 

directly from the debt problems of the euro zone periphery and, more generally, from the long-

term fiscal predicaments of many in the group of countries that we’ve traditionally called the 

advanced economies. 

Nonfinancial data over the last seven weeks are largely consistent with what has become 

a reasonably well established but not particularly robust recovery.  As noted in the staff briefing, 

consumer spending, manufacturing, and investment in equipment and software remain solid.  But 

other indicators are not so favorable, and it seems less clear that self-sustaining economic 

activity will fully replace the waning effects of stimulus and inventory replenishment.  As 

evidenced by releases of the last two mornings, housing captures the broader picture well, both 

in that we do not see a run of more than a few good data points before less encouraging reports 

appear and in that there has been less good news lately. 

With respect to employment, there is, to be sure, still some reason to be hopeful about the 

jobs picture, notably increases in hours worked and some preliminary information suggesting 

June 22–23, 2010 115 of 213



 

 

 

that any structural unemployment by-products of the recession may be limited.  But we’ve had 

hopeful signs for some time now, and they’ve translated into decent private sector job growth in 

only two months thus far.  Looking at projections that Bill distributed yesterday, the FOMC as a 

whole expects that unemployment two and a half years from now will still be a couple of 

percentage points above what we consider the long-run trend. 

Now to the tail:  Euro zone periphery problems have created obvious stresses, as revealed 

most palpably in the financial data presented by Nellie yesterday.  The uncertainty that results 

has been increased by continued disjointed policy response and communication problems among 

European policymakers.  Owing to the awkward structure of its economic policymaking, this 

awkwardness, I think, has been reflected in both the continued lack of elaboration on some 

particulars of how the SPV will function and, as many of you have noted, in continuing and 

recurring questions surrounding the bank stress test exercise.  A number of observers here and in 

Europe note that each time European policymakers take a leap ahead of the curve, they get 

bogged down in the challenges of coordinating the implementation of their initiatives, and they 

risk falling behind that curve once again.  It’s possible to muddle through sovereign debt and 

banking sector problems, but history suggests that a failure to get ahead of these problems will 

often lead to grief. 

The uncertainties associated with the immediate risks of the sovereign debt and 

associated banking problems are bad enough.  Then we have the view, which I’ve heard from a 

number of market participants, that virtually any policy chosen in Europe will be a bad one.  

Credible fiscal consolidation will be good for reassuring the financial system but, quite possibly, 

bad for economic growth.  Failure to move forward on credible fiscal consolidation may be 

helpful in the short term but will compound the medium-term problems and, quite possibly, lead 

June 22–23, 2010 116 of 213



 

 

 

to a steepening of yield curves sooner rather than later.  Finding the right balance and timing of 

policies will obviously be a challenge, not to mention the coordination difficulties. 

In terms of my own expectations, starting with my modal expectation, the effect of the 

euro zone problems on risk aversion, exports, and equity values will be only partially offset by 

lower Treasury rates and commodity prices.  This expectation led me to pare somewhat my 

projections for GDP growth in the remainder of this year and 2011, though not as much as the 

Tealbook, and that’s in part because I never expected growth as high as the Greenbook had 

foreseen before its recent change of hue.  My modal forecast is not too optimistic to begin with.  

Add to that the tail risk of a financial event in Europe—and I think we can have a disruptive 

financial event that falls short of a full-blown crisis—and we see at least some potential for 

renewed asset value and credit strains in the United States with a resulting significant negative 

effect on economic performance.  So here’s hoping the tail doesn’t wag the dog.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thanks to everyone.  Let me make a stab at 

trying to summarize the conversation around the table.  Intermeeting data were generally mixed, 

and financial conditions became less supportive, largely as a result of uncertainties about 

European sovereign debt and the ramifications of a possible default on the European periphery.  

Most participants, however, continued to expect a moderate recovery into next year, although 

downside risks to growth have increased somewhat.  The labor market is recovering, but 

painfully slowly, reflecting the moderate pace of output growth.  The inventory correction is no 

longer providing significant support to the recovery, and, although private final demands seems 

to have picked up the baton, the strength and certain components of final demand may prove 

transitory.  Inflation remains low and trending down.  Inflation expectations appear stable, and 

June 22–23, 2010 117 of 213



 

 

 

commodity prices are moderating.  Medium-term risks to inflation, to both the upside and the 

downside, remain, although, on net, economic developments and incoming data led inflation risk 

to shift toward the downside over the intermeeting period. 

Household spending has been moderately strong, supported by income growth and a 

modest improvement in confidence.  However, recent reports are mixed, and continued labor 

market weakness could weigh on confidence, income, and spending going forward.  Declines in 

equity and housing wealth are another potential drag on consumption growth. 

In the labor market, data on new hires and UI claims were disappointing, except for the 

temporary boost provided by Census hiring.  Employers thus far have added hours more through 

increases in workweeks and overtime than by adding employees.  Possibly these increases in 

hours may lead to more hiring in the near future, as suggested by increases in temp hiring.  But 

employer pensiveness about the economic and policy environment is also likely playing a role in 

the slow hiring pace.  The staff predicts low productivity growth from here, but productivity 

growth more in line with recent expansions, though good in the long run, could translate into 

weaker, short-term employment gains.  Long-term unemployment represents a serious problem 

with potential longer-term implications for skills, social networks, and labor market attachment. 

Housing demand has been up in some areas but looks to be weaker in the near term, with 

starts and sales down, in part reflecting a withdrawal of federal tax credits for homebuyers as 

well as tight credit.  Home prices are flat to down with the overhang of available supply a drag 

on prices in many localities.  Mortgage modification programs have not had as much success as 

hoped.  Nonresidential construction remains at low levels, and banks’ commercial real estate 

problems may worsen with the large volume of loans coming due in the near term.  However, 

there have been indications of stabilization in commercial real estate fundamentals in prices. 

June 22–23, 2010 118 of 213



 

 

 

Moreover, funding is available for stronger CRE deals on conservative terms, and some grounds 

for optimism on CRE performance exist. 

In financial markets, concerns about Europe and perhaps about financial regulatory 

reform, new capital standards, and accounting changes have increased jitteriness and reduced 

investors’ appetite for risk.  Correlations across asset classes are high.  Lower stock prices, the 

stronger dollar, and somewhat tighter corporate credit are negatives for U.S. economic growth, 

although lower oil prices and lower Treasury yields are a partial offset.  The European bank 

stress test may help the situation.  However, the European situation remains a tail risk, albeit a 

low probability one.  Conditions have improved recently, as confidence that Europe will muddle 

through has increased.  Credit losses and delinquencies at banks may have peaked, and many 

banks are looking to make loans again, though, from their perspective, the supply of 

creditworthy borrowers appears very limited.  Bank profits have been better recently but could 

well slow and face a number of downside risks, including the effects of the financial reform 

package. 

In the nonfinancial sector, industrial production has continued to expand.  The prospects 

for foreign demand weakened over the intermeeting period because of a weaker Europe and a 

weaker euro, and net exports are not expected to provide much of an impetus to U.S. economic 

growth.  Firms’ investments are focused on replacement and maintenance.  With considerable 

uncertainty, they have limited interest in investing for expansion.  Equipment and software 

investment, though recently strong, seems likely to slow.  Firms are cautious, concerned about 

random refereeing by policymakers, and consequently are focusing on blocking and tackling. 

MR. FISHER.  Nagurski. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Bronko Nagurski makes an appearance in the remarks. 

June 22–23, 2010 119 of 213



 

 

 

Caution is reflected in the large cash hoards held by corporations, which, in turn, are 

being devoted more to dividends and share buybacks than to expansion. 

The Gulf oil spill, which so far has had relatively minor direct economic effects, is also 

weighing on household and business attitudes.  However, several sectors show strength, such as 

manufacturing, including autos and steel, energy, temporary help, transportation, including 

shipping and airline business travel, tourism, and agriculture.  Firms continue to pursue 

productivity gains and cost savings.  Small businesses face credit constraints arising from the 

weaker economy and declines in collateral values, which have the potential to constrain their 

expansion and hiring. 

In the area of fiscal policy, ongoing support from federal stimulus is being partially offset 

by constrained budgets at the state and local level, and fiscal austerity abroad may dampen global 

growth. 

Core inflation has slowed, and overall inflation has also been tame, as the prices of 

globally traded commodities have moderated.  Inflation as measured by median or trimmed mean 

indicators has also slowed.  Inflation expectations appear well anchored, at least for now, 

although that cannot be assumed indefinitely.  Firms have seen reduced cost pressures as slack 

remains high, and, with few exceptions they are not able to pass on cost increases.  Expectations 

about future prices received have generally declined.  The stronger dollar also will have some 

disinflationary effect, and labor cost pressures remain largely absent.  Generally, concerns about 

disinflation, or even deflation, have increased somewhat in the Committee, though medium-term 

risks to inflation remain, depending in part on the nimbleness of monetary policy, fiscal 

developments, and the pace of economic growth. 

June 22–23, 2010 120 of 213



 

 

 

Those are some summary comments.  Any reactions?  [No response.]  Seeing none, let 

me just add a few thoughts on a number of different topics.  I’m going to range a bit more widely 

than usual today. 

On the economy, I agree with the overall tone that we’ve heard around the table.  The 

intermeeting data were somewhat mixed or slightly negative, and combining that with the 

European situation leads to both a somewhat worse modal forecast as well as greater downside 

risks.  Examples of the mixed data include employment, where we saw, on the one hand, low job 

creation and high UI claims, and, on the other hand, increases in hours and labor income.  So the 

general view that the labor market is recovering only very slowly obviously remains intact.  

Some other mixed reports included retail sales, housing starts, and foreign trade.  Each of these 

areas suggests potential problems going forward. 

In the consumption area, despite the retail sales numbers, the data have been reasonably 

strong.  Again, there are some mixed reports.  One interesting development is that there does 

seem to be progress in deleveraging by households.  The flip side of that is that much of this 

deleveraging is occurring through default and delinquency, which is not a good sign for future 

credit availability, though it does free up some income for spending.  One of the major factors 

cited by the staff, of course, is the wealth effect associated with the stock market and housing 

prices.  So I think consumption remains an open question.  It has been fairly strong.  Clearly, 

continued moderate expansion is going to require that consumers remain sufficiently confident. 

I do have a concern that some of the other components of final demand that have recently 

been strong may not remain strong.  I’ll give you three examples.  The first is housing.  Housing 

was a positive support for economic growth in the second quarter, but, with the withdrawal of the 

tax credit, it seems very likely that we are going to see very weak housing results over the next 

June 22–23, 2010 121 of 213



 

 

 

few quarters.  Moreover, a lot of the residential investment we saw in the second quarter was 

either real estate commissions driven by the tax credit, which is not going to be repeated, or 

home improvements, also driven by tax favoritism, which also has been withdrawn.  So I think 

housing is going to continue to be a drag both on real activity and on financial conditions. 

The second is equipment and software investment, which has also been fairly strong 

recently.  Once again, I don’t think it’s going to persist at the recent pace.  There’s too much 

uncertainty.  In addition, a lot of the equipment and software investment has been focused on 

maintenance and replacement, and, clearly, at some point those needs will be met. 

Third, the fiscal components obviously are also going to be a drag on economic growth 

going forward, as federal support is withdrawn, as state and local fiscal conditions continue to be 

constraining, and as global fiscal austerity looms. 

So, to sum up, I think the net effect both of the data and of the European developments, 

as many people have already discussed, is to reduce the mode and to increase the downside risks, 

unfortunately. 

On the inflation front, there has been considerable discussion.  I do think that upside risks 

to inflation are now very, very low.  Certainly, we will always have to keep watching that 

situation, but there seems to be very little momentum in inflation.  I had one small observation.  

In past meetings, we’ve discussed various components of the inflation indexes, understanding, of 

course, that overall inflation is what matters.  But it struck me that the few areas where we were 

actually seeing price increases in the last couple of months were in public services, such as 

public transportation and education, where fiscal problems at the state and local level are causing 

increases in fees.  This is not exactly the inflation that you would normally think of, but that does 

seem to be contributing a bit to the observed data.  Similarly, it’s the way excise taxes affected 

June 22–23, 2010 122 of 213



 

 

 

tobacco prices earlier this year.  So, again, my overall outlook on inflation is I think very 

consistent with what I heard around the table.   

I did want to talk about a couple of other issues.  First, very briefly, I want to say 

something about the labor market and the risk of hysteresis, that is, continued high 

unemployment associated with a permanent increase in the NAIRU, as opposed to a return to the 

NAIRU that existed before the recession.  I think there are a lot of reasons to worry about a very 

slow recovery in the labor market, as many people have discussed.  The sheer depth of the 

recession, obviously, takes us far away from full employment.  Many people have noted the high 

rate of permanent job loss and the reduced reliance on temporary layoffs.  Unemployment 

insurance, while understandable and socially necessary, clearly tends to extend unemployment.  

We have seen the uncertainties and the credit constraints which have led firms to focus on the 

intensive margin of hours and overtime rather than on new hires to meet their labor needs.  

We’ve noted some changes in job-finding rates, as reflected, for example, in the Beveridge 

curve, which has shifted somewhat adversely, as the staff discussed.  There are issues associated 

with immigration, which was also discussed by the staff, related to underwater mortgages and 

perhaps just changes in behavior.  And a number of people have noted that banking crises are 

often associated with very slow recovery.  So I think there are a lot of reasons to be worried 

about a very slow recovery in employment.  That being said, my view at this point—although 

I’m certainly open to new evidence and discussion—is that I am still sympathetic to the staff 

view that the NAIRU—or the natural rate, or however you want to describe it—has probably not 

permanently increased at this point.  There will be a long period of recovery, but I think 

ultimately we will find ourselves back to something closer to the 5 to 5½ percent range. 

June 22–23, 2010 123 of 213



 

 

 

The staff talked about some of the evidence for that yesterday, notably that there doesn’t 

seem to be any greater dispersion geographically or by industry in terms of the flows of 

employees from one sector to another.  The variability of growth across the geographic and 

industrial sectors is not unusual.  And, indeed, if you think about some of the badly hit sectors, 

like construction, clearly they’re well below their long-run sustainable levels, and we would 

expect to see considerable reemployment in those sectors, even if we don’t get back to the levels 

that we had before the crisis.  There are also some demographic factors.  For example, a study 

from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago showed that the duration of unemployment increases 

with the age of the worker; nevertheless, the worker ultimately tends to find work. 

I think the most interesting evidence—and it was not discussed by the staff—about the 

issue has to do with outflow patterns of unemployment, that is, people who move from 

unemployment either out of the labor force altogether or, obviously, into employment.  I would 

recommend to you a paper by Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin—the latter two are from the San 

Francisco and New York Federal Reserve Banks, respectively.  Their paper looked in some 

detail at rates of outflows from unemployment as a function of starting conditions.  They confirm 

that the rate of outflow from unemployment declines with duration; that is, people who are 

unemployed for a long time obviously have a lower probability of leaving unemployment and 

going into employment.  However, that slope is very similar to past recessions, so there doesn’t 

seem to be any structural shift in those reemployment probabilities conditional on the depth of 

the recession and on the extent of the period of unemployment.  I also thought it was particular 

interesting that they showed that the pace at which you leave unemployment does not depend on 

the industry from which you come; that is, unemployed construction workers are finding jobs at 

June 22–23, 2010 124 of 213



 

 

 

the same rate as others in the overall economy, which I think is another piece of evidence against 

this permanent structural mismatch. 

Finally, I’ll mention one other piece of evidence that I found quite interesting.  Although 

monthly outflow rates from unemployment, both at shorter-term and longer-term durations, are 

at record lows for the United States, the monthly outflow rate from unemployment in general is 

currently about triple the outflow rate of what Europe experienced in the 1980s, and, for the 

long-term unemployed, it’s four times the rate in Europe in the 1980s.  So even though it’s very 

slow, it does appear that people are moving back into employment much more quickly than was 

the case in the classic European hysteresis episode of the 1980s. 

I could make other points on this issue, and I think it’s something we need to continue to 

watch.  At this point, though, my own feeling about the labor market is that, while we’re facing 

what could be a very slow and painful recovery, I think there’s reason to hope that at the end of 

this process we’ll be back to something closer to where we were when we began.  Obviously, 

that has implications for our policy discussions, and we can revisit that as we go forward. 

Taking advantage of your patience, I’d like to talk about one other issue, which the Vice 

Chairman raised, namely, the question of the symmetry of more versus less stimulus at this point.  

Now, clearly, we have been focusing over the last year or so on exit.  I think that continues to be 

appropriate.  But you have to concede that, if you look at the projections that we have all put 

together for this meeting, they pretty clearly show that almost everyone thinks that 

unemployment will be above our target and inflation below our target for a number of years.  So 

I think there’s a reasonable question about why we aren’t looking to try to expand from here.  

Why aren’t we trying to become more supportive of the economy rather than less?  Indeed, if 

you look at almost any kind of model-based analysis—take a standard Taylor rule, an optimal 

June 22–23, 2010 125 of 213



 

 

 

control exercise, or a micro-founded model, and I would cite the paper by Justiniano and 

Primiceri from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago—they suggest that our policy right now 

should be a negative nominal interest rate of about 3 or 4 percent.  Former Fed staffer Joe 

Gagnon has also raised these questions; why aren’t we at least symmetrically talking about 

further expansion, why are we still only talking about the exit? 

My own view is that, while further expansion is certainly a possible option and one that 

we need to keep alive, the bar for doing so should be reasonably high.  Let me try to explain why 

I think that’s so.  The point of my raising this is not so much to persuade you about anything in 

particular, but rather to put this on the table, because we haven’t talked about it.  And I would be 

interested in hearing, at this meeting or in subsequent meetings, your views on this issue. 

One line of argument against further expansion is that the output gap might be smaller 

than we think or that we can’t measure the output gap—those are reasonable points based on 

Orphanides’s work, and so on.  But I would note that everyone seems to think that inflation is not 

going to be rising, so implicitly in your forecast is the view—again—that economic growth is not 

in some sense too fast over the next two to three years.  Putting that aside, then we have to ask 

what the effects of additional stimulus would be. In thinking about this issue, it might be useful 

to start with a more familiar type of policy, which is fiscal policy, where we’re seeing the same 

phenomenon. I think we understand fiscal policy better in this particular set of circumstances 

than we do monetary policy.  So the question is:  Why isn’t the United States, for example, 

engaging in another large fiscal stimulus package, as some people would advocate?  Again, 

that’s something that should be open for discussion, but I think an appropriate characterization 

would be that there are unknown benefits and, perhaps, diminishing marginal returns to such an 

action, and there are large and very hard to anticipate risks associated with such an action. 

June 22–23, 2010 126 of 213



 

 

 

Ideally, theoretically, a fiscal expansion would involve a very sharp increase in spending 

today, accompanied by a credible exit and a credible rebalancing of our fiscal position in the 

medium term.  In fact, I have advocated something like that in my testimony, as the approach 

that we should be trying to take.  But I think anybody seriously thinking about this has to 

recognize that that’s very hard to execute, because the increase in spending is today, while the 

decline in spending, or rebalancing of fiscal policy, is a future promise.  So, on the one hand, you 

have a situation in which increased fiscal stimulus may have diminishing marginal returns—for 

example, you may have fewer shovel-ready projects available—but, on the other hand, you have 

quite a bit of uncertainty about what a large program would do to market expectations.  For 

example, would it cause interest rates to jump?  Would it cause inflation expectations to jump?  

Would it lead to financial instability?  I don’t know the answers to those questions, but I think 

that, as we try to balance the costs and benefits of a major fiscal expansion, we have to take into 

account that the risks of doing it are significant, and we don’t have as much information as we 

would like about the implications for markets and expectations of such an action. 

I raise this because the same kind of tradeoff applies to monetary expansion.  Certainly, 

we could go back into large-scale asset purchases and purchase another trillion dollars of assets. 

And I don’t think we should rule that out—I think there are circumstances in which we should 

consider additional expansion of our balance sheet.  But the same kinds of tradeoffs apply at this 

point.  On the benefits side, we already have interest rates extremely low, including longer-term 

interest rates and mortgage rates that are at record lows.  So the question is:  How much 

additional benefit will we get in terms of financial conditions from such a program?  Then, on 

the side of the risks, of course, there’s the risk of a sharp increase in inflation expectations, which 

June 22–23, 2010 127 of 213



 

 

 

could raise nominal interest rates, which could cause capital losses for banks and other holders of 

securities, which could lead to financial instability, etc., etc. 

I’m not raising all of these issues to provide a final conclusion.  I just want to point out 

two things.  One is that the logic of our projections suggests we should at least be keeping on the 

table not just exit but also additional stimulus.  Second is an acknowledgement that there is an 

awful lot of uncertainty associated with either fiscal or monetary stimulus from this point.  We’ll 

need to continue to think about those risks and how we might manage them should we come to 

the point of having to take further steps. 

Again, I thought it was worthwhile to put this on the table, because we haven’t discussed 

it before.  At least some people around the table have raised scenarios in which it might be 

necessary to take further actions, so I would invite research staffs around the System to give this 

issue more thought.  Let me stop there.  It’s past 10:00, which means that I can ask Dave 

Stockton if he’d like to report on the housing data that came out this morning. 

MR. STOCKTON.5  The housing data this morning were rather bleak.  We received the 

report on new home sales, and it looks as if President Rosengren’s turtle not only pulled in its 

head but also fell off the log.  Sales fell about 32 percent to 300,000 units.  We had expected, 

obviously, some decline, because we were anticipating a payback, but not one as steep as this.  I 

think it probably suggests more of what we’d seen earlier this spring:  The strength in sales and 

even the small uptick in starts were probably related to the tax credit.  We had assumed that we 

would be marking down our forecast for sales and starts a bit going forward, taking some signal 

from that. 

The good news, if you can put it that way, is that this sector is small enough now that a 

30 percent decline is not a whole lot of GDP.  In fact, if anything, we’d probably be looking at 

                                                 
5 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 

June 22–23, 2010 128 of 213



 

 

 

less than 0.1 percentage point out of our third quarter forecast from those lower sales, so it isn’t a 

whole lot. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Before we take a break, perhaps Brian 

would go ahead and give us the introduction to the policy go-round. 

MR. MADIGAN.6  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  This package 

includes draft policy statements as they appeared in the Tealbook, the Tealbook table 

that summarizes the alternatives, and draft directives. 

 

 

As Bill English noted yesterday, your projections for this round indicate that you 

generally see the economic expansion as likely to be a bit weaker and inflation a bit 

lower than you anticipated in April, a point reiterated by a number of you in the 

economic go-round.  In these circumstances, you might be inclined to provide more 

monetary accommodation to boost growth, limit the extent to which inflation moves 

further below levels that would be consistent with your dual mandate over the longer 

term, and trim the downside risks to growth and inflation.  Of course, with the federal 

funds rate at zero, the Committee cannot provide further stimulus through 

conventional channels.  However, as in alternative A, page 3, the Committee might 

wish to use the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and policy communications to 

increase stimulus.  Under this alternative, the Committee would use the prepayments 

of principal received on the System Account’s holdings of mortgage-backed 

securities to purchase additional MBS rather than continuing to allow the MBS to run 

off.  This new practice, in combination with the Committee’s current practice of 

rolling over maturing Treasury securities, would keep the System’s holdings of 

Treasuries and MBS essentially flat.  As a consequence, the market would be left 

holding less duration and convexity risk than if the Committee maintained its existing 

MBS policy. 

Market participants appear not to expect any such change in the Committee’s 

portfolio management practices, and thus some immediate decline in longer-term 

interest rates would be likely, as investors took account of the reduction in MBS 

supply to be held by the market.  As drafted, the announcement would not specify 

how long the Committee planned to maintain the new policy under this alternative.  

The final sentence of the announcement would indicate only that “The Committee 

will continue to evaluate its holdings of securities in light of the evolving economic 

outlook and conditions in financial markets and will employ its policy tools as 

necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability.”  Market participants 

would presumably recognize that the new policy would not be maintained 

permanently.  If they judged that it would be in place for about two years, we estimate 

that longer-term yields might fall about 10 basis points immediately, reflecting the 

                                                 
6 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 

June 22–23, 2010 129 of 213



 

 

 

direct effects of the anticipated lower trajectory of market holdings of longer-term 

securities. 

 

 

 

   

 

To reinforce the decline in longer-term rates, under alternative A the Committee 

would also amplify its forward guidance for the federal funds rate.  In the first 

sentence of paragraph 3, the Committee would indicate that it anticipates the 

specified conditions “will,” rather than “are likely to,” warrant exceptionally low 

levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, and it would further state that 

it “expects to maintain the current range for the federal funds rate until resource 

utilization and underlying inflation are clearly moving toward rates consistent with 

the dual mandate.”  This language would likely be interpreted by market participants 

as pointing to a longer period of very low short-term rates, which presumably would 

be reflected in some decline in intermediate- and longer-term interest rates beyond 

that attributable to the change in MBS reinvestment policy. 

As a rationale for this policy choice, paragraph 1 of alternative A would note that 

economic activity has continued to strengthen, but only gradually, and that the labor 

market is improving, but only slowly.  It would note that financial conditions have 

become less supportive of economic growth on balance, and it would also indicate 

explicitly that the near-term growth outlook has weakened somewhat.  Finally, it 

would observe that underlying inflation has trended lower, and that inflation was 

likely to be quite subdued—below mandate-consistent levels—for some time.  It does 

not refer to downside risks to economic growth or inflation. 

The language in alternative B, page 4, is somewhat more upbeat.  Paragraph 1 

would indicate that the labor market is improving gradually.  Like A, it would note 

that financial conditions have become less supportive of economic growth on balance, 

but it would not explicitly state that the growth outlook has weakened.  In the 

inflation paragraph, the Committee would note that prices of energy and other 

commodities have declined somewhat in recent months and that underlying inflation 

has trended lower.  It would reiterate essentially the same outlook for inflation that 

the Committee has put forth since last fall.  The Committee would retain its existing 

forward guidance for the federal funds rate, paragraph 3, and would make no change 

to its portfolio management practices. 

Even though you now see somewhat slower growth and greater downside risks 

than you did in April, you still might not be inclined to change your forward guidance 

or resume securities purchases.  You might believe that the current language suitably 

expresses the conditionality in the Committee’s expectations for the federal funds rate 

and judge that the downward revision in investors’ policy expectations over the 

intermeeting period has appropriately reflected expected changes in the conditioning 

factors.  Indeed, the declines in Treasury rates that have accompanied the lower 

anticipated trajectory for the federal funds rate should cushion the effects on the 

economy of the tightening of financial conditions resulting from lower equity prices 

and higher credit spreads. 

June 22–23, 2010 130 of 213



 

 

 

And you might feel that a resumption of asset purchases is not warranted by 

recent developments.  Even though the growth outlook has softened a little, almost all 

of you still see a gradual strengthening of the economic expansion and do not expect 

significant further disinflation.  Moreover, with mortgage rates already very low and 

housing activity constrained by a range of non-interest-rate factors, you might be 

skeptical that a resumption of MBS purchases would have a significant stimulative 

effect.  And you may be worried about the sorts of uncertainties that the Chairman 

cited—for example, adverse effects on inflation expectations that could be prompted 

by renewed MBS purchases.  Indeed, you may believe that taking additional steps to 

reduce holdings of longer-term securities will be warranted at some point, but believe 

that the downside risks have increased sufficiently of late that the Committee should 

take no action today that would tighten financial conditions.  And you may think, as 

discussed by the Committee yesterday, that it would be appropriate to defer any 

announcement of a possible change in portfolio management practices until this 

possibility has been explained more thoroughly to the public, for example, through 

the Chairman’s upcoming monetary policy testimony.  Such views might incline you 

to issue a statement like that in alternative B at this meeting. 

 

 

 

Investors appear to anticipate a statement along the lines of alternative B, and, 

hence, an announcement of this approach by the Committee seems unlikely to prompt 

much market reaction. 

If you are now convinced that a sustainable economic recovery is under way and 

are especially concerned about the potential adverse effects of sustaining 

extraordinary monetary policy stimulus for much longer, you might believe that the 

Committee should begin moving soon to a less accommodative posture and 

accordingly modify its language now.  Under alternative C, page 5, the Committee 

would revise its forward guidance for the federal funds rate to suggest an earlier-than-

anticipated increase in short-term interest rates.  In particular, the statement would 

indicate that the Committee now anticipates that economic conditions would warrant 

a “low,” rather than “exceptionally low,” target range for the federal funds rate for 

“some time” rather than for “an extended period.”  In the first line of the paragraph, 

the statement would also change “will maintain” to “decided to maintain” to 

underscore that the Committee’s decision to retain the current low target funds rate 

range applied only to this meeting. 

In addition to modifying its language regarding the funds rate, under alternative C 

the Committee would begin to run off its holdings of Treasury securities as they 

mature.  As noted in the memorandum that Brian Sack discussed yesterday, this 

change in portfolio management would reduce the size of the System’s Treasury 

portfolio by nearly $300 billion over the next three years.  Market participants do not 

anticipate that the Committee will begin redeeming Treasury securities anytime soon, 

and an announcement of this decision might raise longer-term Treasury rates by 10 to 

20 basis points, reflecting the higher yields necessary to make investors willing to 

hold a larger stock of long-term assets.  The response might be appreciably larger if 

June 22–23, 2010 131 of 213



 

 

 

market participants were to infer that the FOMC is more inclined to exit from its 

current policy stance than previously anticipated. 

 

 

 

I should note that the language proposed for paragraph 1 of alternative C is 

structured differently from the Committee’s recent statements; among other things, 

the proposed language combines the background on real activity and inflation into 

one paragraph, and it alters the order of the thoughts.  One possible advantage of this 

structure is that it treats economic activity and inflation in a somewhat parallel 

manner by not explicitly discussing the causal factors influencing the outlook for 

each.  Another is that this formulation does not suggest that recent inflation 

developments and the near-term outlook for inflation were part of the motivation for 

the change in forward policy guidance and portfolio management policy under this 

alternative. 

Draft directives for the three alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 9.  In 

addition to language to implement the main policy decisions under each of the 

alternatives, all of the drafts include language that would instruct the Desk to use 

coupon swaps to help settle MBS purchases, as discussed by the Committee 

yesterday, in addition to the dollar roll transactions that the Desk is already using.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Let me call attention to that last point.  

As written, the directive would authorize the Desk to undertake the coupon swaps we discussed 

yesterday, and the current plan would be for those to take place before release of the minutes for 

this meeting.  So it would be treated as a technical change that is announced by the Desk.  An 

alternative would be to ask the Desk to delay until after the minutes are released.  If you have a 

view on that and would like to say something about it, then you can just include that in your 

policy go-round. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Can I ask a technical question about the dollar rolls and the swaps?  

How many other issues are pending in that same category? How big is the backlog, in some 

sense, of this?  Are we going to anticipate having to face this every ten days or every two weeks, 

or— 

MR. SACK.  The main issue is clearly in the 5.5s that we discussed, with the $9 billion of 

unsettled transactions.  I think we will see how things go once we start, but we would anticipate 

June 22–23, 2010 132 of 213



 

 

 

swapping out of those perhaps over a two-month period, so there would be two settlement 

cycles.  In terms of other coupons, there are other unsettled trades, particularly in the 5 percent 

coupons.  At this time, we don’t anticipate having to use coupon swaps to settle those.  As noted 

yesterday, there is still some production in those coupons, and there are other factors that we 

think will keep their supply available.  But we’ll see, and if we do decide that we need to do 

swaps in those other coupons, I would inform the Committee before moving forward with that. 

MR. PLOSSER.  So what’s the size of the 5s? 

MR. SACK.  There’s about $6 billion of unsettled transactions right now. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions for Brian?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  You asked a question, Mr. Chairman, about timing.  I have no problem 

with the coupon swaps.  We are talking about, at least initially, $9 billion out of $1.25 trillion.  

The question of timing, it seems to me, relates to the first two sentences in the directive, because 

it basically says what we’re going to say in our statement.  I would just ask, if we’re going to 

give the Desk a directive—which I support—whether we need to put those first two sentences in 

there.  We’re dealing with a settlement issue.  Do the first two sentences take away or pre-

announce, of course, what we all know we are going to announce, but before we issue the 

statement?  Is it necessary to have those first two sentences in there?  We’re dealing with a 

settlement issue—that’s the point.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we talking about the first two sentences of the 

directive? 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  When is the directive released? 

June 22–23, 2010 133 of 213



 

 

 

MR. MADIGAN.  With the minutes, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. FISHER.  Oh, I’m sorry.  I thought you were asking whether we should issue the 

directive before that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The question is whether the Desk should issue a press 

release explaining the action they’re going to take, not the directive. 

MR. FISHER.  Okay.  I apologize. 

MR. SACK.  And the release wouldn’t list the directive or even refer to the directive, but 

the current directive that the public is aware of doesn’t allow for coupon swaps.  So there is that 

degree of front-running the directive that will come out in the minutes, because it could lead to a 

question. 

MR. FISHER.  Obviously, the purpose is to accomplish what we want to accomplish 

without any implications about the change of policy.  This is to accomplish a specific objective.  

I misunderstood your point, Mr. Chairman.  I apologize. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No problem.  Further questions for Brian?  Anyone?  [No 

response.]  Okay.  If not, since it is 10:30, let’s take a break for 20 minutes, and we’ll come back 

and do the policy go-round.  Thank you. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence, and we’ll begin with the policy go-

round.  President Rosengren, you’re first on the list. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The Tealbook 

has a higher unemployment rate at the end of 2010 and 2011 than at our previous meeting.  It 

also has a lower core inflation rate at the end of 2010 and 2011 than at our previous meeting.  

This forecast is very limited improvement in the very large miss on our unemployment mandate, 

June 22–23, 2010 134 of 213



 

 

 

and we move further away from reaching a goal of 2 percent inflation.  My own forecast has 

moved in the same direction.  As a result, I view any tightening through language or asset sales 

as moving in the wrong direction.  Like the staff, I do not see much likelihood that we should 

tighten policy in 2010 or 2011. 

I would note that key phrases in alternative A provide a description of the outlook and its 

relation to our goals that seems better aligned with the staff forecast and with my own outlook.  

In particular, alternative A highlights the fact that the outlook has weakened somewhat, and 

emphasizes that inflation is likely to remain below, and maybe well below, rates consistent with 

our dual mandate.  Should we experience further weakness and disinflation, we may want to 

move to language closer to that expressed in alternative A at future meetings.  In fact, I am 

concerned that we should be doing more contingency planning with a possibility that deflation or 

financial contagion from Europe could move from the risk to the outcome column.  While we 

were quite innovative during the financial crisis, should these risks become a reality, our 

creativity may once again be tested.  In terms of the coupon swaps, I view it as a technical 

matter.  As a result, I think making an announcement of a technical matter is fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B and approval of the 

coupon swap as proposed by the staff.  The economy is operating far below maximum 

sustainable employment, and inflation is undesirably low—conditions that are likely to persist 

for several years.  Indeed, the outlook has deteriorated since our April meeting, and the time for 

policy tightening has, if anything, moved further off.  At this point, I see the risks associated with 

tightening policy prematurely as extremely high, owing to the zero bound on interest rates and 

the fact that inflation is already so low.  This is not merely a theoretical point.  As highlighted by 

June 22–23, 2010 135 of 213



 

 

 

the Board staff analysis, the fallout from Europe poses significant risk for the U.S. economy, and 

we need monetary policy to be as well-positioned as possible if this or other major downside 

risks materialize.  I strongly support maintaining the “extended period” language.  It continues to 

serve us well in shaping market expectations of future policy, especially as market participants 

have consistently demonstrated that they understand its conditionality. 

A case can be made for further accommodation as in A, but I would not argue for it now.  

I agree that we should think carefully, though, about what we will do if the outlook deteriorates.  

That said, I agree with you that the bar for further steps should be reasonably high.  We must be 

attentive, too, to the possibility that an extended period of near-zero rates could lead to the 

emergence of dangerous financial imbalances.  It remains to my mind unclear just how important 

low short-term rates, as opposed to other factors, were in sowing the seeds of the financial crisis; 

but recognizing and evaluating financial risks and vulnerabilities should be at the center of our 

efforts to ramp up macro prudential surveillance.  So far, as the financial stability staff memos 

document, there are no signs of such excessive leverage or speculation.  In fact, over the 

intermeeting period, the appetite for risk has retreated in reaction to events in Europe.  So this 

leaves me comfortable with our current policy stance and alternative B.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At this meeting, I’m willing to support 

alternative B.  The modest increase in downside risk since the last meeting makes this an 

inopportune time to make any significant adjustments in our policy rate or our language.  I 

continue to believe we’re going to need to tighten earlier than the Tealbook assumes.  I think the 

likely modal outcome is that these downside risks will dissipate, and the economy will proceed 

June 22–23, 2010 136 of 213



 

 

 

to recover, and we’ll get to a point months down the road where the economy looks about the 

way that we forecasted it would back in March. 

I continue to believe that normalizing our balance sheet is an independent policy 

imperative that we should be discussing, and I don’t think it needs to wait until we raise rates.  

As I said yesterday, I think the composition and size of our balance sheet are two different 

things—there’s no reason we can’t vary them independently.  I don’t think we’ve given that 

option enough attention in our discussion, so I support President Hoenig’s letter urging more 

discussion and analysis of scenarios involving asset sales.  Everything the staff has presented to 

us, as I said yesterday, involving asset sales involved a concomitant variation in the size of our 

balance sheet. 

There was some discussion yesterday about the effect of reserves, rather than our assets, 

on the economy.  I don’t see, from observations on what we’ve done so far, how you disentangle 

the effect of our asset purchases from the effect of the reserves we have put in the economy.  If 

there’s a way to identify it, I’d be really interested in seeing it, but I certainly haven’t seen it in 

any staff analysis.  The general presumption is that there are general equilibrium effects running 

around. 

I’ll point out—and I sort of made this pitch before—that, to the extent that some theories 

about the effects of our asset purchases rely on market segmentation, that’s something that, in 

principle, is amenable to direct observation and verification:  We should be able to document that 

these institutions face this impediment from participating in that market as opposed to this 

market.  Surely the facts about that are out there, and relying on indirect econometric evidence 

alone seems weak to me.  This is just by way of a suggestion for future staff research. 

June 22–23, 2010 137 of 213



 

 

 

I was questioned as to the benefits of reducing our mortgage-backed security holdings 

rapidly.  I’ve admitted before that, for me, the benefit is chiefly in the nature of political 

economy.  If there are some political economy considerations on the other side that would make 

us resist moving to all Treasuries in an expeditious way, I’d be interested in hearing about them.  

But I don’t know of any. 

Again, I support further study of asset sales and a program as suggested by President 

Hoenig.  I don’t see why, if we adopt a program like that, we can’t independently vary our 

Treasury holdings in the natural way, either to maintain the current size of the reserve balances 

in the system and our assets or to have them trace out a path higher than they would trace out if 

we just sold the assets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’d just make the observation, without knowing exactly 

which way it cuts, that conversations with foreign holders of U.S. securities suggest that for 

some reason, which I don’t understand, they believe Treasury purchases to be much more 

inflationary than MBS purchases.  I understand there’s no theoretical basis for this distinction, 

but somehow it’s a very strongly held view—just for what it’s worth.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I agree with 

some of the suggestions around the table that we need to be thinking about contingency planning 

of various kinds.  On the one hand, things could surely go better than we are currently expecting, 

and we have to have a strategy in place not just about what we’re going to do, but also about how 

we plan to communicate what we’re going to do.  For example, the Chairman suggested 

yesterday we might start talking about doing sales in six months, with an interest rate hike 

somewhere in between—that might be one possibility.  But I think we have to be formulating 

June 22–23, 2010 138 of 213



 

 

 

plans now for these contingencies, because it could well be that in six months or nine months 

we’ll be surprised on the upside and have to think that through. 

At the same time, I think we have to be thinking about what we would do in response to 

adverse shocks, as President Yellen and President Rosengren have suggested.  Should we go out 

and buy more assets?  My guess is that that’s not going to be the best thing to do right now.  I 

think this was an effective strategy in late 2008 and early 2009, because markets were much 

more dysfunctional than they are now.  When markets are functioning well, you don’t have the 

kind of segmentation necessary for a change in the composition of assets to have huge effects on 

market prices.  And you’re not going to be able to have a huge stimulus effect as a result.  I think 

the correct thing—although we have to think more about this—would be to try to commit as 

much as possible to language like the “extended period” language.  For example, the proposal in 

alternative A says “will” instead of “likely” to warrant, which basically commits us to being 

slower to tighten—in other words, our best response to adverse shocks would be trying to stretch 

out the zero as long as we can. 

A much more difficult problem, is the situation where deflationary expectations start to 

become hardened—a deflationary trap— as I discussed in the economic go-around.  My own 

assessment of the literature and my own thinking about this lead me to believe that we, the 

monetary policymakers, have very limited tools at our disposal in this situation.  I think it would 

be great to have staff research on this, because it’s a very challenging problem.  Without a lot of 

monetary policy tools at our disposal, we would have to hope for a sufficient degree of fiscal 

irresponsibility from the Congress [laughter].  The Japanese have tried the fiscal approach, and it 

has not been successful for them.  So I think it would be a very challenging problem if we got to 

that stage.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

June 22–23, 2010 139 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I was thinking about your thoughtful summary, 

particularly the last part of your statement.  Don had scared me a little bit with his intervention, 

and I think you summarized it all very, very well.  I would like to just make some general points. 

I think we have to be very careful with our franchise.  We have comported ourselves 

well.  We instituted liquidity measures that frightened some people and led to assumptions about 

what we were likely to do, possibly leading the nation to ruin.  We executed them well, and then 

we unwound them.  I can’t think of many government institutions that do that.  In fact, I can 

think of none, but there may be cases in history.  The point is that I believe we are a very 

credible institution.  We are primus inter pares among central banks.  That is befitting for a great 

economy and for a great society.  And I think we have to be extremely careful at this juncture, 

indicating changes of purposeful direction. 

You know that I like to think in terms of decision trees.  I think it is absolutely 

appropriate for us to think of different conditions that might obtain.  But I think we have to be 

very careful how we signal that, having earned the respect of the marketplace and of other 

leaders elsewhere, because they are way behind us, and many are seeking to emulate what we do 

as they transform themselves, as in the case of the ECB.  So, as my colleague from Minnesota 

expressed well, I wouldn’t rule out either scenario. 

I would remind myself that we are correcting from a very traumatic period.  It takes a 

long time to recover from trauma, and it is being done in the context of globalization, a rapid 

ascent up Moore’s curve, and several other things that are impacting a significant part of our dual 

mandate.  Inflation doesn’t seem to be the issue currently—we all acknowledge that.  And, in 

fact, there are downside risks.  But there may be limits to what we can actually do about 

June 22–23, 2010 140 of 213



 

 

 

unemployment.  For example, I think unemployment is a function of many things.  It’s a 

correction from excess; when you’re fat and happy, you make mistake—employers did that 

under the Great Moderation.  It’s a reflection of enhanced ability to ride Moore’s curve to greater 

productivity, having fewer people perform more functions.  It’s a function of education.  It’s a 

function of choice, and by that I mean that if you’re not happy with the random refereeing here, 

you go to where there’s more stability.  There are other mentions of companies that seek to 

increase their cap-ex elsewhere rather than here.  Here is the point:  We have to be very careful 

that we don’t promise something we cannot deliver.  It’s not clear to me that expanding our 

balance sheet will have an impact on the employment side of our dual mandate.  So I think we 

have to be very careful about what we promise.  Having said all of that, I think you’re right that 

we have to consider the options and draw out the decision tree. 

I do want to comment on the asset part of the portfolio.  When we started, if my 

calculations are correct, the duration of our portfolio before the crisis was 2.6 years, and 

35 percent of our portfolio was in bills.  Even after adopting the option we seem to be gravitating 

towards, option 2, the duration of our portfolio will be 3.9 years, and the holding of our bills will 

be 9 percent, up from 2 percent.  So we are far away from the norm, and I think we need to bear 

that in mind.  You make a good point on Treasuries, because this is a message all of us are 

receiving whenever we’ve gone to see the Chinese and others.  But we do need to remember that 

our holding of mortgage-backed securities is an unnatural act, and it’s something we did to 

remedy a market dysfunction.  I still wouldn’t rule out taking advantage of the fact that this 

market is priced very handsomely, and we might be able to take advantage of that in order to get 

out of that unnatural holding that’s in our portfolio.  So I want to underscore parts of what 

Presidents Lacker and Hoenig have said. 

June 22–23, 2010 141 of 213



 

 

 

Against that background of remembering that we have hard-earned credibility and, at the 

same time, that we’re in a very difficult period of uncertainty, I would be supportive of 

alternative B.  The one thing I notice missing in the draft statement is the reference—and I don’t 

know how we do this and whether we should do this—to the random refereeing, that is, the 

reason that investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak and that employers 

remain reluctant to “add to payrolls” is in part uncertainty about tax and regulatory requirements.  

That was referred to by the Vice Chairman, by Governor Duke, and by several others that talked 

about what they are hearing anecdotally from companies and employers.  So I would prefer to 

add that in there, unless it crosses the line into politics.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m in favor of alternative B.  I don’t think 

we’re any closer to tightening than we were two months ago.  The downward revision to the 

outlook has pushed our tightening off by at least a couple months, so I think the “extended 

period” is still appropriate, and I fear the “extended period” is going to be appropriate for an 

extended period.  As I noted at the end of my previous presentation, the path for the outlook is 

really unsatisfactory, and if the nominal funds rate were above zero, I would be advocating that 

we reduce it.  President Fisher, I think you’re right that a lot of the problems in the labor market 

are structural, such as education, etc., but there is a demand deficiency that has produced a 

substantial proportion of that unemployment, though by no means all of it.  And I think that, 

consistent with our dual mandate and without sacrificing the price stability goal at all, if we 

could make demand stronger, we would be fulfilling our responsibilities under the law.  But I 

agree—now that we’re at zero, it’s difficult. 

June 22–23, 2010 142 of 213



 

 

 

The hurdle for doing something extra is higher than the hurdle for just reducing the funds 

rate, given the uncertainties and the possibilities of adverse feedbacks.  I completely support your 

suggestion, Mr. Chairman, that we should be looking at that contingency and the various things 

we might do if circumstances suggest that more stimulus, greater impetus to demand, from the 

monetary authority is required.  Along those lines, President Kocherlakota talked about forward 

guidance.  That was on my list, too.  For example, are there things we could say that would 

change market expectations about when we will tighten that would lower long-term interest 

rates?  The Vice Chairman talked about not reducing our portfolio of MBS any more—that 

would be one thing.  Getting back into buying assets would be something else, although it has 

the negatives that you talked about.  And one instrument no one has talked about is the interest 

on excess reserves.  It’s not totally clear to me, if the situation were weakening, why that should 

be 25 basis points.  I think we put it there because we were worried about things like the money 

market funds and market functioning of one sort or another.  But, if we get to the point where we 

think easing is necessary, then I would reduce that all the way to zero.  I don’t see why not—

Brian Sack might have a reason why not, but right now I don’t see it.  I think it would be a 

powerful signal of the Committee’s intentions and of our concern, so I would add that to the list 

that everyone has put forward of the contingency plans we ought to look at.  

The fact that we’re having this conversation just reinforces my predilection, as I said 

yesterday, not to announce or do anything with sales or redemptions that could actually be a 

tightening or even be perceived as a tightening.  This is not the right time to do that.  And I’m 

not quite there, President Lacker, regarding separating totally the level of our portfolio from the 

composition of our portfolio.  I think the composition of the portfolio had a lot to do with the 

effects we did have on the market, and I’m not sure we could change that composition without 

June 22–23, 2010 143 of 213



 

 

 

having some tightening effect.  It would depend on the type of changes we’re talking about.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with some 

modifications.  Just as a general comment, this statement doesn’t mention the quantitative easing 

program.  I don’t think it’s wise not to mention the program in some capacity—I don’t have 

language to do this—because we’re thinking that we might have to adjust the program one way 

or another in the future.  If we leave it out, then it looks as if the program isn’t a tool.  You 

wouldn’t leave the interest rate out of the statement, so why would you leave the quantitative 

easing program out? 

In paragraph 2, we use the phrase “substantial resource slack.”  As I’ve said before, I 

think this puts too much emphasis on this factor.  My reading of the literature is that the 

empirical evidence is very mixed on this question.  The relationship between inflation and slack 

is tenuous at best.  Elevating this to a key policymaking pillar, which is what we’re doing by 

continually putting it in the statement, is a misrepresentation of what we know.  Slack can 

certainly be a factor, but there are many factors in a large economy that affect inflation.  

Overemphasis on this factor did not serve the Committee well in the 1970s or in the 1990s, and I 

think it may not help this time either.  The U.K. is a current example of a country with 

substantial slack by conventional measures, but which, nevertheless, has inflation above desired 

levels.  So I’m just reiterating that I’d prefer not to put so much emphasis on this in our 

statements. 

I have one broader comment.  As we’ve been saying, the European sovereign debt crisis 

is one of the most serious threats to global recovery since the fall of 2008.  I was somewhat 

June 22–23, 2010 144 of 213



 

 

 

alarmed to see that the adjustment of the date of tightening in terms of the interest rate on excess 

reserves in Tealbook B moved to 2013.  That sounds way too long to me and creates a 

substantial risk that we’ll follow Japan, and possibly Europe, into a very long, near-zero interest 

rate era. 

If we think that the outlook has actually weakened that much—I’m not sure I do—then 

we should think about and analyze actions we can take through our quantitative easing program.  

So I agree with President Dudley and others on this dimension.  If we do have to take further 

action, I would prefer not to go the MBS route, which I think we’ve exhausted at this point.  We 

can buy additional Treasuries.  I’m fairly convinced that that would increase inflation 

expectations and put upward pressure on inflation, if the concern is that inflation is below target, 

and it also would be stimulative for the real economy.  I don’t think we should take that action 

today, but if we were to see an additional adverse shock in the future, then, we should have a 

method of addressing it other than indefinite delay of the date of IOER rate increases. 

And I for one question the effectiveness of further delays in the increase in the interest 

rate on excess reserves in stimulating real activity and in keeping inflation near target.  In 

models, that kind of thing works well, and it has, obviously, been recommended from the New 

Keynesian literature, namely, that policymakers should promise to stay at zero for a longer time.  

But I’d question whether markets understand it that way and whether it’s having any impact at 

all on real activity.  I am doubtful that, in the event of further adverse shocks, stretching out the 

time before rates are increased will have any effect.  Quantitative easing, on the other hand, at 

least according to our staff analysis so far, does have an impact, so we should use that in a state-

contingent way, either on the upside or the downside, as shocks come into the economy. 

June 22–23, 2010 145 of 213



 

 

 

Let me just elaborate a bit further on this.  In the New Keynesian model of Mike 

Woodford and others, which is the leading theory in this area, it is very important to take action 

continually in response to shocks that hit the economy.  The worst policy in that analysis, if you 

believe it—and there are a lot of assumptions—is the “no response” policy, no reaction to 

shocks.  In the model, that’s the interest rate peg policy—policymakers just leave the interest rate 

at some level, and, as shocks come into the economy, they don’t react; it’s a passive policy. 

Why is it the worst policy, according to the model?  Because it’s the one that allows 

multiple equilibria, which means that many possible sets of prices and expectations can clear 

markets.  So you get this “anything can happen” result in the model if you follow this passive 

policy and you don’t react to the shocks.  To me, staying at zero for such a long time sounds a lot 

like the passive policy, where you do not react to shocks at all.  And if you’re also going to put 

quantitative easing on hold, then you would really not be reacting as shocks come into the 

economy.  People in policy circles have talked about this, namely, that such a passive policy 

somehow has been generating the kinds of bubbles that we’ve observed in the 1990s, and 

especially in this decade.  To avoid that outcome, the recommendation would be to maintain an 

active policy through the quantitative easing program and to react in a state-contingent way to 

the shocks that come into the economy. 

I have one final comment on a separate issue.  The Chairman pointed out that, in our 

forecasts, everyone expects inflation to be low and unemployment to be high for the foreseeable 

future.  I will just point out that those forecasts are done under an assumption of appropriate 

policy.  I always feel constrained not to say that I think inflation is going to be very high in the 

future, because I’m supposed to be making a forecast under the appropriate policy, and I think 

under the appropriate policy we should be able to hit whatever our inflation target is in the 

June 22–23, 2010 146 of 213



 

 

 

medium term.  I don’t want to turn in a forecast that’s going to betray a lack of confidence in the 

rest of the Committee to follow the appropriate policy that’s going to help us hit inflation.  So 

I’m not sure you can read off the forecasts that that there aren’t a lot of worries around the table 

about what inflation is going to be in the future.  But I think everyone is saying that if you follow 

their policy or you follow the appropriate policy, you’ll get the inflation outcome that they want 

in the medium term.  That’s the last point.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s interesting that we’re ending about a 

year’s worth of economic growth.  The recovery, of course, has gone through various phases, as 

President Fisher and others have noted, and the data have been mixed throughout.  Accordingly 

there has always been a degree of uncertainty with us.  I’ve been at this table many times in the 

past where uncertainty has caused us to wait.  Waiting is always attractive—certainly, I’m 

attracted to it, as well.  I recall discussions earlier in this last decade about concerns of deflation, 

uncertainties regarding world events, just as we’re discussing here.  There’s always a good 

reason, and I don’t dispute that.  I, too, worry about employment.  Jobless recoveries seem to be 

becoming the norm, and the adjustments seem harsher.  But my bottom line is that our dual 

mandate is a long-run mandate, and we need to go oh so carefully now to become less 

accommodative, because otherwise we may face the risk of adverse long-term consequences. 

My view is that the situation we’re coming out of was, in part at least and perhaps 

significantly, related to a period in which we kept rates very low in this world of uncertainty.  So, 

what is it we have here?  We have an outlook.  There are tail risks; I recognize that.  And we tend 

to focus on those tail risks—they scare us to death, but that’s what we tend to do.  However, the 

economy is growing, and the outlook suggests further growth.  That’s what we’ve all said—not 

June 22–23, 2010 147 of 213



 

 

 

robust economic growth, but further growth.  Inflation is modest, but our actions have effects on 

resource flows as well, imbalances, and long-term stability, some of which President Bullard 

referred to.  Europe is a concern, and we need to keep our eye on it and be prepared to act, of 

course.  But it should not drive our decisions today.  Asia is actually stronger and is a positive 

factor that we ought to take into consideration. 

So I think it’s very important that we take this “extended period” language out, that we 

open up the possibility of selling assets as the economy evolves.  Taking the language out 

doesn’t mean we increase the funds rate.  I know it may have an implied tightening effect, but I 

think, with the right explanation, that opening up our options is something we have to think 

about very carefully.  As I said at the last meeting, we ought to begin to talk about a strategy 

going forward.  Yes, that would take away this very significant accommodation.  I believe there 

are consequences to maintaining the accommodating, and that’s my major concern.  Thank you 

very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the policy of alternative B and 

most of the language.  I do want to point out a slight concern—it may not amount to much.  In 

the first paragraph of alternative B, it reads that, “Economic activity has continued to 

strengthen,” and I wonder whether there will be some inconsistency in the interpretation of the 

minutes with that word “strengthen.”  One slight change could be to say that “the economic 

recovery continues to proceed,” which avoids the risk that people will think there was an 

inconsistency between the statement and the minutes.  I think it’s particularly important at this 

juncture that the statement and the minutes align well, because the market is, in all likelihood, 

June 22–23, 2010 148 of 213



 

 

 

going to react to the minutes.  The results of the forecast, as well as the tone of the meeting, 

could evoke quite a response, and it’s important that we make sure there’s consistency. 

I favor the approval of the coupon swaps and the inclusion of it in the directive as 

proposed. 

And, finally, I’d propose that we delay the statement by half an hour and cite the World 

Cup as our excuse.   I think this will add to the prestige of the Fed [laughter] and will, on a global 

basis, add to the credibility of our institution and have very positive effects on the efficacy of 

monetary policy going forward.  Let the transcript read that I’m kidding.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for that clarification.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite the talk around the table, I think the 

modal forecast for most of us is that a sustained, modest recovery is continuing, although the 

forecasts have been tempered ever so slightly—not substantially at this point.  There clearly are 

upside and downside risks to that forecast.  In my own case, as I mentioned yesterday, at the last 

meeting I did see the risks tilted to the upside, because I felt that the recovery was proceeding 

and because historical correlations suggested that it ought to be stronger than we were seeing.  I 

now treat them as balanced, so I changed the balance of risks.  But I don’t think that’s a cause for 

changing policy at this point. 

I’m actually quite worried.  Several others have touched on this, and President Lockhart 

just alluded to this—part of our job is thinking about the what-ifs.  What-ifs can almost paralyze 

you in making policy decisions.  I think we have to be very careful to resist allowing that 

paralysis to set in.  Given the nature of the discussion around the table, I’m also somewhat 

concerned that the minutes not show a terribly bleak picture.  Considering that we haven’t 

June 22–23, 2010 149 of 213



 

 

 

changed our forecast that much, painting a bleak picture of the uncertainty and risks around 

Europe and the euro zone could actually be detrimental to our cause and create uncertainty and a 

lack of confidence in the economy as a whole.  So I think we have to be careful not to talk only 

about the downside risks and the problems that might happen, but rather to focus on what our 

forecasts in fact do say.  And, speaking of forecasts, I’d like to reinforce President Bullard’s 

point about appropriate monetary policy under the assumptions.  Certainly, in my own forecast, 

while I have inflation contained, I probably have a very different forecast of the underlying 

interest rate and appropriate policy than many others might have around the table.  So I think we 

need to be careful about that. 

I also share President Lacker’s view about the composition of our balance sheet—I think 

our MBS holdings present important political risks to us going forward.  I think the longer we 

maintain large holdings of those, the more we reinforce the expectation that that’s the 

appropriate role of monetary policy, and we’ll be subject to pressure on that going forward.  We 

bought those—as has been emphasized several times, and President Kocherlakota has made this 

point—at a time when markets were in fact dysfunctional.  And while there might have been a 

good reason for doing it at that time, I think it’s less clear that that’s necessary in the current 

environment.   

Yesterday we discussed option 2 for redeeming Treasuries and moving to a shorter-term 

duration of our Treasury portfolio, even though we may be maintaining the size of our balance 

sheet.  I think that it’s important for us to continue that discussion and that it will be helpful for 

you to lay the groundwork in your July testimony for the beginning of that message.  So I would 

encourage us to continue to pursue that.  I think we have some real challenges ahead of us, but I 

just want to emphasize that, despite the risks, our forecast is still in place.  And we need to 

June 22–23, 2010 150 of 213



 

 

 

continue our planning about how we will unwind ourselves from still extraordinary policy 

accommodation. 

I think we have to be very careful not to fool ourselves into a false sense of precision 

about the magnitude of actions that we take.  Our ability to predict the effect on aggregate 

demand, or unemployment rates, from a move of 10 or 20 basis points, in reaction to either an 

asset sale or a decision on our part, is remarkably imprecise and completely unknown.  After all, 

the 10-year Treasury note has fallen almost 50 basis points in the last two months, with no action 

on our part.  Given that we have so little ability to predict these effects, I think we shouldn’t tie 

our hands, worrying excessively about those sorts of moves.  I think President Hoenig was 

correct that we need to keep our focus on the long-term consequences of our actions.  And while 

the short term is surely important, again, we must not sacrifice the long term for the short term.  

That’s what central banks are for and what monetary policy ought to be focused on. 

I can live with alternative B at this point.  I do have one observation about the language, 

and that’s in paragraph 2.  I share President Bullard’s concern about using slack as the primary 

variable that policymakers look at.  I’ve talked about that for at least two years now, so I won’t 

mention it any more.  But I would say I’m puzzled by the insertion of the first sentence in 

paragraph 2 about energy prices.  I don’t know why we want to bring that into this discussion.  

I’d be perfectly happy just to leave the statement as it was last time.  Our ability to pick and 

choose certain relative prices over others to throw into the statement, to try to explain what’s 

going on, seems to me not very productive.  So I would just as soon get rid of that first sentence 

and leave it as it was before.  And that’s my only suggestion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

June 22–23, 2010 151 of 213



 

 

 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with alternative B, and I am fine with 

the coupon swaps.  I’d like to agree with President Bullard—I think that he has a good point on 

including the size of our balance sheet as a tool of monetary policy in paragraph 3.  It does seem 

that we’ve spent a lot of time talking about a second tool of policy aimed at term premiums, and 

language indicating that the Committee has injected a large amount of liquidity through LSAPs 

and will maintain our target rate for the federal funds rate would be accurate in describing what 

our tools are.  It may be difficult to do, though. 

Given our collective outlook and policy objectives, I continue to believe that substantial 

monetary policy accommodation will be appropriate for a good while, so I agree with the 

“extended period” language.  I take this stance, however, mindful of the many policy risks that 

we face.  In particular, although I put little weight on some issues at the moment, it does seem 

that it would be proper due diligence to consider some criticisms about earlier periods of highly 

accommodative policy and ask if we’re sufficiently insulated from adverse outcomes this time 

around.  Specifically, I’m thinking about John Taylor’s arguments that policy remained too 

accommodative during the 2003–2006 period, which contributed to financial markets’ failing to 

price risks adequately.  Are these same risks relevant today?  What actions would best safeguard 

against them? 

Although our forecasts are underrunning our objectives, as you mentioned, Mr. 

Chairman—and as did many others—it seems natural to me that many are uncomfortable with 

our now 18-month-old policy of a zero federal funds rate and a pretty large balance sheet.  As 

President Hoenig mentioned, the recovery is on, economic growth is okay, though it’s not robust, 

and zero seems like a very low interest rate for us to be targeting.  But there is a bit of déjà vu of 

the earlier period right now.  We again have large-scale joblessness, and maybe some further job 

June 22–23, 2010 152 of 213



 

 

 

losses coming—who knows?—even though economic growth has picked up.  Indeed, one reply 

to Taylor’s 2003 criticisms is that policy at that time does not look as accommodative if one 

focuses on Taylor rules that use labor data, like the unemployment rate, instead of output gap 

data, which he has emphasized. 

How about today?  Well, in the Tealbook, the labor-market-based optimal control rules 

may have the funds rate negative until 2013, so the labor market is contributing to that.  And it’s 

possible, as others have mentioned, that there are structural elements to the high unemployment 

rate now and the labor market difficulties.  But even abstracting from that, looking at the output-

based Taylor rules, they point to continued very low, zero funds rates for an extended period, 

into 2012.  And, as I’ve mentioned at other times, there are many other indicators of resource 

slack.  So the downtrend in the inflation numbers is not consistent, in my mind, with us having 

experienced a large drop in potential output.  Slack in labor and product markets currently is 

sufficient to outweigh the anchor of inflation expectations at the moment. 

My point simply is this:  The projected output and inflation paths corroborate the labor 

market justification for our policy stance, in my opinion.  And it’s hard to see the same forces 

building that John Taylor spoke of in that earlier period, 2003–2006.  So I think that 

accommodation is a robustly appropriate policy at the moment. 

I certainly agree with your observations, Mr. Chairman, that our policy choices should be 

symmetric with regard to our dual mandate goals.  I’ve said before, as Governor Kohn 

mentioned, that I would prefer a policy with an even lower interest rate, if that were possible—

it’s not.  And I do worry about the argument concerning diminishing returns for some of our 

policy actions.  I think that if we considered more large-scale asset purchases, we ought to talk 

June 22–23, 2010 153 of 213



 

 

 

about that issue.  For example, would we be stimulating certain sectors of the economy, which 

already are struggling, like housing?  How would we deal with that?  

Finally, I think the forward-looking language falls into this category, too.  There’s only 

so much we could get out of extending the “extended period” language.  In theory, yes, but, in 

practice, I’m doubtful—I agree with President Bullard’s comments in that regard.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think the 

uncertainties are too great to adjust our policy in either direction at this meeting.  The economy is 

recovering gradually, but the European debt crisis and the resulting lower appetite for risk in 

financial markets are risks to the recovery.  The inflation data continue to show a broad 

disinflationary pattern, and compensation data have been weak, and have led to yet another 

round of lower inflation projections. 

My baseline outlook is still consistent with alternative B, but, in my view, the risks for 

both inflation and output are weighted to the downside.  I do think that these downside risks 

warrant discussion of actions we could take in the event of an adverse shock.  While I’m still 

satisfied with the state of our exit strategy discussion, I do think we should devote some time to 

talk about policy alternatives that we have if the downside risks materialize.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the current situation, I support 

alternative B and the coupon swap as requested by Brian and the Desk. 

June 22–23, 2010 154 of 213



 

 

 

In terms of the statement itself, I think paragraph 1 will sound to markets a little stronger 

than expectations—not a lot, but a little.  There’s some language in it that makes me feel a little 

uncomfortable.  Describing the E&S spending as appearing to rise at a robust pace sounds a little 

ahead of where our discussion has been.  But I don’t want to micromanage the statement. 

In terms of the other policy considerations, building on what you said, Mr. Chairman, 

about diminishing returns of the QE regime, I would say we are past the point of diminishing 

returns.  The judgments we made on the size of our asset purchases were made amid a ton of 

uncertainty.  I don’t think any of us knew with precision what that optimal point was.  Looking 

back, it appears to me as though we went past the point where we were getting net benefits.  That 

judgment, and the different judgments we have on that question, should inform our moves in 

either direction for policy going forward, whether there’s more that should be done through the 

balance sheet or whether there should be a period of what I describe as opportunistic divestment 

of some of our MBS holdings, perhaps akin to opportunistic disinflation from central bank 

meetings of the past. 

In order to have that discussion, though, about trying to find what the equilibrium level of 

our balance sheet is, it strikes me that the most important discussion, both for us and for the 

public to understand, is that we have multiple tools, not one.  I continue to believe that, if we 

were to announce at this moment that we were shrinking our balance sheet, it would likely bring 

forward expectations of a policy shift, because the public thinks that the size of the balance sheet 

is directly linked to policy rates.  I don’t think that’s a proper understanding, so my policy 

predilection would be to try to describe as clearly as we can that we have multiple policy tools, 

and, consistent with the minutes from last time and your discussion, Mr. Chairman, it is still the 

case, I think, for most around the table that the policy rate is the predominant tool. 

June 22–23, 2010 155 of 213



 

 

 

But there are other tools that might move, and we could imagine circumstances where the 

size and composition of the balance sheet might move in ways that doesn’t or ought not bring the 

policy rate expectations forward or back.  So I’ll say just a word on each of the three policies—

size, composition, and policy rate—from my own perspective. 

In terms of size, as you said, Mr. Chairman, it’s hard to know what we’d buy if we 

wanted to expand the balance sheet, and what benefits we would get.  In terms of composition, I 

think that if we were to make a decision to buy Treasuries under an LSAP program, the 

consequences for our credibility, given the current fiscal question, would be very significant, so I 

would be quite allergic to that, given what we know now.  Finally, on the policy rate, I hope and 

expect that the Tealbook is wrong, that is, I hope that policy moves with greater force and greater 

speed than anticipated in the Tealbook.  But, again, given my own sense of when it’s going to 

move, and given the market’s reaction and understanding of what “extended period” means, 

“extended period” is fine in the statement as written. 

Just a final point:  I’ll join many of my colleagues in saying that the work done by staff in 

preparation for this meeting was really helpful, really extraordinary.  But I would also say that 

the staff work is a shared burden for all of us and for all of our staffs.  And I think there is 

incredible talent around the System, and it is very well funded.  So, as we think about new 

projects, I think that our staff here will continue to be doing a ton of work to prepare for these 

meetings, but I don’t think the burden should rest totally with them.  And I’d encourage my 

colleagues to think about work that can be done to inform your own thinking and the broader 

thinking by your own teams.  Thank you. 

 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

June 22–23, 2010 156 of 213



 

 

 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B and the coupon swap.  I’d 

still like to see us normalize our balance sheet, including the duration of the Treasury portfolio, 

but I recognize that this is not the time to do so, and I’m cautioned by the potential that our next 

move would be further accommodation. I’m actually frightened about the idea of getting memos 

from 12 different Reserve Banks.  [Laughter]  But the staff’s work has been incredibly helpful.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor the policy actions in alternative B, 

but not necessarily all of the language.  Alternative B, as drafted, does not seem to me to reflect 

either what I described as my modal projection or the tail risks that many of us have talked 

about.  With respect to the tail risks, I am not sure it would be particularly helpful to specify 

those in our statement, and they will be evident in the minutes when they’re released in a few 

weeks.  But, with respect to the projections of the economy, I think that there was a palpable 

change in the attitude of the Committee, and I agree with Kevin that alternative B, paragraph 1, 

is rather more upbeat than either the Tealbook forecast or what most of us had to say around the 

table.  Initially, I was going to say I just favor the language in alternative A, but I only see two 

differences between A and B, one of which is the insertion of “in recent months” to “bank 

lending has continued to contract,” and that doesn’t strike me as a salient difference.  So I would 

favor more particularly the substitution of the last sentence of paragraph 1 in alternative A for the 

last sentence of paragraph 1 of alternative B.  I thought that the effort in the first red insertion in 

paragraph 3 of alternative A—if I understand it correctly—to try to specify a bit more our 

reaction function was and is an interesting and good effort.  I don’t think the language quite 

June 22–23, 2010 157 of 213



 

 

 

captures probably what all of us would agree to, but I think it would be worth doing more along 

those lines for the next couple of meetings. 

The only other thing I’d say, Mr. Chairman, is in support of my argument for the 

sentence change in the first paragraph.  I recall the debate last year, which included, to some 

degree, people around this table, between those who said that the mixed data we were seeing at 

the time were eminently characteristic of the early stages of a pretty strong recovery, and that we 

would pretty soon see things converging around stronger data more or less across the board, and 

those who predicted that this was going to be a halting recovery in which there were going to be 

potholes, or headwinds, or some other metaphor, looking out a fair time into the future, and thus 

we are going to continue to see a pattern that was sort of two steps forward, one step back. 

I think that, nine months later, that debate has been, at least in the medium term, clearly 

decided in favor of the latter camp.  So I think we’ve got to come to grips with the fact that, even 

in the modal forecast, this is not a lot of strength, and this does not promise anything close to the 

achievement of at least one side of the dual mandate, and, I suspect, increasingly, both sides of 

the dual mandate.  I don’t know how many years it takes before the high levels of unemployment 

that we all project constitute the long run rather than the short run.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B, and 

I’m fine with the coupon swap as proposed by the staff.  That said, it wouldn’t take much in 

terms of weaker economic data, lower inflation, and further financial market distress for me to 

prefer alternative A.  I am concerned, in particular, that any significant weakening in the 

economic data from here could raise fears of a double dip, and that, in turn, might increase the 

risk of further risk aversion and a further tightening of financial conditions, which would actually 

June 22–23, 2010 158 of 213



 

 

 

make the double dip more likely.  I think that, in those circumstances, alternative A would be 

appropriate.  I’m not quite there yet, but it wouldn’t take much to push me there. 

If economic conditions deteriorated and financial markets were to tighten, it would be 

important at that stage for the FOMC to show that our toolbox was not empty and that we were 

still willing and able to act to lean against such developments.  I think a failure to act at that 

particular point would be quite dangerous, because it would reinforce fears that there was limited 

scope for further economic policy support, and that would create even greater fears of a double 

dip.  In terms of escalation, I think we’ve laid out what the options are:  We could stop 

redemptions of agency MBS, we could restart a purchase program of Treasuries and/or agency 

MBS, we could change the language in the statement to try to commit to lower short-term rates 

for a longer period of time, or we could cut the IOER rate. 

I think the bar to reinvesting maturing agency MBS should be pretty low, because that’s 

really just maintaining the status quo.  Letting the agency MBS run off is essentially a de facto—

very modest but, still, de facto—tightening of policy over time.  I don’t think it’s going to be 

very stressful on the economy, but I don’t think the bar to reinvesting the agency MBS should be 

very high.  I do agree with Governor Warsh and others that bar to expanding the balance sheet 

should be considerably higher for a whole variety of reasons. 

In terms of changing the language, although it’s an option, I don’t have any really great 

ideas that I think would be particularly helpful.  “Extraordinarily low for an extended period” is 

already pretty strong, and the market doesn’t seem to be off base in their expectations relative to 

our own expectations.  I suppose we could commit to some sort of price level target, so that any 

undershooting on inflation over the next couple of years would be reversed down the road, but, 

as we’ve discussed in the past, I think that has real communication difficulties right now. 

June 22–23, 2010 159 of 213



 

 

 

In terms of the interest on excess reserves that Governor Kohn raised as a potential 

option, I think it certainly should be examined, and I’d like to see a little bit more work done on 

what the costs and benefits of that are; that is, how much market dysfunction we’d create by 

cutting the IOER rate further versus what the benefits would be in terms of the signal that we 

would be sending to markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thank you all for your comments.  Let me 

just give a few thoughts, and then we can discuss some of the language suggestions. 

On the substance of the policy, as I said in my earlier remarks, most quantitative analyses 

would put us at the zero bound, I think, at this point, including Taylor rules, optimal control 

exercises, and some micro-founded analyses.  It is true, as President Bullard pointed out when I 

made this point at the last meeting, that, in addition to our interest rate policy, we have language, 

and we have some QE.  On the other hand, we also have some financial headwinds, which aren’t 

incorporated in the typical Taylor rule type of analysis.  So on the substance, I think there’s 

considerable agreement that we should remain at the zero bound at least for now. 

What are the risks to that?  First, of course, is inflation.  The inflation data look very 

moderate, and inflation expectations seem to be flat to down.  I didn’t hear much concern around 

the table, at least for the near term, about inflation risk.  The risk that has gotten more attention—

and President Hoenig has been particularly strong in advocating it—is the potential risk to 

financial stability from low interest rates over a long period of time. 

I’d like to make a few comments about that.  First, I remain at least somewhat skeptical 

of what I understand is the conventional view, namely, that too low for too long was an 

important contributor to the financial crisis that we recently experienced.  I gave a speech about 

this in Atlanta at the beginning of the year, which was backed up by staff research.  That 

June 22–23, 2010 160 of 213



 

 

 

research, for example, showed that cross-national comparisons of monetary policy bore no 

relationship to housing price increases.  It also showed that Taylor rule calculations of the type 

that John has done are extremely fragile and that alternative Taylor rules don’t show any 

particular problem with monetary policy in the early part of this decade.  In particular, I would 

add that I think it’s a mistake to appeal to Taylor rules to talk about asset price bubbles, because 

Taylor rules are not designed to talk about that issue at all.  There’s no reference to them in the 

Taylor rule, which is entirely about the traditional employment and inflation objectives.  So I 

would just appeal to you to think more about the premise that, I understand, is widely accepted, 

but that, I think, at best is uncertain.  Moreover, I also think that, regardless of the source of the 

overheated financial conditions, a stronger regulatory and supervisory response could have 

avoided much of the bad outcomes that we had. 

In regard to President Hoenig’s concern, I think it’s important to respond to it because, 

even if we’re uncertain about whether low interest rates lead to imbalances, there certainly is the 

possibility that they do.  Any fair-minded person would have to admit that, and therefore, it’s 

important for us to take that into account.  Again, I want to reiterate, as a number of people have 

done, the praise for the staff’s work at looking at various measures of imbalances.  I thought it 

was very helpful.  I think we need to expand those types of evaluations, and, as Governor Warsh 

did, I invite research staffs around the System to try to add their own cites.  But I’m not sure 

what else we can do besides do our every best to analyze and assess whether imbalances are 

developing.  I note that if we had applied the tools we use today in the late 1990s or in the early 

2000s, we would have detected imbalances in stock prices and in housing prices.  Moreover, I 

think it’s very important that we continue to strengthen our supervisory tools and regulatory 

tools.  That process is already under way, and I see that financial regulatory reform is near 

June 22–23, 2010 161 of 213



 

 

 

completion.  I hope very much that we will have an additional set of surveillance and response 

tools available to address these concerns without distorting monetary policy to address them 

alone. 

In summary, I commend President Hoenig for bringing that issue to our attention.  I 

understand the concern.  I think even with the uncertainty about it, it is important for us to 

monitor that issue.  We are, indeed, monitoring it, and I think we should continue to do that.  I 

would also add that whatever early indicators there were of excess in financial markets, the 

European developments over the intermeeting period have offset a good number of them and 

have reduced risk preferences and have indicated less interest, for example, in carry trades.  

Again, I think we have to balance all of these concerns, but I hope we all agree that we’re not 

neglecting this issue as we discuss it. 

I have just a final point on this issue.  There’s an awful lot of talk about how our policy is 

extraordinary and the zero interest rate is unprecedented, and so on and so on.  That is true in one 

sense.  But I think most of us around the table would agree that real interest rates are more 

important than nominal interest rates, and real interest rates currently are about minus 

0.9 percent, using the 12-month core inflation rate as the inflation measure.  That is 50 basis 

points tighter than it was eight months ago and less negative than it was during the 2003–2004 

episode, while, of course, unemployment was about 3½ percentage points lower.  So it’s true that 

nominal interest rates are very low, but I hope that we can understand that real interest rates 

should at least be given equal attention.  Again, I believe that the substance should be that, for 

now, we should stay where we are and have a pretty much status quo policy and policy 

statement. 

June 22–23, 2010 162 of 213



 

 

 

I listened yesterday with great interest to the discussions about the balance sheet.  I will 

be checking back with you, depending on developments, about what I should or could say in the 

hearings in about a month.  I think those are all valid points, and, personally, I found it very 

illuminating to hear the discussion yesterday, so I appreciate that. 

In terms of the statement and the preferences, virtually everybody agreed with alternative 

B.  There were a number of suggestions.  Let me try to talk about a few of them and see if there’s 

any interest in making changes.  Both President Bullard and President Evans pointed out 

correctly that we don’t have any explicit reference to quantitative easing in this statement.  I 

looked back, of course, in the last statement and we had no reference to it there, either, so there’s 

no change from our previous statement in that respect.  We’ve only referred to our balance sheet 

when we’ve made some kind of change, but I think your point is a good one, and, in going 

forward, I think we ought to try to look for a way to emphasize that we have, as Governor Warsh 

said, two different tools, not just one. 

While I’m addressing President Bullard, let me refer to his discussion of the issue of 

slack and inflation, and I understand there are mixed views about that.  I would venture the 

opinion that the last few months have been fairly kind to the slack theory.  At least core measures 

seem to be responding to slack, although, admittedly, in a short period of time, you can’t make a 

definitive judgment.  One thing we have proposed in this statement is to add a sentence about 

other factors—as you mentioned, energy and commodity prices—and to state that underlying 

inflation has trended lower.  The latter, of course, is simply a statement of fact and moves in the 

direction of saying “here’s something that we observe,” and it doesn’t say that underlying 

inflation has trended lower because of slack or any particular factor. 

June 22–23, 2010 163 of 213



 

 

 

President Lockhart, Governor Tarullo and Governor Warsh all raised concerns about the 

first paragraph, and I understand those concerns.  I guess my reaction to Governor Tarullo’s 

suggestion is that I think the last sentence still qualitatively describes the modal discussion 

around the table.  I’m happy to be corrected on that, but I’m a little reluctant to change what is a 

fairly strong signal about the broad outline of the outlook at this point.  Perhaps an alternative 

would be to address a couple of the other descriptive sentences.  Let me suggest two possibilities 

and then see what the reaction is.  First, in the second line it says, “Economic activity has 

continued to strengthen,” and I’m not sure that that’s actually wrong, President Lockhart, 

because that’s a level statement.  Activity is a measure of the level of GDP, and of course, it has 

continued to grow, but we could say “the economic recovery is proceeding,” which I think might 

be a somewhat less strong statement.  Second, Governor Warsh referred to business spending on 

equipment and software “rising at a robust pace.”  A very simple fix to that would be to go back 

to the statement from the last meeting, which just said, “Business spending on equipment and 

software has risen significantly,” which is a fact about recent events and which would not be a 

change. 

Let me get a sense of everyone’s reactions.  What about returning to the language from 

the previous meeting on business spending on equipment and software?  I’m seeing nodding.  

Are there any who are opposed to that change?  [No response.]  All right.  Why don’t we do that? 

The other more significant change would be to change, “Economic activity has continued to 

strengthen,” to say, “Economic recovery is proceeding.”  Could I have responses, views?   

MR. TARULLO.  Is it clear that that actually softens our sense of the recovery? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, it takes out the word “strong” and just says 

“proceeding.” 

June 22–23, 2010 164 of 213



 

 

 

MR. TARULLO.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But that’s the judgment I’m asking for. 

MR. TARULLO.  It doesn’t feel to me that—I could interpret each one either way, so 

I’m sort of indifferent. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Does anyone take a view or any other suggestion? 

MR. LACKER.  Plodding along.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Muddling through. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Staggering along. 

MR. TARULLO.  I’d be in favor of any of those.  [Laughter] 

MR. EVANS.  I assumed you were not liking the word “strengthened.” 

MR. TARULLO.  That was actually more Dennis than me. 

MR. EVANS.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, let me ask you what you— 

MR. LOCKHART.  I basically proposed what you just said, and that is the recovery 

continues to proceed or is proceeding.  So I favor that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How many people favor saying that the economic recovery 

is proceeding and that the labor market is improving gradually?  Charles, Charlie Evans, 

Lockhart, Rosengren.  Jeff, did you—?  I see about four.  President Yellen.  Any others?  Who is 

in favor of keeping it? 

MR. FISHER.  We can just say economic activity continues.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  We’re going to wrap this up quickly.  Let’s do 

this again.  Please raise your hand if you’re in favor of changing “economic activity has 

continued to strengthen” to “the economic recovery is proceeding”?  How many are in favor of 

June 22–23, 2010 165 of 213



 

 

 

that change?  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.  That’s a pretty high number.  How 

many are in favor of the status quo?  Two, three, four, five. Well, it looks like the bears have it.  

[Laughter] We’re saying “The economic recovery is proceeding,” and we’re also changing the 

business spending back to the April language.  Is that okay?  Helpful? 

PARTICIPANTS. Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard? 

MR. BULLARD.  On this issue of mentioning quantitative easing somehow in the 

statement, you do have paragraph 4 in alternative A, which is slightly different from paragraph 4 

in alternative B, and it makes a little more reference to the fact that we will evaluate the balance 

sheet going forward. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that raises other issues that we’ve discussed before 

about what we want to signal about our balance sheet, but your point is noted. 

MR. TARULLO.  It may be an asymmetric interpretation 

MR. BULLARD.  Why is that?  It just says evaluate the holdings of securities. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, because it suggests, as we have discussed before, that 

we are looking potentially to near-term sales or purchases. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s coming out of alternative A, though. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that’s true.  That’s because it was including purchases 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It’s including purchases. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I think I’m a little worried about that. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s creating an unnecessary ambiguity, I think. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, I’m a little worried about that one for now.  All right.  

Michelle, do you have everything you need? 

June 22–23, 2010 166 of 213



 

 

 

MS. SMITH.  Yes, got it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other thoughts?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I had asked a question, Mr. Chairman, about whether we were crossing 

the line if we added what we heard from many people about the uncertainty about tax and 

regulatory requirements.  I just want some definition here. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think referring to political uncertainty would be crossing 

the line.  Putting in general uncertainty might be acceptable, but I’m not quite sure I see where to 

do that.  Do you have a suggestion? 

MR. FISHER.  No, not for that specific reference, but it is going to come through in the 

minutes, and that’s sufficient.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  If there are no further comments, we’ll take the 

roll, please. 

MR. LUECKE.  This roll will encompass alternative B as printed on page 4 of the 

handouts for Brian’s briefing on policy alternatives, with the exception that the first sentence will 

refer to “economic recovery is proceeding” instead of “economic activity has continued to 

strengthen.”  Second, it will refer to “business spending on equipment and software has risen 

significantly” instead of “equipment and software appear to be rising at a robust pace.”  It will 

also encompass the directive as printed on page 8 of the handout. 

Chairman Bernanke  Yes 

Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 

President Bullard   Yes 

Governor Duke   Yes 

President Hoenig   No 

Governor Kohn   Yes 

President Pianalto   Yes 

President Rosengren  Yes 

Governor Tarullo   Yes 

Governor Warsh   Yes 

June 22–23, 2010 167 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  A couple of quick other items.  Brian Madigan 

will be stepping down before the next meeting, effective July 23, as the FOMC Secretary and 

Economist.  We would like to propose Bill English to succeed him as the head of the Monetary 

Affairs Division to fill that position for the rest of this year until next January when we will have 

our annual election.  If we move Bill to that position, that would leave open an Associate 

Economist position.  Bill and Jim Clouse have been alternating in that Associate Economist 

position.  So it would be natural to make Jim Clouse the Associate Economist for the Committee, 

and I’d like to propose that.  Any comments, questions? 

MR. FISHER.  May I just add? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. FISHER.  On behalf of, at least, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and I think all 

the Reserve Banks, I’d like to offer an appreciation for the way Brian has conducted himself.  He 

has been very respectful of the input of the Banks, and the courtesy—punctilious courtesy would 

be the best description—has been truly remarkable.  I hope it’s noted that his work is deeply 

appreciated, obviously, by the Board, but also by the Reserve Banks and their staffs. 

PARTICIPANTS.  Here, here. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. 

MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you very much. 

[Extended applause] 

MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian, for very good work, well done.  I need a 

motion on this. 

MR. KOHN.  So moved. 

June 22–23, 2010 168 of 213



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Kohn. 

PARTICIPANT.  Second. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection?  Seeing none, the last piece of business 

is to note that the next meeting is Tuesday, August 10.  I am about to adjourn the meeting.  The 

lunch for Governor Kohn will start at 1:00 p.m. in the dining room upstairs.  We will now 

adjourn the meeting.  For those of you are interested, Brian Gross is prepared to give us a little 

bit of legislative update.  President Lacker? 

MR. LACKER.  Another kind of update.  This being the first instance that I can recall of 

a noteworthy athletic event occurring during an FOMC meeting, I thought I’d let you know that 

the U.S. won 1 to 0.  [Applause] 

MR. KOHN.  Peeking at your BlackBerry. 

MR. LACKER.  I won’t say how I found out. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  The meeting is adjourned. 

END OF MEETING 

June 22–23, 2010 169 of 213




