











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, March 16, 2010


Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

March 16, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of 

the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, 

D.C., on Tuesday, March 16, 2010, at 8:00 a.m. Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Donald L. Kohn 

Sandra Pianalto 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo  

Kevin Warsh 

Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and 

Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal 

Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively 

Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist  

David J. Stockton, Economist 

Thomas A. Connors, William B. English, Steven B. Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, 

Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 

Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 

March 16, 2010 1 of 146



Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director for 

Management, Board of Governors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Sherry Edwards and Andrew T. Levin, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors; David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior 

Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Michael G. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, 

Board of Governors 

 

 

 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Min Wei, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 

Governors 

Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Jamie J. McAndrews, Loretta J. Mester, and Harvey Rosenblum, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and Dallas, respectively 

David Altig, Craig S. Hakkio, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Mark E. Schweitzer, Daniel G. 

Sullivan, and John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 

Atlanta, Kansas City, San Francisco, Cleveland, Chicago, and Richmond, respectively 

Giovanni Olivei, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Joshua Frost, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Jonathan Heathcote, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

 

March 16, 2010 2 of 146



Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

March 16, 2010 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I need a motion to close the Board meeting. 

MR. KOHN.  So move. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Well, today is kind of an important day.  This 

is the first one-day meeting we have had in—[laughter]—some time.  So let me just remind 

everybody to please be concise and to the point, so we can get done in time for the 

announcement. 

Let’s start this morning with Brian Sack’s report on financial developments and system 

facilities.  Brian.  

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Several broad themes have garnered 

significant attention in financial markets in recent months, including mounting 

concerns about sovereign credit risk, ongoing assessment of the strength of the 

economic recovery, and continued focus on the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy.  The 

net effect of these factors over the intermeeting period was to leave financial 

conditions modestly more supportive of growth. 

 

 

 

1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

As shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 1, market-implied expectations for 

monetary policy shifted lower since the last FOMC meeting, continuing the trend 

seen over the past several intermeeting periods.  This reassessment has occurred 

against the backdrop of ongoing communications from the FOMC that the policy rate 

will remain “exceptionally low for an extended period.”  The current configuration of 

rates suggests that market participants do not see substantial risks of policy tightening 

until late this year. 

Similarly, the Desk’s survey of primary dealer economists showed that the 

average respondent placed the first policy tightening at right around year-end.  The 

survey also indicated that dealers do not expect any major changes in the policy 

statement to be released today.  Regarding the exit strategy, the dealers continue to 

anticipate that reserve-draining tools will be implemented two or three meetings 

before any increase in the target federal funds rate and that asset sales will take place 

after the target rate increase, if at all.  The Desk continues to make substantial 

progress in preparing for reverse repurchase agreements, including the publication of 

criteria for money market mutual funds to participate in the program, as I indicated in 

a memo to the FOMC from two weeks ago.  

                                                 

March 16, 2010 3 of 146



Even though market pricing suggests that the FOMC’s exit from current rate 

levels is a ways off, investors seem sensitive to any news related to the exit.  For 

example, the increase in the discount rate came as a surprise to some, despite the fact 

that the FOMC minutes published a day earlier said that such an increase would 

“soon be appropriate.” This prompted discussion about the likely path of the Fed’s 

exit.  The announcement that the Treasury would increase the size of the SFP back to 

$200 billion was also widely discussed in this context.  The amount of focus on these 

two events highlights the market’s sensitivity to the issue of exit, although the net 

responses of asset prices were muted. 

 

 

 

 

 

Although policy expectations were marked down slightly, Treasury yields edged 

higher over the intermeeting period, as shown in the upper right panel.  This pattern 

does not appear to be driven by perceived inflation risk.  Indeed, some of the 

concerns about inflation risk that had been priced into Treasury yields appear to be 

diminishing, as suggested by the decline in break-even inflation rates from their 

recent highs, shown in the middle left panel.  Moreover, measures of implied 

volatility and payer skew on longer-term interest rates have come down, presumably 

for related reasons. 

Government securities markets around the world have also had to contend with a 

greater focus by investors on sovereign credit risk.  As shown to the right, investors 

have been quite concerned about default prospects in Greece, and some of those 

perceived risks have spilled over at times into other countries in the European 

periphery.  Greece managed to placate those concerns to some degree by announcing 

several important steps towards fiscal austerity that, along with a statement of support 

from the European Council, enabled Greece to issue €5 billion of new debt.  

However, Greece still faces some near-term hurdles, as it has to issue a considerable 

amount of additional debt in coming months.  Nathan Sheets will discuss these 

developments in more detail in his briefing. 

Regardless of how the situation in Greece plays out over time, it has precipitated a 

wider discussion about sovereign credit risk across all major economies.  At this 

point, however, investors’ concerns about U.S. sovereign risk appear to be limited.  

Indeed, as shown in the bottom left panel, CDS spreads on U.S. Treasuries have not 

widened in any meaningful way.  There has been some widening in the CDS spreads 

for U.S. states that face challenging fiscal situations, but those pressures have not 

passed through strongly into the cash market.  The municipal bond market continues 

to benefit from strong investor inflows, spreads on municipal bonds have narrowed, 

and issuance by municipalities has been solid, despite the continued deterioration of 

fiscal conditions in various states. 

The events surrounding Greece appear to have had an impact on currency values, 

contributing to the euro’s weakness against the dollar, shown in the bottom right.  In 

addition, other countries facing fiscal challenges, such as the U.K., also saw their 

currencies weaken against the dollar. 

March 16, 2010 4 of 146



This intermeeting period included several notable events for the Federal Reserve’s 

liquidity facilities.  A number of the facilities closed on February 1, including the 

PDCF, the CPFF, the AMLF, the TSLF, and the currency swaps with foreign central 

banks; in addition, the TAF conducted its last auction on March 8.  Accordingly, all 

of the short-term credit facilities that were introduced during the crisis are now 

inactive, in that there will be no additional operations.  The outstanding credit 

provided by those facilities, shown in the upper left panel of exhibit 2, has reached 

minimal levels and, by June, will be confined to just the primary credit facility. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The markets have adjusted well to the withdrawal of this credit.  As shown by the 

LIBOR-OIS spreads to the right, there has been no evidence of any reemergence of 

market strains as the facilities have wound down. 

Another facility that is approaching its end is the TALF.  The final subscription 

for non-CMBS took place on March 4, and the final subscription for legacy CMBS 

will occur later this week.  After that subscription, the only remaining operations will 

be in new-issue CMBS—an asset class for which there are currently no outstanding 

TALF loans.  Subscriptions in new-issue CMBS will continue until their scheduled 

end date in June. 

As shown in the middle left panel, the cumulative volume of borrowings from the 

TALF has expanded fairly steadily in recent months.  However, the volume of 

repayments of TALF loans has also risen, as borrowers have been able to secure 

funding from other sources on more favorable terms.  As a result, the net amount of 

outstanding credit from the TALF has leveled out to some degree and currently stands 

at around $50 billion.  That balance will presumably decline going forward as 

repayments continue. 

Securitized credit markets have not shown much strain from the termination of the 

TALF program.  As indicated to the right, spreads on ABS remain tight.  Moreover, 

ABS issuance has been fairly strong, and only about one-fifth of the issuance this 

year has been financed by the TALF.  A survey of TALF-eligible ABS issuers 

suggested that the expiration of the TALF will not significantly affect the use of 

securitization as a source of funding for auto loans and credit cards.  Nevertheless, the 

securitization market faces several challenges going forward, including uncertainty 

about the balance sheet treatment of the assets supporting ABS and the consequent 

impact on the cost of funding through securitization. 

Other risky asset prices continue to fare well, supported by decent earnings and 

ongoing evidence that an economic recovery is taking hold.  Major U.S. equity 

indexes advanced about 5 percent over the intermeeting period, as shown in the 

bottom left panel, and measures of implied volatility on equity prices dropped back 

sharply.  Corporate bond spreads, shown to the right, narrowed modestly over the 

intermeeting period. 

March 16, 2010 5 of 146



Your next exhibit focuses on the Fed’s large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) 

programs.  We are nearing the end of the programs.  MBS purchases are on track to 

meet the $1.25 trillion target, with only $20 billion of additional purchases needed to 

reach that goal.  Agency debt purchases have fallen somewhat behind the schedule 

that would be needed to reach $175 billion.  Our purchases currently stand at just over 

$170 billion, and we have only one more operation scheduled, which is likely be 

around $1 billion in size. 

 

 

 

 

 

Even as our purchases have slowed, the spreads on agency debt and MBS have 

remained tight, as indicated in the middle panels.  This pattern has led market 

participants to reassess the vulnerability of the market to an increase in rates as our 

purchases end.  The current view among market participants is that the MBS spread 

may widen only marginally, by 10 basis points or so, as our purchases come to a 

close.  That estimate is down substantially from their earlier estimates; indeed, just 

six months ago, the average response in one of our surveys was 60 basis points.  We 

continue to believe that the LSAPs helped to lower longer-term interest rates, and that 

those effects will only slowly unwind as the stock of the Fed’s holdings gradually 

declines. 

With our purchases ending, it is a good time to assess how the program has left 

the functioning of the MBS market.  As shown in the bottom left panel, our holdings 

of MBS represent a sizable portion of the outstanding supply across the coupon stack, 

particularly in the most active coupons.  Over time, the share of our holdings will 

decline, as we receive prepayments and as new issuance of MBS comes to the market.  

However, this decline has yet to materialize, despite the slower pace of our purchases, 

because of the tepid pace of new issuance. 

Overall, the market has had to adjust to our large presence—and particularly to 

having less tradable float than it would in our absence.  As I highlighted in my last 

briefing, our holdings have contributed to the unusually large volume of settlement 

fails in the market in recent months, shown in the bottom right panel.  However, this 

situation has improved notably in recent weeks.  Moreover, trading volume in the 

MBS market has remained healthy even as our own transaction activity in the market 

has faded.  Thus, while our presence has caused some strains, the market seems to be 

functioning with decent liquidity in most areas. 

Your final exhibit discusses the Fed’s balance sheet and the issue of whether the 

FOMC may want to redeem its maturing holdings of Treasury securities.  The overall 

size of the balance sheet currently stands at $2.3 trillion.  As shown in the upper left 

panel, about $2.0 trillion of that is associated with the outright holdings of securities 

in the domestic SOMA portfolio.  These holdings have expanded rapidly with the 

purchases of agency debt and agency MBS; in addition, our Treasury holdings have 

returned to near $800 billion. 

The expansion of the SOMA portfolio has been accompanied by a notable shift in 

its risk characteristics.  Most important, as shown in the upper right panel, the 

March 16, 2010 6 of 146



duration of the portfolio has jumped from an historical level of between two and three 

years to more than four years, with the current reading indicated by the red square.  

Our Treasury holdings have the longest duration of all of the asset classes held in the 

portfolio, at around five years, as shown by the blue line.  The duration of our MBS 

holdings is around four years, although I should note that measuring this duration 

requires one to use a prepayment model and hence is only an estimate.  The duration 

of the agency portfolio, at three years, is the lowest of the three asset classes. 

 

 

 

 

The changes in both the size and the duration of the SOMA have resulted in a 

substantial increase in the risk of the portfolio, at least on a mark-to-market basis.  

Under the current portfolio, a 100 basis point upward shift in the yield curve would 

generate mark-to-market losses on the order of $100 billion.  The comparable figure 

from July 2007, when the portfolio was regular-sized and concentrated in Treasuries, 

is about $20 billion.  Thus, the duration-related exposure of the portfolio has 

increased fivefold.  In addition, the portfolio has substantial exposure to prepayment 

risk that it did not previously have.  Of course, removing this duration and 

prepayment risk from the market was part of the purpose of the large-scale asset 

purchases, in order to shrink the risk premiums on the assets purchased. 

The FOMC will have to make decisions that affect how quickly its asset holdings 

will decline, including the policy for redeeming maturing SOMA holdings.  The Desk 

is currently employing an interim strategy of allowing SOMA holdings of agency 

debt and MBS to roll off the balance sheet, without reinvestment, as those securities 

mature or are prepaid.  To date, about $3 billion of our agency debt holdings have 

matured, and about $80 billion of our MBS holdings have been prepaid.  As shown in 

the middle panel, if this interim strategy is maintained, we would expect to shed 

another $250 billion of asset holdings by the end of 2011 and $545 billion by the end 

of 2015. 

For Treasury securities, the current practice of the Desk is to reinvest all maturing 

holdings, but the FOMC could decide instead to implement a strategy of allowing 

some or all of its Treasury holdings to mature without reinvestment.  Such a policy, if 

applied to all maturing Treasury holdings, would produce a runoff in the portfolio of 

$139 billion through 2011 and $436 billion through 2015.  Note that the runoff 

through 2015 is comparable in size to the declines in agency debt and MBS holdings. 

The staff memo circulated ahead of this meeting highlighted several potential 

benefits associated with redeeming Treasury securities.  First, redemptions would 

reduce the need to drain reserves through other tools such as reverse repurchase 

agreements and term deposits.  This could be seen as advantageous if the FOMC does 

not have full confidence in the capacity of those draining tools or in the efficacy of 

interest on reserves.  Second, redemptions would lower the overall interest rate 

sensitivity of the portfolio.  Third, by reducing the balance sheet to its typical size 

more quickly, redemptions could underscore the FOMC’s commitment to price 

stability.  And lastly, even though the FOMC ultimately plans to hold a portfolio of 

March 16, 2010 7 of 146



Treasury securities, redemptions would give it more flexibility to rebuild the Treasury 

portfolio with the most appropriate structure. 

 

 

 

 

Treasury redemptions raise some potential concerns as well.  The primary concern 

may be that redemptions could hasten the reversal of the portfolio balance effects that 

were associated with the large-scale asset purchase programs.  Our empirical work on 

this issue suggests that the effects of the incremental increase in Treasury supply on 

longer-term interest rates would likely be relatively small.  In addition, some 

expectations for Treasury redemptions may already be reflected in yields, further 

limiting the scope for a market response.  Indeed, in our recent survey of primary 

dealers, respondents saw a 28 percent chance that the FOMC would adopt a policy of 

redeeming all Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter, and another 16 

percent chance that it would begin redeeming some Treasury securities over that 

period.  However, with so much market focus on the Fed’s exit, it is possible that a 

decision to move forward with Treasury redemptions would have a larger effect than 

we are anticipating, especially if it were seen as indicating an inclination to exit along 

other dimensions. 

A second concern is that redemptions would limit the scope of the securities 

lending program that the Federal Reserve currently offers, by eliminating our 

holdings of on-the-run and other recently issued Treasury securities.  This change 

could potentially have negative implications for the repo market in specific Treasury 

securities.  However, we judge that any detrimental effects on market functioning 

would be limited, in part because of the ample supply of Treasuries in the market. 

The expected path of the size of the domestic SOMA portfolio under the 

redemption policy is shown by the darker line in the bottom left panel, compared to 

the expected path under the current redemption policy, the lighter line.  As can be 

seen, the more aggressive redemption policy causes the size of the portfolio to decline 

more quickly.  However, by 2015, the portfolio reaches a point at which excess 

reserves are back to minimal levels, and hence the portfolio has to begin growing 

again to accommodate the ongoing expansion of currency and other factors.  At that 

point, the Desk would presumably still be allowing agency and MBS holdings to run 

off and would be purchasing Treasury securities to make up for that runoff and to 

produce the overall portfolio expansion shown.  Thus, the redemption strategy 

involves some churning of the Treasury portfolio, allowing our holdings to decline 

for several years and then rebuilding them more aggressively thereafter.  

Lastly, it is worth considering an alternative redemption approach under which 

the Desk would roll maturing holdings into shorter-term Treasury securities.  There 

are some operational impediments to this approach, unless the FOMC is willing to 

acquire the shorter-term securities in the secondary market.  In particular, based on 

longstanding interpretations of the Federal Reserve’s authority to purchase securities, 

the amount of newly issued securities that the Desk can acquire at a Treasury auction 

is limited to its holdings maturing on the day of the auction settlement.  The practical 

implication is that it is difficult to roll over maturing Treasury coupon securities into 

March 16, 2010 8 of 146



Treasury bills, since coupon securities mature at mid-month or end-month dates, 

while bills settle every Thursday. 

 

 

 

The table to the right highlights this issue.  The amount of Treasury redemptions 

through 2011 under a full redemptions strategy is $139 billion, consistent with what 

was reported in the middle panel.  If the FOMC reinvests into bills whenever 

possible, it can only roll over $36 billion of its maturing holdings, leaving net 

redemptions still sizable at $103 billion.  The capacity to reinvest goes up sharply, 

though, if the strategy is expanded to allow for reinvestment into shorter-term notes, 

given that those are issued on the mid- and end-month schedules of the maturing 

coupon securities.  If two-year securities are included, an additional $71 billion could 

be rolled over, bringing net redemptions down to $32 billion.  If three-year notes are 

included, all maturing holdings could be rolled over, leaving zero net redemptions.  

Of course, if the FOMC were willing to purchase securities in the secondary market, 

it would have the flexibility to shift all of the maturing holdings into Treasury bills, 

without the constraints presented in this table. 

Any of these strategies would reduce the duration of the SOMA portfolio and 

hence shed risk.  However, it is worth asking what the advantage of these strategies 

would be over a full redemption strategy.  The primary difference is that these 

strategies leave larger amounts of reserves in the system over the near term.  While 

the shorter maturity profile of Treasury holdings would provide the FOMC with 

flexibility to withdraw those reserves relatively quickly in the future by allowing 

holdings to mature, that option, even if fully exercised, would only bring reserves 

down to where they otherwise would have been under a full redemption strategy.  

Thus, the partial redemption strategy would only seem to have clear advantages if the 

FOMC felt it was important to keep more reserves in the system for now, or if it were 

part of a longer-run plan to restructure the Treasury holdings in the SOMA portfolio.  

Thank you.  That concludes my prepared comments. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we going to take questions now or go on to the next 

report? 

MR. SACK.  It’s up to you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Jamie, do you want to make your report? 

MR. McANDREWS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The last time that reserve 

collateral accounts, or RCAs, were discussed, at the November 2009 FOMC meeting, 

a decision was made to delay further operational work on them to avoid any 

contention for resources with the implementation efforts for the term deposit facility.  

As the TDF work subsequently progressed, an RCA planning group was convened.  

This group consists of staff from all the relevant System groups and is considering in 

detail the operational and policy issues associated with their implementation.  This 

group has explored all the expected operational implications of establishing and 

March 16, 2010 9 of 146



managing RCAs and has found no major impediments to their implementation.  In 

particular, the group has found that RCAs would likely be straightforward to 

implement and operate using existing Federal Reserve platforms with only relatively 

minor changes to accounting and reserves procedures.  The legal aspects of RCAs are 

clearly an important element in their creation, and Board and Federal Reserve Bank 

of New York attorneys have written a draft agreement under which the accounts and 

their transactions would be governed.  The degree to which RCAs would fulfill their 

goal of a tighter link between interest on reserves and market rates is uncertain; past 

interviews with market participants are encouraging but not definitive.  I now turn to 

a summary of the RCA policy goal and how RCAs would be expected to achieve 

their goal; my remarks summarize a memo that was distributed to FOMC members 

last Wednesday. 

 

 

 

The large negative spread between the interest rate paid on excess reserves and 

the effective federal funds rate has raised concerns about the Federal Reserve’s ability 

to remove monetary policy accommodation smoothly using interest on reserves alone.  

One explanation given for the size of this spread focuses on the limited nature of the 

competition among buyers of funds sold by the government-sponsored enterprises, or 

GSEs.  The GSEs, who are ineligible to earn interest directly from the Federal 

Reserve and are significant sellers of federal funds, considerably reduced their lists of 

approved counterparties and credit lines starting in September 2008.  As a result, 

competition for their funds has fallen, and buyers are able to purchase funds from 

GSEs at rates well below the IOER rate. 

If RCAs were made available, GSEs and potentially even some banking 

institutions that lend at rates below the IOER rate would have the option of selling 

funds to banks that owned RCAs, where the funds in such accounts would serve as 

collateral for the repayment of the principal amount of the loan.  The dramatically 

reduced level of credit risk on these transactions could prompt GSEs to lend to an 

expanded set of counterparties for potentially larger amounts, thereby improving the 

competitive environment for the sales of funds.  Under more competitive conditions, 

trading in federal funds would be expected to move closer to the IOER rate.   

Information obtained through a limited number of staff conversations with two of 

the GSEs suggests a strong interest on their part as lenders in the RCA concept, but 

conversations with a small number of depository institutions have not yielded much 

concrete information about their potential interest as borrowers under these 

arrangements.  Thus, a significant outstanding question is the likely extent of 

participation of borrowers in RCAs, which could ultimately determine their impact on 

the federal funds rate.  Notably, however, all of the interviewees felt that RCAs 

would narrow the spread between the IOER rate and the federal funds rate.  One 

possible drawback of RCAs is that, if they work as intended, there would likely be 

fewer sales of fed funds by GSEs to banks.  As transactions of this type currently 

dominate the brokered trades used in the Desk’s calculation of the effective federal 

funds rate, RCAs could make measurement of the effective federal funds rate less 

reliable.   

March 16, 2010 10 of 146



 

 

 

 

One question that should be addressed is whether the RCA program would be 

needed if the Fed plans to conduct reverse repos with the GSEs.  The following 

reasoning suggests that RCAs would indeed continue to serve their policy objective in 

that case.  First, it is not certain that an RRP program arranged by the Fed, where we 

expect to conduct term RPs with periodic auctions to settle on T+1 via the triparty 

repo mechanism, would necessarily be structured to fit with the GSEs' particular 

investment preferences.  GSEs clearly prefer a same-day settlement, overnight option, 

which we are unlikely to accommodate with RRPs.  In addition, because GSEs cannot 

incur daylight overdrafts, they would prefer RCAs at a given interest rate because 

they control the timing of return of funds, while in the triparty repo mechanism they 

have less control.  It is also not clear that GSEs would necessarily be able to 

participate in RRPs on the scale they would desire.  GSE lending volume has 

fluctuated between $50 and $100 billion during the past six months and appears to 

vary by $10 to $20 billion in a typical month.  RCAs may be better suited to handle 

such short-term fluctuations in supply than RRPs, which are targeted toward less 

volatile supply.  It is also not clear what the long-run disposition of an RRP program 

will be, in terms of size, whereas RCAs represent a change in the account framework 

that would be expected to last as long as there was market demand for the product, 

regardless of what we might prefer to do with discretionary operations.  Finally, 

RCAs put their use at the discretion of the seller of funds, whether it be a bank or a 

GSE, while RRPs will be conducted with a specified dealer, money market fund, or 

GSE counterparty at the Fed’s discretion. 

Staff recommends that policymakers ask the planning group to proceed with the 

following steps:  Complete the necessary legal agreements; enter into discussions 

with the FDIC regarding the treatment of RCAs in bank resolutions; share the term 

sheet of the legal agreements with GSEs on a confidential basis to allow them to write 

the bilateral legal agreements that they would need in order to enter into RCA 

arrangements with depository institutions; and, once the RCA proposal is made public 

through the publication of the minutes of the March FOMC meeting or another 

vehicle, engage the GSEs and their possible counterparties as needed to better 

determine their interest in entering into RCA agreements. 

The planning group would expect to be able to report back at the April FOMC 

meeting, and if the RCAs appear to be desired by GSEs and their counterparties, the 

group would recommend going forward with publishing a notice for public comment 

to amend Regulation D prior to a final decision to make RCAs available.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman.  That concludes our prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Before we continue, Vice Chairman, you had 

an introduction to make? 

March 16, 2010 11 of 146



VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I just wanted to introduce Joshua Frost—he’s 

sitting between Brian Sack and Jamie McAndrews—from our Markets Group in New York. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  The staff circulated some questions for 

discussion before the meeting.  Before we go into Q&A and any views that people want to offer, 

I just want to make sure we understand what is being asked today.  First, on the portfolio, I 

assume that we want to know if there are any objections to continuing with the redemptions of 

the agency securities.  That’s the current policy. 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On Treasury redemptions, my understanding is that you do 

not need an answer today and that you would like to hear any feedback, but that this would be a 

decision to be taken in April or at a subsequent meeting.  What is the staff’s preference on that 

decision? 

MR. SACK.  I think our intention was certainly at least to start a discussion of the 

redemption issue.  Whether the Committee wants to reach a decision now or at a later meeting—

it’s fine, because either one could be implemented.  There may be reasons to wait, but maybe we 

can get into that in the discussion. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  And then, thirdly, on the RCAs, I think you’re 

looking for some approval today to continue with those preparatory steps that you mentioned. 

MR. McANDREWS.  Yes, Mr. Chairman, and that would also involve essentially 

making the concept public to facilitate the discussions with the GSEs and depository institutions.  

But then we’d report back to the Committee regarding the outcome of all of those discussions, at 

which time we’d have a more precise view on how the market would receive RCAs. 

March 16, 2010 12 of 146



CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With that understanding, let me open for the floor for any 

questions.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Can you offer an explanation of the 

tightening of the gap we’ve seen just in the last few days between the fed funds rate and IOER 

rate? 

MR. SACK.  I didn’t mention that, but I think that is an interesting and potentially 

important market development.  Overnight interest rates have been somewhat firm.  Both the 

federal funds rate and the Treasury GC repo rate have drifted up at times into the 15 to 20 basis 

point range, which, based on historical behavior of those rates relative to the level of excess 

reserves, looks anomalous—it looks surprisingly firm.  We don’t necessarily have a strong 

explanation for why that’s taking place.  Some have pointed to the supply of Treasuries coming 

back into the market from the SFP, but I think we would be surprised if that effect were that big.  

Others have pointed to more idiosyncratic factors—initially the month-end and, more recently, 

Treasury settlement days.  So I think we would like to take some more time and see if the rates 

settle back down into that expected range before drawing too much inference from it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  I have a couple of questions.  First, on the Treasury redemptions, I’m 

struck that this is brought to us in isolation.  At the last meeting we talked about a range of 

strategies and a range of sequencing, and yet here you’re asking us to think about this in 

isolation.  You folks say there is something like a 10 to 15 basis point effect on yields.  What if I 

said, “Let’s not redeem Treasuries but sell an equivalent amount, follow an equivalent path, of 

MBS”?  What would the effect on yields be? 

March 16, 2010 13 of 146



MR. SACK.  The staff generally thinks of the LSAPs as arising from removing the 

duration and other risks from the market.  So, in that sense, a credible complete commitment to 

sell only that amount of MBS, something equivalent to the Treasury redemptions, should have 

effects that are fairly comparable in size.  There are a few differences.  Selling MBS puts not 

only duration back to the market but also prepayment risk, and it also has different 

characteristics.  I think there’s perhaps some sense that the effect is slightly bigger for MBS, but 

it’s presumably in the same ballpark. 

I think an issue with asset sales is whether the FOMC would be willing to commit 

strongly to a gradual pace of sales.  An advantage of redemptions is that the market can look at 

the portfolio and have an estimate of how quickly the actual holdings would run off, and it’s 

credible if you are in a regime of only redeeming securities—that puts a limit on how quickly the 

duration gets reduced.  So the issue with asset sales is that, unless there’s an ironclad 

commitment in terms of the pace, the markets may always worry that the sales could end up 

being larger than indicated, and it would price that risk factor. 

MR. LACKER.  How did we do with our commitment last year?  Did they view that as a 

relatively ironclad commitment to a certain pace of purchases?  It didn’t seem that there was a lot 

of uncertainty or that the market was terribly troubled by the prospect that we would stop selling 

or start buying more. 

MR. SACK.  Right.  But there was conditionality attached to the purchase program.  And 

I think the issue in a program of sales is this:  If the Committee would want that same kind of 

conditionality and flexibility, that may be seen as a risk factor to the markets, and they may price 

some risk of more rapid sales that would be more disruptive. 

March 16, 2010 14 of 146



That’s the issue.  We’ve talked about this in past meetings, namely, that redemptions in 

some way are a commitment device to shed the portfolio only gradually.  And if you could 

achieve something equivalent through commitments, presumably you could do something 

similar through asset sales. 

MR. LACKER.  So you don’t think it’s infeasible for us to achieve that level of 

commitment. 

MR. SACK.  I don’t think it’s infeasible, but I think you have a tradeoff between wanting 

to retain flexibility and at the same time creating a perceived risk, at least, in the markets. 

MR. LACKER.  More broadly, I’m drawn to the idea of thinking about what reserve 

balance path we want and then choosing among a variety of ways to achieve that.  I’d feel more 

comfortable thinking about redemptions in that context. 

Regarding the RCAs, last week one of the GSEs, Fannie Mae, announced that it was 

dropping something like a dozen or so counterparties from its list of counterparties.  To me, this 

seems problematic for the theory of the usefulness of reserve collateral accounts, because the 

theory is that risk considerations lead the GSEs to limit the number of counterparties, and yet 

that’s costly to them because the resulting diminution of competition leads them to earn less on 

their invested funds.  So here they are voluntarily shedding a bunch of counterparties, which 

presumably is going to lead to their earning less on their funds.  And this is happening in an 

environment in which the broad trend is that institutions are getting less risky, not more.  Some 

of these institutions are less risky than institutions that are still on their counterparty list.  So I’m 

wondering how you’d square that observation with your theory. 

MR. McANDREWS.  The observation is that they are concerned about the risk.  It’s not 

necessary that they can unilaterally change the competitive conditions that they face.  So the fact 

March 16, 2010 15 of 146



that they shed almost half of their counterparties after September 2008 is consistent with their 

being very concerned about their risk.  The questions are whether any one individual GSE can 

change competitive conditions sufficiently to get higher interest rates, and what is essentially the 

elasticity of the interest rates that it would face if it expanded its counterparties.  That does not, 

however, suggest that it wouldn’t be beneficial to both the GSEs and, more importantly, the 

market for funds altogether, if there were a more competitive environment for the bidding for 

funds.  The Federal Reserve is paying 25 basis points to the banks for holding this risk-free asset, 

and that is not getting passed on, through a competitive mechanism, to nonbanks.  The RCA 

program is attempting to achieve that.  No individual GSE can affect competitive conditions very 

much by adding or dropping one counterparty. 

MR. LACKER.  The theory is all built on this restriction to the number of counterparties.  

I don’t see how arbitrarily adding counterparties is going to improve their competitive position in 

the model you wrote down, right?  I just don’t see how they’re unrelated. 

Another observation that I think is relevant here is that, at the same time, Fannie Mae 

approached a large Carolina-based institution to increase the amount of overnight fed funds 

lending it would do with the institution from $500 million to $5 billion, and Fannie Mae is doing 

this at 5 basis points.  This isn’t brokered, so it doesn’t enter the effective fed funds calculation, 

but I noticed that yesterday’s expected fed funds rate was around 20 basis points.  To me, this 

suggests that there’s a lot of other stuff going on in the market:  First, that leverage constraints 

could well be binding—there’s something limiting banks’ willingness to bid aggressively for 

funds to drive up the rate that Fannie Mae pays; second, that there’s some sort of relationship—

people do business with Fannie Mae across a broad array of products and services, so the funds 

rate might not be a particularly market-driven rate or a rate determined in isolation.  I also note 

March 16, 2010 16 of 146



that GSEs are active in the repo market and have an effect there and have the ability to arbitrage 

those two choices.  And the funds rate is at about the same level as the RP rate. 

More broadly, I think we ought to take two steps back and ask why we care about the 

effective funds rate.  The staff mentions two reasons.  One is as a measure of banks’ marginal 

opportunity cost of funds.  If that’s the purpose it was serving well before the crisis, let’s take a 

step back and ask how to measure that.  Presumably, there still exists a bank’s marginal 

opportunity cost of funds.  The natural question seems to be, “Why isn’t IOER the best estimate 

of that”?  The staff also mentions a tighter link to IOER.  I’m not quite sure why we care about 

that per se.  Our quantitative easing has driven down market rates, so you’d expect a broad array 

of market rates, including RP rates, to be driven down, and that pulls down the fed funds rate. 

I’m not sure why we want a technical measure to undo that. 

We have the effective fed funds rate, a measure of bank’s marginal opportunity cost of 

funds, and dramatic changes in the policy regime make that a much less perfect measure.  It 

seems that we’re trying to make a structural fix in order to get that measure what it used to 

measure.  I think it makes more sense to take a step back and ask, “How do we want to measure 

this best?” 

If you look at the effective fed funds rate mechanism, too, it’s sort of antiquated.  We 

take rate and volume data from a set of brokers—it’s just a fraction of the market—and the 

volume is relatively small.  People can move transactions out of brokers or into brokers and 

affect the rate.  I heard a rumor that Citibank is unwilling to take trades through brokers at less 

than 10 basis points, but they’ll do it if you call them up.  I don’t know what that’s about. If we 

really want to measure the funds rate more accurately, we could ask for everybody to report all 

March 16, 2010 17 of 146



fed funds trades, right?  We could put a new transaction code in Fedwire.  So this just doesn’t 

seem to be solving the right problem, and that’s my reaction to the RCAs. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So if the difference between the IOER rate and the market 

rate doesn’t matter, then we should just raise the IOER rate and ignore all of these reserve-

draining issues.  Yes?  

MR. LACKER.  I don’t think that building the mechanism is worth doing.  Now, I’m not 

saying we ignore the fed funds rate.  I don’t think we ignore the RP rate.  We don’t ignore 

commercial paper rates.  We don’t ignore a lot of rates.  If we want the fed funds rate to be close 

to the IOER rate, making reserves scarcer seems like a logical strategy, and I think that would 

help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two distinct questions, and one of them 

is on the RCA.  In part my comments are somewhat sympathetic with President Lacker’s, I think.  

For those of us who are not really sure, it’s a very confusing issue.  I don’t want to give up on the 

funds rate spread per se.  I guess you could say, “If we wanted the funds rate to be firm at 25 

basis points, we should drain reserves.”  That’s a little further than I would think we would want 

to take this. 

From a first-order standpoint, it seems to me that the GSEs have a bunch of funds.  In the 

first-order effect, they are lying dormant, and they’re not allocated, and maybe they’re getting 

five basis points or maybe they’re not getting anything.  In this proposal, those dormant funds, 

on which they’re getting five basis points from a bank, then get placed with the Fed and earn the 

IOER rate.  The GSEs then get part of that surplus.  That’s not allocative for credit.  That’s just 

giving the GSEs a gift. 

March 16, 2010 18 of 146



The paragraph on what the implications are for other financial markets depends on that 

constraint not being slack.  So those funds just stay in the same place.  I don’t think that this has 

any real effect.  That’s really my question:  Is it allocative?  On top of that, I was surprised by the 

commentary that this is going to make the brokered market seem more idiosyncratic.  I thought it 

meant that the brokered market would give us a better idea of what the marginal investor cost 

actually would be.  I wasn’t expecting that.  Is that off base? 

MR. McANDREWS.  Your point about the allocation of rents between the GSEs and the 

banks is well taken.  But the point of the RCAs is to create a competitive environment for the 

purchase of funds generally.  And this will set a harder floor on rates as conveyed by the IOER 

rate.  Again, the problem is essentially that the Fed is paying 25 basis points, and yet that 

monetary impetus is not being passed on to nonbanks generally.  In a frictionless banking 

system, the funding rate for banks would be bid up to 25 basis points.  That underlies Jeff’s 

comments that the IOER rate should be the funding rate of banks.  In fact, it’s the rate that banks 

earn on a certain asset, but through competition we would expect the funding rate to be equal to 

the IOER rate.  In fact, it’s well below the IOER rate now, and so RCAs are intended to make the 

link much tighter. 

Another point is with regard to the volatility of that spread between the funds rate and the 

IOER rate.  With a more competitive environment at such high levels of reserves, we expect very 

little volatility between the market rates and the IOER rate, such as we’ve seen just recently. 

Finally, on measurement, and perhaps Brian can talk about this, we are considering better 

ways of measuring market rates generally, and we expect that the RCA would lead to higher 

market rates not just in the measured effective federal funds rate but in repo rates and euro dollar 

rates. 

March 16, 2010 19 of 146



MR. EVANS.  I just don’t see that channel between markets in your analysis.  That was 

my basic point.  It seems to me like the competitive channel is blocked because the funds rate 

channel is still largely a slack constraint.  Maybe as interest rates go up, it would tend to bite a 

little bit more. 

MR. McANDREWS.  We discussed it.  At current rates of euro dollars and RPs, with 

RCAs banks would certainly start borrowing euro dollars and RPs.  That would increase demand 

in those markets and lead those rates to rise as well.  So that’s a fundamental linkage between 

those market rates. 

MR. EVANS.  If people want to borrow these funds, why don’t they go to the GSEs and 

offer 10 basis points? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s the problem.  I think it is allocative, because IOER is 

restricted—there’s a barrier, in that IOER is essentially restricted to banks.  Banks are not doing 

the arbitrage of relating that IOER rate to other money market rates.  This reduces the barrier, 

essentially allowing other money markets to be tied more closely to IOER.  It should transmit the 

effects of IOER more strongly through other money markets.  That’s the intention. 

MR. EVANS.  Okay.  Let me move on to my second question.  It has to do with Brian 

Sack’s discussion.  I think I heard you say the survey of the dealers on the effect of our MBS 

purchases had changed from 60 basis points to 10 basis points now, and I don’t think I heard that 

there was a change in the path of purchases.  Does that mean that they just had a very bad guess 

initially?  If that’s the case, are there other aspects of our analysis where this would have some 

implications for how we estimate the effects of our LSAPs?  The staff estimate of the effect is 

80 basis points for the entire program and, if we adopt a Treasury redemption strategy, 20 basis 

points.  Does that change our thinking on that at all? 

March 16, 2010 20 of 146



MR. SACK.  For the first part of the question, I think the answer is yes, they had a bad 

guess.  And they essentially just gradually whittled down that guess over time as the effects 

didn’t materialize.  We sat at the table talking about when we would expect to see these effects, 

and they just never came, so they gradually shrank their estimates. 

In terms of what it means for how we assess the program, the fact that the market may 

not react to our moving away from the LSAPs could have two interpretations:  One is that the 

LSAPs didn’t do anything; the other is that the effect of the LSAPs was mainly through the stock 

of our holdings.  The staff, at least, puts the weight on the second argument.  The flow effects are 

smaller than we thought.  The stock effects are probably still there.  We believe they are there 

from various types of empirical evidence.  And, of course, that has important policy 

implications—it means that the effect on long rates isn’t going to reverse quickly; it’s only going 

to reverse gradually as the stock of our holdings diminishes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I want to tie the two together because I actually am 

concerned not by the presenter, Brian, but by the content of his presentation.  As exhibit 2 shows, 

all of those things we set out to accomplish, we did and we did well.  Central bankers should 

never pat themselves on the back, but I think those are all positive outcomes.  What bothers me is 

exhibit 4, chart 19.  According to the memo Brian sent out earlier, we will wind up with 

69 percent of our portfolio concentrated—I’m talking about the asset side of our balance sheet—

in GSE securities. 

Mr. Chairman, you expressed this eloquently in your testimony, and all of us have 

repeated it, and, Brian, you repeated it this morning.  You used the word “ultimately.”  I’m 

wondering when “ultimately” is in terms of getting back to having an all-Treasury portfolio.  

March 16, 2010 21 of 146



We’re stuck with a massive portfolio of GSEs.  Speaking personally, I don’t want to be there at 

all.  I’m concerned that we have somehow avoided the question; and, in fact, through statements 

that are being made before we have complete unanimity at this table or at least agreement at this 

table, we’re saying we’re not going to be selling GSE securities until we raise rates and other 

things to that effect.  This little yellow section here in that chart and even more dramatically in 

the table and the pictures you provided in your briefing memo raise my question:  When is 

“ultimately”? 

Second, in the excellent briefings you’ve provided and the Board briefing that was 

provided yesterday, which was superb, we note that there’s pent-up demand for GSE securities.  

We’ve taken that market away.  So my question is:  If most managers are underweight MBS, 

why don’t we sell to them and take advantage of it?  I’m all for Treasury redemptions, by the 

way, but why are we, in a sense, putting Treasuries before MBS?  That doesn’t make sense to 

me.  I’d be interested in the Desk’s answer.  If, indeed, we have pent-up investor demand, would 

you give us some sense of how serious that is? 

I also have a comment that links to the issue of RCAs.  RCAs have the benefits that have 

been outlined.  But I’m also looking at some of the negatives, which you point out in your paper.  

It will probably shrink the federal funds market.  That diminishes the role of the FOMC to a 

degree, at least given the way we used to operate.  And a super cynic would say not only were 

the GSEs accomplices to the housing and financial crisis—we were cleaning up that mess by 

buying up that portfolio, as we have particularly in two areas of the maturities spectrum; we are 

at 80 percent of the market—but now we’re also handmaidens to cleaning up, in a sense, the 

mess they are creating in the fed funds market. 

March 16, 2010 22 of 146



So I’m very uncomfortable—and I want to get this out up front—with the buildup in GSE 

holdings.  I’d like to get a sense from the Desk of what is the resolution and what does the word 

“ultimately” mean.  Second, I want to suggest that we go very slowly on this RCA concept.  

There’s a key statement in the very good paper that you wrote, where you say this is a 

“permanent modification to the reserve account framework.”  A permanent modification to the 

reserve account framework to me warrants, Mr. Chairman, a great deal more discussion than just 

saying “go ahead and continue the process.”  I have mostly made a statement, but I have also 

asked a question.  Brian, when is “ultimately?”  When do we get out of this stuff?  And do you 

think it’s wise, operating the Desk, for us to end up in 2014 with 69 percent of our assets 

invested in mortgage-backed securities? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, let me interject, because that’s something 

we discussed.  Brian was talking just about redemption strategy.  Now, at the last meeting, 

President Kocherlakota presented what he called a “reverse taper strategy,” which involved a 

program of sales, not a huge program in the short term, but over time, a gradual and pre-

announced program.  And I thought there was a good bit of comfort around the table with that 

general approach.  The advantage of that approach is that it does bring us down, not 

immediately, but over a reasonable period of time, to an all-Treasury portfolio, and I think that’s 

where we all want to be.  But this is only about redemptions. 

If I may say one more thing—I don’t want to be using the clock as a defense, but I do 

think there’s no hope that we’re going to resolve these exit issues completely today, and I think 

that we ought to make sure at the two-day meeting in April that we completely review all of 

these issues.  If there’s not comfort with going ahead with RCAs, I think there’s already some 

question about whether or not we want to make a decision today.  It looks like we do not want to 

March 16, 2010 23 of 146



make a decision today on the Treasury redemptions.  That’s fine.  So we can put these things off.  

But I don’t think we’re going to come to a final conclusion.  Regarding Brian’s presentation, it 

was about looking strictly at a redemption strategy.  I thought there was a lot of agreement 

around the table that we do want to have sales, but that the proposal was to do them in a gradual, 

pre-announced way. 

MR. FISHER.  And I don’t want to take too much time because we do have to run against 

the clock, Mr. Chairman, but it seems to me that the tone at the table has been “hold back on 

sales of mortgage-backed securities until we raise rates,” and I don’t believe that has been agreed 

at the table.  This is a derivative of the broader issue, which is the MBS, and I guess I should say 

I’m uncomfortable with question number four.  I don’t have a problem with the first three 

questions, but for number four, I’d say “Whoa, Nelly.” 

MR. SACK.  I’m not sure what I’m supposed to answer.  I mean, your observation is 

correct.  Under a redemption-only strategy, it takes a very long time to shed the MBS. 

MR. FISHER.  So ultimately is 2025, 2050? 

MR. SACK.  Well, we’ll have some MBS holdings on our books for 30 years 

essentially—not much, since the securities will be paid down under the redemption strategy.  

But, as that memo shows, at the end of 2011 we still have $943 billion of MBS, and at the end of 

2015, I think we still have $715 billion of MBS on the books.  It does take quite a long period of 

time under a redemption-only strategy. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Brian. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you.  Two questions that I’ll pose as questions.  [Laughter]  First, 

on the RCAs, Jamie, if the intent of the statute from the Congress is that you can’t pay interest on 

March 16, 2010 24 of 146



excess reserves to the GSEs and we design a product that effectively lets them get some piece of 

that, is that consistent in the eyes of the working group with what the legislative directive is? 

MR. McANDREWS.  I think that whether we use reverse RPs, term deposit facility, or 

RCAs, the GSEs will have to get paid a higher rate for the federal funds rate to rise.  An element 

common to reverse RPs, RCAs, and term deposits is that GSEs would receive higher interest 

rates in the market by their counterparties—under RRPs, it would be by the Federal Reserve—

but the intent is to raise market rates in a way that they would earn higher rates in the market.  

Again, when the Congress gave the Fed the authority to pay interest on reserves, the idea was to 

avoid the reserve tax for banks, and essentially it was an oversight that many other entities—the 

Treasury, the GSEs, the World Bank, and so on—had balances at the Federal Reserve, but they 

were not reserve balances.  The fact that the GSEs are heavy users of the federal funds market is 

essentially an unhappy coincidence.  What we’d simply like to achieve is a very competitive 

environment when they’re out selling their funds, and that competitive environment would be 

conveyed to all sellers of funds who are funding banks.  It would be essentially a healthier 

market overall and not something that would benefit the GSEs necessarily.  So we think it’s 

perfectly consistent with the legislative mandate. 

MR. WARSH.  My second question is for Brian, and I should know the answer to it and 

don’t.  It’s about the CDS on New York and California, as an example.  If states can’t go 

bankrupt, what triggers the CDS contract?  Just nonpayment for a while? 

MR. SACK.  Yes.  The possibilities outside of bankruptcy are a disruption to coupon 

payments or, maybe in extreme cases, debt restructuring.  Either of those in some cases can be 

considered default events. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you. 

March 16, 2010 25 of 146



CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be brief.  I guess some of my questions 

have been asked and answered, but I will say a couple of things.  Your clarification helps me, 

because I also wasn’t clear on what the purpose of the discussion around redemptions was, but 

you’re telling me it is one part of a broader issue. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s correct. 

MR. HOENIG.  I think the discussion in April would be very good because the goal for 

me is to get the excess reserve levels down as quickly as possible.  So I’m very much in favor of 

Treasury redemptions and also the systematic sale of the mortgage-backed securities to the 

extent the market can handle it without being disrupted.  So that, I think, is the most important 

element that we can have as a discussion item. 

On the RCAs, I do associate myself a little bit with President Lacker and President 

Evans.  I see it as more of a transfer than really a competitive enhancer into the market.  The 

enhancement is by giving the guarantee—you basically transfer earnings over to the GSEs.  

They’ve chosen to narrow their scope in terms of whom they’ll have as a counterparty.  That’s 

their choice.  I don’t know that we need to get involved in that.  I don’t think we’re going to 

gather that much more information, especially if we focus on getting the excess reserves down as 

quickly as possible.  So I’ll leave it at that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to echo some of the 

things that have been said already.  I, too, share President Fisher’s concerns about the fraction of 

the MBS that’s shown in the projections.  I was glad to hear the Chairman’s affirmation that we 

want to be moving into an all-Treasury portfolio ultimately, well before 2040.  I recognize the 

March 16, 2010 26 of 146



communications issue, and I’ll offer some suggestions later today about how we might think 

about the communications challenges.  But I think it would be useful for the staff to provide us 

with some alternative paths for the structure of the portfolio would look like under alternative 

sales patterns.  So that’s actually a comment, not a question. 

And I’ll offer yet another comment, on the RCAs.  I would feel much more comfortable 

with this proposal if I had a really strong sense that it would fix the problem at hand, and I just 

don’t have that.  I do not have a sense that we know how the GSEs will change their behavior 

and how the depository institutions that will enter into the contract would change their behavior 

when this kind of contractual change appears.  Until we have that, I’m not sure why we’re going 

forward with all of this work.  I felt the proposal is backwards.  It seemed as if we’re going to do 

all of the work first and then engage the GSEs and their possible counterparties as needed to 

determine an interest in entering RCA agreements.  It seems wrong to me.  It seems as if we 

want to figure out what’s their interest level, and, given their interest level, what’s going to 

happen as a result of that in the market before we do all of the work.  So that was my concern 

about RCAs. 

In terms of the redemptions, as President Hoenig said, I’m all in favor of reducing excess 

reserves.  The staff seems to feel the passive redemptions have small price effects that happen 

once.  I’m not sure I understand it fully, but that’s great.  So let’s do it that way. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be very brief because I’ll echo some of 

the points that have already been made.  In terms of redemptions, I’m all in favor of them.  I 

think the important thing about where we’re going is not just the size of the balance sheet, as 

President Kocherlakota just said, but also the composition.  I’m uncomfortable with a 

March 16, 2010 27 of 146



redemptions-only policy of either one because at the end of 2014, we’ve still got almost 

70 percent of our SOMA portfolio in MBS, and that’s not a satisfactory outcome.  So we need to 

change the composition as well as the size. 

On the RCAs, I’m very dubious about their benefits.  I’m very worried that this will be 

read by the press and others as a way for the Fed to provide backdoor interest on reserves to the 

GSEs, and I think we will look bad in that process.  I don’t believe it’s necessarily going to be 

effective.  And I worry that if our long-term objectives are to return to, let’s say, some kind of 

corridor system, the RCAs may put at risk the functioning of the fed funds market.  Are we then 

shooting ourselves in the foot, making the return to a corridor system more difficult, or will we 

be forced into looking at other interest rates? 

So I think all of this stuff kind of needs to be looked at collectively.  As President 

Kocherlakota just said, we need to look at scenarios that meet all of our objectives, including:  

what is our long-term operating regime going to be, how are we going to get back to an all-

Treasuries portfolio, and how are we going to reduce excess reserves.  All of those things are 

intertwined with each other, and we need to look at them collectively and not as one-off 

decisions.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My answers to the four questions reflect my 

overriding conviction that there’s no case at present to tighten monetary policy, and for this 

reason I don’t favor redeeming Treasuries at this time.  I could eventually see doing that.  I see 

Treasury redemptions as a modest tightening of policy in two respects.  First, an announcement 

of Treasury redemptions would likely be perceived by markets as an indication that we’re close 

to raising the policy rate, and I think we saw just such a communication hazard with the 

March 16, 2010 28 of 146



renormalization of the discount rate.  Second, any direct effect from our asset purchases that 

lowered Treasury yields would presumably be reversed through redemptions.  Indeed, I think a 

case could be made for maintaining the status quo, which would preserve the current duration of 

the SOMA portfolio and provide the maximum downward pull on longer-term yields and 

mortgage rates.  But that said, I think there are benefits to reducing SOMA interest rate risk.  So I 

could certainly support option 3 which would involve reinvestment into bills and two- or three-

year notes.  I also support the current approach of not reinvesting agency securities.  Of course, 

that is also a marginal tightening of policy, but it is offset by the benefit of moving us more 

rapidly towards the Treasury-only portfolio. 

On the reserve collateral accounts, I think the staff has done a lot of good work, but I 

have to say I share some of the concerns that have been expressed by others here.  I am worried 

about introducing a facility that’s geared solely to overcoming legislative restrictions on the 

GSEs’ ability to earn interest, and I share the concern that, by expanding to such a great extent 

trading reserves outside the brokered fed funds market, we can end up undermining the 

functioning of the brokered fed funds market.  I think that, especially when reserves are so large, 

the consequences for the behavior and volatility of the effective fed funds rate really concern me. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN: Are we going to have a go-around, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m trying to avoid it, but I’m not being successful.  

[Laughter]  Let me make a proposal, if I might, just to condition the rest of the comments that 

people might make.  I haven’t heard any objections to continuing our interim policy of 

redeeming MBS and agency securities.  I’m seeing nodding around the table. 

March 16, 2010 29 of 146



It’s clear we need to have an overall discussion.  Several people have made the point that 

we need to look at this in a general equilibrium way, that we need to put together all of the 

different components.  I think that’s right, and I was going to propose—I have proposed—that 

we revisit the entire strategy in April, including both the short-term reserve-draining issues and 

also the long-term strategy for returning to a Treasury-only portfolio.  So let’s do that.  Given 

that, my proposal would be that we put off making any decision on Treasury redemptions until 

we have that full discussion and, for the time being, continue to roll over Treasuries. 

On the RCAs, clearly, there is some reluctance there.  Let me ask Jamie—I don’t know 

the answer to this—is it possible to do some additional thinking about this tool, to be prepared to 

present to the Committee some further considerations both of the practicalities and of the 

economics, as well as of what goals we are trying to achieve, but not to make it public between 

now and April that we are looking at this.  I guess the minutes will say we’re looking at 

alternative tools, but in the next meeting this would be part of the overall discussion of how we 

were going to go back to achieve both our short-term and our long-term goals.  Is that a 

satisfactory way forward?  [Nodded assent.] 

Okay.  So given that, which means that everybody will indeed have an opportunity to 

express their full views on all of these issues, I’m happy still to entertain any additional questions 

that remain.  Are there any other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Mr. Chairman, if we do it that way, then, sometimes press will come 

up and ask about this issue, and so we should just say we are not looking at it, or we should say 

that we are looking at some mechanisms to push the fed funds rate up? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher raised implicitly a question about my 

testimony on exit strategy.  I brought a copy just in case we wanted to talk about it.  I did try to 

March 16, 2010 30 of 146



make it a contingent discussion.  My understanding—again, maybe I over-read the sense of the 

Committee—of the discussion following President Kocherlakota’s proposal at the last meeting 

was, on the one hand, that the majority, though not unanimous, view was that we did not want to 

use MBS sales as a principal means of short-term reserve reduction, that we are going to look at 

RRPs and term deposits as the more immediate short-term method of reducing reserves, because 

of the concerns that even one MBS sale would trigger unknown revisions of expectations in the 

market, which could lead to very sharp changes in longer-term rates and in mortgage rates. 

That was my sense on the one hand.  On the other hand, I think there was also a very 

broad acceptance of the proposal that redemptions alone were not going to be sufficient to get us 

back to a Treasury-only portfolio.  And I was very clear in my testimony that sales were going to 

be part of this process, but that they would be well-communicated and deliberate, etc. 

Now, if I have overstepped the consensus, I apologize.  I have to warn you that the 

testimony which was postponed because of snow has now been rescheduled for next week, and I 

don’t see any alternative to just resubmitting the same testimony.  I don’t see any way to change 

that.  I think there is some flexibility there.  I think it’s fine to hedge a bit and just say we’re still 

discussing exactly how this will work. 

MR. BULLARD.  I actually just meant on this GSE issue, because we have some bright 

people in the markets, and so, if they’re talking in markets then it might come up. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the thing which I think is already known in markets is 

that we’re looking at reverse RPs for GSEs.  So I think that’s sufficient. Okay?  

MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  So I’ll just say that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher.  

March 16, 2010 31 of 146



MR. FISHER.  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to make sure, because, again, we do 

get asked about GSEs.  I don’t think we’re asked about the RCAs.  I haven’t gotten a question on 

that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  RCAs are not going to be made public until the next 

meeting. 

MR. FISHER.  On GSEs, the question is—and it may have been misinterpreted, Brian, 

from something you may have said—whether we would contemplate selling GSEs before or 

after we raise the base rate.  The timing is the question that we get now from the more 

sophisticated audiences.  I would like some guidance, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I will be quite frank.  My own strong preference is 

that we do not sell MBS until we have a longer-term plan. 

MR. FISHER.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re going to have to withdraw hundreds of billions of 

dollars of reserves at the time we begin to raise the short-term rate.  I don’t see any way to sell 

hundreds of billions of dollars of MBS without having very sharp implications for longer-term 

rates and for mortgage rates.  I think it is much safer to use the reserve-draining mechanism in 

the short run and to have a path, an announced path, for selling MBS over the medium term.  

That would be my personal preference, and I’ve stated it as my preference.  If you disagree with 

that, of course, you are free to say so.  Maybe the best thing is for all of us to make sure that we 

emphasize that there is still discussion going on in the Committee about the issue. 

MR. FISHER.  I think that’s probably the sensible answer—we are still discussing the 

issue. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We are discussing it, and we will discuss it further in April. 

March 16, 2010 32 of 146



MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman, one possible source of confusion is that President 

Kocherlakota proposed that we begin midyear with this reverse taper.  And in your summary at 

the end of our discussion—I have the transcript, I brought it—you don’t comment on the timing.  

Presumably we didn’t think we were going to raise rates before midyear.  So I came away with a 

very different sense.  I mean, your summary didn’t give me the same sense that your testimony 

did. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, part of this is my own view, obviously, but President 

Kocherlakota’s proposal was to sell very, very small amounts in 2010, $5 billion a month or 

something—very small amounts—so that the fundamental observation I took from that was that 

whenever this path of pre-announced gradual sales were to begin, clearly we would not be 

relying on it as a major tool for draining reserves.  I think that was implicit in the discussion, 

because he was talking about relatively small amounts of sales.  So we will just have to continue 

to discuss this and try to get further clarity.  President Kocherlakota, do you want to defend your 

own—[laughter] 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think my own concern about 

the public discussion—your testimony, some of the statements that have been made by the other 

Presidents—is that a lot of this is about the short run, notwithstanding what I said in my memo.  I 

think your testimony did summarize what I took away as the sense of the Committee, which was 

that people want to wait.  Personally, I disagree with that, but it was my sense of what people on 

the Committee thought.  Having said that, I think that there hasn’t been quite enough emphasis in 

public about the longer run, that there’s going to have to be a fair amount of active selling at 

March 16, 2010 33 of 146



some point, if we want to be out of MBS by 2020.  So that would be my concern about the public 

statements. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I will read you the sentence, if you’d like, but there’s a clear 

statement of that in my testimony.  Anyone else?  [No response.]  Okay.  Now that that’s all 

clearly resolved, [laughter] we need a vote to ratify the Domestic Open Market operations.  

MR. KOHN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Without objection.  Let’s turn now to Item 2, the 

economic situation, and Dave Stockton. 

MR. STOCKTON.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the shortness of time we 

that have available this morning, I considered moving FOMC proceedings to a whole 

new level of efficiency by Twittering my briefing [laughter], with a Tweet something 

along the lines of “Recovery remains on track, though headwinds continue to be 

evident.”  But, proving that we are still in Washington, I was informed by the FOMC 

Secretariat that any proposals for improvements in efficiency require a detailed study, 

formal reports, and approval by a subcommittee of FOMC members, preferably 

chaired by Governor Kohn [laughter].  Appropriately chastened, I will try to remain 

brief within the confines of the traditional format. 

 

 

2 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

The bottom line is that, although the incoming data have required some modest 

adjustments in our projection, they have generally been supportive of our view that 

the economy in the midst of a moderate recovery.  Perhaps the most encouraging 

readings have been centered on private demands—both from consumers and 

businesses.  It now appears that consumer spending has been on a solid uptrend since 

the summer.  Indeed, last week’s figures on nominal retail sales, which were released 

after the Greenbook was completed, showed an increase in spending on consumer 

goods other than motor vehicles of nearly 1 percent in February.  That gain was 

considerably larger than we had expected, and has led us to revise up our projected 

growth in overall real PCE by a bit more than ½ percentage point to an annual rate of 

about 3 percent in the current quarter. 

In the business sector, outlays for capital equipment have staged an appreciable 

turnaround in the last couple of quarters.  Businesses have upped their purchases of 

motor vehicles, and there has been a noticeable quickening in the pace of spending on 

high-tech equipment.  The recent improvement in tech spending has been reasonably 

congruent with widespread reports that many firms are increasing outlays on 

computers and communications equipment in order to replace aging equipment and 

upgrade networks.  Even outside of transportation and high-tech investment, more 

                                                 

March 16, 2010 34 of 146



traditional capital spending appears to have flattened out late last year and to have 

posted a solid gain in the first quarter, after plunging in late 2008 and early 2009.  

And with new orders continuing to trend up in this area and survey data pointing to 

improved business confidence, the prospects for further gains look favorable, though 

I’d hasten to admit that given the volatility of these data, this outcome is far from 

assured. 

 

 

 

 

 

The broad-based improvements in household and business spending over the past 

six months, in combination with the steep cuts in production that occurred during the 

recession, have gone a long way toward eliminating the inventory overhangs that 

were so prevalent in middle of last year.  Indeed, we experienced the powerful upside 

of the inventory cycle in the fourth quarter, when firms boosted production 

substantially to limit further liquidation of their stocks.  That process has not yet fully 

run its course, and we expect firms to boost production further in coming months as 

inventory liquidation gradually gives way to a modest pace of restocking later this 

year. 

The efforts by firms to better align production and sales have been reflected in the 

rebound in manufacturing production that has been under way since last July.  We 

reported yesterday that manufacturing output dropped 0.2 percent in February, but 

that figure was held down by the snowstorms and by the temporary suspension of 

some production lines by Toyota.  It also comes on the heels of an increase of nearly 

1 percent in January.  Positive readings from the national and regional purchasing 

managers continue to point to moderate gains in factory output in coming months, 

and that is what we are projecting. 

Even the labor market has been providing more favorable signals of late.  The 

unemployment rate fell 0.3 percentage point to 9.7 percent in January and then held at 

that lower level in February.  Although private payrolls contracted another 18,000 last 

month, our best guess is that, if not for the snowstorms, jobs would have increased by 

something in the vicinity of 75,000.  There have been other encouraging indicators as 

well:  Temporary help employment has increased in each of the last five months, 

help-wanted advertising is moving up, and the workweek looks to be firming. 

But our projected upturn in employment still remains very much a forecast.  Most 

troubling for our projection, initial claims for unemployment insurance have shown 

little further improvement since January and remain above levels that we would think 

consistent with any noticeable increase in employment.  Likewise, most hiring 

indicators, such as the January reading from the JOLTS data, have shown little to no 

discernible improvement. 

All told, we are reasonably confident that the economy has moved onto an 

expansion track.  But we remain uncertain about whether the current expansion is in 

the process of transitioning into the above-trend growth in output and spending that 

we are forecasting.  Still, we think that accommodative monetary policy, a 

diminishing drag on spending from the earlier declines in household wealth, and 

March 16, 2010 35 of 146



further gradual improvements in overall financial conditions should provide sufficient 

impetus to aggregate demand to more than offset the waning fiscal stimulus.  In our 

forecast, real GDP grows 3¼ percent this year and then steps up to a 4½ percent pace 

in 2011, a pattern of growth that only trims the unemployment rate to 9½ percent by 

the end of this year, but puts a more perceptible dent in unemployment next year 

when the rate falls to 8¼ percent. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Although the general contour of our forecast is the same as in January, we have 

marked down growth this year and next in response to some disappointments in the 

recent data that bring into sharper focus some of the headwinds that the economy still 

confronts. 

Housing is at the top of that list.  To be sure, the snowstorms, the effects of the 

homebuyer tax credits, and the usual difficulties in extracting a signal about sales and 

construction during the winter months make any assessment about underlying activity 

in this sector especially uncertain.  But we’ve seen enough bad news across enough 

indicators to make us think our January forecast was too optimistic.  This morning’s 

data on housing starts support that view.  Single-family starts remained at about 

500,000 units last month, as did single-family permits—figures noticeably below our 

January forecast.  Both series have been moving sideways for the past six months.  In 

light of the steady stream of downbeat indicators, we are projecting a lower path for 

starts and sales and have accordingly marked down our projection of residential 

investment both this year and next. 

The other prominent area where the incoming information has led us to rethink 

our forecast has been the state and local sector.  Both the data on employment and on 

construction for this sector have surprised us to the downside in recent months.  

Although these governments are receiving considerable support from federal fiscal 

stimulus monies, the support has not prevented some significant retrenchment in their 

spending of late.  In our current forecast, we are expecting state and local purchases 

to be flat this year at a lower level and then only edge up in 2011—a noticeably softer 

picture than was painted by our January projection. 

The weaker outlook for activity in housing and in the state and local sectors, 

combined with downward revisions to the published data on labor income that were 

discussed in the Greenbook and a stronger dollar, led us to mark down projected 

growth of real GDP both this year and next by about ¼ percentage point. 

For now, we view these revisions as modest adjustments to a forecast that remains 

one of gradually accelerating activity.  But they highlight some of the obstacles the 

economy faces in returning to more robust growth. 

Turning to inflation, we have also made only modest adjustments to our price 

projection.  Core PCE prices came in lower in January than we had expected, leading 

us to mark down our projection by about ½ percentage point to an increase of 

¾ percent at an annual rate in the current quarter.  That revision along with lower-

March 16, 2010 36 of 146



than-expected food prices also took about ½ percentage point off our forecast of total 

PCE prices, which was reduced to show an increase of 1½ percent at an annual rate in 

the first quarter.   

 

 

 

 

  

Over the medium term, we marked down our forecast of core inflation by 

0.2 percentage point in 2010 and a tenth in 2011 in response to the favorable 

incoming price data and sharp downward revisions in readings on labor 

compensation.  But with inflation expectations holding steady, we didn’t see a larger 

revision as being warranted at this time.  All told, we expect total PCE prices to 

increase 1.3 percent this year and 1 percent in 2011, a bit lower than in our January 

forecast.  Nathan will continue our presentation.  

MR. SHEETS.  Economic activity abroad has continued to gain steam, but the 

pace of recovery across regions remains uneven.  Foreign GDP growth in the fourth 

quarter came in at 4¾ percent, nearly 2 percentage points stronger than we had 

expected.  Notable upside surprises were recorded in Canada, Latin America, and 

through much of Asia.  However, concerns about the ongoing stresses in Southern 

Europe, the slightly softer outlook for U.S. activity, and our judgment that the fourth-

quarter rise reflected in part a temporary boost from inventories have all tempered 

any inclination to mark up our forecast.  As such, we continue to expect foreign 

growth to average about 3¾ percent through the next two years, with a small upward 

revision in the first half of this year and a modest downward revision thereafter.  We 

anticipate that private final demand will gradually firm, as financial headwinds 

continue to subside, labor market conditions improve, and monetary policy remains 

accommodative. 

The global recovery continues to be led by the emerging market economies.  

Recent data suggest that China’s economy is expanding at a near double-digit pace, 

driven by solid domestic demand and firming international trade.  With inflation now 

moving up, the Chinese authorities will continue to tighten policy in the months 

ahead, with particular emphasis on keeping credit growth in check. 

The recovery also appears to be strengthening in Latin America.  The Brazilian 

economy has been buoyant, with some confidence indicators reaching all-time highs.  

And in Mexico, fourth-quarter activity surged at an energetic 8½ percent rate, 

reflecting strong manufacturing output and rising exports to the United States—in 

line with the continued recovery in automotive trade.  Going forward, we expect 

Mexican growth to step down to a still solid 4 percent pace, broadly in line with the 

forecast for the United States. 

In the advanced economies, growth prospects are more mixed.  Canadian 

domestic demand remains strong, with GDP projected to rise 3½ percent on average 

over the next two years.  Growth in Japan may finally be getting its footing.  

Supported by strong exports to Asia, Japanese GDP expanded solidly in the fourth 

quarter, and recent data have been encouraging.  Nevertheless, with persistent 

March 16, 2010 37 of 146



deflation, nominal GDP back to 1991 levels, and public debt approaching 200 percent 

of GDP, Japanese policymakers face some daunting challenges. 

   

 

 

 

 

Ongoing stresses in Greece and other Southern European countries are weighing 

on the outlook for the euro area.  Greek spreads over comparable German bunds 

remain elevated but retreated some following the Greek government’s announcement 

of sizable fiscal cuts designed to narrow the budget deficit by 4 percent of GDP this 

year.  The introduction of these measures also appears to have greatly improved the 

prospects for financial support from other EU countries.  Given these developments, 

we are hopeful that the financial stresses in Greece will now gradually abate.  

However, this outcome is far from certain and, in any event, the planned path of fiscal 

retrenchment is likely to restrain Greek activity severely over the next several years. 

Triggered by the ongoing stresses in Greece, financial markets have become 

increasingly attuned to sovereign risk.  While to date these concerns have been 

principally focused on Southern Europe, there are other countries in the world that 

face a troubled fiscal outlook.  If market pressures were to force a broader group of 

countries to consolidate their budget positions sharply, the negative impulse to global 

growth could be substantial.  Increased anxieties regarding sovereign risk also could 

create stresses for the global banking system—both through banks’ direct holdings of 

sovereign credit and through higher funding costs and increased macroeconomic 

uncertainties.  Recent developments have also highlighted some key weaknesses in 

the institutional infrastructure of the euro area, including the limited capacity to 

provide conditional financial support to a stressed member and the lack of any sort of 

streamlined and transparent decisionmaking apparatus.   

Recent data for the euro area have been generally downbeat, with GDP rising at a 

meager ½ percent pace in the fourth quarter and more recent indicators also indicating 

little momentum.  That said, the latest release of industrial production data, which 

came in after the Greenbook closed, was more encouraging.  These data showed a 

record increase in January and pointed both to stronger first-quarter GDP growth than 

we had envisioned in the Greenbook and to an upward revision for the fourth quarter.   

Activity in the United Kingdom expanded at a disappointing 1¼ percent pace in 

the fourth quarter.  We expect that ongoing balance sheet pressures in the household 

and financial sectors and strains from prospective fiscal retrenchment will weigh 

heavily on U.K. activity through the forecast period. 

Increased concerns about the outlook for Europe have led us—and the markets—

to push back the timing of rate hikes by the Bank of England and the ECB.  We now 

anticipate that the BOE will remain on hold until early next year and the ECB for a 

couple of quarters longer.  In contrast, we continue to expect that the Bank of Canada 

will lift off in the second half of 2010.  Other industrial country commodity 

producers—notably, Australia and Norway—have already started to hike rates.  

Likewise, several emerging market economies have also begun to tighten monetary 

policy, and others are expected to start soon. 

March 16, 2010 38 of 146



 

 

 

The dollar has risen slightly on balance since the last Greenbook, gaining more 

than 4 percent against the euro and 8 percent against plummeting sterling.  The 

decline in the U.K. currency reflects growing concerns over the country’s fiscal 

outlook and a rise in political risk, as polls increasingly suggest a hung parliament 

following the May general election.  But the dollar is down some against the 

Canadian dollar and several major EME currencies, in line with the strong recent data 

for these countries.  Going forward, we continue to project that the broad real dollar 

will depreciate at roughly a 3 percent annual pace, similar to the January Greenbook.  

Our projected paths for oil and nonfuel commodity prices are also little changed from 

the last Greenbook. 

The January trade data, which we received after our forecast went to bed, were 

well aligned with our expectation that net exports are poised to subtract only 

0.1 percentage point from growth in the first quarter.  Thereafter, exports are slated to 

rise at roughly a 9 percent pace, supported by stimulus from the dollar and the 

ongoing recovery abroad.  Imports should increase at a slightly slower 8 percent rate, 

in line with strengthening U.S. activity, but from a higher level.  Together, these paths 

imply a slightly negative contribution from net exports to U.S. GDP growth on 

average over the forecast period.  This contribution is little changed from the previous 

Greenbook, as the negative impact of the higher dollar is balanced by the softer 

outlook for U.S. growth.  That concludes our presentation.  We’re happy to take 

questions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for our colleagues?  [No 

response.]  A very thorough report.  Thank you.  Why don’t we turn, then, to our go-round, and 

we’ll begin with President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At my directors’ meeting last week, the 

most commonly used adjective to describe the economy was “flat.”  The Greenbook is 

estimating first-quarter final sales at 1.6 percent, which is roughly the same pace of final sales 

growth we experienced in the second half of 2009, and it certainly seems consistent with the 

qualitative assessment of a flat economy. 

While the Greenbook and my own forecast assume a gradual increase in momentum, 

there is a high degree of uncertainty around the forecast.  In particular, it is hard to be confident 

that private demand will offset the reduction in overall fiscal stimulus as well as the end of 

March 16, 2010 39 of 146



targeted fiscal programs, such as the first-time homebuyers’ program, and our own program of 

purchasing mortgage-backed securities.  It is worrisome that housing seems to have stalled in the 

first quarter, even before the monetary and fiscal programs that were supporting the sector have 

ended.  Coupled with continuing problems in commercial real estate, the outlook remains dim for 

those in construction trades who are hoping to be hired. 

These problems are quite apparent in the employment statistics.  Men in the age category 

of 20 to 24 years currently have an unemployment rate of 18.7 percent, 5 percentage points 

higher than women.  Of course, transitory movements in and out of the labor force can add 

measurement error to the unemployment rate.  To avoid these difficulties, one can examine the 

employment–population ratio.  But the employment–population ratio for these prime-age males 

portrays the same qualitative picture as the unemployment rate.  Its decline is striking—far larger 

than in the previous three recessions, even when one includes adjustments for the significant 

demographic shifts over the past decades.  This group has been particularly hard hit by the 

dramatic decline in construction and manufacturing jobs, but is a group that would certainly be 

rehired if the economic recovery were more rapid.  I would also note that the adjusted 

employment–population ratio has shown a fairly reliable link to inflation, and its implications for 

the inflation outlook are not reassuring.  While layoffs have been subsiding, business confidence 

has not improved to where businesses are doing significant hiring.  Anecdotal stories 

complement the employment report that indicates improvements in hiring of temporary workers, 

but continued hesitance in hiring permanent workers until the recovery is more firmly 

established. 

As for inflation, the trend of lower core prices continues, and the Greenbook has lowered 

its forecast for core PCE inflation to only 1 percent at the end of 2011.  The recent behavior of 

March 16, 2010 40 of 146



compensation suggests that this trend is not yet at an end.  The Boston staff model finds that the 

recent wage deceleration is well explained by low inflation expectations and significant labor 

market slack, partly offset by rapid productivity growth.  Interestingly, the one-year inflation 

expectations implied by the model are currently below 1 percent.  That model suggests subdued 

wage growth throughout the forecast horizon and a continued decline in core inflation, even as 

short-run inflation expectations return toward their 2 percent anchor over several years.  I would 

also note that deflation rather than inflation has become a problem in Japan, and many European 

countries are reporting very subdued core prices, particularly countries such as Spain and 

Ireland, which have been severely impacted by the financial crisis. 

The problems in Europe highlight a continued downside risk.  Problems with sovereign 

risks have the potential to be amplified through the banking system.  According to data from 

DTC, the three largest net sellers of credit default swaps to Greece are financial institutions that 

have exposures ranging from $690 million to $990 million, and one of the three is a large U.S. 

financial institution.  Greece is a relatively small country, but a crisis of confidence in firms and 

governments and peripheral countries in Europe could raise the possibility of once again creating 

problems at highly leveraged institutions.  We should be particularly alert to problems in 

countries such as Spain, with its high unemployment rate, falling housing prices, and banks 

reliant on wholesale financing. 

While the brunt of the problems would be centered in Europe, we would certainly not be 

immune.  While I expect that Europe will be able to resolve these problems without a large 

negative shock, the risk of such shocks at a time when our recovery is still anemic and our policy 

tools limited bears careful monitoring.  While the economy is recovering, it is both a slow and 

March 16, 2010 41 of 146



fragile recovery.  I expect that it will be some time before we can have much confidence that the 

recovery has firmly taken hold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The level of economic activity in the 

Eighth District is slowly improving, although reports remain mixed as manufacturing activity has 

increased in these months and firms continue to report that they are reluctant to hire.  Contacts 

indicated that the level of retail sales in the District was lower in January and early February 

when compared with one year ago.  However, most retailers were optimistic for March and 

April.  Residential real estate markets in the District continue to be weak, but appear to have 

stabilized.  The pace of home sales, for instance, remains about the same as it was one year ago.  

Commercial and industrial real estate markets continue to struggle.  Contacts in the District’s 

transportation industry were generally positive, reporting volume increases that suggest a 

sustained recovery and strengthening across categories, regions, and internationally. 

My sense is that the economic recovery remains on track.  Nationally, business capital 

spending continues to trend upward, as discussed earlier, which I find encouraging.  Households 

seem to be returning slowly to more normal consumption patterns.  I expect the U.S. labor 

markets to show improvement soon, very soon, I hope.  Failure to see job creation in the next 

few months would be a significant worry.  We’ve waited a long time and had a long stretch of 

negative numbers; I would expect that to turn around this spring.  Continuing expansion in Asia 

seems to be helping U.S. firms, including many in the Eighth District.  One risk to the forecast is 

possible derailment of that expansion.  China, in particular, may be susceptible to a crisis event.  

It’s a concern to me, and I think we should be prepared to adjust policy should that scenario 

unfold in the next year or so.  The pace of projected growth in Europe seems very slow to me 

March 16, 2010 42 of 146



relative to the U.S., and, certainly compared with Asia, momentum seems very weak.  A stagnant 

Europe also seems like a risk to the broader recovery in my view. 

U.S. inflation trends are subdued.  Risks to inflation in the U.S. in the medium term rest 

on how finely calibrated our ultra-easy monetary policy is in reaction to a very severe recession, 

and I’m not sure how good our calibration really is.  TIPS-based expected inflation measures fell 

modestly during the past week.  I interpret this as markets pricing in some probability of a return 

to more volatile financial markets in response to sovereign debt issues around the globe. 

I put a low probability on the scenario that renewed financial market turmoil will 

materialize near the levels of the last 18 months.  As I see it, for better or worse, governments 

have shown that they’re willing to back the largest financial institutions internationally and, 

therefore, I think we’re not susceptible to the same type of turmoil that we saw a little more than 

a year ago.  Those government guarantees remain in place. 

I’m concerned about the influence of the shelter component in measures of inflation.  

Prices in this area are more reflective of excess supply conditions in housing markets than they 

are of underlying inflation trends.  They are likely to remain so for the foreseeable future.  The 

core CPI inflation rate without shelter is running at about 3 percent, measuring from one year 

ago.  Of course, it’s completely arbitrary to throw out components of the price index, but, 

unfortunately, we do it all the time.  Our core measures of inflation exclude food and energy, 

which gives shelter a large role in the story on inflation at this time.  A better approach, in my 

view, is simply to use the headline price index, which, I admit, can be volatile.  These are the 

prices that people actually have to pay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

March 16, 2010 43 of 146



MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In general, the business conditions in the 

Third District continue to show signs of improvement since our last meeting, and the tone of our 

business contacts has become somewhat more positive.  The manufacturing sector shows the 

clearest signs of increased activity.  Our Business Outlook Survey’s general activity index has 

been in positive territory now for six months.  The index rose slightly in February to 17.6, and 

the preliminary results, which will be released on Thursday, will show another slight increase for 

March.  Also, the new orders and shipment indexes rose significantly in February, and even the 

employment index is now in positive digits.  These measures are all consistent with typical 

recovery patterns. 

Retail sales in the District have been growing slowly, with most of our contacts reporting 

soft sales as having been tempered somewhat by the snowstorms in February.  Firm contacts tell 

us they see this positive trend for retail sales on somewhat firmer footing than they did a few 

months ago. 

One of my contacts is the CFO of a very large national cable company headquartered in 

Philadelphia.  He reports there has been a significant pickup in their businesses in the last several 

months.  Last year advertising revenues were down between 25 and 30 percent.  In the last few 

months, local advertising, which they view as more indicative of economic conditions than the 

national bulk advertisers, has surged, suggesting that businesses have become more confident 

and that the recovery is sustainable.  Conditions improved on the consumer side as well.  

Delinquencies, which rose significantly last year, are falling and now are at or near what he 

described as close to normal levels.  What they call “churn”—that is, the number of people 

dropping their cable accounts relative to those signing up for cable—has also returned to more 

normal levels after deteriorating dramatically last year.  These are both very positive signs.  Of 

March 16, 2010 44 of 146



course, all of the news isn’t good.  This company usually spends $200 to $300 million a year 

building out cable services, mainly laying cable for new home construction.  As you might 

expect, those capital expenditures are way down, and they don’t anticipate those coming back 

until housing construction returns. 

The weakest signals in our District come from the labor markets.  Unemployment rates in 

our three states are at or near recession highs, and payroll employment has continued to decline 

over the last three months.  State and local budget situations are not rosy, and that, of course, is 

tied closely to employment, and that also remains a concern. 

On balance, the outlook for the region is for continued modest improvement.  The 

Philadelphia Fed’s leading economic indexes are projecting economic growth of around 2½ 

percent in our District for the next nine months or so.  The outlook among our business contacts 

has improved, but most are still expecting economic growth to be modest. 

At the national level, my outlook for the economy has changed very little since January.  

I see a modest, but steady, recovery in economic activity that I believe will be sustainable even 

after the effects of monetary and fiscal policy wane. 

On the negative side, housing markets continue to be stressed, and the improvement in 

sales and starts seen earlier appears to have been driven by the tax credits.  It’s difficult to read 

precisely, because of bad weather, which also affects the numbers.  More broadly, I think that, 

given the distortions in the marketplace with programs like “cash-for-clunkers” or first-time 

homebuyers’ credits, it remains unclear how much of that spending that was taken out of the 

market and directed to those specific products will begin showing up in demand for other goods 

and services if consumers feel like spending.  So, although we may see a weakening in housing 

when the tax credit ends, we also may see a pickup in spending on automobiles and other things. 

March 16, 2010 45 of 146



Labor markets continue to be weak, but job losses appear to be bottoming out.  

Businesses’ future hiring plans seem to be firming, and that’s indicated on our outlook surveys.  

And I continue to expect a resumption in payroll growth in the second quarter.  This will be key 

to a continued improvement in household balance sheets and consumer spending.  The pickup in 

business investment and equipment that has been referred to is consistent with stronger business 

confidence.  

The risk I see around my forecast for this year of around 3¼ to 3½ percent is roughly 

balanced.  My inflation forecast continues to differ from the Greenbook.  In the near term, I 

expect underlying inflation to remain very modest, but I do expect it to drift upward over the 

next several years, and I see upside risk to inflation in the medium to longer term. 

I continue to believe that we will need to begin tightening policy this year, certainly well 

before what is anticipated in the Greenbook, where there is no increase in the fed funds rate until 

2012.  Sustained economic growth in the next coming quarter or two will be, to me, an important 

signal that we should begin normalizing policy.  So I would hope that in our April meeting we’ll 

be able to work towards a consensus on our longer-term operating framework, including our 

operating target.  Knowing, for example, that we will want to converge towards a corridor 

system will help us in our deliberations on the exit strategy to achieve our goal of dramatically 

reduced reserves and a portfolio that consists only of Treasuries.  With that, we will know better 

how to communicate those messages to the public.  Thus, I hope we can reach a decision on that 

goal soon.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is, of course, our first one-day 

meeting in a long time, and the premium is on brevity.  I was reminded of this on Sunday when I 

March 16, 2010 46 of 146



was driving to the bank to do my final preparations, listening to Garrison Keillor’s “Prairie 

Home Companion.”  He was reciting pearls of cowboy wisdom—I would think my western 

colleagues would know this—including “Never pass up an opportunity to remain silent.”  

[Laughter] 

MR. LACKER.  Is that your only point? 

MR. LOCKHART.  Actually, I do have something to say.  In our conversations with 

directors over the past two weeks, the most common characterization of the economy in the Sixth 

District was fragile.  We detected some improving optimism, but this optimism is tempered by 

concern and uncertainty about top-line prospects, policy coming out of the Congress, worsening 

problems of state and local government, and the commercial real estate exposure to the banking 

sector. 

The Sixth District’s outlook narrative is broadly consistent with the Greenbook, but 

Atlanta’s forecast remains weaker than the Greenbook, stemming in large part from our 

assumption of a slower pace of business investment.  Over the last two weeks, we focused our 

inquiries to directors and their contacts on this assumption.  We heard that inventories are being 

managed to unusually lean levels, and businesses seem committed to tighter inventory ratios on 

an indefinite basis, in some cases even at the expense of sales.  We also heard a good deal about 

advancements in just-in-time supply capability on the part of most domestic and foreign 

suppliers.  This feedback casts some doubt on the prospects for much near-term GDP 

contribution from inventory replenishment.  We also detected from our Sixth District contacts 

very restrained intention to invest in equipment and software or nonresidential structures beyond 

maintenance levels.  This anecdotal feedback produces some cautious skepticism regarding the 

Greenbook forecast of strong economic growth and expenditure on equipment and software.  Our 

March 16, 2010 47 of 146



contacts also conveyed a strong hesitance to hire, and their opinion was that, where investment is 

occurring, it is labor-replacing.  One contact also noted the renewal of offshoring activity.  We 

heard through directors that many business people seem to be talking about potential inflation, 

but few appear to be acting on this concern.  There is a widespread assessment that pricing power 

remains very weak. 

Regarding inflation, it’s hard for me to summon much concern about inflation in the 

immediate future.  Almost all measures of core inflation show indications of disinflation, and 

inflation expectations continue to strike me as stable. 

Finally, I see the growth risks as pretty balanced.  Not one Atlanta or Branch director 

expressed the opinion that growth in their businesses would be slower in the next six months 

versus the past six months.  At the same time, as I noted, they characterize the economy as 

extremely fragile and the recovery as tentative and held back by uncertainties.  These reports 

capture what I perceive to be an encouraging but inconclusive real economy picture at this 

juncture.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  There’s a South Carolina version of your 

aphorism, which is, “If you should ever have an opportunity to keep your mouth shut, be sure to 

take advantage of it.”  [Laughter]  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Well, I was going to say that the Texas version of the aphorism is, “Never 

be silent.”  [Laughter]  But I will try to be brief. 

Very quickly, in terms of our District, we are seeing a pickup in economic activity.  

Exports are up 31.6 percent year over year through the end of January, not unimportant for us as 

an exporting state.  Retail sales grew at an annual pace of 0.8 percent in December.  They have 

now increased for four consecutive months.  Single-family housing permits increased strongly in 

March 16, 2010 48 of 146



January.  Our leading index increased in December and January and has now risen for nine of the 

past ten months.  And our job forecasts by our staff indicate that we our employment will 

probably increase by 2.1 percent this year.  By the way, 2.8 percent is the average for Texas over 

the last 30 years.  We see a pickup in economic activity.  Having been one of the last to go into 

recession, we’re coming out, not robustly, but we are coming out.  With regard to the comment 

on snowstorms, the snowstorms held things down.  There may well have been a slightly more 

robust expansion on our hands than we had thought.  So enough of the District. 

I want to share with you quickly what I am hearing from my CEO contacts.  Most of this 

information is through last week in terms of their own activity, and I’ll just walk you through 

some key indicators that I think may add to the information that you imparted so well in your 

briefing. 

Through the end of January year over year, air freight activity has taken a big pop 

upwards of 28.3 percent, building on what is continuous sequential improvement since October 

of ’09.  As you know, Herb Kelleher—I’ll drop one name—is on our Board.  He has a sense of 

humor.  He said, “Things are not coming up roses, but they’re coming up periwinkles.”  So we’re 

beginning to see some improvement, including in premium traffic in terms of airlines.  For the 

first time since May of ’08 premium traffic has picked up by 1 percent. 

With regard to the shippers, they’re reporting a slight improvement in demand-supply 

balance, and a slight strengthening of container market and day charter sales.  And with regard to 

the rails, which I like to look at, volume shipped through last week year over year is up 

3½ percent year to date.  Just to put that in context, their loading last week for the industry 

entirely was 633,000 cars.  The peak was 771,000.  So it’s coming off a low of 525,000, and it’s 

a sequential pickup.  There still is excess capacity in ships and in rails.  About 25 percent more 

March 16, 2010 49 of 146



volume could be handled under the current availability of capacity, but the point is capacity is 

picking up, and shipments are improving. 

With regard to petrochemicals, there has been a “remarkably strong beginning in January 

and February,” according to one of the largest petrochemical producers.  Most of that is going to 

manufacturers and replacing very lean inventories, but autos seem to have led the way. 

With regard to semiconductors, the producers that I talked to are reporting underlying 

demand increasing significantly across all business lines, “beyond normal seasonal demands.”  

This started escalating about 60 days ago in auto production, 30 days ago in communication, 

most recently in PCs.  The result is that some of them are adding capacity “aggressively,” and 

this is confirmed by some of the computer and PC manufacturers that we talked to.  The CEO of 

Dell reports—and I believe this is not yet reported publicly—20 percent revenue growth year 

over year through last week, the return of large business orders, but building what they call 

“spend to save”—that is, continuing to drive efficiency so they don’t have to rehire labor. 

AT&T reports that long distance minutes are tracking upward, roaming has stabilized—

those are two key indicators for them.  Very interestingly, only 3 percent of the people use 

40 percent of the available bandwidth in this country.  They charge them $30 a month.  Needless 

to say, to get that reshaped they are going to start pushing prices up on the order of 15 to 

20 percent beginning in May—at least they will attempt to do so. 

And with regard to final consumption, it is interesting.  President Plosser made a point 

about advertising.  The large national advertisers and the local advertisers are reporting they’re 

seeing a trending upward, but the buys are coming late and there is very little visibility going 

forward.  There still is that uncertainty of how much buying you have three months in 

anticipation. 

March 16, 2010 50 of 146



With regard to retailers, the lowest quartile still is in the foxhole.  The second and third 

quartiles are coming out of the bunker—that is, those in the middle-income groups.  And then, 

the balance sheet buyers that shop at Neiman Marcus and the higher-end stores are seeming to 

party once again.  And this is confirmed by MasterCard data, which show that luxury goods sales 

year over year through the end of February are up 15 percent.  And mall traffic is slightly picking 

up.  Malls, again, are places where people don’t need to go.  They go because they wish to go, 

and you’re seeing, despite gas prices, an increase.  According to those that report to us, sales this 

year are up in the 2 to 3 percent range, even in California, by the way.  And Michaels, which is 

an interesting store, has 1,000 units, 250 of them in California—they had the best month they 

have had in the last four years in California this month.  So, as their CEO said, there’s even a 

sign of a heartbeat in California. 

Turning to inflation very quickly, every so often you get a PCE release which indicates 

the outsized impact of one fluky item, and the misinformation being imparted by one month’s 

numbers.  The last PCE for January is a good case in point.  Of all things, luggage and similar 

personal items, which has a weight of 0.2 percent in the total PCE, had a one-month, annualized, 

rate of decline of 94 percent.  This was before it was announced that Janet might be the next Vice 

Chairman and might have to move from San Francisco.  [Laughter].  But it’s interesting that, 

absent this little event, headline PCE would have grown at an annualized rate of 2.7 percent 

rather than the 2.1 percent annualized rate that was reported.  I mention this as a little 

advertisement for the trimmed mean.  Our Dallas trimmed mean came in at an annualized 

0.8 percent in January.  That is the third consecutive number below 1 percent.  And the twelve-

month trimmed mean has trimmed down to 1.2 percent from 1.3 percent. 

March 16, 2010 51 of 146



So this and continued weakness in labor costs and wages indicates to me there’s very 

little upward pressure, as President Lockhart indicated, to overall foreseeable inflation, though I 

am watching carefully the turnaround in OER, which we saw a glimpse of in January.  And then, 

for the internationalists in the room, there are widespread reports that the Chinese are already 

beginning the pricing for the next spring season, including significant increases—on the order of 

10 to 15 percent—to cover their costs of labor, which they are trying to draw back from the 

provinces to the coastlines and their manufacturing centers.  

So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, on the economic front, I believe that we do have a 

recovery under way.  The issue really still has to do with employment.  There does not seem to 

be a great amount of interest—whether it’s small business or Fortune 500 companies—to rehire.  

And one still has to ask the question:  Even if we had increasing prices coming through the front 

door, is there consumer demand that will sustain it going out the back door in goods and 

services?  I don’t see that in the immediate future. 

I want to conclude with a quick comment.  In surveying small companies and large 

companies, the issue is not the price of capital.  Liquidity is ample, and money is cheap.  The 

constant refrain of complaint is what one small businessman calls regulatory roulette:  Those 

small companies that are creditworthy are seeking loans, and they feel that they have access to 

capital.  If you look at the NFIB surveys, they’ll tell you that only 3 percent of business owners 

report finance as their number one problem.  For most, their number one problem is uncertainty.  

A very disheartening point when talking to CEOs today is that small businesses are reluctant to 

hire because of uncertainty in terms of what social overhead costs are going to be, taxation, and 

all of these other things that we have heard about before.  But most disheartening of all is that 

large businesses are loath to grow their payrolls and spend beyond maintenance cap ex in this 

March 16, 2010 52 of 146



country.  And CEO after CEO after CEO, and business group after business group after business 

group, at least claims that they will be expanding their cap ex.  If it’s beyond maintenance, say 

like AT&T or Exxon, or those kinds of people, it’s all going abroad.  To have a CEO of an iconic 

U.S. company tell me, “It’s time to get the hell out of Dodge,” meaning to invest elsewhere, 

because they don’t believe that ROI is comparable in this country, has nothing to do with 

monetary policy or central bank policy.  It has to do with uncertainty.  And I hope, even though 

it’s not our policy and has nothing to do with what we do for a living, that eventually those 

uncertainties will be removed.  If they’re removed, I believe that American businesses are 

running very tight, they’re extremely muscular, they will have to add to their labor force, and 

they will have to invest more.  But currently they’re totally reluctant to do so.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The most recent published data for the Fifth 

Federal Reserve District continue to show a lethargic recovery.  For example, our surveys of 

manufacturing and service sector activity were tepid in February.  Within the last few weeks, 

however, the tone of the information flow has begun to improve noticeably.  Several of my 

directors have reported positive unexpected developments that occurred in recent weeks, such as 

IT suppliers beginning to hire temporary workers to fulfill rising demand.  In addition, a 

preliminary tally of responses for our March survey has found improvements in a number of 

categories.  For example, our manufacturing shipments index was zero last month, but the 

preliminary March reading is 8, and the retail sales index was a minus 15 last month, while the 

preliminary March reading is 5.  These indexes are often choppy, of course, and the February 

March 16, 2010 53 of 146



readings were likely held down by the snow.  Still the improvements are striking, especially in 

conjunction with the better anecdotes we’re hearing. 

Turning to the national outlook, the Greenbook responded appropriately to the soggy 

information flow by marking down the current quarter GDP growth forecast by 0.6 percentage 

point.  In addition, the staff lowered the projected growth rate of real GDP through the end of 

next year.  I do agree with the staff that it makes sense to mark down the near-term outlook.  The 

downward revisions to previously published employment and income levels were striking, and 

the housing market appears to have stalled out.   

That said, I’m not so sure that the latest data warrant pulling down the forecast of growth 

a year or more ahead.  Consumer spending still appears to be expanding at a reasonable pace 

despite the substantial strains many households must be experiencing, and housing is such a 

small part of the economy now that flat residential investment isn’t much of a drag on economic 

growth.  Besides, this is likely to continue to be a somewhat choppy recovery for some time, and 

I think we should be careful not to over-interpret or perhaps over-extrapolate month-to-month 

forecast misses.  I haven’t pulled down my longer-term forecast just yet, and I still think that 

there’s a reasonable chance that growth will come in above our baseline projection.  If growth 

does surprise on the upside, we’ll probably want to begin to normalize policy sooner, perhaps a 

lot sooner than the Greenbook assumes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic recovery continues to progress 

modestly.  Our contacts indicate that business conditions are improving gradually.  Most 

manufacturers report increases in orders.  The inventory cycle accounts for much of this, and 

businesses expect this rebuilding will largely be completed during the first half of the year.  The 

March 16, 2010 54 of 146



usual post-recession surge in sales associated with pent-up demand for consumer durables and 

capital goods has not materialized to date.  A lack of confidence and restrictive credit appears to 

be trumping the desire to make up for spending bloodied by the downturn.  Accordingly, all of 

the businesses I spoke with remain conservative in their medium-term outlooks for growth.  By 

sector, commodity-related industries are doing somewhat better, but construction-related 

businesses are still scraping along the bottom. 

With restrained expectations, very few firms are planning robust increases in workforces 

or capacity.  For example, Caterpillar laid off 37,000 workers during the recession.  Now it is 

bringing back 7,000 of them, and it does not expect to return to the previous workforce levels 

within the foreseeable future.  In a similar vein, United Airlines has seen a pickup in business 

travel because companies are sending their sales people back on the road again, but United has 

reduced its overall capacity. 

In terms of the forecast, we agree with the Greenbook’s assessment that the balance of 

the incoming data has been a touch weaker than anticipated, but only by enough to shave a 

couple of tenths off of the outlook for economic growth in 2010.  We see GDP increasing in the 

range of 3 to 3½ percent this year and 4 to 4½ percent for the next two years.  The decline in the 

unemployment rate was a bit of unanticipated good news, and we carried a lower rate forward in 

our projection. 

There’s not much new to say with regard to the inflation outlook either.  The significant 

resource slack in the economy is exerting downward pressure on pricing.  My contacts said that 

planned wage increases are still small or nonexistent, and scattered reports of higher materials 

costs do not appear to have had much effect on end-user prices.  But the TIPS and survey data 

still indicate that inflation expectations are pretty well anchored.  Accordingly, we’re continuing 

March 16, 2010 55 of 146



to expect only a slight further drop in core inflation this year and then some gradual pickup to 

about 1¾ percent by 2012.  So the implication seems to be that strong accommodation remains 

an important element of this outlook.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll organize my remarks on the current 

economic situation around the three explicit qualifiers we’ve used to condition the “extended 

period” language for  our policy statement, namely, low rates of resource utilization, subdued 

inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations. 

Beginning with resource utilization, my assessment of both the current situation and the 

likely future path has changed very little during the intermeeting period.  I continue to anticipate 

only moderate economic growth and an extended period of substantial underutilization of 

resources.  The boost from the inventory cycle appears largely over, and the growth contribution 

from fiscal stimulus is waning, but improvements in exports, consumer spending, and business 

investment should support moderate real GDP growth this year.  Given the extraordinary depth 

of the recession, I expect it will be a very long time before the economy returns to its potential, 

and my own economic growth forecast exceeds the pace my business contacts consider plausible 

in light of the pervasive caution about spending that they see among their customers and business 

associates.  The latest labor market reports have been a bit more favorable than expected, 

especially given the unseasonably bad weather; but even so, as I stressed at the January meeting, 

labor market readings paint an even bleaker picture of underutilization than product-side 

measures. 

During the intermeeting period, the housing sector has emerged anew as an area of 

concern.  It now appears to be bumping along the bottom, which is consistent with our 

March 16, 2010 56 of 146



expectation that residential investment will not play its traditional key role in moving the 

economy during the early stages of recovery.  This stalling out of the hoped-for recovery in 

residential real estate is disappointing, and my concern is compounded by the continued 

deterioration we’re seeing in the performance of residential mortgages, suggesting that 

foreclosures will weigh on prices going forward.  The good news is that mortgages issued in 

2009 are now performing relatively well as they age in comparison with previous vintages.  But 

older vintages continue to perform very poorly due to past declines in house prices and high 

levels of unemployment. 

Some observers have been heartened by the fact that the share of mortgages 30 to 89 days 

past due has declined recently.  Unfortunately, analysis by my staff of loan-level data reveals this 

decline actually represents a worsening of mortgage market conditions.  The decline in 30- to 89-

day delinquencies does not reflect an increase in the “cure rate,” which is the fraction of 

delinquent borrowers becoming current.  Instead, it reflects a faster transition of delinquent 

mortgages to even poorer performance status.  The data for January of this year appear to 

confirm that conditions are continuing to worsen.  I, therefore, anticipate that the share of loans 

that is seriously delinquent will keep moving higher, generating further increases in the pace of 

foreclosures.  I fear, too, that we have had a temporary reprieve in new foreclosures due to the 

ramping up of the government’s trial modifications, but only a small share of these modifications 

will stick.  All in all, the prospects of further additions to the already very large inventory of 

vacant homes represents downside risk to home prices and new home construction. 

Let me now turn to the second economic condition underlying the policy guidance, a 

subdued inflation trend.  Since the start of the recession, core PCE price inflation has fallen 

1.2 percentage points.  In joint work with staff at the New York Fed—and I see that Bill has 

March 16, 2010 57 of 146



distributed a picture that my staff has also been working on—they find that this decline reflects 

diffusion across many categories of spending.  I won’t go into too much detail, because I think 

Bill is going to talk about this.  But one point I wanted to make is that, while the deceleration in 

shelter costs certainly has contributed to the disinflation, that deceleration is not entirely due to 

rents and the imputed costs of owner-occupied housing.  An important reason for it is that there 

has been a sharp decline in lodging away from home, and that reflects something quite different, 

which is a real contraction of tourism and travel.  I think, as Bill is going to discuss, what we see 

here is broad disinflation across many categories of spending.  Furthermore, with various 

measures of utilization still showing significant margins of slack, I expect the downward trend in 

inflation to continue. 

The third economic condition in our “extended period” statement—namely, that of stable 

expectations—is probably the most challenging to assess, and many measures of inflation 

provide somewhat mixed signals.  I think if we look at measures over the next five years, almost 

all measures have fallen on balance since the start of the recession.  However, for the five-year 

forecast horizon five years ahead, I think survey measures have edged up a bit.  Break-even 

inflation rates, in contrast, are about where they were two years ago, and my staff’s finance 

model, which accounts for shifts in inflation risk premiums, puts inflation expectations well 

below their pre-recession levels.  So when I take everything together, I would judge that inflation 

expectations remain reasonably well anchored, despite considerable turmoil and uncertainty that 

has afflicted our economy over the recent past. 

All in all, my bottom line is that the three economic conditions we have explicitly 

attached to our “extended period” statement are still satisfied, and when we get to the policy go-

March 16, 2010 58 of 146



around, naturally I’m going to conclude that the economic outlook continues to support the use 

of that language for a forward-looking policy guide. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll focus mostly on the region and let that 

carry into the national outlook.  If you talk to people in our region, as our economy continues to 

show modest, systematic improvement in the manufacturing and especially in our energy and 

agricultural sectors right now, there is an attitude that we are basically grinding our way through 

to a sustained modest recovery, barring shocks from congressional action, fiscal policy, 

international events, and all those caveats.  So there is a certain confidence building of a modest 

recovery going forward. 

Turning to the sources of some strength, manufacturing activity is increasing steadily and 

has been so since September.  Production has nearly returned to year-ago levels.  Even some in 

manufacturing are becoming more optimistic in terms of their production outlook.  In the energy 

sector, capital spending is now expanding even though natural gas prices have been relatively 

low.  The technology and the opportunities are there, and they are investing pretty significantly 

right now.  I would point out that our agricultural sector has improved, and there are stronger 

income levels that have led to a rise in loan repayments and fewer reports of loan renewals and 

extensions.  Crop land values have strengthened pretty noticeably—we have a director in our 

Omaha area, and he is in the land auction and brokering business and management business 

across the country, and some of the increases in the last couple of months have been quite 

striking.  Sales of land that was once $3,000 an acre is now $8,000, and when asked why people 

are leveraging off adjacent property, the answer is, “I can’t put it anywhere else and get any 

money, so I might as well put it in that.”  We’re seeing some pickup in mergers and acquisitions 

March 16, 2010 59 of 146



as well.  Retailers report January and February were weaker than they expected and flat relative 

to a year ago, as others might have said.  But they are optimistic as we look ahead. 

Commercial real estate, as others have said, remains very weak, but I would note the 

following.  We have worked with some of the real estate companies and some of the appraisal 

companies in our part of the country; now, for Class A space, the cap rates are actually coming 

down again.  So we are seeing some improvement in that top layer in terms of the willingness to 

finance and the willingness to lower the cap rates, and I think that is of some importance. 

There’s little evidence of wage and price pressures in the District.  One thing I would 

report:  A former director of ours who has a temp employment company said that, since last 

spring to the middle or maybe the first week in February, the firm has seen a 50 percent increase 

in activity.  Part of that is market share, but part of that is the level they’re starting from, and it’s 

also kind of the company’s trial balloons, and this sort of thing, but it has picked up noticeably. 

On the national outlook, I continue to hold the view that we are in a state of recovery—I 

think we’re probably looking at 3 percent economic growth, not unlike the Greenbook.  So there 

are differences here and there, but I suspect we’ll have a sustained recovery going forward. 

On the inflation front, I agree that if you look at the trimmed numbers or you look at the 

core, a 1 percent outlook for near-term inflation is a reasonable estimate in my mind.  Over the 

longer term, of course, those projections change.  I would also mention here, and I will perhaps 

mention it later, as well, that an issue that keeps coming up in terms of the guarantees on the low 

rates is that—and we learned this a little bit and this why we’re suffering some of our 

unemployment—those very guarantees encourage the leverage that we are concerned about and 

encourage some of the distortions that we’ll have to deal with later.  So it’s not just the inflation 

March 16, 2010 60 of 146



outlook, but how we’re encouraging leverage going forward that I think we have to be mindful 

of.  I will stop with that, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook for GDP growth remains 

somewhat below the Greenbook baseline forecast for both this year and next, and I don’t expect 

the unemployment rate to fall below 9 percent until mid-2011.  My weaker output growth and 

higher unemployment profile resembles a combination of the Greenbook’s lower-potential-

output and persistent-caution scenarios.  In my outlook, unprecedented levels of long-term 

unemployment lead to a weaker recovery in output growth along the lines of the Greenbook’s 

lower-potential-output scenario. 

Past experiences with very long-lived unemployment spells indicate that workers lose 

valuable human capital during their unemployment that is not recovered for years after the 

unemployment spell ends.  The clearest evidence for these losses is research that examined the 

consequences of permanent job losses in Pennsylvania in the wake of the severe shake-out in the 

steel industry during the 1980s.  Unfortunately, many of today’s long-term unemployed could 

suffer a similar fate, which, when added up over millions of people, accumulates to a lower level 

of potential output.  The loss of human capital is likely to be extended for some time, as I’m also 

seeing early evidence of a jobless recovery.  The past two recoveries were characterized by low 

job-finding rates, and that pattern seems to be repeating itself in the current recovery.  The 

comments that I’ve been hearing from a range of business people have indicated few plans for 

hiring in the coming year, as many have already mentioned.  This has been particularly the case 

for large groups of small businesses that we’ve been meeting with throughout the District during 

March 16, 2010 61 of 146



the past couple of months.  Overall, what I’m hearing is that it’s likely that the unemployment 

duration is set to grow even longer. 

I also find the Greenbook’s persistent-caution scenario consistent with widespread reports 

that I’m hearing from both households and businesses in my District.  The sheer magnitude of 

the recession caught many by surprise and has instilled a heightened sense of caution in both 

households and businesses.  This is evident in a range of sentiment indicators, but perhaps most 

telling in households’ expectations for their own income growth.  The Michigan survey has 

included that question for years, and households reliably answered that they expected their 

incomes to grow about 3 percent or more, even in recession years.  Since March of 2009, 

respondents are now anticipating near zero growth in their income.  With these types of 

expectations for no income growth, it’s likely that we’re going to see the elevated saving rate 

continue beyond the current year. 

Businesses that have made it through this recession, with a few exceptions, are just as 

cautious in their investment and hiring plans.  Most of the CEOs that I talk to from large and 

small companies say that there’s just way too much uncertainty out there, uncertainty over health 

care reform, energy, environmental, and tax policies.  As President Fisher commented, the CEOs 

claim that uncertainty is so great that it’s causing them either to delay investments or to divert 

them to countries where uncertainty is much lower.  It’s not a ringing endorsement of our 

country when I hear these executives say that they see China and India as a lower-risk 

investment climate. 

Shifting to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on consumer prices highlight 

significant downward pressure on pricing, as many have already commented.  I’ll add one more 

data point.  The Cleveland trimmed mean and median CPI series have both been on a 

March 16, 2010 62 of 146



disinflationary path since mid-2008.  Looking at the distribution of price changes, more than 

40 percent of the consumer’s market basket has been exhibiting outright price decreases over the 

last six months.  This is somewhat striking considering that during the 2003 period, in which we 

were worried about falling prices, that phenomenon occurred only once.  This tendency for core 

inflation to head lower is gradually offset in my projection by the effects of lower potential 

output and anchored inflation expectations, which, in my forecast begin to push inflation higher 

in 2011. 

Overall the risks around my outlook for output growth remain balanced, with my 

business contacts citing a range of potential downside risks that are offset by the fact that 

pessimism does tend to dominate at similar points in recoveries, and then we’ve been surprised 

with growth to the upside.  In terms of inflation, with core inflation rates edging lower and our 

limited options for further policy responses, I’m now leaning towards the inflation risks in my 

forecast being slightly to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll focus my remarks on four 

elements of the current economic situation: conditions in the Ninth District, national labor 

market conditions, the inflation outlook, and conditions in financial markets.  The first two feed 

into my current thinking about our policy on interest rates, and the last two feed into my current 

thinking about the balance sheet. 

Throughout the Ninth District, businesses generally report that they do not anticipate 

making further cuts in production and employment.  However, they generally do not see a need 

to expand either in terms of capital or labor.  The possible exception may be Minnesota.  

Businesses in Minnesota, especially those with foreign markets, report seeing increases in 

March 16, 2010 63 of 146



demand in the latter part of 2009 and anticipate more increases in the first half of 2010.  Some of 

the Minnesota contacts report that temporary hiring in the manufacturing sector has increased, 

although there are few, if any, plans to undertake permanent hires. 

Let me turn to the national labor market.  Nationally the unemployment rate in February, 

as we all know, remained elevated at 9.7 percent.  I think the data on labor turnover from the 

JOLTS survey continue to be troubling.  The hiring rate began to fall in early 2007 before the 

credit crisis and reached a historical low in early 2009.  The January 2010 hiring rate remains 

near this historical low.  It’s true that employment losses have stabilized over the past several 

months, but only because the separation rate has also declined to historical lows.  Solid job 

creation can only take place when the hiring rate starts to increase.  One bright spot in the JOLTS 

data is that the job openings rates did tick upwards in January.  But my view is that we’re not 

meeting the employment part of our joint mandates either nationally or in the Ninth District. 

I turn next to the outlook for inflation.  Both realizations and expectations of inflation 

remain well within desired ranges.  Nonetheless I do continue to be concerned that our large 

balance sheet, combined with the large federal debt, implies that we face a low-probability risk 

of high inflation.  One way to get a market measure of this risk is to look at the prices of options 

that pay off if 10-year Treasury yields rise by significant amounts over the coming three years.  

These prices reveal that market participants see the risk of such an increase in Treasury yields as 

being highly elevated by historical standards, although I’m happy to report that they have 

declined significantly since I joined this Committee [laughter]. 

Finally I turn to the condition of financial markets.  Corporate bond risk spreads and 

interbank lending spreads are at normal or below-normal levels.  Treasury and equity volatility 

are at near normal or below-normal levels.  Financial markets are now functioning much better 

March 16, 2010 64 of 146



than they were in late 2008 or early 2009.  As I emphasized at the last meeting, improvement in 

the conditions of financial markets is an important consideration when we turn to policy.  There 

are many forms of long-term, relatively riskless debt available for investors.  When markets are 

functioning poorly, cross-market arbitrages are difficult—these different assets are essentially 

traded in distinct and relatively small markets—so our interventions, either sales or purchases, 

will have big price effects in these conditions.  When markets are functioning well, as they are 

now, these roughly substitutable assets are traded in a single well-integrated market, so our 

interventions, either sales or purchases, will have only small price effects.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Well, it’s about 10:30.  Why don’t we take a 

20 minute coffee break?  See you at 10:50. 

 [Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we ready to recommence?  All right, why don’t we turn 

to the Vice Chairman? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 3 Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with the consensus 

view that the outlook has not changed much at all since the last meeting.  I’d like to point out just 

two things.  Consumption is a bit stronger, but I think you also have to note that the 

compensation trend was revised down, so the saving rate is also lower, and that may exert some 

constraint on how fast consumption can continue to grow.  On the capital spending side, I think 

it’s true that we’re seeing some strength in technology spending, but I think, as others around the 

table have noted, policy does seem to be inhibiting the bigger kinds of investments—for 

example, whether to locate a plant in the United States or overseas?  So I’m not sure how big or 

sustainable this bounce in technology spending is going to be. 

                                                 
3 The materials referred to by Mr. Dudley are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

March 16, 2010 65 of 146



In terms of risks to the outlook, I want to talk about two things.  I want to talk a little first 

about this issue of disinflation.  I handed out these two figures because I thought they were pretty 

good at getting at this whole issue of what’s happening and how important shelter is in terms of 

the disinflation that we’re seeing.  Figure 1 basically looks at core CPI inflation with and without 

shelter, and on both bases you’re seeing disinflation.  Obviously, shelter is a big factor in terms 

of pushing down the level of the core so much, but I think you can’t dismiss the low level of core 

just on the basis of shelter; and that’s consistent with President Fisher’s and others’ remarks on 

the trimmed mean.  Figure 2 looks at what’s happening to all of the components of the core PCE 

index prior to September 2008 and afterwards.  Looking at this chart, you see a lot of data points 

below the 45-degree line, and that implies that disinflation is broad.  It’s interesting that the two 

dots that are the furthest above the 45-degree line are used motor vehicles and new motor 

vehicles; and the used motor vehicles, as Glenn pointed out to me when we were talking about it 

during the break, was partly due to the “cash-for-clunkers” program and what’s happening in 

terms of its effects on the supply of used cars.  You’ll also notice on this figure that the housing 

bubble, in red, does not really stand out relative to the other components.  So I think this tends to 

underscore the fact that the disinflation that we’re seeing is pretty pervasive. 

The second thing I want to talk about very briefly is the fiscal sustainability issue.  I think 

it’s a risk to the outlook.  I have two concerns.  The first concern is that when market participants 

become worried about fiscal sustainability in the U.S., they may start to price in bigger risk 

premiums, so long-term rates would go up.  And, the second concern is that, if that were to 

happen, it could actually provoke or necessitate earlier fiscal consolidation.  Either or both of 

those things would actually exert constraint on economic activity.  I think this risk can’t be 

completely ruled out, given what we saw happening in Europe.  The Greece situation is clearly in 

March 16, 2010 66 of 146



a better place than it was six weeks ago, but a lot of other countries in Europe are in similar 

positions, and they have much more economic weight; and our own budgetary situation isn’t 

very good either.  So the risk of contagion, perhaps from Europe to the U.K. and then on to the 

U.S., can’t be completely ruled out. 

Both these risks—disinflation and fiscal consolidation—obviously underscore in my 

mind why it’s very premature to tighten monetary policy now.  I’m very much on the side of 

keeping stability right now in terms of the monetary policy course and the message that we’re 

sending people.  But we’ll talk a little bit more about that in the monetary policy round.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like the others, I saw the incoming data 

suggesting that the economic expansion is proceeding about as expected, that is, for a gradual 

recovery that, over time, should slowly begin to put a dent in the considerable margins of unused 

resources.  I think the odds of either a material softening in the pace of recovery over the next 

year or a sharp strengthening in growth have diminished over recent months. 

The recent strength in retail sales and equipment and software spending are encouraging 

and do suggest a basis for continued expansion, even after the inventory and fiscal impulses ebb 

in the second half of the year.  But consumption growth did come at the expense of a drop in the 

saving rate; that’s inconsistent with ongoing balance sheet repair.  And with income growth 

revised lower and consumer confidence still in the doldrums, the odds on substantial continued 

upside surprises from consumption seem limited.  Persistent weakness in the housing sector is a 

concern not only for its direct effects on GDP, which, as President Lacker pointed out, are pretty 

small given the small size of the sector these days, but also for the possibility that further 

March 16, 2010 67 of 146



declines in prices would reduce household wealth and increase the losses to be absorbed by 

banks and other lenders. 

In financial markets, the lack of reaction to ending our special liquidity programs is a 

definite positive, as is the extent to which markets seem to be open to large volumes of bond 

issuance without any upward pressure on spreads or rates.  However, there has been little sign of 

any response in the price or quantity of bank credit to the huge volume of reserves we have 

injected into the banking sector.  Bank loans continue to decline rapidly, and spreads of many 

loans over benchmarks have risen further.  In addition, the money supply growth remains 

subdued—there’s effectively no growth in M2 in the first quarter. 

Although fourth-quarter economic growth in our trading partners exceeded expectations, 

the prospects are for moderate growth going forward.  The mood at the BIS the weekend before 

last, Mr. Chairman, was somewhat more cautious than at the previous meeting you attended in 

early January, perhaps reflecting the dominance of the Europeans in that group.  Economic 

growth prospects in industrial countries have been revised down a little, and markets had pushed 

off the expected time of first tightening as they had in the United States.  Market reaction to 

problems in Greece makes fiscal consolidation both more necessary and more likely in a wide 

range of countries, restraining the rebound in demand.  Emerging market economies were 

tightening policies through increases in reserve requirements in Brazil, China, and India, to 

control the effects of capital inflows.  Moreover, there was a sense of greater fragility behind the 

expected expansions, importantly reflecting concern about market response to perceptions of 

unsustainable fiscal paths, especially if such responses were to lead to higher risk premiums on 

interest rates and problems in banking sectors exposed to sovereign risk and exposed to 

borrowers and countries with heightened sovereign risk.  On net, I don’t think we can expect 

March 16, 2010 68 of 146



much help from net exports in propelling our expansion, as is consistent with the Greenbook 

forecast. 

It is striking that the recovery in spending is so measured at such low real interest rates—

minus 1or minus 2 percent real federal funds rates.  Expansion is held back by the high cost of 

bank credit, uncertainty about sales and income prospects, household needs to rebuild wealth, 

and, as many have remarked, uncertainties about the legislative and regulatory environment.  I 

expect that these restraints will dissipate over time and that some favorable feedback loops will 

develop between improvements in labor markets and household and business confidence in 

spending, and between improved profitability and declining loss experience at banks and better 

credit availability for small businesses and households.  I think both of those favorable loops are 

likely, and I’m somewhat heartened by the conversation around the table, namely, that some of 

you are beginning to see a little more encouragement from your business contacts.  But in both 

cases I think these are mostly forecasts at this time and not yet supported by data. 

There are also some downside risks.  We’ve brought a lot of spending from the future to 

the present through very low interest rates and through fiscal policy; in many cases, policy 

explicitly encouraged bringing spending from the future to the present, such as the “cash-

for-clunkers” and first-time homebuyers programs.  At some point, we’re going to get to that 

future [laughter]. 

MR. TARULLO.  Some of us will, Mr. Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  That was a broad “we.”  We’re also are aware that rising bank capital and 

liquidity requirements could damp the easing in credit conditions. 

The incoming information on consumer prices suggested a somewhat greater deceleration 

than had been expected, especially outside the energy sector, to relatively low rates of inflation.  

March 16, 2010 69 of 146



The slowdown has been evident not only in the usual core consumer price indexes but also in the 

trimmed means.  I looked at the trimmed means the way everyone else did—I think President 

Plosser can take credit for incenting people to look more deeply into price indexes—and they 

have come down quite substantially over the last year to about 1¼ percent in the CPI and PCE; 

they do abstract from outliers.  The slowdown is evident in the higher frequency data, too.  The 

trimmed mean three- and six-month inflation rates are a little below the one-year trimmed mean 

inflation rate.  So unless inflation picks up, we’re going to see continued deceleration there. 

Measures of nominal compensation have also tended to slow or hold at very low levels.  

In my view, the behavior of prices and costs, while inflation expectations remain anchored, tends 

to confirm that a large margin of underutilized capital and labor resources and a very competitive 

environment are exerting considerable downward pressure on prices.  With petroleum prices 

having flattened out since last fall, we can expect headline inflation to retreat to these low core 

measures, well below the 1¾ to 2 percent level favored by most Committee members. 

In sum, I see the data since the last meeting as having tended to confirm that there’s a 

considerable output gap; that the gap is unlikely to close very quickly, even at very low interest 

rates; and that the result is likely to be very slow inflation below Committee members’ objectives 

for some time to come.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m not from the south, and those from the 

south had witty aphorisms to begin.  I’m a Yankee, and I went to a public school in upstate New 

York, and it was a rambunctious crowd at school.  We were all bussed in from smaller towns to 

go there.  And so I can only begin by saying what the principal would say on the loudspeaker.  

March 16, 2010 70 of 146



After the Pledge of Allegiance he would tell us, “Don’t just say something—sit there.”  

[Laughter]  So let me try to accomplish that. 

I think there are a couple of differences in amplitude of concerns from when we last met, 

though, like most of you, my modal forecast, which is a little less optimistic than the Greenbook, 

still hasn’t changed much.  So let me talk a little bit about those risks are, and then, second, I’ll 

provide an obvious insight on the nature of this cyclical recovery. 

First, I think the European economic risks, as Nathan discussed, are rising as much as we 

feared.  The cyclical story there is not pretty—the recoveries are remarkably weak, even given 

massive monetary stimulus.  I think the near-term trends there are quite troubling.  And potential 

economic growth seems to be falling as well, with rising protectionism, political infighting, a 

more fragile banking system than many in Europe may have been willing to admit during the 

darkest days of our turmoil, perhaps a mistaken understanding of what ails their economy, and 

further extensions of implicit guarantees, all of which have to be doing harm to their 

productivity, their unemployment rate, and to their growth.  I would say that Greece is indicative 

of European troubles, not the source of European troubles.  I take much less comfort than other 

observers cited in the papers about these “successful debt offerings” from Greece due to its new 

austerity program.  For example, what if we said that there were successful bank offerings after 

the TLGP came into being?  We’d say, “Well, there aren’t successful offerings by all these 

banks.  These are guarantees that the government put in place.”  And if I look for new investors 

in these so-called successful debt offerings, they’re almost impossible to find.  The investors in 

these offerings are the same large institutions that hold lots of old vintage paper who are buying 

new vintage paper as if to protect the value of the old. 

March 16, 2010 71 of 146



I think the open question is:  Will the whistle be blown on the strength of European 

financial institutions, or won’t it?  I did share the conventional view that they might just be able 

to pull it off with less capital than U.S. financial institutions before the crisis and after.  But, as 

we learned in the U.S., once the pressures in markets build, it’s not obvious that you can get 

away with disclosures that are not up to best practices around the world and to levels of capital, 

which, I think on an apples-to-apples basis, look rather poor. 

The periphery, as staff here describes—Portugal, Italy, Spain, and Greece—looks to me 

to be expanding.  The Greek spreads are likely to stay elevated as issuance continues.  Even 

when these spreads come down, we see new sellers in that market, making it impossible for them 

to come down on a dependable basis.  So I don’t suspect that we’re going to see Greek spreads or 

spreads of some of the other peripheral nations narrow too dramatically.  There could be 

narrowing, but it could happen because the German and French debt securities actually rise in 

price. 

So European weakness, in general, is bad news for U.S. prospects directly, and indirectly 

I think there’s a real risk of some shock that could find its way into our economy.  Markets in the 

U.S. somehow believe that these shocks are very much of a piece with the events of 2008 or 

2009, and that those are behind us.  I’m not convinced.  If I look at 2010, I think there’s a risk of 

some meaningful discontinuities.  If you look at sovereign credits, currencies, political regimes, 

there are plenty of sources of what could cause that.  Take government borrowing, which looks 

to be exploding in 2010.  There should be somewhere between $3 and $4 trillion of new net 

issuance from sovereigns this year.  That’s three to four times the average of the level of issuance 

from 2002 to 2008.  I think the prospects of what could otherwise be dismissed as sloppy 

auctions could end up leading markets to get much more concerned.  Regarding U.S. 

March 16, 2010 72 of 146



relationships with our big trading partners, an important issue during a period of global 

recession, I think they aren’t what they could be or should be.  The greater rhetoric we’re hearing 

from countries that are having their own domestic problems and trying to direct those at the U.S. 

speaks to some internal weaknesses that we shouldn’t take lightly.  So a shock in the world this 

year is more likely than markets expect, and I think such a shock is more likely to originate 

outside the U.S. than inside. 

Now to my second and final point, which is the cyclical recovery.  It may just be that this 

recovery is driven by big firms and not small.  And the nature of the cyclical recovery might look 

different from we’ve grown accustomed to, based on past recessions.  Big firms look more 

poised to lead, not lag.  Big firms’ cap-ex seems to be improving smartly, more smartly than 

smaller firms.  February U.S. tax revenues were up for the first time since April 2008—it’s hard 

to get more detailed data, but it looks as if it’s largely due to large corporate profits.  Big 

business is leading small business on cap-ex and on confidence.  One thing that’s harder for us to 

wrestle with is the implication of that for the labor markets.  It’s more likely that we’ll see 

continued cyclical upsurge in productivity coming from these big firms than some robust change 

in economic growth prospects.  But this development of the nature of the cyclical recovery 

certainly bears watching, and I’d be more comfortable if we saw small businesses entering with 

the same kind of confidence that we’ve seen in the last quarter from the big businesses.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The banker outlook remains pretty much the 

same, with credit losses reaching a plateau and loan demand weak.  One banker summed it up by 

saying, “2010 won’t look better, but it will feel better.”  There is a lot of concern about 

March 16, 2010 73 of 146



regulatory and supervisory issues, and most are worried about the fragility of the recovery.  A 

number of them mentioned a double-dip recession as a possibility, but I suspect they may also be 

talking about a double peak, because most of them are mainly worried about the unemployment 

rate. 

Given the time frame, I’m going to skip to the residential lending market.  Mortgage loan 

volume is down.  The mortgage bankers speculate that most of the borrowers who can qualify for 

a refinance have already done so, and they’re concerned that much of the purchase volume is 

driven by the tax credit. 

In the construction lending area, the builders that remain are still selling off their 

inventory at a loss.  The new product that’s going up is smaller, with fewer extras but quality 

finishes, and at entry-level price points.  In some markets, recently built resales and foreclosures 

are coming to market at prices lower than the cost to construct them.  Most markets have multi-

year inventory of unsold lots, and higher-end new homes and condos are not selling at all, as 

they’re very difficult to mortgage.  Supply and demand for construction loans is weak, with the 

remaining builders and lenders very skittish.  Most lending is for contract homes, as lending for 

speculative construction requires strong cash investment by the builder, and even model homes 

are being financed on an amortizing basis.  Given the lending conditions, the price levels, the 

mortgage availability, and competition from existing home inventory, I continue to be 

pessimistic about any significant pickup in residential construction. 

In the existing home market, I could not find a single lender that was having any 

difficulty moving foreclosed inventory or even one that was deliberately slowing foreclosures to 

avoid building inventory.  The banks that are selling their REO are seeing strong demand from 

investors and foreign buyers and a high proportion of cash sales.  So the bottleneck seems to be 

March 16, 2010 74 of 146



in the foreclosure process.  We’re now two years into various iterations of mortgage 

modifications, foreclosure moratoriums, and state legislatures lengthening the legal foreclosure 

process.  The results for the HAMP are likely to be disappointing.  At this point, it looks as if 

modifications will be in the hundreds of thousands rather than in the millions.  Lenders, 

borrowers, and most recently the Administration, are now focused on principal write-downs, 

short sales, and deeds in lieu of foreclosure.   

From the borrower’s perspective, many are now tired of struggling to make payments on 

houses that they cannot afford or that have negative equity.  So even those who have received a 

modification, made all their trial modification payments, and completed all the documentation to 

make those modifications permanent, are now hesitating as the prospect of a short sale with the 

ability to walk away, rent for a while, and reenter the housing market later, seems to be an 

attractive option. 

For the lenders and servicers, short-sale agreements provide a quicker, less expensive 

resolution than foreclosure.  Short-sale programs are becoming more formulaic regarding the 

price the lender agrees to accept and the fixed time period after which the borrower must turn 

over the home through a deed in lieu of foreclosure.  Some lenders require income 

documentation and perform asset searches to determine whether or not the borrower can actually 

pay the loan or a deficiency balance; others do not.  Some agreements extinguish the debt 

entirely; others don’t.  Some provide relocation assistance or cash for keys.  I think these 

programs have the potential to move us through the problem faster, but probably with more 

inventory coming to market and correspondingly lower prices.  However, to the extent that 

hardship is not documented and deficiencies are not pursued, moral hazard is going to be 

exacerbated. 

March 16, 2010 75 of 146



Finally, home equity loan and other junior claims make all modifications, short sales, and 

other foreclosure avoidance programs much more difficult.  Those with a strong interest in 

modifying first mortgages charge that the junior lienholders are just being selfish and ignoring 

their losses.  There do seem to be two categories of second liens.  First, those that were 

originated through indirect channels or as piggyback loans have had very high default rates and 

have been written off for the most part.  But just because they were written off does not mean the 

liens have been released, and those liens become worthless only in foreclosure.  So if foreclosure 

is taken off the table, those lienholders seem likely to hold out for some payment.  The second 

group, banks with large portfolios of home equity loans generated through branch offices, report 

that approximately 30 percent of their loans are underwater with combined loan-to-value ratios 

greater than 100 percent.  But of those underwater loans, more than 95 percent are current. 

A startling number of borrowers are delinquent on their first mortgages but still paying on 

their home equity loans.  If these loans are modified, the accounting and regulatory rules require 

them to be written down to the same value that would be received in foreclosure, and in a short 

sale their position is partially or totally wiped out.  So these lenders have very little incentive to 

come to the table unless foreclosure is imminent. 

Programs are now being developed to make payments to junior lienholders.  Fannie Mae 

has a program.  The Administration’s HAMP effort has a companion program.  Various private 

lenders have programs to offer small payments to second lienholders.  But getting the holders of 

performing loans to accept pennies on the dollar seems unlikely to generate any big participation.  

None of the current modification programs address unemployed borrowers.  Programs are in 

development that will include six to nine months of payment forbearance, followed by a 

March 16, 2010 76 of 146



modification or a short sale depending on reemployment, but accounting and regulatory rules 

again require that these loans be written down to foreclosure value. 

All in all, it seems likely that the roughly five million loans that are seriously delinquent 

or in the process of foreclosure will take at least two to three more years to resolve, and that there 

is still a large dollar amount of mortgage debt to be extinguished.  Going forward, if mortgages 

are to be booked at lower loan-to-value ratios, and those ratios are applied to lower home values 

or new homes at lower price points, and lower home ownership rates result in fewer homes being 

financed, it seems likely that the volume of mortgage debt outstanding would continue to 

contract.  Adding to that a debate about the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that won’t 

start until next year, a private securitization market that seems unlikely to restart until the role of 

government in housing finance is resolved, and the effect on securitization of the interaction of 

accounting, skin in the game, and capital proposals, I don’t expect a normal housing market 

anywhere in our planning horizon. 

So while consumer credit is beginning to rebuild slowly—and I do believe C&I lending 

will recover with the economy, and nonfarm, nonresidential real estate volumes are likely to be 

flat but with better quality— I expect overall lending to stay down as residential construction and 

mortgage volumes continue to fall.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me try to do this in the form of bullet 

points, with staccato delivery where possible.  [Laughter]  First point—overall assessment:  

unchanged.  We have a reasonably well-grounded recovery, but it’s still halting and there seems 

little prospect that it’s going to strengthen any time soon. 

March 16, 2010 77 of 146



With that in mind and with little else to say, let me go to three contextual points.  Point 

two—most important uncertainty:  jobs and job creation, not just because it is an explicit 

statutory responsibility of this Committee to promote maximum employment, but also, 

obviously, because any recovery in self-sustaining demand is going to depend on personal 

consumption expenditures, which, I think, ultimately will depend on job creation.  While it is 

true that the deceleration of job losses and the levels of temporary hiring continue to give reason 

to hope that significant net job creation is just around the corner, we’ve been looking around that 

corner for a little while, and, as David pointed out in his presentation, this is a phenomenon still 

more anticipated than actualized. 

Third point—vulnerabilities of the economy.  Here I’m a little bit more balanced.  I agree 

with Bill and Kevin that the fiscal vulnerability is probably increasing a little bit, in the sense that 

there’s potential market reaction to fiscal situations—almost a demonstration effect in Europe 

may be coming over here a bit. 

Having said that, though, I thought it was mildly reassuring, both with respect to the 

Dubai situation last year and the immediate reactions to the Greek situation this year, that 

financial markets overall were not particularly thrown off stride.  For example, CDS spreads are 

still up, so it’s not as if all of that has just been absorbed.  But, it didn’t feel as though the 

markets were so on edge that anything was going to throw them off. 

I would also mention on the upside something that has been less remarked.  The edginess 

I felt about foreign exchange markets for a time last fall has actually diminished in response not 

only to some of the international stresses, but also to increased confidence in U.S. recovery.  The 

strengthening of the U.S. dollar has, I think, removed the concerns that some were beginning to 

feel about whether foreign exchange markets could themselves be a source of instability.  

March 16, 2010 78 of 146



Ironically, of course, that’s likely to provide something of a drag on our exports and thus 

economic performance going forward, but in a vulnerabilities analysis, it’s probably not a bad 

thing.  And finally, as Don mentioned, the withdrawal of liquidity facilities and the change and 

normalization of discount rate policy raised issues only about whether we were moving towards 

an increase in the federal funds rate, and I think that also was a confirmation that there is 

substantially more financial stability now. 

Point four—new worries.  We always have to have new worries.  Like many of you, I’ve 

heard a lot of caution from some market participants about incipient asset price bubbles 

developing in this lengthy period of zero interest rate policy.  I think there’s little doubt but that a 

search for yield has been on for some time, particularly since equity markets in the U.S. leveled 

out towards the end of last year.  Having said that and after having made some inquiries and 

looked at some data, I don’t see much evidence of asset bubbles at present.  It’s a little harder to 

tell if the very low interest rates over this period have increased leverage in some asset markets 

to levels that could suggest that we’re going to have bubbles at some time in the foreseeable 

future, but, based on some very helpful analysis from Board staff and from staff in the New York 

Fed’s Markets Group, it doesn’t appear at present that there are any obvious suspects.  We’ll 

obviously want to watch this going forward, because I think the distinction between, on the one 

hand, a return to normal levels of risk and leverage and, on the other, a potentially unhealthy 

buildup of leverage in some asset classes may not be so clear.  We should surely be monitoring 

behavior and experience of our regulated institutions with this issue in mind. 

In sum, lots of slack, lots of unemployment, no evidence of inflation, and little evidence 

of incipient asset bubbles.  While I can tell the story of how some of these conditions could turn 

March 16, 2010 79 of 146



reasonably quickly, I don’t see any evidence yet that this has happened.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thank you all not only for insightful 

comments, but concise ones as well. 

Let me try to summarize and then I’ll just add a few observations.  Intermeeting data 

were perhaps slightly weaker than expected, and some bouts of bad weather further muddled the 

picture.  The economy was characterized as flat, fragile, lethargic, choppy, and improving.  

Generally, moderate growth is projected for 2010, with slow improvement in the labor market 

and low near-term inflation risks.  Private demand needs to pick up where the inventory cycle 

and fiscal policy are leaving off to create a sustainable expansion.  Outside of Europe, foreign 

growth continues reasonably strong, especially in China and other EMEs, although there are 

various risks abroad ranging from an overheated China to a fiscally strapped Greece.  Financial 

markets generally continued to be supportive of recovery.  Inflation risks appear low in the short 

run, but may be higher in the medium run, and uncertainty about the forecast remains quite high. 

Recent data suggest that retail sales and household spending are growing at a moderate 

rate, though consumers remain pessimistic about income growth in the labor market, and income 

and the saving rate have been revised down. 

The most recent labor market report was mildly encouraging, and job growth might have 

been positive except for weather disruptions.  Temporary jobs have increased considerably.  

However, labor market conditions overall remain very weak.  Unemployment is high, especially 

among men, and long-term unemployed are losing skills.  The decline in UI claims has stalled, 

suggesting that layoffs have not entirely stopped, and, while there are signs of hiring, they are 

still somewhat limited.  Firms are quite reluctant to add to payrolls, given the level of uncertainty 

March 16, 2010 80 of 146



about the sustainability of the recovery and about government policy.  Nevertheless, some job 

creation is expected in coming months, as very lean firms are forced to respond to higher 

demand. 

Housing sales and starts have been stalling in most regions, despite various forms of 

government support.  Foreclosures are likely to remain quite high and may depress both housing 

prices and mortgage quality further.  Construction generally is contracting as commercial and 

industrial sectors struggle. 

Some glimmers of optimism were detected among firms, perhaps especially the largest 

firms, although caution remains the watchword as firms worry about regulatory roulette.  

Investment in equipment and software is largely for maintenance or updating of technology, and 

investment in structures continues very weak.  Manufacturing looks to be expanding in part 

because of growing export demand.  Other sectors showing signs of life include energy and 

petrochemicals, agriculture, shipping, and advertising.  Construction remains very weak. State 

and local employment and investment remain tightly constrained by lower revenues. 

Public equity and credit markets continue to perform well, but bank lending remains 

constrained.  Mortgage quality is a risk for banks, and housing finance remains troubled, but 

banks are able to sell their REO.  Markets have expressed some concerns about sovereign risk, 

notably in Greece and other European countries, which may pose risks to the banking system and 

to the broader economy.  Bank capital and liquidity requirements could dampen the easing of 

credit conditions, which we are beginning to see. 

Finally, on inflation, shelter costs continue to account for part of the decline in overall 

inflation, but core or trimmed measures suggest that underlying inflation trends are moving 

downward in a broad-based way.  Inflation expectations moderated slightly over the intermeeting 

March 16, 2010 81 of 146



period, as seen, for example, in TIPS spreads.  Growth in wages and unit labor costs remains low 

or negative, labor market slack remains high, inflation expectations stable, and productivity 

growth accelerated.  The dollar has also strengthened.  Near-term inflation risks appear low and 

even to the downside, although expansionary monetary and fiscal policies imply some medium-

term risks. 

Fiscal imbalances both here and abroad could restrain growth if they push up rates, and 

on the monetary side, a long period of low rates may lead to increased leverage or financial 

imbalances even if they don’t cause inflation. 

That’s my summary.  Any comments?  [No response.] 

Well, usually the summary is the most useful part of my presentation.  I’ll say a couple of 

additional things here.  First of all, I think we might as well take note of the fact that this is the 

one-year anniversary of the March 2009 meeting where we took some very strong measures to 

add something on the order of about $1 trillion in additional asset purchases.  Since then, we 

have maintained our low interest rate policy.  We have conducted the stress test of the banks.  

We have managed and closed our liquidity facilities, and the economy obviously is doing a lot 

better.  I don’t think that’s entirely accidental.  Economic growth is where we were a year ago, 

and relative to the challenges we faced a year ago, I think we should be a little bit pleased at 

least. 

That being said, of course, the economy is still quite weak.  I listen to the comments 

around the table about “optimistic projections” of 3 percent growth, and I ask myself where is 

that going to take us in terms of labor markets and financial conditions.  So this is still quite an 

unsatisfactory situation, but certainly one that we should feel we have made an important 

contribution towards stabilizing. 

March 16, 2010 82 of 146



Looking forward, my concern basically is, again, where strong economic growth is going 

to come from.  I think the 3 percent scenario is plausible, but even in that case, there are 

downside risks.  Notably, as people have mentioned, after the big inventory correction, we’re 

going to need private final demand growth to take up the slack from inventories.  In order to get 

its 3 percent plus growth for 2010, the Greenbook is looking for average growth in private final 

demand at an annual rate of 3.7 percent for the rest of the year.  That would be a considerable 

pickup—more than 2 percent over each of the last three quarters—so there really needs to be 

some pickup of final demand from where we are.  It seems unlikely to come from housing, given 

what’s developing there.  In the household sector, I was very pleased to see, as all of us were, the 

recent consumption spending numbers, which suggest we might have 3 percent growth in 

consumer spending in the first quarter.  But, again, will this be sustainable?  Will we see stronger 

household spending?  I note one serious weakness is the lack of income growth.  Real disposable 

income in January of 2010 was essentially identical to what it was in January of 2009, and, 

indeed, it would not have been that high except for the fact that transfer payments were up 12 

percent over the year.  So we’re looking at a situation where growth in income is not yet 

transpiring and, therefore, we’re relying very heavily on continued confidence in the household 

sector and the expected rebound in the labor market.  Again, we’re looking at a situation where 

we’re going to need some pickup in income and final demand to get 3 percent growth, and I 

think that does pose a risk. 

I do think the labor market is looking a bit better.  We saw some positive signs in terms 

of hiring indicators, such as help wanted, workweek, diffusion indexes, and temporary work.  At 

the same time, of course, UI claims have remained quite sticky, and the number of people on 

March 16, 2010 83 of 146



temporary and emergency unemployment is extraordinarily high, and it has not begun to come 

down. 

A point that no one mentioned—and it’s rare at this point for me to find something that 

nobody really mentioned; maybe somebody did and I missed it—is that a big uncertainty about 

labor market going forward is what’s going to happen to productivity growth.  The Greenbook is 

projecting that, after 6 percent productivity growth in 2009, productivity will grow ¾ percent in 

2010, and that provides a reasonable growth in employment.  Obviously, if we get stronger 

productivity growth and demand is not more robust, then we could have a worse outcome.  So 

there are a lot of uncertainties in the labor market. 

Financial conditions, as people have noted, are generally better.  There certainly are some 

risks.  I took note of an interesting financial conditions index that was constructed by a number 

of people, including our ex-colleague Governor Mishkin and others, which gave a very broad- 

based look at financial conditions.  The interesting result was that, although there was a big 

improvement in financial conditions through most of 2009, once you hold constant the 

improvement in the economy, financial conditions had become something more of a drag in the 

latter part of 2009 and 2010.  That’s mostly due to quantities rather than prices, for example, the 

lack of rebound in securitization and the lack of rebound in lending.  So I think there is, again, 

still a headwind coming from the financial side. 

I want to restate a theme that President Hoenig has raised a couple of times and Governor 

Tarullo mentioned, which is the question of financial imbalances.  As inflation looks a little less 

worrisome, that’s clearly something we want to pay attention to.  I think you can break it down 

into more than one category.  I think we need to worry about valuation, that is, bubbles, asset 

prices.  We need to worry about leverage.  And we need to worry about underwriting quality.  

March 16, 2010 84 of 146



Those are three separate dimensions, all of which deteriorated during the crisis.  As Governor 

Tarullo mentioned, Board and New York Fed staff have been looking at some of these things, 

and we have various indicators for stock prices and bond spreads.  We have various measures of 

leverage.  We are, after all, bank supervisors, and we’re telling the world we need to be bank 

supervisors so that we can follow this stuff.  So I would suggest that we all do it and that we 

increase our focus on these things.  It is possible to try to make an assessment of those risks, and 

it is very important that we continue to look at them. 

Finally, a word on inflation.  I have a small thing to add here as well on the debate about 

OER.  There is another important component of the inflation rate which is the nonmarket-based 

component, and interestingly that turns out to be almost exactly the same weight as OER in the 

PCE index, and it has been running at 2.6 percent, which is above the rest of the basket.  So 

maybe we want to put those all together in one big element and decide that it’s not making that 

much difference at this point.  I also looked at the various trimmed means, and we want to thank 

the Dallas and Cleveland Banks for maintaining those useful numbers.  As the Vice Chairman 

pointed out, there does seem to be a broad-based slowing, although I think we can’t be too 

complacent, certainly, and among other things, we’re still seeing some increase in energy and 

commodity prices, and that is, of course, something we have to worry about. 

So again, I think we should be grateful for what has happened in the last year and the 

stabilization we’ve seen.  We do look to be in a recovery.  I wish it were stronger.  I wish the 

labor market were improving more quickly, and we need to pay very close attention to the real 

side of the economy.  Regarding inflation, we must always pay attention to it.  At the moment it 

seems not particularly worrisome, but certainly we are in a very difficult world in which a 

variety of issues, including financial imbalances, need our attention as well as the conventional 

March 16, 2010 85 of 146



inflation measures.  So let me stop there, and let’s turn to the policy go-around, and I’ll call on 

Brian. 

MR. MADIGAN.4  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  This package 

includes the draft policy statements as they appeared in the Bluebook, with the 

addition to alternatives C and C′ of alternative language suggested by President 

Hoenig, in brackets.  Also included are a revised version of Bluebook Table 1, 

summarizing the alternatives, and draft directives. 

 

 

 

4 The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

Your policy decision today takes place against a backdrop of continued 

improvement in financial market conditions overall, evidence that a moderate 

economic recovery is on track, and signs that inflation pressures remain subdued and 

inflation expectations contained.  Still, the staff anticipates a relatively slow recovery, 

with the unemployment rate still at 8¼ percent late next year.  And with considerable 

resource slack expected to prevail over the projection period and inflation 

expectations steady, the staff sees core inflation this year as edging down to a 

1 percent rate and holding at that level next year.  Your remarks this morning suggest 

that many of you have a similar outlook, and, as the Chairman noted, Committee 

participants may see the forecast as somewhat unsatisfactory. 

In these circumstances, it would seem that one question facing the Committee is 

whether additional monetary stimulus would be appropriate to help reduce downside 

risks and spur the recovery to a brisker pace that would result in a steeper decline in 

resource slack and, eventually, inflation at rates closer to desirable levels over the 

longer run.  Under alternative A, page 2, the Committee would provide such stimulus 

by extending and increasing modestly its purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  

The description of the economic backdrop in paragraphs 1 and 2 would generally be 

similar to that in the January statement, but it would note that unemployment is high 

and that housing activity continues to be sluggish.  It would state that, “in light of the 

weakness in labor markets and prospects for a subpar economic recovery, the 

Committee judges that further monetary stimulus is warranted.”  With the federal 

funds rate at its effective lower bound, the Committee would apply additional 

stimulus by increasing its MBS purchases by $150 billion to $1.4 trillion and 

extending them through the end of the second quarter.  That modification to the 

program would entail a continuation of MBS transactions at approximately the 

$10 billion average weekly pace that the Desk has maintained recently. 

Market participants are not expecting any change to the LSAP program, and the 

staff estimates that increasing MBS purchases by $150 billion would lower mortgage 

rates and other long-term rates by 5 to 15 basis points.  This announcement could also 

prompt market analysts to push off the date at which they expect policy firming to 

commence and more generally lead to a somewhat flatter path for market 

expectations of short-term interest rates.  All in all, the staff estimates that this policy 

                                                 

March 16, 2010 86 of 146



would provide modest additional stimulus to the real economy that could lower the 

unemployment rate relative to baseline by perhaps one-tenth percentage point two 

years ahead. 

 

 

 

 

However, some significant uncertainties would attend this policy.  For example, 

with mortgage spreads already very tight, the actual extent of the effects of additional 

purchases on mortgage rates is unclear.  And the possible effects on inflation 

expectations are difficult to gauge.  In view of such considerations, the Committee 

might believe that its existing degree of policy stimulus appropriately balances the 

costs and benefits, and so it might favor the language presented in alternative B, page 

3.  As in alternative A, this alternative would note that unemployment is still high and 

is one of the factors constraining household spending.  It would mention that business 

spending on equipment and software has picked up significantly but that housing 

starts have been flat at a depressed level.  The statement would again indicate that the 

Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a 

context of price stability. 

In paragraph 2, the Committee would repeat the view that with substantial 

resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation 

expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.  The Committee 

could add the bracketed sentence, which in effect notes that monetary policy is 

responsible for controlling inflation over time.  Although the wording does not say so 

explicitly, the sentence could also be read as indicating that the Committee anticipates 

that inflation would edge up over time from “subdued” rates to somewhat higher rates 

that are consistent with price stability and thus that excessive disinflation should not 

be a concern. 

In paragraph 3, the Committee would indicate that it is retaining the existing 0 to 

¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate and would reiterate that it sees 

economic conditions as likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds 

rate for an extended period.  The Committee would also note that its large-scale asset 

purchases are coming to an end.  In place of the indication in January that “the 

Committee will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities,” the statement would 

make the more general indication that “the Committee will continue to monitor the 

economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as 

necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability,” thus finessing the 

purchases versus holdings issue that the Committee has previously discussed.  This 

statement would be silent about the Committee’s exit strategy, pending further 

discussion at the April meeting. 

In paragraph 4, the Committee would note that the Federal Reserve has been 

closing most of the special liquidity facilities that it created to support markets in the 

crisis and would indicate that the TALF is still expected to close down on the 

previously specified schedule.  The statement at the end of the January statement that 

the Federal Reserve is prepared to modify its plans to close its lending programs 

March 16, 2010 87 of 146



 

 

 

 

 

would be dropped.  Our sense is that market participants already see essentially no 

likelihood that the TALF will be extended. 

The Desk’s survey suggests that investors generally do not anticipate any changes 

in the Committee’s forward policy guidance at this meeting.  Overall, the statement 

for this alternative seems to be about in line with market expectations, and it would 

likely prompt little market reaction.   

By contrast, alternative C, page 4, and its variant C′ would summarize plans for 

exit and would suggest that the Committee was moving more quickly toward 

reducing monetary policy accommodation.  In paragraph 1, the statement would note 

various positive economic developments and indicate that a sustainable economic 

recovery is now under way.  Paragraph 2 would recognize that energy prices have 

recently boosted inflation modestly but would observe that underlying inflation 

pressures remain muted.  It would also say that “the Committee will adjust the stance 

of monetary policy as necessary over time to ensure that longer-term inflation 

expectations remain well anchored and that inflation outcomes are consistent with 

price stability.” 

In paragraph 3, the Committee would indicate that its fed funds target range 

would remain unchanged for now but would modify its conditional expectation for 

exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate such that it now extends only “for 

some time” rather than “for an extended period.”  If it wished, the Committee could 

provide more specific guidance by indicating that exceptionally low rates were likely 

“at least through the end of the second quarter.”  Changing “extended period” to “for 

some time” alone would likely cause market participants to advance sharply the time 

at which they expect policy firming to commence; adding “at least through the end of 

the second quarter” might help moderate that shift a little.  But even that language 

would probably lead investors to believe that policy firming beginning in the third 

quarter was quite possible and perhaps even likely. 

The first sentence of paragraph 4 would provide more information on the 

Committee’s rationale for modifying its forward guidance.  In the Bluebook version 

of the language—the phrase shown in red and bracketed—the motivation is solely to 

prevent the development of inflationary pressures.  In language suggested by 

President Hoenig, shown in blue and bracketed, the motivation would be to prevent 

the buildup of financial imbalances as well as inflationary pressures.  In this regard, 

one issue for consideration might be whether the Committee would see an express 

indication that adjustments to monetary policy were undertaken to prevent incipient 

financial imbalances as consistent with the dual mandate established by the Congress. 

With the Committee preparing to firm policy under alternative C, paragraph 4 

would also provide some indication of how the Federal Reserve intended to use the 

various tools at its disposal to effect the tightening.  Although the Committee plans to 

discuss these issues in detail at the April meeting, I will comment briefly now on the 

exit strategy language that was prepared for alternatives C and C′.  Alternative C 

March 16, 2010 88 of 146



would note plans to continue to test tools for draining reserves, for subsequently 

scaling up those operations to drain more reserves, and for then increasing IOER rate 

and the target federal funds rate.  The Committee would indicate an expectation that 

“any sales of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings would be gradual and would 

not occur until after policy tightening is under way and the economic recovery is 

sufficiently advanced.” 

 

 

 

 

Alternative C′, page 5, is identical to alternative C except for its description of 

some key aspects of the exit strategy.  In particular, under this variant, the Committee 

would indicate that it would let all maturing securities run off beginning on April 1.  

It would also note that the Committee “will also be assessing the possibility of 

gradual sales of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings to accomplish further 

reductions in the size of its portfolio.”  Although both of these changes are presented 

in C′, they do not necessarily have to be paired. 

Market participants do not expect a statement along the lines of alternative C or 

C′.  Depending to some extent on whether the Committee included the bracketed 

phrase in paragraph 3, investors would revise sharply the time at which they 

anticipate policy firming to begin and possibly steepen their expected path of 

tightening.  The message they took from the shift from “extended period” to “some 

time” would be reinforced by the Committee’s discussion of its exit strategy in 

paragraph 4.  Because this would be the first time that the Committee covered such 

ground in a policy statement, it would likely bolster the sense that the Committee had 

now set in motion a process that would lead to policy tightening. 

Finally, I should note that the directives for alternatives B, C, and C′ incorporate 

significant changes from recent directives, partly to reflect the imminent termination 

of the large-scale asset purchases.  I might note particularly that for alternative B, the 

directive, which is shown in the second page from the end of the handout, would 

delete the sentences that provide qualitative guidance to the Desk for asset purchases 

and that indicate the Committee’s expectation that asset purchases will cause a 

significant increase in the balance sheet, again because these purchases are nearing 

their completion.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian?  President 

Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I have just one question.  I 

saw, in the Bluebook, that there is an analysis of the long-run scenarios for the balance sheet 

under alternative A and under alternative B.  I didn’t understand the logic of not including such 

scenarios for alternative C.  If you could, please talk through that one. 

March 16, 2010 89 of 146



MR. MADIGAN.  We did discuss whether or not to include those, President 

Kocherlakota.  Our rationale simply was that it was not very clear at this point what sort of 

assumptions to employ for all of the variables that the Committee now faces as policy 

instruments—redemptions, asset sales, the various reserve-draining tools, and so on.  We’d be 

happy to include them in the future, obviously, but we felt that our decision to include them 

would be better informed by further Committee discussion of these issues. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  In some sense those choices are also implicit under alternative 

A and alternative B, and you’re opting for a no sales default across all three alternatives or 

possible alternatives. 

MR. MADIGAN.  That’s true. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should have alternative scenarios to discuss in the next 

meeting.  Any other questions for Brian?  [No response.] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There has been increased communication 

about our exit strategy—I think this is a good thing—but I think we’re a bit hampered, because 

we really haven’t decided upon yet as a Committee or reached a consensus on many of the facets 

of the exit strategy, which we’ve just been alluding to, and I hope we’ll continue to make 

progress on this important topic.  As I’ve mentioned, our choices on the various elements of our 

exit strategy are all interrelated in some way, and we need to look at them collectively rather than 

as one-off. 

In particular, I think that we need to discuss further our longer-term operating framework, 

including the appropriate operating target, and that we need to do so in conjunction with the 

management of our asset holdings as we seek to shrink the size of reserves and move towards an 

March 16, 2010 90 of 146



all-Treasuries portfolio.  As the Chairman just indicated, I hope this will be an active discussion 

on the agenda in April so we can get a sense of where the Committee stands as we, so to speak, 

hone our exit strategies.  I think having a better idea of where we’re going will help us decide 

how we exit. 

In general, we want our language to help us implement policy, not hinder us from 

implementing policy or inappropriately constrain us.  Given the economic outlook, I do think it’s 

time for us to seriously consider backing away from the “extended period” language.  I would 

like our language to give us more flexibility with regard to policy than we currently have.  The 

forward guidance language, I believe, is beginning to become a hindrance rather than a help.  

The longer we maintain it, the more difficult we may find it to unwind from it.  We will need to 

prepare the markets for the eventual start of our exit from this period of extraordinary policy 

accommodation. 

It’s important for the public to understand that zero interest rates is not normal policy.  In 

fact, a 1 percent interest rate is not normal policy.  I view in many ways the start of moving rates 

up or selling assets from our portfolio not so much as a tightening in the usual sense of the word, 

but as a step towards normalization of policy in the same way that we’re unwinding our liquidity 

facilities.  With the large size of our balance sheet and with rates at zero, policy will remain 

accommodative for a very long time to come after we start normalization. 

I like the idea of discussing some of our plans for exiting in our statement, but again, I 

think we need to be careful and choose language that will not become a constraint on us as we 

try to react to economic conditions.  This means being careful not to make commitments to a 

particular sequencing until we have more evidence on how our tools are working and how the 

economy is evolving.  We are in new territory.  We may find that we aren’t able to maintain a 

March 16, 2010 91 of 146



particular sequencing and simultaneously meet our policy objectives.  From my perspective we 

ought to be trying to describe a reaction function that depends on the state of the economy to the 

extent we are able, not on something that looks like a mechanical set of actions that are a 

function of calendar time. 

It probably won’t surprise anyone that I’m in favor of alternative C′, but with a couple of 

changes.  I would change the forward guidance in paragraph 3 to “some time,” period.  I oppose 

an additional clause that says “at least through the end of the second quarter.”  As I said, our 

policy needs to be contingent on the state of the economy, not on the calendar.  And I wouldn’t 

be conveying that idea that it’s tied to the calendar even if we thought economic conditions will 

likely mean that we won’t be raising the target funds rate.  Again, I want the description in terms 

of the state of the economy, not in terms of the calendar. 

I had similar views to my colleagues, President Lacker and Fisher, regarding alternative 

C, paragraph 4:  I think the C′ language is a little better.  I think President Hoenig’s suggestions 

for the first sentence would be fine, but I do have some concern about whether that might be read 

as indicating that the Committee is going to act on bubbles, and that part of it makes me a little 

cautious.  However, in paragraph 4, I would not necessarily commit us to using tools for draining 

reserves before raising the IOER rate and the funds rate target.  I think this locks us in before we 

know how effective these tools will be; nor would I commit to saying that we’re only 

considering possible gradual sales of assets from our portfolio or that they would only occur after 

we began to raise IOER rate.  Based on our previous discussions, it’s not clear that these 

sequencing decisions represent any conclusions or consensus of the Committee. 

I would note here that I believe to a large degree that President Kocherlakota’s view of 

the functioning of financial markets is correct.  In a market where longer-term and short-term 

March 16, 2010 92 of 146



rates are integrated and where we have an appropriately functioning term structure, there may 

not be much difference in the effect on longer-term interest rates of selling longer-term assets 

versus the expectation effects of beginning to raise the IOER rate and, through expectations of a 

tightening cycle, raising long-term rates; it’s not clear how those two pieces could fit together.  I 

think those are the kinds of interactions we need to explore as we think about our exit strategy. 

Let me turn briefly to alternative B, because I don’t think alternative C will be the 

consensus here.  As I’ve discussed in previous meetings, I like the idea of conveying that it is 

monetary policy actions rather than structural features of the economy that influence inflation 

over the longer run.  Thus, I am strongly in favor of including the bracketed sentence in 

paragraph 2.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I strongly support alternative B.  With 

no change in the federal funds rate through 2011, the Greenbook still expects an unemployment 

rate above 8 percent, and most measures of core inflation are around 1 percent.  My own forecast 

is not significantly different, implying at the end of 2011 we will still be well below my inflation 

target and well above my estimate of full employment with no change in interest rates.  If this 

forecast is right, the “extended period” language will need to remain for an extended period. 

In the popular press, many have raised the concern that keeping interest rates at very low 

levels could spur a leverage-supported bubble in asset prices.  While I find the historical 

evidence for this connection ambiguous at best, I see no evidence currently of excessive 

extensions of credit in this country.  In fact, my concern is the exact opposite, that even at these 

low interest rates, lending is shrinking, not growing, and leveraged financial institutions are still 

deleveraging. 

March 16, 2010 93 of 146



In assessing the risk to a policy of keeping rates unusually low, I see an important 

asymmetry.  Large positive shocks would get us somewhat closer to our desired targets, but still 

leave us plenty of time before a tightening would be required.  Large negative shocks, on the 

other hand, would be difficult to offset and would push out further the date we reach either 

element of our dual mandate.  In short, there is little risk of growing too fast, but a significant 

risk if the economy grows too slowly. 

In terms of the questions posed on reinvestment strategy, I would use the following two 

principles.  First, the reinvestment strategy should be consistent with the interest path.  If we 

need to remain accommodative, any reduction in reserves should be done in ways to minimize 

the impact on borrowing costs of households and businesses.  Second, in the long run, we should 

return to an all-Treasury portfolio, but, in the short run, we should be focused on getting the right 

macroeconomic outcome. 

Given my expectation for the need for accommodative policy for some time and my 

concerns that selling of MBS will have a more significant impact on borrowing costs for 

households than Treasuries, I would not expect to sell any mortgage-backed securities until after 

we have begun tightening.  It is quite possible that the recovery is slow enough that sales of MBS 

will not be required at all.  I would be comfortable not rolling over some Treasury securities if it 

was viewed as desirable to reduce reserves more quickly and the impact on yield was minimal.  I 

would suggest a gradual reduction in rollover so that we can determine the potential impact.  

Assuming yield movement is minimal, we could continue to let Treasuries roll off.  Once we had 

reduced our balance sheet to low levels of excess reserves, we could replace mortgage-backed 

securities as they rolled off with Treasuries eventually returning to an all-Treasuries portfolio. 

March 16, 2010 94 of 146



Finally, I would not retain the bracketed sentence in paragraph 2.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In the interest of time, we will be discussing the issues of 

balance sheet adjustment in April. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s not all give those views now.  Everybody will have a 

chance to discuss it.  President Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B, and I would exclude the 

bracketed sentence which is arguably redundant, given the last sentence of paragraph 2.  The 

economy is clearly operating far below maximum sustainable employment, and inflation is 

undesirably low.  Under these circumstances, I see no case now for tightening monetary policy, 

and this includes any additional language that would trigger changes in market expectations 

about the pace of tightening.  I found it striking that none of the alternative scenarios in the 

Greenbook have an increase in the funds rate this year.  Furthermore, I believe that the risks 

associated with tightening prematurely still exceed those resulting from tightening too late. 

I think we’ve been quite clear that the promise of low rates is not unconditional or 

calendar-dependent.  Rather it depends on explicit economic conditions, including “low rates of 

resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations,” conditions that 

still prevail.  I think this guidance does not bind future policy to the mast.  Rather it helps inform 

our passengers of the likely direction of the journey, and that type of communication facilitates 

the transmission of policy. 

It’s true that the “extended period” statement isn’t explicitly conditioned on 

developments in asset and credit markets, and I agree with President Hoenig and with the 

March 16, 2010 95 of 146



comments of the Chairman and Governor Tarullo that we should be considering the possibility 

that our monetary policy could foster the emergence of new financial imbalances, and that we 

should be monitoring financial markets closely.  But I would just say at this point that I, too, do 

not see evidence that excessive investor risk-taking has developed.  As supervisors, we have 

potent regulatory tools at our disposal to address these risks, and I believe that we need to use 

them to ensure that financial imbalances do not emerge. 

At this point in the cycle, with exceptionally high unemployment and very low inflation, I 

believe our policy actions should focus squarely on our mandate for price stability and full 

employment. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m not in favor of alternative A.  

I see no evidence that further expansion of the LSAP would be appropriate at this time.  

However, I like elements of both alternatives B and C′.  I like B because I believe the current 

high rate of unemployment and low levels of expected and realized inflation support continued 

use of the “extended period” language.  On the other hand, I’m in favor of communicating our 

exit strategy immediately as is done in alternatives C and C′.  I don’t see a logical reason to wait 

to start communication until we drop the “extended period” language.  In terms of exit strategy, I 

liked C′ better than C, without the language in blue type that’s included in C′.  I indicated in the 

economics go-round that I remain concerned about the inflationary risks of our large balance 

sheet.  Given those current concerns, I like C′ because it allows the possibility of sales beginning 

before raising rates, although it does not necessarily require that. Likewise, C′ is explicit about 

our desire to run off maturing and prepaid securities. 

March 16, 2010 96 of 146



Putting these thoughts together, I support alternative B with the inclusion of a new 

paragraph 4, which would be paragraph 4 of alternative C′.  To be consistent with the rest of 

alternative B, I would change the first sentence in paragraph 4 to refer to “an extended period” 

rather than “for some time.” 

Keeping the Chairman’s admonition about time in mind, but having been in favor of C′, I 

have to say something about the exit strategy.  I will tax you with my thoughts on that, I hope 

briefly.  I think the Bluebook expressed some concerns that paragraphs like C′ 4 may generate 

uncertainty about our exit, and so may lead to untoward asset-market volatility.  I’m very 

sympathetic to these concerns.  The right answer is not simply to avoid the topic entirely, as is 

done in alternative B, but rather to improve upon C′ 4 by being much less vague about our 

intentions.  For 2008 and 2009, the Committee was explicit about timing and quantities.  We 

should be explicit about timing and quantities during our exit. 

In my memo on reverse tapering, I offered one way to proceed.  One thing we should be 

actively considering is committing as much as possible to an end date and to a rate of sales. In 

the meeting last time, I think we said we all wanted to be out of the housing market and back into 

an all-Treasury portfolio eventually.  I would like to be explicit about what “eventually” means 

and state that we anticipate not having agency securities in our portfolio at the end of a given 

date—I’ll suggest 2016.  I’m not wedded to 2016, but I strongly prefer it to be an end date in this 

decade as opposed to the 2020s or 2030s or President Rosengren’s strategy, in which I think it 

would take until 2040 before we got out of agency MBS.  In terms of the speed of sales, I 

recommend we explicitly state that, through the end of 2016 or whatever end date we choose, the 

Federal Reserve would put a cap on sales.  I’ll make another suggestion along these lines:  

$25 billion of assets in a month. 

March 16, 2010 97 of 146



I think the big concern among market participants about our sales procedure is that, once 

we start selling, we’ll go crazy and start to sell everything in a very short period of time.  I think 

we should commit to not being that kind of actor in the marketplace.  Now, I think that my 

proposed slow rate of sales would have little in the way of price impact, given the kind of 

financial market functioning we’re seeing right now.  The results of the March 2010 working 

paper by Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack were suggestive of such a notion.  In March of 

2009, a year ago, the Fed announced the decision to buy up an additional $750 billion of agency 

MBS over the coming nine months.  The working paper estimates the impact of this purchase on 

agency MBS yields to have been about 30 basis points. 

I’m proposing selling that same amount of agency MBS, or less, over a two-and-a-half-

year period.  If financial markets are functioning much better, I would conjecture that the price 

effect of such sales would be considerably less than 30 basis points.  As I said, I propose an end 

date and a sales cap. Those would both be satisfied by 2016 at a pace of $25 billion a month, 

even if we wanted to wait to start to sell.  If we begin sales in mid-2011, 15 months from now—

we’d like to start sooner—but if we wanted to wait that long and sell $20 billion of MBS per 

month, that’s inside the cap, we will eliminate agency securities from the balance sheet sometime 

in 2015.  This cap on sales would also imply that we would normalize reserve balances to a 

desirable level sometime in mid-2013.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  You know there are some who hold that 2010 

is the last year of the previous decade.  [Laughter]  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I mentioned my questions to Brian, and you summarized 

eloquently and reminded us that we have accomplished a great deal, and to be sure the liquidity 

measures we undertook, I believe, prevented a financial meltdown and restored the economy—

March 16, 2010 98 of 146



pulled us back from the abyss.  We’re now undoing all of these initiatives because the markets 

for interbank lending and commercial paper and money market mutual funds, asset-backed 

securities, and so on have been restored and have been re-liquefied.  So we’ve normalized in 

almost all areas but one, namely, we are maintaining zero interest rates for interbank lending, 

promising to do so for “an extended period,” despite the fact that the banks and the debt markets 

at all points on the yield curve and across the range of quality have also been restored and, in 

fact, are, as Governor Kohn pointed out, at least in terms of excess reserves, awash in liquidity. 

President Yellen had a very interesting phrase just now.  She talked about the likely 

direction of the journey, and I think that’s the key point here.  I think it’s important for us to spell 

out where we are likely to go.  As I mentioned in my summary of the economy, I don’t believe 

we’re going to have inflationary pressures for the foreseeable future.  I worry enormously about 

absorbing this big slack we have in labor.  But I also worry about how people view us over the 

long term, and I’m quite worried about our balance sheet. 

Not to put too serious a tone on this—but it did catch my eye—there was a very good op-

ed by Mikhail Gorbachev in the Sunday New York Times when he was talking about what went 

wrong.  As they were celebrating perestroika, he said he didn’t realize that the radicals were 

pushing us to move faster and the conservatives were stepping on our toes preventing our 

forward movement.  I think we have to be very careful here not to take too much comfort in what 

we’ve done, because we’ll be judged by where we’re likely to go.  What I worry about in terms 

of where we’re likely to go was touched on by Governor Warsh and others at the table.  We have 

an enormous amount of Treasury issuance coming forward.  We have an enormous amount of 

sovereign debt issuance coming forward.  No one mentioned this, but it was covered fairly well 

March 16, 2010 99 of 146



in the New York Times this morning, there’s a huge wall of maturity in 2012 in terms of 

corporate debt, the debt that’s going to have to be rolled over for LBOs and for junk. 

By postponing laying out the road map, that is, the likely direction of the journey, as 

President Yellen referred to it, I’m just concerned that we are boxing ourselves in.  If rates were 

to rise because of the factors that Governor Warsh mentioned or other factors in the marketplace, 

I could see this Committee, if we continue down the current path, saying, “We dare not sell 

because we’ll realize capital losses.”  One hundred basis points leads to $100 billion, or whatever 

number you mentioned earlier. 

I would like us now to lay out our path.  I’m in favor of alternative C′, but I agree with 

President Kocherlakota that a melding of B and C′ might be a wise thing to do, with a slight 

variation, and that is that I would like that fourth paragraph to be in B.  I would accept the fact 

that we keep the phrase “for an extended period.” I think that would mitigate whatever negative 

influences we’re worried about in terms of the market reaction.  We’re saying we expect to hold 

rates low.  I would prefer “for some time”—I know I can’t sell it at the table.  But if we say “for 

an extended period” and then we marry it with that road map, the likely direction in which we 

are going, as stated in C′ paragraph 4, I think that would be a good combination, and that’s my 

recommendation, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Kohn. 

MR. KOHN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be prepared to discuss the asset sale issue 

next time and perhaps meld it into the statement in April after we have a full discussion, but not 

at this meeting.  I see a long period of inflation below target and output below target even with 

very low interest rates.  I don’t see a need to prepare for an interest rate exit at this time.  I think 

that the decline in inflation and edging off of some expectation measures suggest reduced risk of 

March 16, 2010 100 of 146



inflation moving higher, and I don’t see much evidence that this massive quantity of reserves is 

having any material effect on bank behavior.  So I don’t see any reason to start the tightening 

process now, and I would retain “extended period.”  It is conditioned on the economic analysis.  I 

think the economic circumstances are moving about as we expected, as everyone has said, and 

not suggesting there is a need to tighten any time soon.  We’ve had some demonstrations of the 

market sensitivity to hints of exit, and I think having “extended period” in the announcement has 

helped us talk about and test our exit tools without setting off persistent market speculation.  So 

it has been very useful in that regard. 

I do think it has been unfortunate to have this definition of three meetings out there for 

“extended period,” because I think it means that we don’t have some of this flexibility to move.  

As soon as we go to “for some time”, everybody will say “that means after two meetings” 

because the three-meeting definition is out there, even though the Committee never defined it 

that way.  So I don’t think we have the flexibility to tinker with the language before we’re sure 

we know we want to move pretty quickly.  I don’t see, so far, low rates as having greatly adverse 

consequences for financial stability, though I agree we need to monitor it.  The bond spreads, 

equity prices, I think, are still in line with fundamentals. 

And given my expectation that both inflation and output and employment will remain 

below our objectives for a long period of time, I would have a very strong preference for using 

supervision and regulation to counter any hints of instability in financial markets or dangerous 

situations in financial markets rather than have those measures fall even further below our 

objectives. 

With regard to the bracketed sentence in paragraph B2, there’s a very similar thought in 

the end of paragraph 3.  I like the sentence at the end of paragraph 3.  I don’t see any reason to 

March 16, 2010 101 of 146



have another sentence in paragraph 2.  It singles out inflation as if we’re not paying equal 

attention to both parts of our dual mandate.  So I would strongly object to keeping that bracketed 

sentence in paragraph 2.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B with some 

modifications and my modifications are so substantial that we may not recognize it.  [Laughter]  

In paragraph 1, I actually like the “however” sentence, which qualifies our description of the 

economy.  I also like the “however” sentence from alternative A actually, which is “investment 

in nonresidential structures is still contracting, housing activity continues to be sluggish, and 

employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.”  I think this employer reluctance to add to 

payrolls is a key feature of the economic situation, maybe we should acknowledge that. 

In paragraph 2, I’m still in favor of substituting paragraph 2 from alternative C and C′—

they’re identical.  I like that language better on this dimension.  As I’ve said many times in our 

debates here, I feel that there’s an overemphasis on the slack term in alternative B, and it puts 

more weight on the idea that there’s a lockstep statistical relationship between slack and inflation 

than I think is warranted.  I also have a thought about the issue that the statement should combine 

monetary policy with resource utilization when we talk about inflation.  A second best would be 

to include the bracketed sentence in alternative B2: “The Committee expects that over time and 

with appropriate monetary policy, inflation will run at rates consistent with price stability.”  But I 

prefer the language from all of paragraph 2 of alternative C and C′. 

Concerning the “extended period” language, I’m increasingly concerned that we are 

telegraphing a time-dependent policy with this wording.  I don’t think we mean it that way, but 

it’s being interpreted that way.  I don’t think we’re in a position to alter this today.  I think the 

March 16, 2010 102 of 146



best course of action on this would be to switch to a completely new and different and hopefully 

more explicitly state-contingent wording.  The markets will then have to adjust to this new 

wording, but it will set out and convey what the Committee has in mind.  I think it might knock 

the markets off the idea that a rate hike is imminent this fall, which is too early according to our 

staff analysis, as several people have noted.  There’s hardly any scenario, according to the staff 

analysis, that would lead to making that kind of adjustment in the fall.  I am concerned about the 

mismatch between market expectations and staff analysis and to some extent Committee views.  

I think better aligning these expectations might improve prospects for the economy today. 

Alternative B does not give forward guidance for the asset-purchase program.  My 

question is:  Why not?  Why give forward guidance for one aspect of our policy and not for 

another?  I’m not going to go into too much here, but just in terms of the statement, I think 

passive approaches to the balance sheet runoff strike me as being far from optimal policy.  

Expectations of the future of quantitative easing policy are important for economic performance.  

Markets will build in expectations whether we shape them or not.  So we should go ahead and try 

to shape them. 

One way to offer some guidance for the asset-purchase program would be to include 

paragraph 4 from C′.  C′ has Treasuries rolling off the balance sheet and includes language 

saying that the Committee is evaluating asset sales, which I think is an accurate description of 

the situation.  I do not like the C version, which unnecessarily locks us into a timing protocol for 

our exit.  That kind of protocol is to drain reserves with term deposits and possibly reverse repos, 

raise the interest rate on excess reserves, and then sell assets later, maybe much later.  I prefer a 

timing protocol which would remove quantitative easing as appropriate as the economy improves 

and then raise rates later, possibly much later, and possibly in conjunction with the use of term 

March 16, 2010 103 of 146



deposits and reverse repos.  That’s a last-in first-out policy.  I think that would take some 

pressure off the interest rate move that was dominating market reactions to this Committee. 

I think it’s far from clear that a protocol of raising interest rates first is the optimum one.  

Arguably, the reserve-draining that may accompany the interest rate move takes back much of 

the quantitative easing in conjunction with the increase in interest rates.  Not to put too fine a 

point on it, but that could be a 1937-type mistake, and I think we should analyze that very 

carefully.  It may make more sense to withdraw quantitative easing at an appropriate pace and 

then focus on short-term interest rates later. 

I also agree with President Fisher’s concerns about the possibility of selling MBS at some 

later date with higher interest rates.  Suppose that we do get into the situation where we have 

caused a lot of inflation.  We don’t expect that we’ll cause a lot of inflation, but now interest 

rates are higher and we’re reluctant to sell our MBS because of capital losses.  That’s a “train 

wreck” scenario that we have to take pretty seriously.  So I appreciate President Fisher’s bringing 

that up.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You’re in favor of B?  If I can summarize your statement, it 

is you’re in favor of B.  I’m just joking.  [Laughter]  Again, we will be discussing all of these 

issues.  Just one comment on the train wreck is that, if we wait a couple of years, we’ll be a lot 

more advanced in terms of stuff running off as well.  So the calculus will change over time.  

Who’s next?  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of comments to begin with.  I 

appreciate the reference to supervision, and I’ve been involved in it for a number of years, and 

the thing that this very much reminds me of is more of a “back to the future” kind of 

environment, because I have been through the energy price crisis and the agricultural land crisis 

March 16, 2010 104 of 146



and the Long-Term Capital Management crisis, and there are many similarities.  And to that 

point, I know that we can’t necessarily identify bubbles.  That’s not my point.  My point is that 

we do tend to create conditions that invite bubbles, and that’s what I’m concerned about as we 

look forward.  I do realize—very, very much—that the fundamental challenge for this 

Committee is to balance the near-term economic conditions with the longer-term risk of 

inflation, but, to my mind, also financial imbalances and financial stability.  That’s a part of the 

challenge we have. 

Certainly, current conditions warrant a low interest rate environment—I’m not arguing 

that point.  But I am equally concerned that the longer-run risk to financial and economic 

stability warrant eliminating our commitment to exceptionally low rates for an extended period.  

My concern is that we need to give more weight to these longer-run risks now, before we 

actually see them and ask “Is this a bubble?” because by the time you ask that question, you’re 

probably too late.  My concern is that, in not looking at the long run, we may keep rates lower 

than we should longer than we should, thereby creating the conditions that foster the future 

imbalances that I worry about.  The Committee needs the flexibility in the coming months to 

move from the emergency level of accommodation implemented during the financial crisis a 

year ago to a level of accommodation that appropriately balances—and remember I said “level of 

accommodation”—the short-run and the longer-run macroeconomic and financial risks that we 

face. 

What are some of the longer-run risks that I think about and worry about and I know all 

of you do as well?  While the research is early and not typically included in most models, some 

past crises I, at least, have observed have stemmed in part from exceptionally low interest rate 

guarantees, which have contributed to the buildup of financial imbalances—I think we’ve seen 

March 16, 2010 105 of 146



some of that over the past decade—encouraging leverage and facilitating credit booms.  Over the 

past decade extensive resources under those conditions have been channeled to residential and 

nonresidential construction and to financial markets.  While they have benefited the financial 

institutions, they also have penalized savers.  I know the reasons for maintaining low interest 

rates are important—we’re trying to maintain the broader economy—but there are consequences.  

And finally exceptionally low interest rates and the Federal Reserve’s large balance sheet, if 

maintained too long, should lead to an unanchoring of long-run inflation expectations.  That’s the 

last of the issues that I have been trying to bring up and have brought up in the past. 

So in light of these risks, there is, I think, a case for modestly raising the interest rate on 

reserves and the federal funds rate target sooner than the Greenbook or the markets necessarily 

assume.  I’m not talking about now, but I’m thinking sooner than the Greenbook and the 

markets.  Any such move, if it is to be effective, will be some surprise to the market, of course, 

but less so if we remove our current guarantee of exceptionally low rates.  And if we remove it, 

we stop this issue of “What does it mean? Six months?  Or three months?” and so on, which only 

creates its own set of uncertainties.  I think we ought to have some flexibility in case we need to 

begin to raise rates late this summer, to start bringing them back to 1 percent—which I think of 

as a reversal of the emergency actions, not really a tightening of monetary policy.  That 

flexibility should be ours, and we can’t have that until we get rid of this language. 

Turning to the exit strategy, I know we’re going to have the discussion at the next 

meeting, but I generally support C′, and if I had my druthers, I would say we’re going to start 

redeeming government securities in April and not wait until after our next meeting. 

I’ll stop with that, except to say that for me C′ is where we ought to be heading.  The 

reason to begin tightening policy soon is not simply or even primarily to prevent the issues 

March 16, 2010 106 of 146



around inflationary pressures immediately.  That’s longer term and important.  Rather it is to 

prevent future buildup of financial imbalances and reduce the risks to longer-run macroeconomic 

and financial stability that come from maintaining a commitment to exceptionally low rates for 

an extended period of time.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  In my remarks 

in the economy go-round, I highlighted some differences, and some others around the table did, 

in my sense of the economy and outlook versus what is in alternative B and in the Greenbook, 

but those differences aren’t large enough for me to take issue with the language.  So I’m okay 

with the language in the first paragraph. 

I see little value added in the bracketed language in paragraph 2.  We already have the 

conditionality statement at the end of paragraph 3 that the Fed is monitoring risks to price 

stability, etc., and will take appropriate actions based on revisions to the outlook.  So this 

statement seems to me to be quite balanced and appropriate. 

I favor keeping the “exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended 

period” language.  I don’t see the economic case for changing the language at this time.  I think 

changing to “for some time” will be interpreted as a signal that tightening is imminent, probably 

in the next three meetings, which I’m not prepared to support quite yet.  So it’s obvious that I 

don’t support the inclusion of the bracketed language in alternative C of “at least through the end 

of the second quarter.”  I think this is too short a time frame and too strong a commitment. 

Regarding the language in alternative C and C′ that describes the sequencing of events in 

draining reserves and raising interest rates, I think that, once agreed to by the Committee, this 

would provide useful information to the public about the exit strategy.  However, I think this 

March 16, 2010 107 of 146



information is better explained in testimony, speeches, and press conferences where it can be 

carefully framed.  My impression from feedback received from market contacts is that this 

approach has been fairly effective in raising public understanding of the Committee’s thinking 

about the exit strategy.  Again, the inclusion of such an explanation could be interpreted as a 

prelude to an earlier move of the policy rate than many on the Committee may be contemplating. 

Finally, alternative A lays out a recommendation for additional MBS purchases, and, 

while I don’t support such an action today, it does raise the question of what we would do if our 

forecasts turn out to be too optimistic and warrant further accommodation because of a double 

dip developing or something like that.  So I’d like to see some contingency discussion about 

policy options if the economy appears to be dangerously weak.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to associate myself with the 

compelling arguments of the Committee participant who is catty-corner from me, President 

Kocherlakota, about combining alternative B with C′.  I think that has a lot to recommend it.  

And although I would personally make modifications to C′, I think that doing it sooner rather 

than later makes sense.  I’d be willing to support doing it immediately, but doing it after the 

April meeting at which we have plans to devote more time to discussing our exit strategy, makes 

a lot of sense as well. 

I strongly support the idea of keeping the “extended period” language over the horizon of 

introducing the public to our exit strategy and our plans.  I think that makes eminent sense.  I’ll 

also say that I thought a people made good arguments about the idea that at our first sale markets 

are going to go a little bonkers and just be totally perplexed about what we’re going to do next, 

though it’s a bit of a red herring.  We were very careful about communicating a pace and 

March 16, 2010 108 of 146



committing to it, following through, on the way up.  And I would expect, if we adopted an asset 

sale program, we’d find a way to do our best job of communicating a steady, moderate pace for 

our reductions.  Besides—I made this point last time, maybe not that effectively—we are going 

to take a first step.  By definition, the probability of a second step will rise, because, before the 

first step, the probability of a second step is zero.  You can’t do it before you take the first step.  

So, inevitably, we’re going to get a reaction in markets, and I don’t think that should overly 

dissuade us.  We always get a little burp when we turn, and we can just hope that we 

communicate it clearly and that it’s a manageable change and one that aligns well with what we 

think about how markets ought to react. 

There was an argument articulated at our last meeting that the prospect of capital losses 

ought to dissuade us, or is an argument against or a danger to selling MBS.  I’d just note that, 

thanks to an accounting policy change recently adopted by the Board of Governors, we no longer 

need to fear capital losses, because they would merely be accounted for with an offsetting 

addition to our assets in the form of future interest on Federal Reserve notes to the Treasury. 

I want to reiterate this.  I think it’s intuitive to think about a balance sheet path, and then 

figure out the order in which we’re going to do things.  From that point of view, as you know, I 

still favored selling MBS first—I think that makes the most sense.  The language in C′, 

paragraph 4, still places term deposits and reverse RPs in temporal priority as draining tools.  I 

was a bit surprised to see that.  Like President Fisher, I was a bit surprised to see the testimony 

and the way it formulated the priority.  I didn’t come away from January feeling as if we had 

settled that.  And, as you know, we’re going to discuss this further in April.  So I would support 

B with C′, combined this way. 

March 16, 2010 109 of 146



About financial imbalances, I can appreciate, just given the history of what has happened, 

the role of financial balances in macroeconomic growth and in monetary policy.  But I’m still 

very unclear myself about whether it’s a separate factor or whether it’s something that’s related 

to future growth in a way that we ought to respond to it.  And I fear, as President Plosser said, 

that articulating financial imbalances as an objective will lead some to believe we have the 

capacity not only to judge inappropriate financial market behavior ourselves but also to eliminate 

as much financial instability as some people may hope.  So I’m very wary of going down that 

path.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  For your future intellectual reputation, President Lacker, I’d 

like it to be noted that you were smiling when you made that point about the accounting.  

[Laughter] 

MR. LACKER.  Silver linings. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My view hasn’t changed since the last 

meeting.  Substantial monetary policy accommodation is still appropriate.  Alternative B 

captures this need as well as other factors that justify this policy stance. 

I don’t favor including a sentence in paragraph 2 on inflation.  It seems a little odd to me.  

I don’t think it would be well understood.  “The Committee expects that over time and with 

appropriate monetary policy, inflation will run at rates consistent with price stability.”  This is 

usually a phrase that we use when inflation expectations are too high.  If we use this sentence 

today, it requires that everybody understand that we’re below our inflation target, so the 

appropriate policy would be to goose things a little bit.  I just think it would cause confusion. 

March 16, 2010 110 of 146



The sequencing in alternative C and C′ is intriguing, and I certainly accept putting this off 

until April for a full robust discussion.  But I have to admit, with the enormous accommodation 

that we have in place, appropriately, I think it’s essential to have in mind the dynamic plan for 

where monetary policy is going.  I just can’t really accept alternative B repeatedly without 

having in mind some idea of what future monetary policy actions are going to be, in this context.  

I think it’s critical to think about future policy tightening in the context of a baseline outlook, in 

terms of the models that we’re presented with—our best efforts, such as FRB/US, the Greenbook 

analyses, and FOMC central tendency projections.  I favor thinking about them seriously.  And 

that’s what we have for looking into the policy future. 

Assuming that these forecasts basically hold—they’re in the ballpark—this is what we’re 

expecting:  We’re expecting unemployment to move only slowly—the unemployment rate might 

break through 8 percent sometime in 2011, if the Bluebook’s chart 7 is correct; in terms of 

economic growth, we’re not sure about what the sources of growth are going to be, but I think 

it’ll be stronger than labor markets alone suggest, though we’ll still have a sizable resource gap; 

core inflation is expected to be about 1½ percent at the end of 2011—maybe medium-term 

inflation expectations would have a slightly higher range for 2012—but that’s the situation that 

we’ll be in. 

I won’t venture into the April sequencing discussion now, but chart 7 in the Bluebook 

implies that the funds rate will be zero at the end of 2012.  Although I don’t trust this model 

analysis completely, other things could happen.  This is sobering to me.  And I guess my 

question would be:  Which analyses suggest something different than this?  We all have fears of 

risks.  At the moment I can’t see them that clearly.  So I can imagine, much as President 

Rosengren indicated, that alternative B will be appropriate for an extended period.  And I’m a 

March 16, 2010 111 of 146



little concerned that once we signal that the alternative C preparations are appropriate, there’s 

going to be a lot of momentum.  I think President Lacker was capturing that when he said 

something like, “Even as we have this sequencing, the ‘extended period’ language might still be 

appropriate.”  I think containing that momentum is going to be tough.  Once we start, the train 

keeps running and the next thing we know we’ll be talking about tightening.  If we could 

separate it as well as President Lacker and President Bullard were suggesting, then I’d find that 

pretty acceptable.  But I am kind of concerned about that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m from the boring Midwest, so I don’t 

have a pithy quote on brevity, but I am going to be very brief.  I support alternative B.  In my 

view, policy needs to remain accommodative while we’re still waiting for clear evidence of a 

self-sustaining recovery and the abatement of any further disinflationary pressures.  I prefer to 

make minimal changes to our statement, so I would not include the bracketed language in 

paragraph 2—I’m concerned that it would be a distraction.  Finally, I, too, am looking forward to 

a time when we can communicate our exit strategy in our statement, so I’m hopeful that our 

discussion at the April meeting will move us closer to that possibility.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B, although I would 

say that I think that the formulation we have in alternative B, come our April meeting, might 

well be outstaying its welcome.  I think the bracketed language is accurate in and of itself but is 

likely to be quite confusing, and for that reason, I think it should be struck. 

March 16, 2010 112 of 146



Let me turn, then, to a view on rates.  I think that the view on rates expressed in the 

Greenbook would be a surprise to the markets, if that ended up being the policy view.  And it 

would be, frankly, a surprise to me.  I think the language we have in alternative B on 

“exceptionally low” and “extended period” served a very useful purpose for us when we put it in, 

so we shouldn’t be troubled by its existence now.  It showed a demonstrated perseverance on 

these rates.  I think that it now looks to markets to be somewhat more like an on/off switch than 

the dimmer switch we wish it were.  So my sense is that we’re going to have to use that; that is, 

we may now be stuck with this brutal on/off switch. 

But we very effectively brought the discussion of liquidity facilities into the statement.  

We then wound them down in the statement, and we carried on a very useful dialogue with 

markets.  I think, come our April meeting, with the likely continuation of “exceptionally low” 

and “extended period,” we should then bring in the balance sheet discussion of Treasury 

redemptions and the discussion of MBS sales.  I think that is a fertile way to do it.  That lets us 

be more flexible in the statement without ripping the tough bandage off interest rates, which 

markets have now assigned to this language.  I think the Committee is not ready to have that 

discussion now.  We certainly don’t have consensus now.  But I think that’s the germane 

discussion.  C′ and versions thereof could be quite credible for us to adopt as spring gets going. 

My last point, Mr. Chairman, is on Tom’s suggestion on structural imbalances.  I would 

say that, while I’m sympathetic to the idea that the Division of Supervision and Regulation has a 

role to play, I’m uncomfortable overburdening supervision and regulation with that responsibility 

alone.  The way I would describe the near- and medium-term challenges with exceptionally low, 

even negative, real rates is not so much that another bubble is on the doorstep, but that we likely 

are having, even in real time, some misallocation of capital, some misallocation of credit.  I don’t 

March 16, 2010 113 of 146



think supervisors and regulators are ideally situated to deal with it, and I don’t think that the 

reference to structural imbalances really captures that essence, which strikes me as the bread 

crumbs to some longer-term asset bubble problems.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When I look at the Greenbook and the 

Bluebook, I can’t find anything that even gives me line of sight to the day when we need to 

tighten policy.  And so for that reason, I favor alternative B.  Nevertheless, I remember the 

conversations we had in December of 2008 about the potential for disruptions and dislocations 

caused by the near-zero interest rates.  If there were a way to somehow get back to that floor of 

1 percent and stay there for an extended period, I could be happy with that.  But we just don’t 

have any framework right now to communicate that. 

I’m afraid that, with the number of levers we have at our disposal—the reserve-draining 

tools, asset sales, interest rates—and the timing and the calibration of each one of those levers, 

there are thousands of possible approaches.  So it does seem to me pretty critical that we 

converge on a plan with the timing and calibration then to be debated inside this room and 

announced as part of our statement.  And I would be in favor of including the kind of language in 

C′ to indicate our consensus once we’ve actually reached a consensus.  But it’s difficult to 

communicate one that we don’t have. 

There’s so much uncertainty gripping markets, business people, and consumers right now 

that I believe the contour of our policy may be less important than the resolve and the clarity 

with which we pursue it.  And I think the quality of our communication is more important than 

the precision of our calculations.  I’m not just talking about the nuances of the statement or what 

the phrase “extended period” means to a very sophisticated investor.  In fact, I’m afraid we might 

March 16, 2010 114 of 146



actually need a plan to communicate how we are going to change our communications.  

[Laughter]  I’m talking about stating as clearly as possible in our statement our expectations for 

the sequencing of exit tools, where we are in that sequencing, and how we will communicate if 

those expectations change.  Then, I would hope that we could all dedicate ourselves between the 

statements to focus on explaining that strategy to the world, what we’re doing, why we’re doing 

it, and how we think it will work.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.   

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say first that I noticed in Vice 

Chairman Dudley’s handout in the lower left-hand corner there is a Federal Reserve Bank of 

New York Blackbook.  Now, I have also noticed that the motor vehicles of the Federal Reserve 

Bank of New York are black, and this has led me to wonder what color the aircraft of the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York are—[laughter] 

Coming back to the monetary policy statements, I think the most important thing for us 

today is once again to remind ourselves that, by and large, markets and Fed watchers do not read 

our language; they read changes in our language.  So, for me, every change in the language has 

to meet a fairly high hurdle rate, because it’s going to be interpreted and likely over-interpreted.  

That leads me to question, in the context of my self-evident support for alternative B, what, if 

anything, do I want to change in communicating in March as opposed to January?  And I think 

my answer is:  Not much. 

I am concerned that there’s a bit of a drumbeat out there now, as if we’re moving down a 

road towards tightening, a drumbeat which I think we have inadvertently amplified a bit, because 

we’ve been changing our statement so much—we’ve been closing the liquidity facilities, we’ve 

been doing a lot of things lately—all of which is, I think, the right thing to have done.  But, to 

March 16, 2010 115 of 146



switch metaphors, as I said last time, we can’t get ourselves into a circumstance in which we 

have to throw a maiden over the cliff at every FOMC meeting.  And I think this is a meeting 

where everybody should live.  [Laughter]  And that implies we can just stay calm and indicate 

that not much has changed, things are going as we anticipated, and we are not moving towards a 

tightening.  I didn’t hear any real arguments, other than a kind of intellectual predisposition for 

tightening, and I certainly didn’t hear any data-driven arguments for tightening. 

In terms of the language, the bracketed language, again, clearly seems a sensible 

sentence.  But I just worry about how it would be interpreted, given that it would be a delta.  So 

I’m not in favor of that.  I’m certainly not in favor of including anything about a road map for 

exit, and I will say in advance that I’m not sure I’m going to be in favor of that next time around 

either, because of the drumbeat phenomenon, where people are going to think, “Okay, now 

they’re just moving down that road.”  I have no problem with the additional sentence at the end 

of paragraph 3. 

That brings me to “extended period,” and it actually brings me to the concept of what Jim 

calls state-contingent and Charlie refers to as a reaction function.  I’m genuinely sympathetic to 

the notion that we want to communicate that our actions are going to be dependent on what’s 

happening in the economy going forward.  I wish we were in a position to do that today by 

removing “extended period,” but we are not.  If you were to remove “extended period,” you have 

raised interest rates.  I don’t think there are any two ways around that, and we’ve moved 

ourselves into a bit of a corner on this.  I think some of us have kind of reinforced the assumption 

out in markets that the day we remove “extended period” the clock begins to tick, and the federal 

funds rate goes up two or three meetings thereafter. 

March 16, 2010 116 of 146



So, like Betsy, I think the best outcome might be one in which the market understanding 

of what that language means changes.  It changes from the sense that it’s the early warning 

signal, with a date more or less certain of an interest rate rise, to an understanding that extended 

period meant that, beginning over a year ago, we were in a period in which things were 

obviously so bad that absent quite extraordinary and unanticipated changes in the foreseeable 

future, the monetary policy was not going to shift. 

I think many of us are now in a mode where, although we’re likely to have interest rates 

remaining low still for quite some time, we are more data-driven, and we are wanting to be more 

sensitive to data coming in.  But that’s not what the “extended period” language or its removal 

would communicate.  So if people want to do something about that language, and want to do it 

with a credible assertion that it is not de facto an increase in interest rates, I think we’re going to 

have to change the public perception of what it means.  To do that, it’s going to take a lot of 

cooperation and a lot of self-discipline among the seventeen members of the Open Market 

Committee.  I hope we might be able to achieve that, but, to be perfectly honest, recent history is 

not particularly cause for optimism on those grounds.  So I’m for B, without the brackets, 

everything else is okay, although I’d be happy to incorporate President Bullard’s suggestion for 

the addition of the “reluctance to hire” in paragraph 1. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor strongly alternative 

B.  In my view, it’s not time to change the “extended period” language or, in fact, to do other 

things, beyond what we’ve already done in terms of phasing out our liquidity facilities and 

ending our LSAP programs, to indicate that we’re moving in any way closer to tightening 

monetary policy.  First, there’s no significant change in the growth outlook, and, on the inflation 

March 16, 2010 117 of 146



side, there is more evidence of disinflation than there was earlier—inflation expectations have 

declined a bit.  Second, if we were to do anything to move in the tightening direction, I think that 

would create credibility issues for us.  We’ve said the discount rate change was not part of 

tightening.  If we then were to change the language or do other things that indicated tightening, it 

would be contradicting what we had just said.  Expectations are very much on the side of no 

change in the language.  That’s not a binding constraint, but if we contradict those expectations 

that we are ourselves tried to foster, there will be a credibility consequence for us that I think we 

would regret. 

Regarding the language of B, I’m not a fan of the last sentence in paragraph 2.  I don’t 

think it says much, but I think the more important problem is that I’m not sure how it parses with 

the sentence that comes immediately before.  Is price stability greater than, less than, or equal to 

subdued inflation?  I’m just not sure how to fit those two sentences together in a meaningful 

way. 

In terms of the C′ paragraph, I think the problem is that we haven’t agreed on the 

sequence or strategy.  So how can we import this thing in to the statement that we haven’t agreed 

on yet?   

Regarding the financial imbalances issue that President Hoenig raised, I think this would 

be a good topic for a future FOMC meeting, so that we can discuss this whole issue of financial 

imbalances, asset bubbles, monetary policy, supervision, and regulation.  How should we think 

about all of that?  One reason to do this is that I think the view is changing, and I’m not sure 

where everybody on the Committee is, and it would be useful to reevaluate this.  I think we 

clearly found out in this cycle that the consequences of waiting for asset bubbles to burst and 

cleaning up after the fact was very unfortunate—the tradeoffs were much graver than we 

March 16, 2010 118 of 146



anticipated.  So I think that would be a good topic for a future FOMC meeting.  I know we don’t 

have as many two-day meetings anymore, but I’d still like to put my two cents in for that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Well, we have been, of 

course, continuing the exit from nonstandard policy, for example, closing facilities. We’ll be 

ending MBS purchases at the end of this month.  We raised the discount rate.  We have been 

developing and explaining exit tools.  Obviously, there’s more to do, but clearly we have been 

working towards normalization.  On the other hand, as people have pointed out, the outlook is 

one that is disappointing to all of us, I’m sure, and it’s fairly evident that we need to continue to 

support the economy.  Therefore, you won’t be shocked to know that I would propose that we 

take alternative B, including the “extended period” language. 

Let me talk about that language, because I’m a little puzzled by the way some people are 

characterizing it.  There are two important things to say about this.  Let me start off by saying 

that, whether it was a good idea or not initially, it’s a sunk cost now.  We have it.  There is no 

way that I can see that we can somehow magically get rid of it without any consequences.  So it 

is there, we have to manage it, and we have to deal with it. 

Now, having said that, let me make two comments.  One is that this is clearly not a fixed 

time commitment.  It is a conditional statement, and we made a big point of putting in these 

conditionalities when we changed the language and added them.  So if there were to be, for 

example, a very adverse movement in inflation expectations, then all bets are off.  We have a 

conditional statement here, and that would allow us to move immediately, and that provides us 

with at least one safety valve.  Also, I would just ask is that everybody emphasize in talking 

about this publicly that it is conditional and that we are tying our policy to the state of the 

economy.  I think this will turn out to be important, because if, God willing, the next three 

March 16, 2010 119 of 146



employment reports are 400,000, then the conditionality will be causing markets to say, “Well, 

they’ve got to change now.”  And our change will be, in fact, a smooth change as we do it, 

because the markets will be reading from the data that policy needs to change, and, therefore, it 

will, in fact, be surprising if we don’t make language changes.  So I think the conditionality is 

very important, and it will help us when the economy becomes clearly ready for tightened policy. 

The second comment I want to make is that there’s this perception somehow that because 

of this language we now have to figure out six months in advance when we have to tighten 

policy.  That’s not true.  The day that we change this language we have tightened policy.  So, if 

in April, for example, we were to change to C′, put in “some time,” and put in the exit tools, 

those would be a more powerful impact than a normal increase in the funds rate.  We would 

actually begin to raise the funds rate, say in August, but the policy would clearly be much tighter 

from the moment we make that statement.  So it’s not the case that we are stuck at a maximally 

accommodative situation until six months from the time we finally decide to move.  In fact, the 

day that we make the statement it will respond. 

I recognize, you know, that there are pros and cons to this kind of language.  I do think it 

was helpful, at least for some time.  But it doesn’t box us in, I don’t think, quite as seriously as 

some of the discussion has suggested.  That being said, we need to be very careful with it, 

because we don’t really want to remove it until such time as we are ready essentially to tighten 

financial conditions. 

To use that to think about the statement, several people talked about adding the 

alternative C language on exit.  I think that’s not the right thing to do today.  We haven’t had the 

discussion.  We’re going to have it in April.  I agree with President Lacker, by the way, that, 

when we do add it, if it’s appropriate, then having the extended period language to kind of 

March 16, 2010 120 of 146



protect against the misinterpretation would probably be a good idea, but we’ll discuss that when 

the time comes.  Like Governor Tarullo, I’m not completely persuaded that the statement is the 

right place to put this.  It’s conceivable that speeches and minutes, and so on, might be a better 

place to provide a more extensive explanation, but that’s something, also, that we should discuss 

in April as we come back to this. 

I want to come back to financial conditions just one more time. I do realize—and 

President Hoenig has been very eloquent on this issue—that it’s very difficult to know.  We want 

to do our best.  I think we should try to monitor it.  It can’t hurt to monitor and to try to identify 

problems.  I realize that that’s imperfect, but we should clearly make this one of the things that 

we continue to look at, and I would urge research staff, and so on, to increase their attention of 

this.  But there are dangers both ways.  An example I would raise would be the case of the 

Japanese.  If you think that our policy has been static—of course, they had interest rates at zero 

for seven years—and on two occasions—I believe, this is just my recollection, I haven’t checked 

it—they were concerned about the financial implications of their low interest rate policy.  It was 

causing the money market not to operate, and they were concerned that it was supporting zombie 

lending, because, with zero interest rates, there was no trigger for bankruptcy.  On two occasions 

they raised interest rates to 25 basis points, and both times it was considered ex post to have been 

a very serious error, and they retracted, because it had negative consequences for the economy. 

We do have all of these concerns, and we do have to balance them off.  There is a big 

picture.  It’s a very, very difficult situation.  It’s not because of our actions.  I think it’s just 

because it is inherently going to be a difficult set of tradeoffs that we have to face as we go 

forward. 

March 16, 2010 121 of 146



With respect to the language, in terms of people who expressed an opinion, the majority 

were not in favor of adding the second sentence in paragraph 2.  If anyone who didn’t speak 

would like to support it, I’ll give you a chance to do that in a minute.  But I got a pretty strong 

sense of concern, not about the language per se, but about its interpretation in the context of our 

statement. 

President Bullard suggested changing paragraph B1 by adding the “however” statement 

from A1.  I think the reason that that was not done initially is because there are already two 

references to the labor market—“the labor market stabilizing” and “household spending is 

constrained by high unemployment.”  So that would be a third statement about the labor market 

in that one paragraph.  I don’t think it’s an incorrect statement.  If there are people who would 

like to make that change, I think that’s fine, and I’ll open the floor for that in a minute.   

Again, I don’t think I would like to add the sequencing language today, and I do think 

that, putting aside even the short-run implications, the “extended period” language is not as 

restrictive as some have suggested.  I realize it is to some extent restrictive, but I think there are 

some ways to deal with that situation. 

Let me stop here.  If there’s anyone who did not speak on the B2 language and would like 

to support it, we can hear that.  And does anyone have any views on President Bullard’s 

suggestion about replacing the “however” sentence in B1 with the “however” sentence in A1?  

So let me just raise those two questions.  Would anyone like to comment?  Brian? 

MR. MADIGAN.  Just one quick point, Mr. Chairman.  I’d note that in January we did 

have three labor market references. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Should we make the change, then?  I guess that 

would amount to going back to the January language. 

March 16, 2010 122 of 146



MR. MADIGAN.  Or just picking up the final clause and adding that to the end of the 

existing sentence in B. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The proposal is to replace “However, investment in 

nonresidential structures is declining, and housing starts have been flat at a depressed level,” 

with, “However, investment in nonresidential structures is still contracting, housing activity 

continues to be sluggish, and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.”  Now, that actually 

changes some of the adjectives as well. 

MR. KOHN.  Why are we changing the housing starts? 

MR. WARSH.  Right.  I think Brian’s suggestion is to just add the third clause. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So let’s add a third clause that employers remain 

reluctant to add to payrolls.  Is that something that people are comfortable with?  [No response.]  

I’m not getting a whole lot of reaction.  Are you okay?   

MS. PIANALTO.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Everyone okay?  

MR. LACKER.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So the changes in Statement B, paragraph 1, take 

out the “and” before “housing starts,” comma, and then add the clause “and employers remain 

reluctant to add to payrolls.”  Would anyone else like to comment on my comments or on the 

statement?  [No response.] 

All right.  Hearing none, does anyone want to hear that paragraph read again?  [No 

response.]  Okay.  If not, perhaps we can vote on this. 

MR. LUECKE.  The vote will encompass alternative B, with the change read by the 

Chairman, as well as the Directive B, which is on the ninth page of the handout. 

March 16, 2010 123 of 146



 Chairman Bernanke      Yes 

 Vice Chairman Dudley   Yes 

 President Bullard      Yes 

 Governor Duke        Yes 

 President Hoenig      No 

 Governor Kohn        Yes 

 President Pianalto     Yes 

 President Rosengren     Yes 

 Governor Tarullo      Yes 

 Governor Warsh      Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  The next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, 

April 27th and 28th.  We will, of course, be discussing more on the exit strategy as well as the 

policy decision. 

Lunch is available.  Meeting is adjourned.  Thank you. 

END OF MEETING 

March 16, 2010 124 of 146




