











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, December 14, 2010


 

 

 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 

December 14, 2010 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 

Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 14, 2010, 

at 8:30 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

James Bullard 

Elizabeth Duke 

Thomas M. Hoenig 

Sandra Pianalto 

Sarah Bloom Raskin 

Eric Rosengren 

Daniel K. Tarullo  

Kevin Warsh 

Janet L. Yellen 

Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and 

Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Richmond and Atlanta, respectively 

John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 

Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Nathan Sheets, Economist  

David J. Stockton, Economist 

Alan D. Barkema, James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, 

Lawrence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board 

of Governors 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 

December 14, 2010 1 of 127



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Charles S. Struckmeyer,  Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of 

Governors 

David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael G. Palumbo and Joyce K. Zickler, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 

Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate 

Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 

Governors 

Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 

Dale Roskom, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and John C. Williams, Executive Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and San Francisco, respectively 

David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 

Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, 

respectively 

Tobias Adrian, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Satyajit Chatterjee, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 

Alexander L. Wolman, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

December 14, 2010 2 of 127



 

 

 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 

December 14, 2010 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We welcome back First Vice 

President John Moore, who will again represent the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.  

We’ll have a lunchtime briefing by Linda Robertson on legislative updates, and we’ll get more 

information there about our Board nominations. 

Let’s turn to the first item, a briefing on financial developments and open market 

operations.  Mr. Sack. 

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the material entitled 

“Financial Market Developments and Desk Operations.”  Financial markets over the 

intermeeting period have been dominated by two developments: a sizable jump in 

longer-term interest rates and heightened pressures on sovereign and financial debt in 

European countries.  Today I will discuss these two developments in turn. 

 

 

 

As shown in the upper left panel of your first exhibit, Treasury yields have risen 

sharply since the November FOMC meeting.  Virtually all of the increase occurred in 

the real component of the yield, with break-even inflation rates moving up only 

slightly.  On balance, the 10-year nominal Treasury yield ended the intermeeting 

period about 75 basis points higher.  As shown in the chart to the right, this change in 

the yield represents the largest intermeeting increase observed in recent years.  The 

key drivers of the increase in yields appeared to be a downward revision to market 

expectations about the likely amount of Federal Reserve asset purchases, an upward 

revision to the expected supply of Treasury debt as a result of the possible tax 

compromise, and a reassessment of the likely path of short-term interest rates amid 

greater optimism about the economic outlook. 

As shown in the middle left panel, the median response from the Desk’s primary 

dealer survey conducted early last week indicated that the Federal Reserve’s asset 

purchase program was expected to reach $850 billion (the middle column), compared 

with the expectation of around $1 trillion that was priced in ahead of the November 

FOMC meeting (the first column).  That downward revision in part resulted from the 

considerable backlash to the asset purchase program from U.S. politicians and foreign 

officials.  In addition, market participants interpreted communications from 

individual FOMC members as suggesting less support for the program within the 

Committee than had been assumed. 

Market participants scaled back their expectations even further following the 

news last week that a tentative agreement had been reached on a proposal for 

                                                 
1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

December 14, 2010 3 of 127



 

 

 

extending and expanding tax cuts.  This proposal was seen by many market 

participants as providing a significant boost to GDP growth in 2011 and hence as 

reducing the need for additional asset purchases beyond the amount already 

announced.  Indeed, a follow-up survey of the primary dealers that the Desk 

conducted late last week indicated that the median expectation of asset purchases had 

fallen to $600 billion (the last column).  In addition, market participants believe that 

the unanticipated components of the new tax agreement could add between $100 and 

$300 billion to Treasury debt issuance over the next year, further increasing the 

amount of Treasury debt that needs to be held by private investors.  Overall, the 

increase in supply appears to have boosted the term premium embedded in longer-

term yields. 

 

 

 

 

As noted earlier, the increase in longer-term Treasury yields has also been driven 

by a reassessment of the likely path of short-term interest rates.  Market participants 

generally revised up their forecasts for GDP growth next year in response to the 

incoming economic data and the tax proposal.  Accordingly, as shown in the middle 

right panel, investors brought forward the expected timing of monetary policy 

tightening, with the implied policy path from federal funds and Eurodollar futures 

rates now reaching 50 basis points in the first half of 2012. 

With these developments, the interest rate environment has changed substantially.  

Ahead of the November meeting, many market participants thought that the Federal 

Reserve’s ongoing presence in the market and the sluggish nature of the economic 

recovery would ensure a stable and low interest rate environment across the yield 

curve.  That view provided comfort to those establishing long positions in the market 

and likely contributed to the observed decline in the term premium.  However, the 

downward revision in the expected size of asset purchases and the improvement in 

the economic outlook have shaken that view, causing investors to adjust their 

positions abruptly at a time when the approaching year-end may have limited market 

liquidity.  These dynamics contributed to choppy trading conditions and sizable 

movements in longer-term interest rates.  The anticipated volatility of longer-term 

rates going forward, shown in the bottom left panel, moved up sharply, reflecting this 

shift in the rate environment. 

The improvement in the economic outlook and the shift in LSAP expectations 

also influenced broader financial conditions, as shown in the table in the bottom right 

panel.  Equity prices moved up further over the intermeeting period, presumably 

because the more favorable economic outlook was sufficient to offset any negative 

effects arising from higher interest rates.  Corporate bond spreads narrowed slightly 

since the last FOMC meeting, while the broad dollar index appreciated modestly.  All 

of these measures remain more accommodative than they were back in August, as the 

sizable changes that were realized ahead of the November FOMC meeting were 

sustained or only partly reversed. 

In addition to the movements in U.S. rates, an important focus in financial 

markets in recent weeks has been the situation in the European periphery, the subject 

December 14, 2010 4 of 127



 

 

 

of the second exhibit.  Nathan Sheets will cover many of the European developments 

in detail, but I will go ahead and describe some of the related developments in 

financial markets. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As you know, Ireland, the EU, and the IMF agreed to a support package for 

Ireland intended to provide capital to their financial system and to cover sovereign 

debt liabilities for the next two to three years.  However, market attention quickly 

turned to conditions in other countries, including Portugal, Spain, and Italy.  The 

particular situations facing these countries differ importantly, but in each case the 

markets are asking the same question—whether the combination of sovereign debt 

and financial sector liabilities for that country is on a sustainable track.  In addition, 

market participants have increasingly noted that the backstop mechanisms put in 

place to date, including the European Financial Stability Facility, may prove 

insufficient to address pressures in some of these countries, given the volume of their 

debt outstanding. 

In response, sovereign debt spreads in these countries relative to German yields 

moved up sharply, as shown in the upper left panel, and the CDS spreads of the 

largest financial firms in those countries widened, as shown to the right.  Sovereign 

spreads have retraced some of their widening of late, helped in part by a faster pace of 

sovereign debt purchases by the ECB in particular markets.  However, debt spreads 

across these countries remain elevated, and the market seems quite vulnerable to 

further negative surprises. 

The concerns about the debt situation in these countries led to some pressure on 

euro-denominated assets more broadly.  European equity prices have underperformed 

U.S. share prices in recent months, as shown in the middle left panel, and the euro 

depreciated sharply against the dollar, as shown to the right.  In addition, option 

prices suggest that market participants are now placing higher odds on the possibility 

of sizable euro depreciation over the next year. 

An area of particular concern is the funding situation for banking firms in the 

European periphery.  Some of those firms already rely heavily on the ECB for euro-

denominated funding.  In addition, signs are emerging that dollar-denominated 

funding for those firms is becoming strained. 

Indeed, U.S. money market funds are increasingly pulling back from providing 

dollar funding to major financial firms in peripheral countries, similar to the pattern 

that had taken place in the spring.  According to a confidential survey conducted by 

ICI, reported in the bottom left panel, money market funds’ holdings of Spanish bank 

liabilities have declined sharply over the past month, and the holdings of Italian assets 

are also now falling notably.  These data are consistent with anecdotal reports about 

money market funds not rolling over their exposures in these countries. 

Dollar funding pressures have not spread to financial firms more broadly, as 

indicated by the stability of the spot LIBOR spread to OIS, shown in the bottom right 

December 14, 2010 5 of 127



 

 

 

panel.  However, European institutions that rely on currency swaps to raise dollar 

funding have faced higher borrowing rates, as shown by the swap-implied rate for the 

EURIBOR panel.  Moreover, some market participants have argued that funding 

pressures could have already spread more broadly if it were not for the presence of 

the central bank liquidity swap lines that the Federal Reserve has in place with the 

ECB and four other central banks.  They argue that the presence of these lines serves 

as an important backstop that has helped maintain the flow of dollar funding from 

private sources. 

 

 

 

 

Before leaving this exhibit, let me discuss the proposal on the liquidity swap lines 

that Nathan Sheets and I described in a memo that was circulated to the Committee 

ahead of the meeting.  The liquidity swap lines that are currently in place with the 

European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England, the Swiss National 

Bank, and the Bank of Canada are scheduled to expire at the end of January.  Given 

the unsettled conditions in funding markets and the uncertainty about how stresses in 

European financial markets could unfold, our central bank counterparties have 

expressed interest in extending the liquidity swap lines. 

As indicated in our memo, Federal Reserve staff recommends that the Committee 

approve an extension of these swap lines for six months, which would bring their 

expiration date to August 1, 2011.  All aspects of the swap arrangements other than 

the expiration date would remain unchanged, including the expected pricing of any 

dollar funding operations at 100 basis points above the OIS rate.  This pricing should 

ensure that funding from the lines is attractive to financial institutions only during 

times of severe market stress.  We will be asking for a vote on this decision after the 

conclusion of my remarks.  If the Committee were to vote affirmatively, the five 

foreign central banks would take corresponding actions over the next several days, 

and the extension could be publicly announced soon thereafter. 

Your final exhibit focuses on the asset purchases for the SOMA portfolio.  As of 

last Friday, the Desk had conducted $75 billion of purchases out of the $600 billion 

expansion of the portfolio that was announced in November and an additional 

$31 billion of purchases associated with the reinvestment of principal payments on 

agency debt and mortgage-backed securities over the same period.  The Desk’s 

purchases have followed the maturity distribution shown in the upper left panel, 

resulting in an average duration of 5.5 years for the securities obtained, as planned. 

The operations have gone very well.  Participation by dealers has been strong, 

with an average offer-to-cover ratio of nearly 4, and the distribution of securities 

accepted has been fairly wide.  As expected, we have purchased a decent amount of 

securities that have been recently issued but that are not on-the-run issues.  In 

addition, we have purchased some older securities for which the 35 percent limit on 

SOMA holdings would have otherwise been binding.  At this point, 24 issues have 

moved through that threshold, and our holdings of some of those issues are now 

approaching 50 percent.  The Desk intends to place additional limits on the extent to 

December 14, 2010 6 of 127



 

 

 

which SOMA holdings of any individual security can increase above the 50 percent 

threshold. 

 

 

 

 

 

The robust pace of purchases does not appear to be causing significant strains on 

the liquidity or functioning of the Treasury market.  As shown to the right, trading 

volume has been in its normal range.  And while some other measures of liquidity, 

such as the depth of market quotes, have deteriorated a bit, our judgment is that this 

pattern has more to do with the approaching year-end than with our purchases.  

Importantly, we do not see any signs of the market facing unusual scarcity of any 

particular issues, including those for which our holdings have moved through the 35 

percent threshold.  Indeed, the number of securities trading on special in the repo 

market has remained low, as shown in the middle left panel, and there has been no 

unusual activity from our securities lending facility. 

The next two panels focus on the pace of our purchases going forward.  As shown 

in the middle right panel, because the purchases did not begin until the week after the 

FOMC meeting, the purchases in November fell short of the $75 billion per month 

pace that would be required to reach the intended $600 billion expansion in holdings 

by the end of the second quarter.  Thus, the Desk will have to make up a small 

amount of ground at some point during the program.  For now, we have maintained 

the pace of $75 billion per month, but we intend to increase the monthly pace of 

purchases to about $80 billion at some point early next year, as in the potential path 

shown in the chart. 

The bottom left panel shows our projections for the pace of purchases associated 

with the reinvestment of principal payments on our agency debt and MBS holdings.  

Because of the recent backup in longer-term rates, we lowered our estimates of MBS 

prepayments significantly.  We now project that the reinvestment purchases through 

the second quarter of 2011 will run at an average pace of about $27 billion per month. 

The final panel covers the effects of the repurchase program on the pricing of 

long-term Treasury bonds.  The maturity distribution of the Federal Reserve’s asset 

purchases that was announced by the Desk at the time of the FOMC statement 

involved a smaller allocation to bonds than expected by some market participants.  As 

a result, the bond sold off, even as the middle of the Treasury yield curve rallied, 

steepening the slope between the 10- and 30-year Treasury yields shown in the chart.  

The increase in the slope was abrupt, as some market players reportedly had 

established positions betting on a larger allocation to the bond and unwound them 

quickly following the announcement.  Over recent weeks, however, the slope has 

retraced that initial reaction and has returned to levels lower than those observed 

before the FOMC meeting. 

Lastly, I would like to make one brief note about the MBS holdings in the SOMA 

portfolio.  Several weeks ago, I circulated a memo to the Committee with a 

recommendation for conducting CUSIP aggregation for our MBS holdings.  The 

Desk plans to move forward with the plan described, only on a slightly later time line 

December 14, 2010 7 of 127



 

 

 

than presented in the memo.  Our current intention is to announce this plan in early 

January and to begin aggregating our holdings in the middle of that month. Thank 

you.  That concludes my prepared remarks. 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. Let me suggest that we divide the question 

period into two parts.  Let’s first take any questions on financial conditions, and then, if the 

Committee is agreeable, we can vote on ratifying domestic open market operations; after that, we 

can take any questions for either Brian or Nathan on the swap agreement proposal, and then take 

a vote on that.  Okay?  The floor is open for questions on financial conditions.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Brian, margin debt continues to rise to an extraordinarily high level.  I’m 

curious as to how you interpret that, from the standpoint of the Desk.  Are we getting a signal 

that we have excess, or is it just bringing it up to modern times? 

MR. SACK.  Regarding margin debt, or leverage in the financial system more broadly, it 

has been moving up.  We continue to see the levels of that leverage as not excessive and as not 

making us unusually vulnerable to a sharp correction, but we also continue to watch those 

measures. 

MR. FISHER.  The focus has been on the absolute number, but the absolute number—

whatever it is, 300 or so—relative to where we are in terms of the depth and breadth of the 

financial market is not yet worrisome, is that correct? 

MR. SACK.  Yes, that’s our judgment at this point. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, in chart 3, how tight is the 

distribution of opinion among survey participants?  Is this a median of a broad spread of opinion 

as to what we’ll do or what the program will be, or has it tightened up? 

December 14, 2010 8 of 127



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  The distribution has tightened.  Back in November we saw a considerable 

range of views about the size of asset purchases, with some participants expecting very large 

numbers, like $1.5 trillion, maybe $2 trillion.  At this point, the median expectation is, as I said, 

$600 billion, and there were no respondents with a reading below that.  So we’ve seen the 

distribution tighten up around that announced size of the program. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, you wrote us a memo on 

December 10 about SOMA’s holdings of foreign exchange assets and euro-denominated assets, 

and among their holdings are these reverse repo investments.  You talked about the six countries 

whose sovereign debt we accept as collateral for those, which include Italy and Spain.  In a chart 

you showed that the fraction of collateral we get that’s Italian and Spanish sovereign debt has 

increased recently and explained that the margin we take is 2 percent across the board, which is 

comparable with what the ECB does—there’s a table in the back that shows ECB and Bank of 

England haircut rates. 

But there’s also a table that shows the London Clearing House collateral rates, and 

they’re all below 2 percent—well, half of them are below 2—but Italian and Spanish haircuts are 

above 2 percent, at 2.8 and 3.1 percent.  Do you think that’s why we’re getting more Italian and 

Spanish sovereign debt?  And do you think it’s prudent for our haircuts to be below the market 

haircut? 

MR. SACK.  I do think that is why.  As you know, the regime we have in place doesn’t 

differentiate across collateral types, by the haircut or by the rates that we accept in the 

December 14, 2010 9 of 127



 

 

 

operations, so there is a tendency for counterparties to give us what may be seen as riskier 

collateral during times of heightened market stress. 

This regime was set up at a time when there was not the differentiation that we see today 

across different types of European debt.  In looking forward, we have started a comprehensive 

review of the entire framework, including the haircut schedule that we have in place, and we will 

consider whether to make changes, such as graduated haircut schedules by collateral type.  

Having said that, our quick reading at this point is that, even with the elevated volatility that we 

see in European sovereign debt, the 2 percent haircut appears adequate.  Recall that this is a 

haircut applied to collateral that is marked to market and updated every day, so the haircut is 

only intended to cover a daily change in the value of the collateral, and it only is relevant in the 

event of a counterparty default.  Again, though, as you can see, other foreign official institutions 

and the London Clearing House do have differentiated haircuts by collateral type and also, in 

some cases, by collateral maturity, and those are some things we want to look at. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Our exposures are very short term, though, right? 

MR. SACK.  Right.  That’s what I’ve noted in the memo.  We’re authorized to do repos 

with tenors up to 36 days, but we tend to do mostly overnight, and I think the average tenor of a 

repo is three days at this point. 

MR. LACKER.  So for the term repos, it’s marked to market daily, and the haircuts are 

applied daily? 

MR. SACK.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay.  I can appreciate that a daily change is small and that Spain and 

Italy aren’t Ireland and Greece, which we don’t accept.  But if private sector counterparties think 

December 14, 2010 10 of 127



 

 

 

that a higher haircut is warranted, would it do tremendous violence to front run your big 

framework review with some adjustments to collateral requirements in the meantime? 

MR. SACK.  I believe we can do this assessment fairly quickly—that is, I don’t mean to 

imply that there’s this huge framework review that’s going to take years to complete.  We’re 

actively looking at this, and, as we go down that path, if it becomes apparent that it would be 

desirable to have some kind of graduated schedule, then we can go ahead and move in that 

direction.  It may be advantageous—we just want to do some more analysis before we move. 

MR. LACKER.  Is there any cost to graduated haircut schedules?  Is there any 

disadvantage to doing that? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, there is a cost whenever official institutions start 

to pull back, because they can send adverse signals.  So I think you want to make sure that you 

do that after full consideration. 

MR. LACKER.  We have market practice to point to. 

MR. SACK.  If there’s a strong sentiment that the haircut is going to be changed, there’s 

no impediment—we can change the haircuts.  But without some kind of analysis or framework, 

it’s hard to know whether we should change them and, if we should, change them to what.  We 

need to determine what an appropriate haircut is.  So we need to do a bit of legwork, but I fully 

appreciate the sense from your question that there’s some urgency to the issue. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Other questions on the financial situation? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask one more? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  On Dennis’s point on chart 3:  For what it’s worth, I don’t consider this a 

bad thing.  You remember, Brian, you and I went through the dealer survey that was conducted 

December 14, 2010 11 of 127



 

 

 

in November because I had some questions about whether it provided the right balance, and I can 

see where people would conclude a larger number of differences to that survey.  But the fact is 

that we’ve reached a decision, with all the debate that took place and all of the post-meeting 

commentary, and I’m not surprised that there’s a narrowing of the distribution.  We’re back to 

$600 billion, which is what the decision was.  My question—and we can talk about this off 

line—is:  Were any changes made to the way the dealer survey is conducted to reflect a balanced 

view or to throw them off guard in terms of expectation? 

MR. SACK.  We certainly didn’t make changes to throw them off guard.  We always try 

to be careful— 

MR. FISHER.  To keep them guessing. 

MR. SACK.  We always try to be careful with the dealer survey and to keep the questions 

tracked to policy issues that have been discussed in the public domain.  I don’t think the 

November survey was misleading or overly suggestive to them.  It did get a lot of attention, but I 

think that it reflected the environment in the press and in financial markets around the time of 

that meeting.  And this time the survey didn’t really get any additional attention. 

As to the point of whether $600 billion is a bad thing, we do think some of the backup in 

rates has been associated with this revision to the expected size of the asset purchase program.  

Certainly before the November meeting, the effects we saw were quite large—a 50 basis point 

decline in longer-term real interest rates.  That would be very large relative to a $600 billion 

asset purchase program based on the way we’ve calibrated the likely effects.  I think that the 

initial market reaction was larger because of the expectation of a much bigger purchase program 

and the open-ended perception of it.  If that expectation has been scaled down to a $600 billion 

December 14, 2010 12 of 127



 

 

 

program, it’s not surprising that we’ve seen some backup in rates.  A policy issue for the 

Committee is whether that’s the right effect on rates, and whether that was the intention or not. 

MR. FISHER.  My point, Mr. Chairman, is that we’ve achieved greater definition, and I 

don’t consider that to be a bad thing.  We could dispute the cause of the backup in rates—

obviously there are many different variables here.  But I just wanted to point out that, since 

people might refer to this chart in their discussions of policy, this is not necessarily a bad thing 

from my point of view. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, of course it’s not.  Brian was just making a positive 

statement about his analysis of why the rates changed.  It could be a bad thing; it could be a good 

thing. 

MR. FISHER.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Brian, I’m actually more concerned about chart 4, which has the 

implied federal funds rate path.  I didn’t think we were doing anything that stepped away from 

the “extended period” language, and I would have expected the message to be that we’re just as 

committed to “extended period” as we ever were, and in addition, we’re doing quantitative 

easing, and in some ways we’re strengthening our commitment to stay low for longer.  What do 

you think is going on in chart 4? 

MR. SACK.  It does appear that financial market participants revised their economic 

forecast; they did so even in advance of the tax agreement.  We could actually see in our primary 

dealer survey that the incoming economic data had led to more optimism about near-term growth 

prospects.  And then the proposed tax agreement was seen as having a fairly significant effect on 

December 14, 2010 13 of 127



 

 

 

GDP growth in 2011.  I think the revision largely came from greater optimism about the 

economy rather than from any messaging about the policy path from the FOMC. 

MR. BULLARD.  Do you think the private sector is more optimistic than we are about 

prospects for the economy, and that’s why this curve shifted up? 

MR. SACK.  Either that or they sense a slightly different reaction function, one that 

would be more responsive to economic growth prospects. 

Can I make a couple more comments about the chart, though?  First, we do think the term 

premiums moved up pretty substantially.  Of course, term premiums are a larger component for 

longer-term yields, and they tend to get smaller as we move in on the yield curve.  But it’s 

possible that some of this revision, especially out in 2012, reflects term premiums, because this 

chart is constructed with an assumption of a constant term premium. 

Second, the upward shift also reflects greater risk.  As you’ve seen in the Tealbook 

charts, the modal forecast is much lower than the futures path.  The futures path corresponds to 

the mean forecast, and, essentially at the zero bound, you just have one-sided risks.  So when the 

markets have less conviction, you tend to see the futures rate path jump up.  One of the things 

that was striking ahead of the November meeting was the extent to which the implied volatility 

measures of the short-term interest rates had collapsed.  The market had gotten to a point where 

participants were not just seeing policy on hold into the 2012, but they were also feeling 

incredibly confident about that.  And I think what you see here is just less confidence about that, 

even if the modal forecast still has the tightening later in 2011 or into 2012. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  [No response]  Okay, may I have a 

motion to ratify the domestic open market operations? 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

December 14, 2010 14 of 127



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Without objection.  Let’s turn now to the proposed 

extension of the swap agreements.  Just for your information, I have received calls directly from 

the heads of several of the relevant central banks asking us to do this, so there is certainly interest 

on the part of our counterparties.  But let me open the floor for any questions either to Brian or to 

Nathan Sheets on the proposal.  Are there any questions?  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question just about the length of the extension.  Given that 

the sovereign debt crisis is unlikely to be completely resolved in six months, is there a reason not 

to have it go out for a longer period of time? 

MR. SHEETS.  Our feeling was that six months is a good chunk of time.  It gives the 

Committee ample governance of it so that six months from now we can sit down again and 

reassess.  But I very much share your view that it’s unlikely that this crisis will be completely 

behind us after six months, but it might make sense at that point to want to reassess and 

reevaluate whether you want to extend the swap lines. 

MR. TARULLO.  What would change in six months?  I understand that the world would 

change, but are you anticipating, Nathan, that things would be worse in Europe and, therefore, 

we would not want to extend the swap arrangement? 

MR. SHEETS.  My guess is that six months out there will still be a lot of uncertainties, 

and a lot of the arguments that we’re putting forward today about the swap lines providing a 

backstop will probably still be legitimate.  But the sense of the staff was that it made sense to 

give the Committee another “bite at the apple,” so to speak, six months out and make sure that 

you still wanted to extend it.  Certainly, the staff is not opposed to a longer extension if that’s the 

preference of the Committee.  We’d be comfortable extending 9 months or even 12 months out. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

December 14, 2010 15 of 127



 

 

 

MS. RASKIN.  Nathan, what do you anticipate would be the effects of an announcement 

at this point of the extension? 

MR. SHEETS.  Our intention is to keep the whole process of the extension as low-key as 

possible, and our hope is that the announcement will be taken in stride by the markets as 

something reassuring and as a reminder that this backstop is in place.  During periods of 

intensified market stress, we’ve come out with announcements coordinated with other relevant 

central banks using joint language, such as, “we, the central banks, announce today,” etc., etc., in 

an effort to shift market conditions and increase confidence.  In this instance, at least from my 

perspective, conditions in dollar funding markets are less roiled than I would have expected, 

given the stresses that we’re seeing in the sovereign debt markets.  So we’re going to try to 

remind the markets that these swap lines will still be there, and we’re going to keep the 

announcement as low-key as possible; our hope is that this would be very reassuring and very 

soothing to the markets and to market confidence. 

MS. RASKIN.  So, from that perspective, you’d like the announcement to occur with a 

sufficient amount of time before the deadline. 

MR. SHEETS.  Exactly.  That’s why we’re bringing it to the Committee today rather than 

at the January meeting.  We were concerned that, if we waited until the January meeting, then, as 

the deadline grew closer, the markets would start to worry about whether the swap line was 

going to be there or not.  We wanted this to get resolved well in advance of any such concerns. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a two-hander from President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  What would be the interpretation of extending longer than six 

months?  Is there a risk that that would be interpreted as more alarmist in some way? 

December 14, 2010 16 of 127



 

 

 

MR. SHEETS.  It could go either way.  On the one hand, you could say, well, it would 

give the markets confidence that these swap lines are going to be there for an extended period of 

time to provide support.  On the other hand, the markets could interpret it as a sign that the 

central banks are very worried about dollar funding conditions.  So I think that’s more a policy 

judgment. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have no objection personally to making it nine months if 

that’s the Committee’s preference.  We can have a short discussion of that—I don’t want to take 

too much time on this, but we could do that.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Is there some regular cycle on which we normally review this?  I know 

at one time it was annually. 

MR. SHEETS.  We’ve done extensions of varying lengths.  Six months wouldn’t be 

unusual.  So the markets wouldn’t respond to that and say, “Oh, they’re doing something they’ve 

never done before.”  If we go nine months, that wouldn’t seem unusual either.  If we did a full 

year, it would be the longest we ever extended or put them in place. 

MR. BULLARD.  So if we do six months, it’s kind of in a cycle. 

MR. SHEETS.  Six months is a typical approach. 

MR. BULLARD.  Like normal business. 

MR. SHEETS.  Yes. 

MR. BULLARD.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A two-hander from the Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Does the ECB have a preference in terms of the length 

of extension? 

MR. SHEETS.  I’m not sure. 

December 14, 2010 17 of 127



 

 

 

MR. SACK.  Our discussions with them focused on the six-month horizon, and they 

seemed quite comfortable with that.  That doesn’t mean they would object to a longer horizon, 

but we didn’t pursue that deeply. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I imagine this will get some—forgive me for mentioning this—political 

attention.  We just need to explain it in plain English, because my guess is this will be one of the 

actions that comes out of this meeting that is different from what we have done before.  It might 

get more attention.  I would rather just pay the price for a nine-month or a longer-term extension, 

because we are likely to renew it.  Of course, it is obvious we should explain this in the simplest 

terms to that audience regarding the low nature of the risk that is involved.  So if we are going to 

get some criticism from some of the people that like to criticize us, I would rather just lock it in 

now than do it in bits and pieces.  That would be my opinion. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you see any problem with our counterparties if we do 

nine months today?  Nathan. 

MR. SHEETS.  I wouldn’t. 

MR. SACK.  I wouldn’t think so. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Is there any objection to a nine-month arrangement?  

President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  I would just speak in favor of the arrangement the staff brought us.  It is 

a renewable thing.  I doubt the staff has ever given our counterparties reason to believe that 

renewal was questionable or problematic.  It never has been, but it does give us the opportunity 

to reevaluate the terms, reevaluate amounts, and retain that flexibility.  So I, for one, would be 

more comfortable with the six-month arrangement. 

December 14, 2010 18 of 127



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there others? 

MR. PLOSSER.  For the same reasons I like what the staff proposed.  I thought that was 

perfectly reasonable, and I kind of like the six-month cycle.  That’s fine with me, too. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Other comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Well, 

we could do parliamentary procedure here, but I think there is a sense, at least around the table, 

that we are open to renewal if conditions continue to be stressed in European markets.  Okay, 

any further comments or questions?  [No response]  Perhaps we could have a vote.  Can I have a 

motion? 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any objections?  [No 

response] 

MS. DANKER.  Just to be clear, that vote is on the resolution that was in the memo. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Correct, the resolution that was in the memorandum.  

Would anyone like to hear it read?  [No response] 

Okay, thank you.  Let’s go on, then, to item 2, the economic situation.  Dave. 

MR. STOCKTON.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under the assumption that my 

remarks for this morning have not already been posted to WikiLeaks [laughter], I 

thought I’d provide the Committee with a brief summary of what I believe are the 

four major takeaways from the December Tealbook.  First, the incoming information 

on economic activity has almost uniformly been stronger than we had expected at the 

time of the October projection.  This was true for readings on the labor market, on 

production, and on spending.  Second, there was one important exception to this 

pattern of more favorable data, and that has been the readings on housing activity and 

home prices.  In response to an accumulation of downside surprises since midyear, 

we have marked down considerably our forecast for home sales, construction, and 

house prices for the next two years.  Third, while we have had some noticeable shifts 

in the other factors conditioning our forecast, the net effect has been only a small 

positive for the level of activity by the end of 2012.  Fiscal policy and the stock 

market are expected to provide greater stimulus to aggregate demand over the next 

two years, but the effects of these more favorable influences are partially cushioned 

by higher long-term interest rates, a slightly stronger dollar next year, and a little 

December 14, 2010 19 of 127



 

 

 

higher path for oil prices.  And fourth, core inflation has run noticeably below our 

expectations for the second half of the year.  Although some of that surprise looks to 

us to be transitory, we have taken a little signal from those lower readings on price 

inflation. So let me address, in turn, each of these four takeaways. 

 

 

 

 

I will start with the incoming data, and specifically the employment situation.  A 

surprisingly upbeat October labor market report was followed by a disappointing 

showing in November.  But taken together, these two reports paint a picture of a 

slightly stronger labor market than was anticipated in our previous forecast.  The level 

of private payroll employment in November exceeded our October projection by 

about 130,000, with hours worked and labor income also stronger than we had 

expected.  Moreover, other labor market indicators support our projection of further 

gradual improvement in the employment situation in coming months.  Initial claims 

for unemployment insurance have resumed their modest downtrend, job openings are 

up, help-wanted advertising is improving, and hiring intentions have moved higher. 

Like the labor market data, the recent readings on industrial production have also 

outstripped our October projection.  Manufacturing IP looks to have posted solid 

gains over the last two months.  Whereas we had been expecting factory output to 

post a small decline in the fourth quarter at the time of the last meeting, we are 

currently projecting an increase at an annual rate of nearly 4 percent.  Moreover, both 

the national ISM index and most of the regional indexes point to moderate gains in 

industrial production in coming months.  To be sure, IP has slowed substantially from 

its pace in the first half of the year when inventory restocking was providing a lift to 

output.  But overall, this sector has shown more resilience than we had expected, 

boosted by strengthening domestic demand and exports. 

The data on spending by both households and businesses also have been firmer of 

late than we had anticipated.  Consumer spending has been coming in stronger than 

we thought, and this morning’s reading on retail sales for November continued that 

pattern.  There were upward revisions to spending in the retail control category for 

September and October, and November increased by considerably more than we were 

projecting.  All told, we now estimate that real PCE increased at an annual rate of 

3¼ percent in the second half—that’s ¾ percentage point more than in the October 

forecast and 1¼ percentage points faster than in the first half of the year.  

Encouragingly, because of upward revisions to estimates of household income, these 

larger increases in spending have occurred alongside an upwardly revised personal 

saving rate.  In the business sector, we now expect real outlays on equipment and 

software to grow at an annual rate of about 10 percent in the second half of this year, 

nearly 3 percentage points stronger than we had projected six weeks ago.  That is still 

a slowdown from the pace seen earlier this year, but a less pronounced slowdown 

than we were expecting. 

Since we closed the Tealbook last Wednesday, in addition to this morning’s 

upward surprise in the retail sales data, we also received stronger wholesale inventory 

data for the third quarter and much stronger readings on merchandise trade data for 

December 14, 2010 20 of 127



 

 

 

October.  This was only offset a bit by a somewhat weaker figure on retail 

inventories.  Taken together, these data would put our forecast for the growth of real 

GDP in the second half of the year closer to 3¼ percent than to the 2½ percent pace 

that we had in the December Tealbook and the 2 percent rate incorporated in our 

October projection. 

 

 

 

 

As I noted earlier, there has been one major exception to the pattern of generally 

more favorable data on economic activity—and that has been the housing sector.  

Home sales and construction have continued to come in below our expectations.  And 

more recently, house prices have fallen more quickly than we were anticipating.  The 

data that we have received since our last forecast, taken alone, would not have 

justified as large a revision to our housing forecast as we made this round.  But we 

have been persistently surprised to the downside since the middle of the year.  Given 

the difficulties of trying to discern the underlying trends in housing supply and 

demand in the aftermath of the tax incentives and more recently the uncertainty 

introduced by the mortgage foreclosure problems, we had been reluctant to make a 

major change in our forecast.  But over this intermeeting period, we felt that we had 

accumulated enough evidence against our previous view that a more serious 

adjustment was called for.  We lowered both the level and the trajectory for home 

sales and construction over the next two years, so that the level of total housing starts 

is nearly 300,000 units below our previous forecast at the end of 2012. 

Of course, we can’t be certain why housing has fallen so far short of our 

expectations, but at least part of the story would appear to be that the overhang of 

vacant homes has put a bigger damper on new construction than we had expected.  In 

addition, that supply overhang appears to be weighing more heavily on house prices, 

perhaps renewing concerns on the part of some potential buyers about buying into a 

falling market. 

The revision that we have made to house prices is sizable.  The CoreLogic house-

price index fell at an annual rate of 15 percent in the third quarter and appears on 

track to decline at more than a 10 percent rate in the current quarter; we had been 

expecting these declines to average about 5 percent.  We took on board these weaker 

near-term figures and further assumed that prices will continue to fall, albeit at a 

much slower pace, through next year.  By the end of 2012, house prices are about 

8 percent lower than in our previous forecast.  That hit to household wealth, in turn, 

restrains consumer spending, all else equal. 

Of course, all else was not equal in this forecast.  The fiscal, financial, and 

external influences that condition our forecast also were shifting over the 

intermeeting period.  These effects netted out to a small positive for the forecast.  On 

the fiscal front, we incorporated the key policy elements of the agreement between 

the President and the congressional Republicans.  Much of what is in that agreement 

was already a part of our baseline forecast, most notably the extension of the 2001–

2003 tax cuts and the continuation of emergency unemployment benefits through the 

end of next year.  The major innovations for our forecast were the incorporation of 

December 14, 2010 21 of 127



 

 

 

the payroll tax holiday worth about $110 billion and the full expensing of most 

equipment, worth about $90 billion.  Based on our recent experience with similar 

accelerated depreciation provisions, we suspect that full expensing will have only a 

small effect on the timing of equipment spending and probably an even smaller effect 

on the timing of capital equipment production—we’ve assumed that this provision 

boosts the growth of real GDP by a tenth in 2011 and lowers growth by a similar 

amount in 2012. 

 

 

 

 

 

The one-year payroll tax holiday also acts to raise growth of real GDP next year 

and lower growth the following year, when payroll tax rates return to their previous 

levels.  But given the lags in spending and the accompanying multiplier effects, we 

expect the level of output to be higher than it otherwise would have been at the end of 

2012.  Putting too fine a point on it, we have the payroll tax holiday raising the 

growth of real GDP by about 0.3 percentage point in 2011 and lowering GDP growth 

by a little more than 0.1 percentage point in 2012. 

Brian has already discussed in considerable detail the backup in long-term interest 

rates that has occurred over the intermeeting period.  As you may recall, we had 

assumed that there would be some gradual upward pressure on long rates and the 

exchange value of the dollar as market participants came to realize that the Fed would 

purchase only $600 billion dollars of assets rather than the $1 trillion reportedly 

anticipated by market participants at the time of the previous forecast.  Of course, 

when we envisioned a process of gradual learning about the ultimate size of the Fed’s 

asset purchases, we were thinking along the lines of six months, not six days.  So in 

this projection, we pulled forward the effect of that learning relative to our October 

forecast. 

As Brian noted, that wasn’t the only story behind the rise in long rates.  Rates also 

appear to have gotten a boost from the prospect of a somewhat more stimulative fiscal 

policy and more favorable assessments of the pace of recovery in the United States 

and in several key foreign economies.  A stronger stock market and higher prices for 

oil and other commodities also appeared to have accompanied the brightening 

outlook.  From the perspective of the forecast, higher rates and the stronger dollar 

cushioned some of the effects of the factors pushing up on aggregate demand. 

Turning to the inflation outlook, core PCE inflation has run below our 

expectations thus far in the second half of the year.  We estimate that these prices rose 

at an annual rate of ¾ percent in the third quarter and at a ½ percent pace in the 

current quarter.  We had been expecting increases at an annual rate of about 1 percent 

over that period.  Some of the surprise can be explained by transitory factors, most 

notably a drop in the erratic nonmarket component in the third quarter and an outsized 

decline in the annual setting of Medicare reimbursement prices in the fourth quarter.  

This morning’s PPI for November, which has another reading on hospital services, 

didn’t seem to change this story much, but we’ll have a better fix when we get details 

later today. 

December 14, 2010 22 of 127



 

 

 

These special factors can’t explain all of our miss, so we also took a small signal 

about the underlying pace of inflation from the string of recent low price readings.  

As a consequence, we reduced our forecast of core PCE inflation by a tenth in 2011 

and 2012, to 0.9 percent in both years.  We made no change to our forecast for total 

PCE prices for 2011, as the lower projection for core inflation was offset by 

somewhat higher energy price increases.  The projection for total PCE prices in 2012 

was lowered 0.2 percentage point, because of both lower core prices and lower 

projected energy prices.  On the whole, the inflation projection is not much different 

from the one that we delivered to you in October. 

 

 

 

 

In fact, much the same can be said for our entire projection.  Yes, we had some 

surprises in the data, in financial developments, and in fiscal policy over the past six 

weeks.  But our basic outlook remains the same.  We believe that a modest recovery 

continues and that it is likely to gradually pick up its pace as the process of repair and 

adjustment to the enormous financial shock of two years ago proceeds.  I’d say we are 

a little more confident of that assessment now than we were a few months ago, when 

the incoming data were heavily tilted in a darker direction.  But as events in Europe 

over the intermeeting period have demonstrated, many obstacles could still deflect the 

economy from the path of gradual improvement that we are projecting. 

Indeed, as I recently reviewed the staff’s forecast performance over the past year, 

I began to feel considerable sympathy for the lady inside the GPS unit of my car who 

seems to be constantly barking out that she is “recalculating” as my driving 

disappoints her expectations [laughter].  We’ve had to do our share of “recalculating” 

this year in response to an economy and to exogenous events that often seemed to 

deviate from the path that we had anticipated.  Somehow, I suspect that, as Santa 

reviews our performance, he won’t show me as much sympathy as I have come to 

feel for my GPS lady.  If that is the case, I’ll just have to make myself content in the 

knowledge that, given the steep rise in commodity prices over the past year, the lump 

of coal that he is likely to leave in my stocking will be considerably more generous 

than anything I will be receiving from the Federal Reserve [laughter].  Nathan will 

continue our presentation. 

MR. SHEETS.  Developments in peripheral Europe have been a source of much 

anxiety over the intermeeting period.  Through the first weeks of November, markets 

were roiled by concerns about mounting losses and large-scale deposit flight in 

Ireland’s banking sector.  Left with few alternatives, the Irish authorities agreed to an 

external assistance package, which included €45 billion from the European Union and 

€22.5 billion from the IMF.  These resources should be sufficient for the Irish 

government to meet its funding needs for the next couple of years and to backstop the 

banking system.  Nevertheless, even with this package in place, the sustainability of 

the country’s debt remains in question.  A continued commitment to disciplined fiscal 

policies and a further stabilization of conditions in the banking sector both seem 

necessary to avoid a restructuring. 

December 14, 2010 23 of 127



 

 

 

After the announcement of the package for Ireland, a strong sentiment of “who’s 

next?” pervaded the markets, with Portugal and Spain seen as the leading candidates.  

But spreads also rose noticeably for Italy and Belgium, both of which have elevated 

debt-to-GDP ratios.  Market tensions eventually calmed some after the ECB’s 

announcement on December 2 that it would extend its special term-refinancing 

operations through the first quarter of 2011 and following reports that the ECB had 

stepped up its purchases of Irish and Portuguese debt. 

 

 

 

A key concern is the extent of the vulnerabilities in Portugal and Spain.  Portugal 

suffers from labor market rigidities and other structural problems that severely 

constrain growth and consequently raise serious doubts about its medium-term fiscal 

outlook.  Reinforcing these concerns, the government’s implementation of its fiscal 

consolidation program has been lagging.  Moreover, market unease about the 

Portuguese banks’ large exposure to the government’s debt has left the banks highly 

reliant on ECB funding.  Given these vulnerabilities, we believe that Portugal is likely 

to require a bailout package.  By our reckoning, around €60 billion would be needed 

to cover most of the government’s cash flow needs for several years and to provide 

support to the banking system.  Such a program should be conditioned on enhanced 

fiscal discipline and, most important, on structural reforms to improve the country’s 

growth prospects. 

We are somewhat more hopeful about Spain, but—given that its economy is 

nearly twice the size of Greece’s, Ireland’s, and Portugal’s combined—the 

consequences of full-blown turmoil there would be much more severe.  Spain’s 

deflating housing bubble has created balance sheet problems for the regional savings 

banks (cajas).  But the country’s large internationally diversified banks are generally 

still seen as healthy, and its fiscal situation is stronger than that of the other 

peripherals.  Indeed, in our baseline debt sustainability exercises, Spanish debt tops 

out at a relatively modest 75 percent of GDP, which leaves some wiggle room for 

either larger-than-expected losses in the banking sector or higher-than-anticipated 

borrowing costs. 

We believe that it will be necessary for the European authorities to adopt crisis-

management policies along the following lines.  First, building a firewall around 

Spain should be a central objective.  To extinguish any doubts about the adequacy of 

resources available to support Spain, as well as Portugal, the European authorities 

need to earmark another €200 to €300 billion, in addition to the roughly €375 billion 

of available EU and IMF resources.  Second, a rigorous stress test and a capital 

backstop to fill balance sheet holes are necessary to address lingering worries about 

the European banks.  The challenges here are significant, however, as a credible stress 

test will need to consider severe and potentially unsettling scenarios, including 

write-downs on some sovereign exposures and further declines in real estate prices in 

certain countries.  Third, the ECB needs to continue with its accommodative policies 

and bond purchase program.  Finally, the peripheral countries should move forward 

with their fiscal consolidation efforts and with structural reforms to strengthen 

medium-term growth.  Our forecast envisions—perhaps optimistically—that the 

December 14, 2010 24 of 127



 

 

 

European authorities will manage to take these (or similar) actions and that such steps 

will be sufficient to keep the crisis contained. 

 

 

 

 

Some observers have called for even more comprehensive crisis-management 

strategies.  One such approach would be an EU sovereign debt sustainability exercise 

with required haircuts if a country’s debt were deemed unsustainable, perhaps 

coupled with an EU guarantee of the country’s post-haircut debt stock.  Such an 

approach would address market concerns about sovereign sustainability, but could 

create other problems.  Judgments regarding debt sustainability are notoriously 

difficult:  Greece’s debt burden is clearly unsustainable, but such assessments for 

Ireland and Portugal are much murkier.  In addition, the prospect of imminent 

haircuts could kick off market runs and create uncertainties about the financial 

viability of entities holding the debt, including European banks and potentially the 

ECB. 

Spillovers from the recent stresses in peripheral Europe have been largely 

contained to date.  Core euro-area economies have continued to record solid 

economic growth, and the deterioration in global financial markets that we saw in the 

spring has generally not recurred.  But a further weakening of conditions would pose 

notable risks.  While the direct claims of U.S. banks on peripheral Europe seem 

manageable, U.S. banks have potentially sizable market risk exposures to the 

peripherals.  Moreover, the U.S. financial system has significant claims on core 

European borrowers and would be hurt if the crisis spread more broadly.  Finally, 

should Spain come under attack, the crisis might potentially snowball into a broader 

run on sovereign debt that could affect Italy, Belgium, the United Kingdom, and 

perhaps other countries as well.  With this warm thought in mind, I would ask all of 

you include in your letters to Santa a request for a quiet and crisis-free holiday 

season. 

Turning now to the rest of the global economy, we have been struck by the firm 

tone of the recent data.  For example, activity in Germany, which accounts for 30 

percent of euro-area GDP, has remained surprisingly resilient:  Retail sales surged in 

October; confidence and PMIs rose in November; and the weaker euro will help fuel 

Germany’s export machine.  Chinese trade—both exports and imports—jumped up 

further in November, and every indication is that the Chinese economy is humming 

on all cylinders.  In response, the authorities there are now moving with increased 

vigor to prevent overheating.  In other emerging Asian economies, a marked rebound 

in November PMI data suggests that activity in the region is strengthening along with 

China.  Consistent with these observations, the International Energy Agency recently 

marked up its 2010 forecast for global oil consumption, while demand for 

commodities more generally appears firm.  And readings on foreign inflation have 

surprised us on the upside, reflecting a recent acceleration of food and energy prices.  

Notably, however, core inflation abroad has remained more subdued. 

Of course, there are still a number of soft spots out there.  But, taken together, the 

recent data generally point to a moderately paced recovery abroad, in line with our 

December 14, 2010 25 of 127



 

 

 

expectations.  As such, our forecast for foreign activity is little changed from the 

October Tealbook, with growth this quarter coming in at 2¾ percent and then 

strengthening to 3½ percent by 2012.  Indeed, a striking feature of our forecast is that 

the modal outlook is still reasonably hopeful, even as the stresses in peripheral 

Europe have markedly increased the tail risks. 

 

 

Finally, trade data for October, which we received last Friday, showed a notable 

pickup in U.S. exports, again pointing to solid foreign demand.  Imports, however, 

were softer than expected.  For the fourth quarter as a whole, we see exports 

expanding at a 10 percent pace, but imports are poised to contract sharply, reflecting 

problems with the BEA’s seasonal adjustment for oil and some payback after two 

quarters of extraordinary strength.  We now see net exports adding 2½ percentage 

points to GDP growth in the fourth quarter, about ¾ percentage point more than in the 

Tealbook.  Over the next two years, real exports should increase at an 8¼ percent 

pace, supported by solid foreign demand.  With the dollar up just slightly since the 

last Tealbook, the lagged effects of the dollar’s previous declines should also provide 

support.  Import growth is projected to gradually rise, moving above 6½ percent by 

2012, in line with the U.S. recovery.  All told, we see net exports making a small 

positive contribution to U.S. GDP growth over the next two years.  Thank you, and 

we’re now happy to take your questions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions?  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of questions for Nathan.  

The first is a narrow one: To what extent is there an Iberian problem?  That is, if Portugal really 

gets into serious trouble, does it almost automatically create contagion that draws Spain into it? 

MR. FISHER.  Be careful with your answer, because the questioner has a Spanish son-in-

law. 

MR. LOCKHART.  But he does have a job. 

MR. SHEETS.  There are several channels.  Let me just highlight two that I think are 

important.  One is that the Spanish banks have substantial exposure to Portugal.  So if conditions 

in Portugal were to deteriorate significantly, and credit quality were to decline correspondingly, 

that would be a further hit on the Spanish banking system.  And it really is the case that the 

banking system in Spain is the point of vulnerability.  There are two separate issues regarding the 

Spanish bank vulnerability.  The first is the cajas and their exposure to the falling real estate 

December 14, 2010 26 of 127



 

 

 

market.  How much more is that real estate market going to fall?  The second issue is just how 

rock solid are BBVA and Santander, the two biggest banks that compose almost half of the 

Spanish banking system by assets?  To date, their CDS premiums are somewhat elevated relative 

to other institutions, but not significantly so.  And if we start seeing signs of significant softness 

in those two institutions, it would be grave. 

Second, I think there’s a sentiment channel and a demonstration effect, namely, that, if 

Portugal comes under stress, that will cause people to be more risk averse and more worried 

about what else is going on in peripheral Europe and could trigger a pullback.  I think it’s very 

likely that Portugal is going to need a program, and I think that’s why it’s imperative that the 

Europeans move now to get the funds in place, so it’s clear that they can support Spain, if 

necessary. 

MR. LOCKHART.  My second, broader question is, again, for Nathan.  When you did a 

European recession scenario in the summer, it had a more severe impact on the U.S. economy 

than the one that is in the Tealbook this time around.  You’ve touched on this a little bit, but 

could you give a deeper sense of what has changed, and why we see less impact on our economy 

in the current circumstances? 

MR. SHEETS.  If things got bad in Europe, I wouldn’t want to rule any possibilities off 

the table, including the scenario that we looked at in June.  I’d say the reason that the spillover 

was somewhat less pronounced this round is simply because, to date, in this episode relative to 

the spring, the financial market feedback effects have been less.  Maybe there has been some 

financial market adjustment or repositioning by U.S. financial institutions.  So far, at least, we 

haven’t seen the same intense effects in the United States.  One particularly notable difference is 

that in the spring we saw very substantial declines in U.S. equity prices, whereas U.S. equity 

December 14, 2010 27 of 127



 

 

 

prices over the intermeeting period are up a little bit.  But that’s something that we’re obviously 

watching very closely, and the situation could change very quickly to much more intense 

spillovers and sympathy effects in U.S. markets, similar to what we saw in the spring. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I have a question on the house-price adjustment.  As I was reading 

the financial stability memos, particularly the one on the banking sector, I noticed that it 

highlighted that the percent of bank assets in 3-, 4-, and 5-rated institutions had become quite 

elevated, approximately where we were the last time we had “headwinds” in the banking sector.  

So, when we think of a house-price decline that’s as large as what you’re talking about, 

combined with the elevated percent of bank assets in 3-, 4-, and 5-rated institutions, do we still 

assume that the headwinds in the banking markets are going to subside over the course of the 

year?  And what are you assuming about securities that are tied to real estate, given your new 

information on the pricing of housing? 

MR. STOCKTON.  In this forecast, we still assume that there will be some improvement 

in bank lending conditions over the course of the coming year.  We think the situation in the 

mortgage market is still going to be very tight—in fact, partly feeding into our downward 

revision to housing was a view that we weren’t going to see as much improvement there as we 

thought. 

Because of the weaker house-price forecast, we’ve upped our forecast of home 

foreclosures, which implies a hit to banking associated with our more negative outlook for house 

prices.  I don’t have the specifics on individual institutions in terms of how that plays out, but, as 

I indicated, we do see the house-price forecast as having more than just a housing effect.  It has 

December 14, 2010 28 of 127



 

 

 

an effect both on consumer spending through the wealth effect and on lending conditions and 

spending through the banking sector. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  [No response]  Okay.  If not, we’re 

ready for our go-round.  And I have President Kocherlakota first. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our Public Affairs Department 

has been gathering information for its 2011 Ninth District forecast.  In doing so, they have found 

a growing sense of optimism since the end of August.  In general, it seems that businesses are 

beginning to be more willing to think longer term, three to five years out.  They’re beginning to 

make plans to hire, increase space, and add equipment. This optimism is widespread across most 

sectors of the economy.  Mining is strong, due to solid prices and increased demand.  Farmers 

had a great harvest in terms of prices and yields, and this spilled into warehousing, 

transportation, food processing, and energy.  More interestingly, both manufacturing and 

services are looking to expand.  However, the general level of optimism does not extend into 

construction.  A big caveat, of course, is sustainability.  I’m describing a pattern that has become 

apparent only over the past three months, and business attitudes certainly remain susceptible to 

shocks of various kinds. 

At the national level, I will focus on an issue that preoccupied us a year ago:  How much 

slack is there in the economy?  Right now, we are following a highly accommodative monetary 

policy, and this accommodative policy is consistent with typical rules, because current output is 

so much lower than our typical measures of potential output.  Hence, as we decide upon future 

monetary policy actions, we need to have good measures of potential output. 

The Tealbook measures potential output largely by focusing on supply-side issues, and I 

view it as essentially using a production function approach that tries to gauge maximum 

December 14, 2010 29 of 127



 

 

 

sustainable production in the economy, given the existing labor force and capital stock.  So its 

measures would take account of changes in productivity or changes in the quality of the labor 

force, but they certainly abstract from shocks to demand.  This approach is definitely a common 

one—common enough, I think, to be called the conventional one.  But it may not be foolproof.  

Consider, for example, a 30 percent to 40 percent fall in home prices, along the lines that this 

country has experienced.  This shock is going to lower the wealth of many people.  Let’s focus, 

though, on retired people.  Those people will demand fewer goods, and in so doing they will 

lower output and employment in the economy as a whole.  Using monetary policy to try to boost 

output above this level would lead to inflationary pressures.  

I want to be clear about a couple of things.  First, the issue I’m raising is entirely distinct 

from my comments about the possibility of increased mismatch in labor markets, and I’m hoping 

that we’ll get more clarity on the issue of mismatch at our next meeting.  And I’m certainly not 

arguing that potential output is always equal to observed output.  Inflation and inflation 

expectations adjust sluggishly to shocks, and this sluggish adjustment creates a need for 

monetary policy interventions.  What I am saying is that the right measure of potential output is 

the level of output that would exist in a hypothetical world in which inflation and inflation 

expectations were fully flexible.  Once you define it this way, it’s clear that potential output has 

to move in response to both supply and demand shocks. 

With this in mind, is there any systematic way to take account of shocks to demand when 

we measure output gaps?  Many formulations of the Phillips curve provide a linkage between 

inflation dynamics and output gaps.  And this linkage is an attractive one, because it’s robust—

it’s robust to the demand shocks that I mentioned, and it’s robust to the mismatch possibilities 

that I mentioned.  In Minneapolis, we’ve been trying to use a particular kind of Phillips curve, 

December 14, 2010 30 of 127



 

 

 

the New Keynesian Phillips curves, to impute measures of the output gap.  These equations link 

current inflation to inflation expectations and the output gap, which is really a marginal cost gap.  

Then, when we take measures of inflation expectations from the Cleveland Fed, we can compute 

estimates of the output gap.  We’ve done this using both simple New Keynesian Phillips curves 

that ignore trend inflation and more sophisticated ones that take account of trend inflation.  

There’s certainly some heterogeneity of results, but, in general, the implied measures are less 

negative than the Tealbook’s estimate of negative 6½ percent.  I’d say that these measures 

certainly are meant to be suggestive at this point, but my main message is that the measures of 

potential output that are relevant for a monetary policymaker should take into account demand 

disturbances, and ones that ignore demand disturbances are likely upwardly biased.  The second 

message, which I’ll deliver with considerably less force, is that, given the observed behavior of 

inflation and inflation expectations, it’s possible that these biases may well be large. 

So as we consider changes to our monetary policy stance, I believe that we should put 

some weight on these possibilities.  For my part, as I’ll discuss in more detail in the next 

go-round, these possibilities lead me to shade my estimate of the output gap from the 

Tealbook’s, which is around minus 6½ percent, up to something closer to minus 4 percent 

instead.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The news regarding business conditions in 

the Third District is on balance moderately positive and consistent with a modest recovery 

scenario.  Residential and commercial real estate and construction, however, continue to lag 

behind the recovery, as these were the hardest hit during the recession.  Overall, employment in 

our three states rose in October, especially in Pennsylvania.  Our November Business Outlook 

December 14, 2010 31 of 127



 

 

 

Survey, released just after the last FOMC meeting, indicated a sharp increase in the current 

activity index—it rose from plus 1 to plus 22.5.  Manufacturers’ orders and shipments indexes 

also rose in November.  About 40 percent of the firms plan to increase spending on plant and 

equipment over the next 12 months—that compares with 16 percent this time a year ago. 

Regional business contacts expect a modest pace of improvement in the months ahead.  

Our December survey, which remains confidential until noon on Thursday, gives similar 

readings to our November results.  The general activity index rose from the 22.5 to 24.3 and is 

very consistent with values seen in historical recoveries.  And, by the way, the market’s 

expectation for that number was 10.  New orders also rose significantly in December. 

As I noted six weeks ago, our regional price data do not raise concerns regarding 

sustained deflation.  In our November Business Outlook Survey, manufacturers continued to 

report higher input costs.  In addition, in November, both the future prices paid and the future 

prices received indexes rose significantly, indicating that firms are expecting prices to be rising, 

not falling, over the next six months. 

Retailers generally report that wholesale prices are stable, but many contacts noted that 

foreign suppliers have raised prices for many products being ordered now for delivery next year.  

Again, our December survey, which will be released Thursday, indicates that even more 

participants are reporting higher prices paid as well as higher prices received.  The prices paid 

index rose further from 34 in November to 51.2 in December, and the prices received by firms 

actually turned positive, increasing from minus 2 in November to plus 10 in December.  That is 

its highest reading since mid-2008. 

Turning to the national economy, incoming data strengthen my belief that the economy is 

emerging from the soft patch we encountered this summer.  Third-quarter real GDP was revised 

December 14, 2010 32 of 127



 

 

 

up; manufacturing and business equipment spending have picked up; consumer spending and 

employment continue to expand and have defied the pessimism of those who saw the economy 

heading for a double dip. 

The recent trade numbers indicate that foreign demand for U.S. products has picked up, 

perhaps boosting fourth-quarter GDP growth more than previously thought.  Thus, I continue to 

believe that the fundamentals are in place for real GDP growth to accelerate to close to 

3½ percent in 2011, even in the absence of any new fiscal stimulus.  I expect the tax package, if 

it passes, to add only modestly to this growth in 2011, and, because of its temporary nature, to 

generate a small, but not significant, give-back in 2012. 

Financial market indicators have attracted a good deal of attention in recent weeks.  

However, I would caution against ascribing too much of the evolution of interest rates over the 

last couple of months to either anticipation of or the announcement of our LSAP program.  Many 

factors have likely affected the decline and then the rise in yields over the last two or three 

months.  We’ve had the much anticipated and discussed lead-up to the results of the elections for 

the House and Senate.  We’ve had a flare-up in the European sovereign debt crisis, which 

probably resulted in some flight to quality, only to be followed by another “stay” of a 

restructuring “execution.”  And, finally, we experienced a steady improvement in the economic 

data, some of which could not have been the result of either the anticipation or the 

implementation of our LSAP.  Disentangling the influences of these factors on yields is likely to 

be a very difficult, if not impossible, task. 

The latest readings on core inflation have come in slightly lower than expected and may 

raise concerns among some about the possibility of sustained deflation.  But there is no such 

indication as yet in either market- or survey-based measures of inflation expectations, and the 

December 14, 2010 33 of 127



 

 

 

likelihood of sustained deflation is no higher now than it was at the time of our last meeting.  

And survey measures indicate that the probability of deflation is lower now than it was in late 

2008 and in 2009.  In addition, I would note that monthly inflation estimates tend to be volatile, 

and, in particular, the PCE estimates often get revised up.  Thus, I continue to expect inflation 

readings to be higher, more in line with our objectives, as we go through 2011. 

In summary, conditions in the Third District, as well as the nation as a whole, seem to me 

indicative of a modest recovery, which I expect to continue and accelerate somewhat next year.  

The economic news we have received thus far does not give me cause for worry about 

encountering any sustained deflation in the near future.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, let me cite my favorite economist, myself.  [Laughter]  I’ll 

read from my last intervention at the last FOMC:  “My contacts report more things are moving in 

the right direction than in the wrong direction.  None speak of the double-dip risk in the United 

States, and none are budgeting to deflation.  Bottom lines are healthy.  Conditions are improving 

slightly, but continually, and are expected to continue to do so.”  I’m going to spare you a 

protracted recitation of my soundings. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  We all have it memorized, so that’s fine.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  I am, however, going to say that uniformly there has been a 

shift in tone.  If anything, I would take out the word “slightly” from the recitation I just gave.  

One sector is an exception, namely, the rails, because you always have a downturn at this time of 

the year—it’s a seasonal adjustment.  But, otherwise, to a person, my interlocutors are seeing 

improved confidence in final demand.  According to my retailer contacts, airlines, express 

December 14, 2010 34 of 127



 

 

 

shippers, IT firms, and manufacturers of household products, household spending, including 

discretionary spending, is expanding. 

One of the key indicators I like to look at is mall traffic.  No one has to go to a mall.  You 

don’t have to buy anything out of necessity at a mall.  The last seven weeks we have seen growth 

in mall traffic.  It’s reflected in MasterCard’s internal data, which, again, I like to remind people 

is confidential, but we have developed a relationship of going through and parsing that data and 

reading the entrails.  November retail sales, ex-auto, ex-gas, year over year, were up 5.2 percent 

versus 2.7 percent in October and 1.3 percent in the third quarter.  So there appears to be a 

pickup in final sales, and that is new data and unlike the slight pickup that I reported earlier.  

There seems to be improved confidence.  I fully suspect you’re going to hear that from the 

Business Roundtable and others who are going to be making these pronouncements shortly. 

In talking to my interlocutors, none see a real threat of deflation.  While they maintain 

they do not have the power yet to price more aggressively, they would like to, Charlie, but they 

don’t yet have it.  We know from the recent data they are even more flush with liquidity than 

they were before.  They are beginning to put some of it to work, primarily to drive productivity 

enhancement, though some, Mr. Chairman, are beginning to report and budget for payroll 

expansion. 

Anecdotal input from my contacts, triangulated with the work of our research staff, leads 

me to think that the Board staff is underestimating economic growth for 2011, though 

unemployment, I think, will remain sticky despite a pickup in the desire to hire.  And it strikes 

me that we will see growth in the first quarter and second quarter 2011 close to 4 percent, with 

inflation remaining slightly under the wire of 2 percent.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

December 14, 2010 35 of 127



 

 

 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The tenor of the incoming data has 

been positive, though not much different from what was expected in most forecasts, and it is 

broadly consistent with only a very gradual recovery.  Even with the announcement of both fiscal 

and financial stimulus, the Tealbook is little changed from our November meeting.  For the final 

quarter of 2012, the Tealbook forecasts unemployment to be 0.1 percentage point higher and 

core PCE inflation to be 0.1 percentage point lower than at the November meeting.  Similarly, 

the Blue Chip forecast is not much different from last month.  Thus, despite the move to more 

accommodative monetary and fiscal policy, we are still expecting only very slow progress on an 

inflation rate that is too low and an unemployment rate that is too high. 

While the inflation forecasts are little changed, the decline in core inflation has 

continued.  In fact, the core CPI inflation rate for the last 12 months, at 0.6 percent, is the lowest 

since 1957 when the index began.  As the Tealbook inflation box shows, the diffusion index and 

a wide variety of inflation measures provide ample evidence of continued disinflation.  While 

commodity prices have certainly increased, there seems little ability to pass these increases on to 

final goods prices, given the significant slack in the economy.  Discussions with businesses 

around New England highlight that they have used productivity gains to offset rising commodity 

prices, because they see little ability to pass price increases on to their customers.   

Our announcement of further large-scale asset purchases has spurred considerable 

discussion about the potential for them to create undesirable inflationary pressures.  For our 

excess reserves to translate into future inflation or debt-financed asset bubbles, banks would have 

to increase lending significantly.  This is not what we see.  In the United States, Japan, and the 

United Kingdom, lending has remained very weak, despite the infusion of liquidity by central 

banks in all three countries. 

December 14, 2010 36 of 127



 

 

 

In addition, discussions with bankers do not indicate that a significant upsurge in demand 

in this country is imminent—rather, quite the opposite.  Bankers continue to experience weak 

demand for loans, particularly among smaller businesses.  While I do not expect these trends to 

reverse any time soon, if they do, they should be quite observable, allowing us to take 

appropriate actions when that becomes necessary. 

With the outlook little changed, it is probably worthwhile thinking about the risks to the 

forecast.  The Tealbook highlights a much weaker path for house prices.  While I am not 

particularly confident of our ability to forecast house prices, significant further declines in house 

prices have the potential to weaken bank balance sheets significantly, further complicate the 

ability to remove the foreclosure overhang, and cause consumers to retrench as their confidence 

ebbs along with their housing wealth. 

A second concern is the increasing difficulties with state and local finances, which some 

have compared with the problems with peripheral nations in Europe.  While I do not think the 

analogy to Europe is particularly apt, these problems share one common attribute, and that is that 

the lack of political will to address problems may make the problems significantly worse. 

My biggest concern remains Europe.  With announcements in late spring regarding 

Greece, many hoped that the problem would be postponed for several years, and that Europe 

would find a way to muddle through.  As events over the last month have made clear, the 

situation remains fragile, and confidence in banks remains tenuous.  Clearly, the Irish stress test 

of their banks did not uncover the significant weakness in Irish banks, and concern with other 

stress tests has contributed to some creeping up of interbank rates.  Should European problems 

become more severe, I do worry about the transmission through U.S. banks and money market 

December 14, 2010 37 of 127



 

 

 

funds.  U.S. prime money market funds with $1.6 trillion in assets have European exposures that 

now account for over 60 percent of their assets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The general sentiment of my Fourth 

District business contacts hasn’t changed much since our last meeting, and my outlook hasn’t 

changed substantially either.  Despite the positive tone set by some of the recent data releases, 

the weak November employment report highlighted that labor markets are still struggling for 

sustained gains, and the pace of the recovery remains slow. 

Even though we saw some positive retail sales numbers, my retail contacts noted that 

they are seeing a problematic pattern.  They suggest that much of the recent progress in retail 

sales has been in the high end of the market.  In their accounts, relatively well-off households are 

purchasing more luxury goods.  They say that many of the mid-market households are shopping 

down in the value chain by sticking to necessities and selecting house brands or other value-

priced items.  My contacts note that retail sales growth can potentially look pretty strong with 

this increased spending by wealthy households, but retailers believe that the longer-run growth in 

personal consumption expenditures is going to require more progress on the other side of the 

income distribution, and job growth there remains the key.  This concern tempered several of my 

contacts’ outlooks in the face of the relatively positive sales figures. 

Banks in my District report that business lending has not grown very much and that new 

commercial originations are being driven primarily by companies in the energy, health care, and 

manufacturing sectors.  Merger and acquisition activities have also picked up and are a growing 

source of credit demand.  My banking contacts also reported that their credit quality was stable 

or showed a slight improvement.  But as the financial stability memo highlights, the U.S. 

December 14, 2010 38 of 127



 

 

 

banking industry faces a wide range of potential risks.  Nationally, many of the smaller banks 

have large amounts of nonperforming assets on their books, and, as was noted earlier, a very 

large number of banks still have adverse ratings. 

My outlook for employment is also little changed from our last meeting, and my business 

contacts have tended to corroborate my outlook for sluggish employment growth.  Although 

there has been some improvement in hiring, especially among manufacturers, employers are 

inclined to hire on a temporary, part-time, or special project basis.  Employers also seem more 

interested in hiring recent college graduates, and this is interesting because the unemployment 

rate, even among young college graduates, is still nearly double its pre-recession levels.  The 

higher unemployment rate seen in this group seems likely to be cyclical, unless you think that the 

recent college graduates are less prepared than those who graduated before the recession. 

My staff’s analysis continues to show that the elevated overall unemployment rate is a 

cyclical phenomenon.  They also note, though, that the job-finding rate in our economy has been 

trending downward for the past 25 years, which is going to slow the rate of convergence toward 

the natural rate of unemployment relative to past expansions.  The lower job-finding trend does 

increase the implied natural rate of unemployment, but it only moves up to 6 percent. 

On the inflation front, I have found little comfort in the most recent data that the 

disinflation process is nearing an end.  At our last meeting I reported that my staff had been 

looking into the growing distinction between the CPI and the PCE price index, and suggested 

that the lower CPI figures might be a more accurate indicator.  Over the intermeeting period, the 

core PCE inflation measures fell sharply, including the median PCE, and they are now more in 

line with the already very low core CPI number.  On a more positive note, market measures of 

expected inflation, which began moving up prior to our November meeting, stabilized in a 

December 14, 2010 39 of 127



 

 

 

comfortable range.  The expected five-year inflation rate derived from inflation swaps has now 

settled near 2 percent, and break-even rates from TIPS show a similar pattern. 

Regarding the risks to my outlook, my view is that the risks for both inflation and output 

remain to the downside.  I continue to be concerned that our options for responding to falling 

inflation are more limited than our options should inflation head higher.  And a variety of 

cautions—from the continued weak banking conditions to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe—

lead me to see the risk for output growth also weighted to the downside.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business contacts in the Eighth District are 

cautiously optimistic about prospects for 2011 on balance.  Early reports on holiday retail sales 

are positive, and I hope that the coming year will produce a relatively good outcome for 

consumer spending.  The positive holiday reports extend from smaller retailers operating in the 

Eighth District to national and global retailers that are based in the District.  So, on this 

dimension, I agree wholeheartedly with President Fisher.  Large transportation companies in the 

Eighth District report brisk business across regions of the United States and globally.  In many 

cases, this is consistent with the improving outlook for U.S. consumption. 

I convened a Health Care Industry Council in recent weeks, composed of a variety of 

participants in the industry in the Eighth District.  The general view is that there is a high level of 

uncertainty, even inside the industry, about how health-care reform will play out and what the 

implications will be for the nature of the industry going forward.  This seemed to be consistent 

with the views of business contacts outside of health care who claim that without more clarity in 

this dimension they are cautious about significant investments and additional hiring. 

December 14, 2010 40 of 127



 

 

 

Turning to the national outlook, my view is that it has improved somewhat.  I hope that 

2011 will be a little stronger than may have seemed likely even a few months ago.  I agree with 

President Rosengren and many others here that one of the key risks going forward is the ongoing 

sovereign debt crisis in Europe.  I’m not very confident that the contagion will end when the next 

country on the block is Spain.  I think markets will test European resolve severely at that 

juncture.  I think the Europeans do have significant resolve to meet the challenge and some tools 

that can be deployed, including ECB purchases of sovereign government debt, but in general the 

situation seems very shaky to me. 

Another key risk for 2011 is the level of federal debt and fiscal deficits here in the United 

States.  The decision of the President and the Congress to add to, rather than to subtract from, the 

level of U.S. debt outstanding gives me pause.  U.S. debt and deficit numbers are not much 

different from those of the very countries that are in trouble today in Europe.  We, as a nation, 

are pushing very hard on our credibility in international markets.  It could go badly and derail 

further U.S. recovery prospects. 

I want to make a few remarks on the effectiveness of asset purchases so far.  My view is 

that these purchases were very effective, in the sense that in the run-up to the November decision 

we observed classic monetary easing effects in financial markets.  So, between the Chairman’s 

speech on August 27 at Jackson Hole and the decision at the last FOMC meeting on 

November 3, we saw real yields decline significantly—the five-year TIPS yield hit minus 

50 basis points at one point.  We saw an increase in inflation expectations that was significant.  

Inflation expectations, according to five-year TIPS yields, were about 120 basis points during the 

summer; today they’re around 160 basis points, so that’s a 40 basis point increase in inflation 

expectations.  I prefer the TIPS measures of inflation expectations to the survey measures.  I 

December 14, 2010 41 of 127



 

 

 

don’t think the survey measures are significantly sensitive to market events.  We saw an increase 

in U.S. equity prices, broadly speaking, which continues to this day.  And we saw a decline in 

the dollar, which I would regard as a normal side effect of policy easing, given all else is held 

approximately constant in the rest of the world. 

I think these effects were fairly clearly due to the anticipation of further asset purchases.  

Surely, there are other things going on in the world, but if you follow financial markets, then it 

was pretty clear that they were focusing on the actions of this Committee.  These effects are 

about as classic as it gets for financial market effects of an easing of monetary policy.  It was as 

if we had lowered the federal funds rate by, say, 50 basis points or we were anticipating lowering 

the federal funds rate by 50 basis points.  After the November 2–3 meeting, as often happens in 

financial markets, attention goes forward and adjusts.  So we saw an increase in longer-term 

nominal yields. 

I thought the Tealbook summary of this issue was very good, but I’m just going to make 

a few comments.  There are, of course, many factors that are affecting nominal yields.  I think 

the real outlook for 2011 has improved.  That has increased real rates, perhaps substantially, and 

led to some increase in inflation expectations, although that probably is a little bit more minor.  

There has been a reassessment of possible policy paths that could be followed by the Committee 

in the first half of 2011, and there has been an announcement of a major fiscal package, perhaps 

against all odds, and that had a big effect on nominal yields as well. 

An increase in nominal rates would also be associated with the success of asset 

purchases.  If we’re successful, we expect to have some influence on the real economy, which 

would cause real rates to rise, and they could rise in anticipation of those effects.  And we expect 

and hope—or I hope—that inflation expectations will increase, not decrease and continue to go 

December 14, 2010 42 of 127



 

 

 

down towards zero or below zero.  Thus, the very success of the program would put upward 

pressure on nominal rates. 

What do we conclude from this?  A couple of things.  First, I don’t think asset purchases 

of this type are completely neutral, as is suggested by some theories.  Going through these events 

over the last six months has shown that, whatever else is going on, these purchases do have 

major effects in financial markets.  Second, the asset purchase program does put downward 

pressure on nominal yields.  I don’t think it could be any other way for purchases of this size.  

We are a major player in this market.  But we are not targeting a particular rate or set of rates as 

we would under normal interest rate targeting.  So, because we’re not setting a target, and 

because there are many other factors that influence nominal yields, other things can happen.  

And the success of the asset purchase program will indeed put upward pressure on nominal 

yields, even as purchases put downward pressure on those yields.  There’s an old saying in 

monetary policy that looking at nominal yields alone is insufficient for evaluating the impact of 

monetary policy, and I think we have a classic case of that here.  I’ll stop there.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On balance, the outlook for economic growth 

seems a bit better than at our last meeting.  I have been heartened by a few more optimistic 

signals from the incoming data and from my business and community contacts.  In addition, I 

think the prospect of greater near-term fiscal stimulus is a positive development and helps reduce 

uncertainty somewhat. 

Still, in my discussions with contacts, their positive comments continue to have a 

somewhat special and one-off tone, as opposed to reflecting expectations of sustained stronger 

December 14, 2010 43 of 127



 

 

 

growth.  Automakers expect industry sales next year to be about a million units higher than in 

2010, a healthy increase, but perhaps a plateau unless accompanied by a more pronounced 

improvement in household balance sheets and income prospects.  And, currently, adding workers 

is not a priority for the auto sector.  Heavy equipment manufacturers are benefiting from global 

demand for commodities and agricultural products.  But, again, even in this sector that’s doing so 

well, their hiring intentions are minimal.  Clearly, the economic recovery is continuing, but I 

expect we will be dogged into mid-2011 by concerns over whether or not the economy is 

achieving escape velocity. 

Specifically, escape velocity would ensure a self-sustaining growth path that moves us 

more assuredly towards our objectives for inflation and employment without a continuing strong 

push from policy.  Still, I think the economy and policy have made progress since I began 

expressing stronger concerns last August, although the feasibility of the firewall around Spain in 

Nathan’s discussion seemed troubling to me. 

Turning to inflation, I agree with the Tealbook’s analysis that transient price movements 

probably overstate the degree of disinflation over the past several months and that the current 

underlying trend in core PCE inflation is likely closer to 1 percent.  Of course, because monetary 

policy acts with considerable lags regarding inflation, we always need to look at what the 

forward-looking inflation indicators are pointing to.  Here’s my list.  First, considerable research 

has pointed to the inconvenient fact that statistical inflation forecasts have trouble beating a 

simple random walk forecast.  If you accept this finding, then you would say today’s low 

inflation experience is likely to be around for the forecastable future.  Personally, I don’t find 

random walk forecasts to be a constructive perspective when monetary policy is either very 

December 14, 2010 44 of 127



 

 

 

restrictive or highly accommodative, but this finding has been mentioned often in the past, and 

today it implies very low inflation pressures. 

Second, are we currently seeing cost pressures that might be forward indicators of higher 

inflation?  Commodity costs have been in the news a lot.  I recently met with a unique set of 

experts on commodities when I paid a visit to the headquarters of Caterpillar in Peoria.  This is a 

large manufacturing company whose business today is thriving on high global commodity prices 

and the incentives for increased mining that go with those price signals, so they’re really tuned 

into the commodity price picture.  They’re producing a lot of big machines that people are 

buying and shipping around the world.  Nevertheless, their business forecasts for U.S. inflation 

are quite low.  They believe resource slack will prevent high commodity prices from bleeding 

into our top-line inflation numbers.  In addition, it is difficult to see any general upward 

inflationary pressure coming from labor costs in the current environment.  After all, unit labor 

costs have been falling, and unemployment is high, although the coal compensation component 

seems to be rising.  I thought that was one of Dave’s best jokes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A total freeze on coal compensation.  [Laughter.] 

MR. EVANS.  That is austere.  Finally, what about inflation expectations?  Survey 

measures of inflation continue to be low.  TIPS break-even rates and inflation swaps have risen 

over the past several months.  Still, the TIPS increases have only retraced the declines that 

occurred last spring and summer, and back in April before the TIPS decline, the Greenbook—it 

was a Greenbook back then—had a core PCE inflation forecast of 0.9 percent in 2010 and 

beyond.  So, ultimate inflation pressures were quite similar.  In sum, the risks of unacceptably 

higher inflation are small over the relevant policy horizon, and I certainly agree with your 

comments, Mr. Chairman, that we could address any unexpected and damaging inflation 

December 14, 2010 45 of 127



 

 

 

developments quickly should they occur.  However, at the moment I’m much more concerned 

that inflation will continue to run below mandate-consistent levels.  In fact, it would be a very 

positive development if inflation rose more quickly, at least to 2 percent. 

I just wanted to mention that I disagreed with Governor Warsh’s characterization of the 

rise in inflation at the last meeting that he referred to as the nominal revenue channel.  You 

know, that’s more money illusion, and this finding that higher inflation would be beneficial 

comes out of fully optimizing models where there is no money illusion.  By lowering real rates, 

such a development would help us to do better on our employment objective.  It would change 

opportunity costs, and it is difficult to imagine strongly sustained higher inflation without growth 

in broad monetary aggregates, bank lending, and growth more generally.  So, as of now, in my 

judgment, the pace of economic recovery and inflation outlook continues to be too weak to be 

consistent with our mandates for the relevant forecast horizon, but things are better today.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our District is growing and is similar to the 

nation in many, many ways.  Our manufacturing sector has picked up.  Our retailers are also 

seeing a pretty good season so far this year, and the responses we get are that things are steady or 

improving or improving nicely—those kinds of descriptors. 

Two areas in our region, of course, are doing quite well.  One is energy, and the other is 

agriculture.  Energy is quite brisk.  They’re switching their activities from natural gas into oil.  

We’re seeing many more efforts to bring oil out of the ground in the region, and that has put 

forward a little bit of a mini boom in parts of our region, which are actually expanding. 

December 14, 2010 46 of 127



 

 

 

In terms of agriculture, this is now what I would refer to as a boom.  We’re seeing strong 

global demand; obviously there have been some shortages.  Prices are moving up.  Commodity 

prices are moving up well, and farmland values are continuing to climb rapidly.  Across much of 

our area—and I think nationally as well—we are seeing substantial increases in land values over 

a year ago.  In our area, the increase has been about 10 percent from a year ago, although 

obviously, it varies with the quality of the land.  That’s a 60 percent increase since 2005.  Ratios 

of land values to rents—that’s like a price-earnings ratio for us—in some parts of our region are 

now at 25, which surpasses the previous high in the 1970s.  The high value-to-rent ratio implies a 

pretty low cap rate; based on what you assume about continued cash flows coming off that, the 

cap rates move back down to around 3 percent.  When you speak with these individuals about 

their choices, they say, “It’s a lot better than what I can get at a bank,” and they certainly don’t 

want to go into the stock market.  So there’s momentum. 

The next question is:  Who’s lending on this stuff?  Of course, banks are or the Farm 

Credit System, and, at the margin on the properties that are selling, they’re lending about 

70 percent of value, which is an accelerated value.  They’re saying that’s not a problem because 

they’re spreading that against other properties owned, but of course, all the properties are going 

up.  So you get the signal that the loan-to-value ratios are still very modest.  That’s because, of 

course, you’re moving the values up as you move the loan.  So they are increasing their debt 

carry, and they are assuming not the highest prices in the commodities, but what they think is a 

good estimate of an average, which is much higher than historical levels.  So, what do we tell our 

examiners?  Do you look at land values of five years ago and say “this is too big a loan on it” and 

get the blowback from that?  You probably won’t.  So this is going to continue to build, I 

suspect, over time, and it’s a worry of mine. 

December 14, 2010 47 of 127



 

 

 

Now, this is only one sector, I realize.  My question is, given that we’re trying to affect 

asset values, what other assets might we be affecting through our current policies?  The point is 

that the national economy and the local economy are improving only modestly.  I see inflation 

also as very low right now and increasing very modestly over time.  But there is an allocation 

effect now going on as there is an asset value effect that’s going on in different segments of the 

economy.  I think we should be mindful of that this time around.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  After my unscripted reference to pop culture 

at the November meeting, my research director coached me on the importance of staying on 

message.  [Laughter]  I assured him I would do so, but I might have forgotten to disclose that I’d 

be adjusting the messages accordingly. 

For the Twelfth District, the economic news is mostly the same.  The high-tech sector, 

which was hit very hard during the recession, continues to rebound.  Profits at major tech 

companies have improved, and one global online retailer is dramatically increasing its office 

space in the Seattle area.  The San Francisco Fed Tech Pulse Index rose 1 percent in November, 

down from the 1½ percent average monthly increases seen earlier in the year.  Homebuilders in 

the West remain very downbeat.  One business contact said recently the word that best describes 

the homebuilding industry is “miserable,” and, unlike the tech sector, no signs of pent-up 

demand have surfaced.  One change is that retailers seem to be in a better mood.  Our contacts 

tell us that sales were good around Black Friday and thereafter, but they also note that retailers 

were much more aggressive in discounting this year, and, of course, they were open for 

considerably more hours over the Thanksgiving weekend.  So, comparisons with last year may 

exaggerate the underlying trend just a bit. 

December 14, 2010 48 of 127



 

 

 

Turning to the national economy, the incoming data have been favorable.  At the time of 

our last meeting, I was starting to worry that the economy might slow to stall speed, but I’ve 

been somewhat reassured by the recent spending data, which show growth in the second half of 

2010 to be at or perhaps even a bit above trend.  In addition, consumer confidence appears to be 

improving as seen in the latest reading from the Michigan survey, which puts us about back 

where we were in the spring prior to the soft patch.  What’s more, the recently announced fiscal 

package, assuming it becomes law, should provide a healthy boost to household spending next 

year. 

The fiscal situation reminds me of a new piece of apparel that a national clothing retailer 

told us about recently.  Over the past few years, a huge market has developed for a product called 

Spanx—there’s an “x” at the end, not a “k-s”—which are body shaping undergarments for 

women.  This year the product line has been expanded to include men’s Spanx, a tight-fitting 

undershirt that can slim down almost any male figure [laughter]—present company excepted, I 

suspect.  Where am I going with this anecdote?  Well, as I observe reaction to the Deficit 

Commission’s proposal, I can’t help but feel that our country will resort to fiscal Spanx rather 

than a good, old-fashioned diet in addressing our long-term fiscal deficit. 

The recent positive news on the economy has been largely offset by the significant 

tightening of financial conditions over the past month, particularly a jump in real longer-term 

interest rates.  Overall my views on the outlook for growth and employment have not changed 

very much and remain reasonably close to those in the Tealbook.  I expect growth to pick up to 

nearly 4 percent next year and a bit above that in 2012, as uncertainty recedes and confidence 

improves.  But I don’t think we’ll see a surge in spending or hiring any time soon.  A recurring 

theme from our directors has been that no business wants to overcommit at this time.  One even 

December 14, 2010 49 of 127



 

 

 

commented that the near-death experience we recently went through is likely to overshadow any 

expansionary desires for a very long time.  I think the expansion is more likely to play out 

gradually, with sustained growth in household spending slowly chipping away at the reluctance 

of businesses to invest and hire.  Like the Tealbook, I do not anticipate reaching full employment 

until the middle of this decade.  One worrying development in the past month or so has been the 

escalation of the fiscal crisis in Europe.  Although spillovers to the U.S. economy should be 

negligible, there is a risk that the crisis could intensify and spread, with more significant 

consequences for the U.S. economy as discussed in the Tealbook simulations. 

Although I’ve been heartened by recent data on economic activity, the very low readings 

on inflation continue to be worrisome.  No matter how you slice the data, whether CPI or PCE, 

total, core, median, or trimmed mean, inflation is on a clear downward trend, and measures of 

underlying inflation are running below 1 percent.  Many of our business contacts report rising 

prices of materials and imported products, especially from China, which could potentially push 

up inflation here, but the economic climate does not appear to support much pass-through of 

these cost increases.  The prevailing thought from our contacts seem to be that these cost 

increases will just put more pressure on margins for suppliers and retailers rather than lead to 

higher consumer prices. 

Of course, the bigger problem is that we still have significant slack in labor and goods 

markets, putting more downward pressure on wage and price inflation.  Indeed, over the past 

year, unit labor costs fell 1 percent on top of a 2 percent decline over the previous four quarters, 

and I certainly know of at least one sector in the economy that will have zero wage growth next 

year.  Given the importance of labor costs for businesses, this downward momentum should 

offset any upward pressure from commodity and import prices. 

December 14, 2010 50 of 127



 

 

 

Finally, longer-term inflation expectations remain relatively stable.  Taking all of these 

factors together, our inflation forecast is similar to that of the Tealbook, with core PCE price 

inflation bottoming out around its current level, slightly below 1 percent, but, given the persistent 

slack in the economy, the risk of further disinflation down the road remains very real.  Thank 

you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Recent reports from contacts in the Sixth 

District were a little more optimistic about near-term growth prospects compared with what I 

heard going into the November meeting.  As is appropriate for this time of year, we asked a 

number of directors and contacts about their early assessment of the holiday retail picture.  We 

heard that post-Thanksgiving receipts beat retailer expectations, in some cases by a good margin.  

One contact with 85 shopping malls in the Southeast and Midwest said that mall traffic and sales 

through last Thursday were much stronger than expected. 

I spoke a week ago to the CEO of one of the two leading parcel shipping companies, a 

company that claims to touch about 7 percent of the country’s GDP daily.  He said they had 

planned for traffic to be 3 percent over last year, but so far they’re achieving 5 percent with the 

strongest week still ahead.  He also offered the opinion that if the pace of spending and 

accompanying shipping carries into January, inventory shortfalls among his company’s retail 

clients will require a step-up in production. 

Notwithstanding this upbeat information, we came away from our board meetings and 

calls with a sense that very few firms are revising up their 2011 business plans.  Contacts still 

cite a host of uncertainties as justification for their “wait and see” posture regarding new hiring 

and capital spending.  We heard mixed messages, for example, regarding the proposed 

December 14, 2010 51 of 127



 

 

 

investment expensing provision.  One buyer of big-ticket transportation equipment indicated that 

accelerated write-offs would certainly cause his company to shift investment into 2011.  Most 

others, however, said they would base investment decisions on business fundamentals and in 

general had not yet factored any substantial effect of the proposed stimulus into their 2011 

forecast and plans. 

Overall, I saw little in the incoming data and heard little in the input from contacts that 

would require a revision of my November forecast of slightly over 3 percent GDP growth for 

2011.  The basic outlook that most here in the room share—moderate and slightly accelerating 

growth, slowly reducing unemployment, and below desired but gradually rising inflation—still 

seems appropriate. 

In our conversations with contacts over the last two weeks, we probed on the question of 

pass-through of rising commodity prices.  We heard that, for the most part, commodity price 

increases are being absorbed at various stages of supply chains, some of which may be offshore.  

Few firms claimed any pricing power at present.  I think the likelihood of accelerating 

disinflation, tipping into sustained deflation, has come down quite a bit since last summer.  

Measures of inflation expectations have moved back up, and the estimates made by my staff of 

probabilities of CPI deflation over the next five years have moved back down.  I believe the 

inflation risks have become somewhat more balanced. 

As regards the overall balance of risks, I’m not quite ready to abandon the cautious view 

that risks to the downside outweigh those to the upside, but my overall sense of risk has 

definitely been moving in the direction of balance.  That said, I see tail risks as having fattened 

somewhat on the downside.  To back up that statement, I’d cite the European situation and 

renewed pessimism about the residential housing sector.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

December 14, 2010 52 of 127



 

 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our last District survey, which came out in 

late November, showed gains in manufacturing and services but continued weakness in retail.  

Price trend indicators, both current and expected six months ahead, have all moved up notably 

over the last couple of months.  More recent anecdotal reports also suggest that District 

economic conditions are improving but are still weak by historical standards.  For example, 

we’ve seen a few encouraging signs in commercial real estate in the District.  Vacancy rates 

appear to have topped out for office and industrial space, though the picture is mixed for retail 

space, and residential real estate sales are declining, but prices seem to be holding up. 

At the national level, confidence in the economic outlook has picked up noticeably since 

our last meeting.  Perhaps most important is the steady expansion in real personal consumption 

expenditures after they bottomed out in the second quarter of 2009 and increased at an annual 

rate of less than 2 percent over the rest of that year.  Since then the growth rate in consumption 

has steadily risen.  It has averaged more than 3 percent over the last four months.  The gains 

we’ve seen in personal income and the stability of the personal saving rate are also encouraging 

signs.  Of course, the November payroll report was disappointing, but I agree with the Tealbook 

that it seems inconsistent with the broader array of labor market indicators.  On top of that, 

consumer confidence readings suggest a return of some of the outcomes we saw last spring.  So 

unless the holiday season is quite disappointing, I think we should enter the New Year with 

momentum in household spending, and that should help broaden confidence in economic 

prospects. 

The outlook for residential investment still looks bleak to me.  The Tealbook quite 

notably has slashed its forecast for housing starts in light of the large inventory overhang, and I 

December 14, 2010 53 of 127



 

 

 

think they have a more realistic path now.  It must have been difficult to keep econometrically 

based forecasts from returning to recovery patterns much more like history, and I think 

estimating the magnitude of overhang relative to some sort of desirable stock of housing is 

inherently difficult.  So I think they have a more realistic forecast right now. 

Core inflation measures have fallen, certainly, in recent months, but measures of overall 

inflation, which is what we really care about, have moved in the opposite direction recently.  

Moreover, survey measures of inflation expectations remain stable, and TIPS-based measures 

have reversed most of this year’s decline.  As a result, I still think the downside risk to inflation 

is relatively small. 

The Desk added more than $100 billion in Treasuries to the SOMA portfolio since the 

November meeting.  Let me just say that I find it hard to attribute much, if any, of the increase in 

the outlook to the quantitative easing at this point, so I agree with others who have made that 

point.  Part of the way we think about the effect of these purchases involves their effect on the 

yields of the assets we’re buying.  Longer-term rates have moved up notably over the 

intermeeting period, but they declined notably before the last meeting, as President Bullard 

noted, in anticipation of our actions.  As a result, it’s hard to know how many basis points of 

easing we created or saved through this action. 

The other way we think about the effects of asset purchases is in terms of Governor 

Duke’s question from the last meeting, which was, essentially:  What will induce banks to hold a 

higher level of reserves?  Either yields on alternative liquid assets will decrease, or deposits will 

be created through lending or asset acquisition or both.  It’s probably too soon to get a 

quantitative handle on this channel, I think, but it’s interesting to note that our most recent asset 

purchases began in the midst of a modest revival in money growth.  So I think it’s going to be 

December 14, 2010 54 of 127



 

 

 

worthwhile to keep a careful eye on bank balance sheets and monetary aggregates in the months 

ahead. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we 

take 20 minutes? 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we reconvene?  I will turn to the Vice Chairman.  

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I generally agree with the 

sentiment that has been expressed around the table, namely, that the U.S. recovery is picking up 

some momentum and that activity will also be supported next year by the likely shift in fiscal 

policy, so that the expansion does appear to be more sustainable and the downside risks do seem 

to have fallen a bit.  The anecdotal reports that we’ve been getting from both bankers and 

retailers are encouraging, and they suggest that credit availability continues to improve and that 

households are more willing to open up their wallets.  That, of course, was borne out by today’s 

retail sales report. 

However, I think we should be careful about not counting our chickens before they hatch 

for a couple of reasons.  First, as others have noted, we’re actually further away from our dual 

mandate now than we were at the last meeting, with a higher unemployment rate and a lower 

underlying trend for inflation, not just today, but, as President Rosengren pointed out, 

prospectively as well.  Second, there are still plenty of risks out there that could impair economic 

growth.  As David Stockton mentioned, the housing sector is under significant pressure, and 

most house-price indexes are showing renewed weakness.  Nearly 25 percent of those 

households with residential mortgages are under water; that is, the mortgage debt currently owed 

exceeds the current value of the home.  This widespread prevalence of negative equity increases 

December 14, 2010 55 of 127



 

 

 

the likelihood of so-called strategic defaults by households.  Some recent work by Fannie Mae 

shows how serious an issue this could be.  For households with underwater mortgages that are 

delinquent 60 days or more, the fraction of strategic defaulters is larger for those with higher 

FICO scores, not lower FICO scores.  This finding indicates the vulnerability of housing to 

strategic default.  So the fact that tougher underwriting standards have led to higher FICO scores 

among recent vintages of borrowers doesn’t necessarily mean that we’re protected in this regard. 

Also, there are still considerable risks to the macroeconomy stemming from 

developments in the financial sector.  Nathan Sheets laid out the issues in Europe very, very 

well.  To my mind, the European authorities have not yet taken steps to provide clarity about 

what happens in 2013 when the funding from the EFSF expires and the peripheral countries will 

need to regain their access to private markets, nor have they created a firewall around Spain.  I 

think, really, those two steps may ultimately be necessary to stabilize the situation.  The major 

issue in Europe, of course, is the question of who is going to bear the adjustment burdens.  Is it 

the ECB or the EU governments?  Is it the citizens of the weak peripheral countries?  Or is it the 

holders of the bank and sovereign debt?  I think that’s what’s making this crisis very, very 

complicated in terms of how it plays out.  It suggests to me that the crisis will likely continue to 

intensify over time in a very irregular manner, with the required political and fiscal responses 

taking place only after sufficient market turmoil forces the necessary compromises.  This, of 

course, is very dangerous for two reasons.  First, the amount of distress is unlikely to be 

independent of the timing of the interventions—dawdling is likely to lead to worse outcomes 

than earlier intervention.  Second, in the middle of the crisis, it’s hard to reach good decisions, 

and there’s greater risk of mistakes and political miscalculation.  To date, the spillover to the 

U.S. outlook from Europe has been very limited.  However, we can’t rule out the possibility that 

December 14, 2010 56 of 127



 

 

 

developments in Europe could deteriorate, and we could have a wider flight from risk, or that 

developments in Europe could put renewed pressure on our own financial institutions. 

The second important risk worth attention emerges from the municipal bond market.  

Many people, when asked about systemic risk, put the municipal sector high on their list.  This 

has gotten some more attention in recent weeks, as we’ve seen a very sharp rise in municipal 

bond yields.  But this seems to be mostly about higher supply—actual and prospective—rather 

than about investor flight.  The failure of the Congress to extend the Build America Bond 

program is leading to lots of this issuance before the program expires at the end of the year.  The 

demise of this program also implies that the supply of traditional long-dated tax-exempt 

securities is likely to increase substantially next year.  Because tax-exempt yields are driven 

mainly by appetite from the household sector, supply changes have typically had outsized 

impacts on relative yields in this market compared to other markets, such as the Treasury market.  

Although the rise in yield appears to be due mainly to supply effects, this doesn’t mean the 

market is safe from other nasty surprises.  In fact, by focusing more attention on the municipal 

bond market, I think the backup in yields makes the market more sensitive to adverse credit 

events, should those develop.  

Finally, I want to return to something that I’ve been talking about for several months—

the potential for credit rating downgrades of major U.S. financial institutions as the credit rating 

agencies think about the reduction in government support caused by the Dodd-Frank Act.  This 

actually seems to have taken a turn in a more positive direction.  Yesterday, apparently, Standard 

& Poor’s told at least two major firms that their stand-alone ratings would be upgraded by one 

notch.  This means that, if S&P subsequently reduces the government support by a notch, the 

December 14, 2010 57 of 127



 

 

 

firms end up at the same place, and that’s important, because ending up in the same place means 

they would not have their short-term debt ratings downgraded to nonprime. 

S&P also said that it is going to defer any decisions about how the Dodd-Frank Act 

affects the uplift to ratings from the government until January.  So the news is not settled yet.  

It’s unclear whether S&P will treat all the major firms in the same fashion.  But at least in the 

last 24 hours it has taken a turn in a more positive direction.  So there seems to be somewhat less 

risk that we’ll be in a situation where a large securities firm has a short-term credit rating below 

prime.  That’s something that makes me nervous, because no investment bank has been able to 

operate successfully for any extended period of time with a nonprime short-term rating.  So 

we’re not out of the woods yet, but things look a little bit better.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The data we have received since our last 

meeting suggest that the economy is continuing to grow, and the mood among households and 

businesses is improving.  My contacts have been cautious for quite some time.  That hasn’t 

changed, but more seem cautiously optimistic.  Incoming data on retail sales and consumer 

confidence have surprised them and me to the upside.  Consumer spending is hardly exuberant, 

but purchases of durable goods, a typical driver of recovery in the early stages of expansion, 

have picked up some steam, and I consider that encouraging.  Given the exceptionally high ratio 

of household debt to personal income, I continue to think that the deleveraging process has some 

way to run.  But the ratio of debt service to income and the financial obligations ratio have both 

declined substantially, and this may be creating greater latitude for a rebound in discretionary 

spending. 

December 14, 2010 58 of 127



 

 

 

Of course, the performance of the labor market is critical to consumer spending going 

forward, and it is disappointing that unemployment ticked up during the intermeeting period.  

But other labor market indicators—initial claims, hours, and incoming data on hiring and job 

openings—suggest some modest ongoing improvement. 

The fiscal package agreed to last week, if enacted into law, is also a positive for the near-

term outlook.  It should boost growth somewhat during the coming year and diminish the risk 

that fiscal drag could tip the economy back into recession.  All of these factors point to an 

improved near-term outlook and some abatement of downside risk to the economic recovery.  It 

seems likely that these developments account for a portion of the extraordinary backup in 

nominal Treasury and TIPS yields since the November FOMC meeting. 

In spite of the many upside surprises during the intermeeting period, the news has not 

been uniformly upbeat.  Two intermeeting developments that particularly concern me pertain to 

the housing market and the European debt situation.  With respect to housing, as David 

explained, incoming data have been dismal, and, to my mind, they justified the substantial 

downward revision to projected residential investment spending in the current Tealbook.  The 

discouraging tone of recent data accord with the truly downbeat reports we are getting from 

homebuilders.  A group we met with here at the Board noted that prices in most markets have 

declined to the point where they no longer cover construction costs.  So from a supply 

perspective, new homebuilding is largely unprofitable.  Moreover, incoming data suggest that 

house prices remain under continued downward pressure due to the bloated supply of new and 

existing homes for sale, plus the huge shadow inventory reflecting foreclosures and seriously 

delinquent mortgages. 

December 14, 2010 59 of 127



 

 

 

One of the most striking and worrisome revisions in this Tealbook pertains to house 

prices.  A further 8 percent decline in house prices, as Tealbook now assumes, will affect 

consumer spending via wealth effects and negatively affect the ability of households to borrow.  

Such a large decline in house prices will also significantly increase the already large fraction of 

homes that are underwater on their mortgages, likely precipitating additional foreclosures and re-

defaults on modified loans.  Financial institutions remain quite vulnerable to losses related to real 

estate.  Such dynamics could restrict the availability of credit, feeding further house-price 

declines in a worrisome adverse feedback loop. 

Like Nathan, Vice Chairman Dudley, and others, I also see the European debt situation as 

very worrisome and posing significant risk to the recovery.  The crisis has intensified in recent 

weeks.  It now shows signs of spreading beyond Greece and Ireland to Portugal, Spain, and other 

euro-area countries.  Strains have been evident in short-term funding markets.  The pricing of 

sovereign debt suggests that markets now assume that restructuring for some countries, 

particularly Greece, is almost inevitable.  And debt dynamics calculations for Ireland and 

Portugal suggest that the fiscal responses required for these countries to avoid restructuring are, 

frankly, draconian.  Fiscal contraction on the scale needed would severely undermine their 

prospects for economic growth.  Moreover, restoration of growth seems likely to require wage 

cuts to restore competitiveness, and such cuts, if they occur, would make the burden of the debt 

yet more onerous. 

The European response thus far strikes me as inadequate to stem contagion, and I am 

concerned that these developments have the potential to precipitate a broad-based pullback from 

risk-taking, with spillovers into domestic asset prices.  For example, we have seen negative co-

movements between U.S. equity prices and peripheral European CDS premiums in recent weeks, 

December 14, 2010 60 of 127



 

 

 

similar to the pattern that prevailed last spring.  The alternative simulations in the Tealbook 

suggest that an intensification of the crisis could have significant implications for the outlook. 

Finally, turning to inflation, the data on core inflation have once again surprised to the 

downside, and wage increases remain very well contained.  Even if temporary factors are partly 

responsible for the very subdued inflation readings in the past few months, the pace of core 

inflation still seems to be moving downward, and, by any measure, the deceleration is broad-

based. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t think the most important development 

since we last met is the improvement in the real economic data, though that is certainly 

significant.  I also don’t think it’s the continuing strains in Europe, which many of us have talked 

about for a long time, though that also is significant.  I think the most important development 

since we last met is the change, level, and uncertainty with respect to longer-term Treasuries.  

The 10-year Treasury, the benchmark security, seems to have awakened from its slumber, and I 

suspect that we will be talking about the uncertainty in the rate increasingly going forward. 

Now, for those of us who were supportive of the last round of policy action, it is tempting 

to say that all that has happened is all to the good and was perfectly predictable.  For those of us 

who were uncomfortable with our last policy action, it is tempting to ascribe all bad facts and 

circumstances to it.  I think that we all, myself included, need to resist that temptation.  The 

move in Treasuries is difficult to disaggregate, but, in my view, it is most likely a mix of both 

benign and possibly less benign circumstances, and it bears significant watching. 

Let me try to make three objective, dispassionate assessments about why the level and 

uncertainty of long-term Treasuries matters.  First, I think it matters because it is the most 

December 14, 2010 61 of 127



 

 

 

important asset anywhere in the world, and this value, this price, this uncertainty impacts every 

price everywhere in the world.  Second, I think the value of the 10-year Treasury has a 

significant impact on other sovereign costs, particularly other stronger advanced foreign 

economies—I’m thinking about Germany, France, Britain, and others.  There’s a huge 

correlation between movements in our own sovereign rates and theirs.  As we think about the 

funding costs for the periphery, it’s not just the spreads that will bear watching, but also the all-in 

funding costs. 

Third, and probably of most import to all of us around the table, the move in Treasuries 

matters because central banks’ ability to control, to impact, to manipulate, to influence, rates 

along the Treasury curve, now appears more limited than the world had grown accustomed to 

over the course of the last several years.  At least some market participants thought that we 

would be able to have a huge bearing on these rates in the next several years, and I think that 

notion is likely to be revisited in real time.  We can push asset prices around for a while, but 

ultimately markets are going to determine these prices, and, I suspect, in the world of Treasuries, 

markets are increasingly going to be setting those prices, and we will be observing them.  So I 

think it’s that development which bears watching.  Markets and real economic actors will have to 

adjust to the fact that the Fed’s actions are less determinative of this 10-year rate, and it bears 

watching by all of us as we think about policy, both today and in the coming meetings.  Thank 

you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a collection of observations about 

lending.  Starting with commercial lending, banks are seeing some demand in the upper ranges 

of the middle market, but there’s also strong competition in that space.  Overall, deposits remain 

December 14, 2010 62 of 127



 

 

 

high and line utilizations low, indicating low demand over the short term from corporate 

borrowers. 

The Survey of Terms of Business Lending indicates that interest rates have come down 

but that spreads are still unusually wide.  I believe this may be due to the use of interest rate 

floors.  Every community bank I called was using floors on most new and renewed loans, and the 

very wide spreads on smaller loans would indicate that the floors are especially prevalent on 

small business loans.  But even one large bank reported that it used floors and that the larger, 

more complex, credits were the most likely to have those floors.  So with floors around 

5 percent, small business borrowers are likely facing pricing equivalent to a 2 percent fed funds 

rate.  The reporting of small loans to businesses, which is a proxy for small business lending, has 

been changed from annual reporting to quarterly, and we now have the first quarterly results.  

While overall C&I loans declined 1.6 percent, loans to small businesses were down at a 

7.1 percent annual rate.  Small business loan demand is reported to be weak, but a number of 

banks noted that the quality of the applicants is getting a bit stronger.  Weak demand is borne out 

in the NFIB survey, where the percentage of respondents who reported having credit needs has 

drifted down to less than 35 percent, compared with a norm in the low-to-mid 40 percent range. 

On the supply side, staff research shows that growth in small C&I loans, as well as in 

small CRE loans, is significantly lower and, for the most part, negative in banks rated 3, 4, and 5, 

compared with banks rated 1 and 2, even after controlling for bank size.  Timing related to 

government programs is also impacting small business volume.  Bankers are rushing to process 

SBA loans before the 90 percent guarantee and fee waiver programs end on December 31.  In 

contrast, I talked to one banker who is gearing up to exchange TARP funds for the small 

business capital injection program.  He has $80 million in TARP and an $800 million small 

December 14, 2010 63 of 127



 

 

 

business loan portfolio.  He thinks he can make the $80 million in additional loans it will take to 

bring the rate on his capital down to 1 percent, but he knows that he will only get credit for loans 

made after he enters the program, so he’s holding back, waiting for the program rules and 

definitions. 

In consumer lending, strength in auto loans and some final student lending contributed to 

growth in nonrevolving consumer debt, but credit card debt has fallen for a record 

19 consecutive months.  According to staff research, contrary to some theories, consumers are 

not paying down credit cards any faster than normal during an economic downturn.  If anything, 

paydown has been slower than would have been expected.  About a third of the drop in balances 

is due to chargeoffs, and the rest is due to a 10 percent reduction in spending on credit cards, and 

much lower new account solicitation and application volume. 

Overall, mortgage debt is down, but banks seem to be holding more of the origination 

volume on their balance sheets.  One significant player in the mortgage business reported that 

2010 originations were a third of levels at the peak, and his expectations for next year were even 

lower.  Most of the origination volume is refinance, and almost all is supported by one 

government program or another.  Refinance volume fell sharply in recent weeks as rates spiked, 

but even before then only some of the population that can benefit from refinance can qualify for 

the low stated rates.  The reasons they fail, in order of frequency, are: loan-to-value ratios, 

debt-to-income ratios, and credit scores.  Ironically, there’s a big group in the middle that can’t 

get a lower rate through refinance because of one of these factors, but nobody will talk to them 

about a modification because they’re still paying their loans.  On the positive side, originations 

and capacity seem to be coming into better balance, which should lead to better pricing, but even 

December 14, 2010 64 of 127



 

 

 

this is being offset by pricing for higher risk—Freddie Mac recently upped delivery fees for all 

loans with loan-to-value ratios over 70 percent. 

Commercial real estate transactions—that is, sales of properties—have picked up 

recently, although a high proportion is at a nominal loss, indicating distressed sales.  Bankers 

report some slight increase in CRE loan demand, with a few categories actually showing growth, 

in particular, loans to strong borrowers to purchase distressed properties, and a pickup in the 

market for multifamily and hospitality properties.  Fundamentals are stabilizing along a rocky 

bottom, with vacancies beginning to plateau in all property types, rental rates still decreasing but 

at a declining rate, and cap rates improving.  In fact, cap rates are the one area of improvement 

that I hear attributed to LSAP2. 

Investor interest is picking up, as insurance companies are back in the game, and REITs 

are accessing equity and debt markets.  And CMBS issuance might get back to $10 billion this 

year, and three $2 billion deals are already in the pipeline for early next year.  So, overall, credit 

conditions continue to improve slowly. 

In light of the continuing declines in bank lending, I did think it would be useful to step 

back and look at the way balance sheets have changed since the crisis begin.  I asked the staff to 

pull data on changes in aggregate balance sheets from the second quarter of 2008 to the second 

quarter of 2010.  During that time, reserve balances increased $972 billion, but total assets grew 

only a little more than $200 million.  Over the same time, loans decreased about $1.1 trillion.  

But it doesn’t look like the reserves crowded out loans.  The drop-off in loans was greater than 

the amount of additional reserves; in addition to the reserves, there were increases in security 

investments and other assets.  Leverage ratios also do not appear to be binding, indicating that 

capital would allow for more lending.  But what appears to be excess capital could be 

December 14, 2010 65 of 127



 

 

 

precautionary, in case losses turn out to be higher than expected or in anticipation of new capital 

requirements.  Alternatively, it could be capital accumulated for dividends or stock buybacks 

once restrictions are lifted.  Deposit growth was also strong over the period; indeed, core 

deposits rose $1.2 trillion, indicating plenty of liquidity to fund loan growth.  Finally, surveys 

and anecdotes indicate banks had very weak demand from creditworthy borrowers.  Looking at 

the same data on the sources and uses of funds basis is supportive of the story that bankers have 

told me over and over:  Loan demand is weak, deposits are strong, and the yields on alternative 

investments aren’t high enough to make borrowing to fund them attractive. 

Adding together the $1.1 trillion in loan runoff and the $1.2 trillion in core deposit 

growth gave banks collectively $2.3 trillion in funds, a whopping 17½ percent of total assets.  

They invested $1 trillion in reserves, perhaps involuntarily.  Borrowings are also down about 

$1 trillion, two-thirds in large time deposits and one-third in other borrowings. 

It is hard to tell how much of this was borrowing that dried up early in the panic and 

never returned and how much was a deliberate effort by banks, who didn’t see enough profitable 

asset opportunities to justify the cost of borrowing.  The remaining $300 billion was invested in 

securities and other assets.  However, because reserves now take up 8 percent of bank balance 

sheets, they have pushed the fraction of total credit to total bank assets down to levels not seen 

since the early 1980s.  I think it will be instructive to monitor the impact of reserves as we add 

another $600 billion and as loan demand begins to recover.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we’ve had a mixed picture since the 

last meeting, and there have been a lot of those recently.  But this is a different kind of mixed 

picture, one in which the medium-term real economy prospects seem clearly to have improved.  

December 14, 2010 66 of 127



 

 

 

However, at least from my point of view, the downside risks are actually greater now, but they 

are predominantly financial rather than from within the economy itself. 

With respect to the real economy, as many of you have already discussed, things have 

improved, even since the last FOMC meeting.  At that time, I thought we were likely to see only 

tepid growth for some time, although I carefully and, it turns out, wisely hedged by saying that I 

thought that the risks to the real economy were on the upside, particularly if there were some sort 

of unanticipated policy action.  I think we’ve gotten the unanticipated policy action in the form 

of a fiscal package that exceeded general expectations.  They may not be the most efficacious 

additional stimulus measures in the world, but the payroll tax reduction and the full investment 

expensing seem to have had a psychological as well as an anticipated real effect.  Having said 

that, though, I don’t think that the economy is likely to get carried away by optimism any time 

soon, and neither should we. 

And now I have to say in recognition of yet another Navy win over Army, my next 

couple of metaphors will be maritime in nature:  While the instinct to “stay in port” has receded 

considerably, it seems to have been replaced by an “ahead one-third” attitude rather than an “all 

ahead full.”  I think we see that in several respects.  One, the mountains of cash on which major 

corporations are sitting are probably a testament both to a lack of confidence in the payoff from 

new investment and to a desire to self-insure against some economic or financial ill winds that 

might blow across the Atlantic or maybe blow east from some of the states with particular 

financing problems.  Housing, as many of you have pointed out, remains in the doldrums.  Even 

though affordability looks good, demand remains low, probably in part because people are 

waiting to see if prices will go down yet more, and, presumably, also because the rate on 30-year 

fixed-rate mortgages is now increasing. 

December 14, 2010 67 of 127



 

 

 

I focus again, as I often do, on the labor market, in substantial part because it seems hard 

to imagine a sustained or increasingly strong recovery without a significant decrease in 

unemployment, unless you expect another really big spike in productivity, which I don’t think 

anybody is forecasting.  Labor market prospects are obviously mixed—there are more 

encouraging indications in surveys of employers about future hiring plans, but those have yet to 

materialize in strong net hiring.  One useful labor market indicator reflecting continued caution is 

the quit rate, a metric that Janet Yellen has mentioned a number of times when we have talked 

about labor markets.  First, I should note, as Janet has in the past, that a fairly high number of 

quits reflects a healthy labor market, because people have opportunities and they have 

confidence to leave current jobs.  Looking at the JOLTS series, which admittedly has a short life, 

quits had always exceeded layoffs and discharges by a minimum of about 20 percent on average, 

and sometimes by as much as 80 or 90 percent.  That changed in the fall of 2008 when quits 

dropped precipitously.  Late that year, as layoffs rose especially steeply, the two lines crossed on 

the JOLTS graph for the first time.  And then, for nearly a year, layoffs exceeded quits by about 

20 percent, and sometimes more, before quits finally stabilized and layoffs declined in the latter 

part of last year.  Since then, layoffs have been near the levels seen in pre-crisis years.  Quits, on 

the other hand, have only inched up since that time—they’re still nearly 20 percent below 

previous levels and, while the quits rate has now edged ahead of layoffs, it has bounced back and 

forth a little bit over the last six months.  Until the gap grows a good deal more, it will be hard to 

conclude that the labor market is returning to some semblance of normality. 

With respect to the financial risks, I think Bill covered those well.  I would just add a 

couple of things about the euro zone.  I think, first, we’ve seen what happens when you try to do 

crisis management and structural reforms at the same time—you massively confuse investors and 

December 14, 2010 68 of 127



 

 

 

markets, and the Europeans are still paying the price for that.  Second, a number of you have 

mentioned the supposed Spanish firewall.  I, for one, don’t see any evidence that anybody is 

building a firewall.  At this point, it just seems to be a forest fire effort which is spread across all 

of the periphery.  If they really mean to have Spain being a firewall, one would hope to see a 

more concentrated Spain-specific set of measures, internally and externally provided. 

In sum, I will end where I began by saying that, oddly in a sense, the real economy here 

in the United States looks still to be improving only modestly, but with more traction than 

before.  But, somewhat counterintuitively, the downside risks are now greater, in the sense that 

they are external, which is to say, I think, in financial markets.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I believe the state of the recovery is more 

promising than it was at the November FOMC meeting, but I see considerable continuing 

downside risks in terms of both price stability and unemployment.  Information we have received 

for this meeting suggests considerable reasons for optimism.  In particular, private domestic final 

purchases are looking stronger, business purchases of equipment and software are increasing, 

and wholesale inventories and merchandise trade have been marked up.  Since the last meeting, 

equity prices are higher, the yield curve is steeper, and risk spreads have narrowed.  I read these 

financial indicators as implying that financial markets could be recovering from their nervous 

conditions of this spring.  Given these stronger indicators and the additional confidence provided 

by our latest program of large-scale asset purchases and by the likelihood of more fiscal 

stimulus, I think there are some reasons for cautious optimism that the recovery is on a path to 

becoming stronger. 

December 14, 2010 69 of 127



 

 

 

There remain, however, significant downside risks.  Specifically, in addition to the 

continued weak housing market, problems in Europe, and weaker banks, the recent decrease in 

measures of core inflation, I believe, bears continued attention.  While I don’t think that we’re in 

serious danger of deflation, I hope that the continuing decline in core inflation does not 

eventually affect inflation expectations and, thereby, lower wages as well as raise real interest 

rates.  While break-even inflation rates have been stable since our last meeting, professional 

forecasters, as measured by the Livingston survey, appear to be revising their forecasts 

downwards, and the level of economic slack continues to be substantial.  If inflation continues to 

fall, becoming difficult to reverse, inflationary expectations could become unanchored, and I 

worry that rising real interest rates could offset the added monetary and fiscal expansion.  Thank 

you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  And thanks, again, to everyone for 

your thoughtful comments.  Let me try to give, as I often do, a quick summary, and then I’ll add 

just a few extra thoughts.  Relative to November, the data suggest some improvement in the 

near-term outlook.  A moderate and apparently more sustainable recovery is continuing and may 

accelerate in 2011 and 2012.  Indicators of household spending and production have 

strengthened.  The tone of the labor market is somewhat better, notwithstanding the weak 

employment report for November.  However, the news on housing has been disappointing.  The 

fiscal compromise, if enacted, should add to policy stimulus in 2011. 

In the household sector, consumer confidence and spending, including discretionary 

spending, have been stronger, and expectations for holiday sales are reasonably upbeat.  A 

disproportionate amount of the strength in spending may be occurring among high-end 

households.  Purchases of durable goods are up.  The labor market is improving.  Still, the pace 

December 14, 2010 70 of 127



 

 

 

of hiring remains slow, and there is considerable reliance on part-time and temporary workers, 

and quits remain low.  Deleveraging in the household sector is continuing, but lower house 

prices are reducing household wealth and could be a negative for spending as well as for bank 

balance sheets and credit extension.  Nearly 25 percent of households are underwater on their 

mortgages, increasing the risk of defaults and foreclosures, and, consequently, further declines in 

house prices. 

Employers are more optimistic about sales and growth but still remain, on the whole, 

somewhat cautious about hiring and investment, although some around the table reported 

improvements on that dimension as well.  Uncertainty about the durability of the recovery and 

about policy, including health care policy, remains an issue.  Manufacturing output is expanding, 

and exports are stronger.  As usual, some industries are doing relatively well, including energy, 

agriculture, and transportation excluding rail.  Construction remains very weak, but high-tech is 

showing signs of recovery. 

Financial conditions during the intermeeting period have been mixed and include some 

simmering risks.  Importantly, there has been a significant backup in longer-term rates arising 

from a number of factors.  However, this development is not inconsistent with our asset 

purchases having been effective in the August–November period.  European sovereign banking 

problems have created significant uncertainties, and these problems could be transmitted to the 

United States via money market funds, domestic banks, or changes in risk aversion.  Burden-

sharing remains the persistent issue in Europe, which argues against early resolution of the issue.  

Bank lending and loan demand, especially by small businesses, generally remain weak, though 

there are some exceptions, including nonrevolving consumer credit.  Mortgage refinancing has 

been limited by tight terms and conditions.  Merger and acquisition activity is up, deposit growth 

December 14, 2010 71 of 127



 

 

 

is strong, but many banks remain low-rated and face challenges in commercial real estate and 

elsewhere.  Rising agricultural land prices may indicate broader concerns about asset valuations.  

The fiscal situation, at the federal and the state and local levels, may ultimately pose significant 

financial risks, including near-term issues with municipal bonds. 

Finally, core inflation measures continue to drift down with the slowdown in price 

increases quite well spread across categories of goods and services and across different inflation 

measures.  Firms do not perceive much pricing power.  Increased energy and commodity costs 

are substantially offset by lower labor costs.  Inflation breakeven rates have risen in recent 

months, but private sector forecasts and surveys suggest reasonable underlying stability and 

inflation expectations at levels close to the Committee’s objectives.  Participants’ views on the 

outlook for inflation and inflation risks for the medium term remain somewhat diverse.  Some 

expect inflation to pick up gradually as the economy strengthens, while others still see downside 

risks.  Difficulties in measuring slack and in beating the random walk forecast make inflation 

predictions difficult.  Overall, though, deflation risk seems to have receded somewhat since the 

summer. 

Comments?  [No response]  Again, thank you for the very useful discussion, which I 

think was very balanced and very appropriate.  Let me add just a few thoughts.  As the Vice 

Chairman pointed out, on a headline basis we are a little further from our objectives, in the sense 

that unemployment is higher and core inflation, at least, is lower.  That being said, I agree with 

the thrust of the comments around the table that the intermeeting data were moderately positive 

for the near-term outlook.  For example, in the labor market, even though we saw a weak job 

growth number for November, we’ve also seen declines in UI claims, increases in vacancies and 

hiring plans, reductions in layoffs and discharges, increased work weeks, some decline in long-

December 14, 2010 72 of 127



 

 

 

term unemployment, better surveys, and so on.  So there are a number and range of indicators 

suggesting a somewhat stronger and more upbeat situation in labor markets.  In sum, then, we’ve 

had some improvement in the near-term outlook. 

As we take comfort from that and feel more comfortable with our forecast, we should at 

the same time keep in mind what a deep hole we’re in.  The unemployment rate is, after all, 

9.8 percent, which is 0.3 percentage point higher than it was in June 2009 when the recession 

officially ended.  A remarkable statistic, which I’ve mentioned in these meetings before, is the 

magnitude of the decline in total hours worked, which is a measure that many business cycle 

theorists rely on.  From peak to trough, total hours worked in this recession dropped 7.3 percent, 

which is about two and a half times the decline in the 1981–1982 recession.  That number shows 

that labor input contracted at more and more margins than in previous recessions.  We have so 

far recovered less than a quarter of that loss. 

Another indicator of the tremendous decline in labor input is the employment-to-

population ratio, which has fallen from 63 percent to 58 percent of the relevant population, about 

a 7 percent decline—not percentage points but percent.  And that low point was in October of 

2010.  We have not made any progress in that particular statistic.  Participation rates, in 

particular, and employment-to-population ratios are particularly discouraging among younger 

and more disadvantaged groups.  For example, young people between the ages of 16 and 24, 

during the strong growth of the late 1990s, had about a 60 percent employment-to-population 

ratio, and now it’s 45 percent; the employment-to-population ratio for teenagers is now 

27 percent, a very significant decline from earlier numbers. 

So, there are encouraging signs for which we should be grateful.  That gives me more 

confidence that the recovery is proceeding, notwithstanding some of the downside risks, 

December 14, 2010 73 of 127



 

 

 

particularly financial, that have been noted.  But, again, we are starting from a very deep hole, 

and no one around the table that I heard is suggesting that we’ll be seeing rapid declines in 

unemployment.  Rather, our hope is that economic growth will be sufficient to begin, at least, to 

set unemployment in the right direction. 

All that being said, I think that we still have risks in both directions on the economic 

growth front.  I’m sure many of you around the table were here in the middle of 2003 when, after 

nearly two years of almost no progress from the 2001 recession, practically out of the blue in the 

third quarter of 2003 we had a 7 percent real growth rate followed by almost a 4 percent growth 

rate in the fourth quarter.  The factors leading up to that were increasing confidence, sustained 

monetary policy support, and a sense among producers that they were running out of room to 

increase productivity gains.  Suddenly, that all came together, and we began to see some 

significant progress, although hiring did lag economic growth by several quarters.  Therefore, it’s 

entirely possible that we will see some stronger quarters going forward.  However, we still 

remain close to the break-even rate, which I think of as the escape velocity of 2½ to 3 percent or 

so.  Given the risks that still exist in the banking sector in Europe and so on, we can’t rule out the 

possibility that we’ll fall back and suffer a further slowdown in growth. 

On the inflation side, I don’t have much to add.  I think inflation remains quite well 

contained, and, indeed, if anything, the risks are still to the downside.  Our LSAP program has 

been successful in raising inflation expectations and moderating the fear of deflation, which is a 

good thing.  I think that’s one of the reasons that confidence is better.  The one issue that we had 

been concerned about when we discussed LSAPs last time was commodity prices, and 

commodity prices are up somewhat.  But I have two observations on that.  The first is that high 

commodity prices have not been associated with a dollar decline—they mostly reflect relative 

December 14, 2010 74 of 127



 

 

 

price changes and changes in real conditions.  Evidence for that, the second observation, is that 

futures prices for oil and many other commodities have gone into backwardation, meaning that 

the expectation is that prices will be flat or down in the next year or so. 

To summarize, then, the broad contours of the outlook have not changed very much.  

Although I think we have somewhat more confidence in near-term growth, we are starting from a 

very deep hole, and we remain far from our objectives in terms of policy. 

I’d like to add a couple of comments about the assessment of the LSAPs so far.  I agree 

with Governor Warsh that judgments at this point are very premature, and it will be quite a bit of 

time before we can say anything very definitive.  Nonetheless, I agree with President Bullard that 

the best assessment of the evolution of financial conditions between the end of August and our 

last meeting has to involve a certain amount of monetary stimulus, and that includes the behavior 

of real rates, the dollar, the stock market, yields, spreads, etc.  Again, I think it’s reasonable to 

attribute some of that to the markets’ anticipation of our actions, and, in turn, to their anticipation 

of some improvement in the outlook due to those changes in policy support. 

That being said, I would disagree with those who might suggest that we are in an 

excessively accommodative position.  There are many different ways to measure policy 

accommodation, and, as Milton Friedman taught us, low nominal interest rates are only one 

indicator of policy accommodation.  We have, of course, tried to do policy simulations, using 

policy rules, and the like.  As President Kocherlakota pointed out, those depend on measured 

gaps, which are difficult to measure, so they have to be taken with a grain of salt.  However, our 

optimal policy simulation still suggests that we’re considerably above where optimal policy 

would be in the absence of the zero bound.  A simpler indicator—the real short rate—has risen 

by about a point and a half since December 2008, as we’ve been pinned at zero and as inflation 

December 14, 2010 75 of 127



 

 

 

has come down by about a point and a half.  An indicator that I take to be important is nominal 

GDP growth—it was less than 1 percent in 2009 and is about 4 percent this year, and the 

Tealbook predicts it to be 4.7 percent next year.  It is very hard for me to imagine that we can 

have both a strong recovery and an inflation risk at the same time that nominal GDP growth is so 

constrained.  I put less weight on monetary aggregates.  I think they are somewhat unreliable, 

given the changes in velocity.  Still, M2 growth in 2010 is predicted to be about 3 percent, and 

for next year about 1½ percent according to the Tealbook.  And then, of course, again, we see 

what is happening to inflation and inflation expectations. 

Therefore, broadly speaking, given the depth of the recession and given how far we have 

to go, I think the evidence at least moderately favors the view that policy is not too 

accommodative, but that, to the extent it is accommodative, it has been somewhat successful in 

advancing our objectives. 

When we discussed this policy last time, I promised we would continue to monitor the 

side effects—I know that has been a particular concern of President Hoenig.  I think we need to 

keep doing that.  I didn’t mention that, as usual, we circulated the financial stability memos prior 

to the meeting, and we have been having regular meetings and discussions of financial stability.  

Notwithstanding the point about land prices, there do not seem to be, in my judgment, any large 

growing imbalances on the financial stability side, but that’s obviously something we have to 

keep looking at.  Inflation expectations remain about where they should be, and the dollar has not 

shown any indication of sharp decline.  Again, I feel reasonably comfortable with the action that 

we took.  Notwithstanding the improvement in the outlook, I think that it was the right decision 

and that it remains appropriate given the depth of the decline in output and hours and the 

uncertainties that we still face going forward. 

December 14, 2010 76 of 127



 

 

 

Let me stop there and turn to Bill English, who will introduce the policy go-round. 

MR. ENGLISH.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the package 

labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”  The 

package includes the four draft policy statements and the associated draft directives.  

The changes to the statements that were distributed over the weekend have been 

incorporated into this package; so the language marked in red now denotes changes 

relative to the November statement. 

 

 

 

We have provided you with three alternative statements, A through C, that are 

similar in structure to the statement issued in November but that vary with regard to 

the size of the intended increase in the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings—

$600 billion, as in November, under alternative B, $800 billion under alternative A, 

and $400 billion under alternative C.  The staff estimates that the $200 billion 

increment employed between these alternatives would likely have macroeconomic 

effects broadly similar to those associated with a 25 basis point change in the federal 

funds rate target if the target rate were not at its effective lower bound.  The final 

statement, alternative D, is quite different; in that case, the Committee would 

immediately cease adding to its securities holdings and would begin laying the 

groundwork for an exit from the current extraordinary degree of policy 

accommodation. 

Turning first to alternative B, on page 3, the Committee may think that it is 

appropriate to continue with the asset purchase program announced in November in 

order to strengthen the recovery and move inflation back toward levels that it sees as 

consistent with its dual mandate.  Such a decision might reflect, in part, a desire to 

show a steady hand on policy and to await more information on economic and 

financial developments before making an adjustment.  In addition, choice of this 

alternative would presumably continue to reflect three judgments:  First, despite the 

somewhat better economic data and the proposed fiscal agreement, that the economic 

recovery is not likely to be sufficiently strong to bring down unemployment at a 

satisfactory rate; second, that additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities 

will help support the recovery and move the unemployment and inflation rates toward 

the Committee’s objectives; and third, that the costs of additional purchases are not 

sufficient to outweigh those benefits. 

Under this alternative, the changes from the November statement are relatively 

minor.  In the first paragraph, they reflect the somewhat stronger growth now seen for 

the second half of this year, the ongoing weakness in the housing sector, and the 

continued downtrend in inflation.  In the third paragraph, the changes that we 

distributed Sunday were intended to make clear that the policy decision at this 

meeting was a routine update and restatement of the policy adopted in November.  

Other than that, the statement is virtually unchanged; it retains the language about 

“disappointingly slow” progress toward the Committee’s objectives, how “the 

                                                 
2 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

December 14, 2010 77 of 127



 

 

 

Committee will regularly review” the asset purchase program, and the anticipation 

that “exceptionally low” funds rates will be appropriate for an “extended period.” 

 

 

 

 

 

Market participants generally expect today’s statement to update the Committee’s 

views on the economic outlook and to make no change to the asset purchase program 

announced in November.  Thus, a statement along the lines of alternative B would 

probably have little effect on asset prices. 

The Committee may be concerned, however, that the run-up in longer-term 

interest rates over the intermeeting period could damp household and business 

spending significantly, and that the proposed fiscal agreement is likely to have only a 

modest and temporary effect on economic activity.  If so, members might be inclined 

to increase the size of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by a total of 

$800 billion—$200 billion more than announced in November, as in alternative A, 

page 2.  Even if members think that the economic outlook improved noticeably over 

the period, they may still anticipate that unemployment will decline only very 

gradually.  Moreover, they may be concerned that underlying inflation has continued 

to trend downward, heightening the risk that adverse shocks could lead to deflation 

and a protracted period of extremely poor economic performance. 

The description of the economy under alternative A would be quite similar to that 

under alternative B.  But the second paragraph would note that measures of 

underlying inflation are “low,” not just “somewhat low,” and that progress towards 

the Committee’s objectives “remains disappointingly slow.”  The third paragraph 

would note the larger increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio intended under this 

alternative.  And the fourth paragraph would provide more explicit forward guidance 

about the federal funds rate, indicating that the Committee anticipates economic 

conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at 

least through mid-2012.  Given the rise in market-based measures of the expected 

path for the federal funds rate and the apparent increase in uncertainty about future 

short-term interest rates, the firmer guidance included in alternative A could be seen 

as an effort to better align the markets’ policy expectations with those of the 

Committee.  Of course, this change in the forward guidance could be combined with 

one of the other alternatives as well. 

A decision at this meeting to increase further the intended size of the Federal 

Reserve’s securities holdings would come as a surprise to market participants.  

Combined with the strengthened forward guidance in paragraph 4, this announcement 

would promote a downward shift in the expected path of the federal funds rate and a 

reduction in longer-term interest rates.  Stock prices would likely rise, and the foreign 

exchange value of the dollar would likely decline.  These effects could be sizable, as 

market participants would likely read this decision as indicating a greater willingness 

on the part of the Committee to use asset purchases to provide stimulus than had been 

anticipated. 

December 14, 2010 78 of 127



 

 

 

The Committee may have read the incoming data over the intermeeting period, as 

well as the proposed fiscal agreement, as suggesting a significantly stronger outlook 

for economic growth and employment and a reduced risk of further declines in 

inflation.  If so, members may want to reduce the intended size of the SOMA 

portfolio, as in alternative C, page 4.  Indeed, if, in November, members had thought 

that the decision to add $600 billion was a close call, then even a modest 

improvement in the outlook could lead the Committee to mark down its assessment of 

the optimal size of the program at this meeting.  Moreover, a slower pace of 

purchases could be seen as attractive because it would give the Committee a longer 

period during which it could adjust the size of the program in response to incoming 

information on economic and financial conditions before the purchase program is 

completed. 

 

 

 

 

 

A decision to slow the pace and reduce the intended size of the Committee’s 

securities purchases at this meeting would come as a surprise to market participants.  

The result would likely be a further increase in longer-term interest rates, lower stock 

prices, and an increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  These movements 

could well be sizable, given the sensitivity that the market has shown over the 

intermeeting period to prospects for asset purchases. 

Finally, the Committee may feel that, with the economic recovery continuing, and 

perhaps even strengthening, further monetary stimulus is likely to have costs that 

outweigh its benefits.  In that case, members might immediately stop adding to the 

Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio and signal a less accommodative policy path in 

the future, as in alternative D, page 5.  That approach could seem particularly 

appropriate if members judged that much of the current elevated level of 

unemployment reflects unavoidable inertia in the reallocation of labor across sectors 

and regions, and so cannot be effectively addressed by additional monetary stimulus.  

In addition, some members may also be concerned that continued extraordinary 

policy accommodation likely will lead to the development of costly macroeconomic 

or financial imbalances. 

The first paragraph of the statement for alternative D notes that the recovery is 

proceeding and that the Committee expects a gradual return to higher levels of 

resource utilization in a context of price stability.  The second paragraph states that 

the Committee decided to discontinue the asset purchase program announced in 

November and suggests that the reinvestment policy could be changed soon as well.  

Paragraph three revises the forward guidance for the federal funds rate to indicate an 

earlier increase in short-term interest rates, and the final paragraph uses more neutral 

language to describe the Committee’s possible actions going forward. 

An announcement along the lines of alternative D would come as a very 

substantial surprise to market participants.  Interest rates would rise significantly 

across the yield curve, equity prices would fall sharply, and the dollar would 

appreciate. 

December 14, 2010 79 of 127



 

 

 

Draft directives for the four alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 10 of 

your handout.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That concludes my prepared remarks. 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Bill?  President 

Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Bill, looking at alternative A, is it your sense—and I don’t want to 

put words in your mouth—that the market might see this as a sequence of steps? 

MR. ENGLISH.  I’m not sure they’d see it as a sequence of steps, but I think they would 

see it as certainly opening the door to additional increases later on. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  [No response]  Seeing none, we’ll start 

the second go-round.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  With our 

announcement of the large-scale asset purchase last month, and with some additional fiscal 

stimulus likely to be approved before the end of the year, this is probably an appropriate time to 

assess the impact of these actions and to gauge whether the slow recovery embedded in most of 

our forecasts unfolds as expected.  With little change to our forecast, which envisions substantial 

misses on both elements of our mandate through 2012 and beyond, it is difficult to imagine why 

we would not purchase all $600 billion of government securities.  Moreover, I remain concerned 

that disinflationary pressures may not abate quickly given the significant excess capacity in the 

economy and given that the recovery, such as we have experienced it to date, remains quite 

fragile.  With core inflation estimates currently getting close to estimates of the inflation bias, I 

can easily envision circumstances in which we would want to expand our large-scale asset 

purchases next year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

December 14, 2010 80 of 127



 

 

 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support alternative B.  I believe 

some patience in letting the effects of the new LSAP materialize is warranted.  I would also say 

that in my view the reversal of the summer’s downward trend in longer-term inflation 

expectations represents an early sign of the success of our current policy course. 

Though I don’t feel any adjustment of policy is needed at this juncture, and though I am 

comfortable with the statement language as presented, I would favor in the coming meetings a 

more thorough discussion of the broad policy framework the Committee believes it has adopted 

and how it should be conveyed in the statements going forward.  In that regard, I would like to 

comment for a second in more detail about the language in alternatives A and C.  Like others on 

the Committee, I think the policy concern of the moment is communication.  The reason I asked 

Bill English the question about the $200 billion change signaling potentially a sequence of 

adjustments on a more open-ended path is that it strikes me that A and C could be interpreted as 

a first step in a sequence.  In that light, the language seems to signal a move toward an approach 

to policy that resembles the funds rate targeting approach when the zero lower bound did not 

pertain.  In alternative A, for example, it has already been mentioned that an additional 

$200 billion might be viewed as roughly equivalent to a 25 basis point cut in the fed funds rate. 

In my mind, this asset purchase analogue to funds rate targeting adds two characteristics 

that the Committee might consider beginning to convey in statements.  First, a sequence of 

similar moves is likely unless economic conditions change in some significant way.  And, 

second, the total value to which the sequence of moves accumulates is left unstated, because that 

quantity is conditional on economic conditions.  If this is not the policy framework we intend to 

communicate, then the language needs to be carefully constructed to avoid any confusion about 

our policy strategy.  So I’d like to advocate that, whatever action we take next on the asset 

December 14, 2010 81 of 127



 

 

 

purchase program, we convey it choosing language that more openly reflects a deliberate 

Committee choice about our policymaking framework for the foreseeable future.  I hope, 

therefore, that at the next meeting we might devote a little time to discussion of our policy 

framework options and the content of communications that would convey them and support the 

effectiveness of the chosen approach.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, by “framework” are you thinking about 

the broader issues we talked about in the teleconference, like an inflation target?  Or do you have 

a more narrow idea?  

MR. LOCKHART.  I have, in some respects, a more narrow idea.  I think some of the 

debate over time has been about a discretionary versus rules-based approach, so it’s that tension 

that I have in mind.  To explain what I mean, I describe our approach today as involving 

meeting-by-meeting reviews that result in decisions around a fairly large asset purchase program 

that is closed-ended, in the sense that a final cumulative target for purchases is explicitly stated.  

In contrast, it has been suggested before that the Committee adopt an incremental approach with 

the cumulative purchase target left open.  So that’s what I am trying to convey. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I understand.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can accept “no change” in policy at this 

time as reflected in alternative B.  In my remarks before this Committee six weeks ago, I 

expressed reservations about embarking on a second round of long-term asset purchases.  A 

significant concern was, and it continues to be, in my mind, that the benefit of further LSAPs is 

likely to be too small to justify the cost and the risk associated with further expansion of the size 

of our balance sheet.  While I still hold that view, it would be difficult to reverse course at this 

December 14, 2010 82 of 127



 

 

 

juncture.  However, I do take seriously the Committee’s promise to reevaluate our policy on a 

regular basis and to adjust it as appropriate in the coming months. 

I would like to take this opportunity to discuss briefly how I think about evaluating the 

LSAP program going forward.  First and foremost, I would like to reemphasize that there are 

significant economic and political risks that stem from the inflated size of our SOMA balance 

sheet.  The economic risk is that we may find it harder to control inflationary expectations when 

the economy goes into full recovery mode and we have possibly upward of $1.5 to $2 trillion of 

excess reserves sloshing around in the banking system.  Our reserve-draining tools are untested 

for large operations, and I’m concerned that they may not be as effective as we currently 

anticipate.  I continue to believe that asset sales will need to play a significant role in our exit, 

but I’m concerned that political criticisms will make both sales and increases in interest rates 

difficult to execute in a timely fashion, thus increasing the risks of falling behind the curve.  

Moreover, by increasing the amount of excess reserves by about 50 percent, we increase the risks 

of falling behind the curve. 

To be clear about what political criticisms I’m worried about, consider the consequence 

of raising interest on reserves.  With $1.5 trillion of excess reserves, a 100 basis point increase in 

the IOER rate, which could easily occur over the course of a year sometime in the future, 

represents a transfer of about $15 billion from the U.S. Treasury to the banking system.  At a 

time when the government faces large deficits and the Fed is already vulnerable to intense 

criticism regarding its treatment of the financial sector, I’m concerned that this redistribution will 

lead to accusations that the Fed is continuing taxpayer bailouts of our largest banks.  Such 

criticism, I fear, will find further ground because the volume of excess reserves is highly skewed 

towards a few of the largest institutions.  This potentially politically unpopular redistribution will 

December 14, 2010 83 of 127



 

 

 

also happen as we use our reserve management tools when we have to pay banks more in IOER 

to sequester the reserves using reverse repos or term deposits.  Of course, this does not mean that 

we should back away from using these tools, and I believe we should use them when the time 

comes, but I think we must be cognizant of the potential cost, namely, the risk to the institution 

and our independence of managing such an overly large balance sheet going forward. 

The key challenge, therefore, is not whether we can raise interest rates in draining 

reserves, but whether we’ll be willing to do so at the appropriate time.  Will we be reluctant to 

act out of fear of criticisms that might endanger our independence?  Of course, that’s not the 

language we’ll use, but we’ll say we choose to delay because of headwinds, a fragile economy, 

and this will lead to a prolonged “wait and see” attitude by the Committee and its approach to 

policies, and we will risk acting too late.  If we do fall behind the curve, we may find ourselves 

needing to reduce the size of our balance sheet very rapidly to contain inflationary expectations.  

This may necessitate a large increase in real interest rates with potentially negative effects on 

real activity and rising inflation.  At the end of the day, we will have contributed to greater, not 

less, instability in the economy. 

Given these concerns, I strongly believe that the economic forecast remains similar to 

what the December Tealbook looks like.  Our goal should be to implement orderly reductions in 

the sizes of our balance sheets sooner rather than later.  Given our current forecast, this makes 

me less inclined to support policy accommodations that involve adding to our already swollen 

balance sheet and more inclined to support recommendations that involve reducing the pace of 

LSAPs and ultimately resulting in the sale of assets. 

That said, I wish to reiterate my remarks from six weeks ago regarding the best way to 

manage our LSAP program.  First, we need to be clear about the expected transmission 

December 14, 2010 84 of 127



 

 

 

mechanisms with these purchases.  In my view, the main impact we seek is on inflationary 

expectations and real interest rates.  Yet our communication does not distinguish between real 

and nominal interest rates in the long-term Treasuries, and we continue to tie the effectiveness of 

LSAP to near-term paths and the unemployment rate.  We know very little about how any given 

LSAP purchases affect demand and supply conditions in the labor market.  By not being clear 

about what we expect LSAP to accomplish, I think we risk damaging our credibility.  Second, 

we need to convey what we’re conditioning the LSAP policy on.  I worry that the tone and 

emphasis of our language and our communications more generally may ultimately back us into a 

corner.  We seem to be increasingly stressing the level of the unemployment rate as the most 

important factor determining policy. 

If we shift our focus from the level of unemployment to changes in it, that would be an 

improvement.  But we still seem to be suddenly deemphasizing real economic growth and 

inflation or inflation expectations as important conditioning variables for policy.  This shift, I 

believe, is subtle but potentially dangerous.  It is a mistake because it risks creating the 

expectation that the Committee will delay tightening until the unemployment rate achieves some 

desirable level.  That would make it even more difficult for us to act in a timely manner. 

So I’ll be focusing going forward on improving economic growth rates of real GDP as 

well as changes in the unemployment rate, not the levels of these variables.  Many of us around 

this table have noted previously that we will have to begin to withdraw accommodation well 

before unemployment reaches acceptable levels or the perceived output gaps are closed.  Let’s 

not let subtle changes in our language make that task any more difficult than it will already be. 

Finally, I would strongly advocate that we revisit our earlier discussions regarding exit 

strategies.  If fully carried out, LSAP2 will increase reserves by about 50 percent, which is a 

December 14, 2010 85 of 127



 

 

 

pretty big increase.  I think we need to know before it’s time to begin the exit if these additional 

reserves will have any material consequence for how fast we will need to sell, or will be able to 

sell, assets or raise the funds rates and what we anticipate the consequences of those actions will 

be.  We had a very fruitful discussion about this earlier this year, and I think revisiting that 

discussion in light of the expanded balance sheet could be a useful exercise.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I still oppose the asset purchase program we 

decided on at the last meeting.  So I personally would favor scaling the program back as in 

alternative C.  However, I can understand why those who supported the asset purchase program 

at our November meeting would be reluctant to back off right now.  The economic outlook has 

improved somewhat since the last meeting, but probably not enough to convince many of you to 

switch camps.  So I won’t bother trying to persuade you to do so. 

What I would like to do is to make some comments in anticipation of discussions we may 

face at upcoming meetings in the new year in light of what’s happened in the last couple of 

weeks to the long rate, and this is by way commenting on essentially our reaction function.  An 

intermediate objective of our asset purchases was to reduce longer-term rates.  So the recent 

increase in those rates presents us with something of a problem, which we may face fairly often 

going forward, namely, how should we react to increases in long rates.  The answer depends on 

just why long rates go up, obviously.  As a general matter, if long rates are driven up by a rise in 

inflation expectations to levels above those consistent with price stability, I think we would all 

agree as a matter of principle that monetary policy should shift to a less accommodative stance.  

In the present case, obviously, the rise in nominal Treasury yields since the November FOMC 

December 14, 2010 86 of 127



 

 

 

meeting has been virtually all real.  Inflation expectations haven’t risen much over that time 

frame, although they did rise between September and November. 

If long rates are driven up instead by a significant strengthening in the economic outlook, 

we should applaud that strength and simply point out that higher expected growth requires higher 

real interest rates.  If we got enough strengthening, that would indicate that monetary stimulus 

should be scaled back, but, in any case, I don’t see a reason why additional economic strength 

would warrant additional stimulus.  As I said before, I think the strengthening in the outlook has 

been modest so far.  So it is unlikely to have been the only reason for the run-up in yields. 

A third possibility is a little more disturbing, and it is that long rates are driven up by 

increasing fears about long-run fiscal balance, in other words, that future debt issues are expected 

to crowd out private investment and drive up real rates.  The rate response to the announcement 

of the tax deal certainly suggests that anticipated fiscal implications could have contributed to the 

recent rate increases.  In this case it would be clearly inappropriate for us to try to counteract the 

increase in rates with an expansion in our purchase plans or by avoiding a reduction in our 

purchase plans that we would otherwise have been inclined to make. 

Now, I believe we would want to be clear that we will not alter policy to accommodate a 

deficit-driven increase in Treasury rates.  I think there are dangers in the other direction, as well.  

In the perhaps unlikely event that the Congress and the Administration move forward next year 

to substantially reduce the path of future federal deficits, we may be pressured to keep federal 

financing costs down.  Moderate long-term interest rates, after all, are one of our three supposed 

mandates.  Obviously, we would want to resist that, but we could find ourselves being perceived 

as thwarting the Congress’s attempts to resolve the nation’s fiscal problems. 

December 14, 2010 87 of 127



 

 

 

I want to point out that the broader point is essentially the one that Eric Leeper was 

making at the Jackson Hole conference.  Eric and Chris Sims and many others have been making 

the same point for many, many years, and it’s about the danger of letting monetary policy slide 

into a stance of passively accommodating fiscal policy, which, in our current case, is at 

significant risk of being dysfunctional.  Eric Leeper argued that even before we switch to a sort 

of passive mode, expectations that such a switch might occur in the near future or even several 

years down the road could well have inflationary consequences today.  Indeed, the story of 

monetary policy in the late 1960s, a period when inflation drifted upward unchecked, is largely 

about monetary policy becoming subservient to fiscal policy.  I think this could be a real problem 

for us soon if the public perception of a politically weakened Fed leads markets to question our 

willingness to act independently of fiscal policy.  I know these dangers are well understood by 

this Committee, but I think it’s going to be useful to try and anticipate how we would respond 

publicly should that challenge face us in the future.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you for the comment.  I think I’m being only partly 

facetious if I reply to you and President Plosser that if our goal is to curry political favor, we’re 

not doing a very damned good job of it.  [Laughter]  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have argued that the financial market 

effects of asset purchases were substantial prior to the November meeting.  I expect that the 

effects on real variables, such as consumption and investment, will follow with a lag of one-half 

to one year.  This would be similar to the real effects of monetary policy easing estimated, for 

instance, by Frank Smets and Raf Wouters, or possibly Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans.  The 

2011 outlook is indeed improving, but it’s too early to come to any policy conclusion based on 

that.  Inflation expectations have increased, according to the five-year TIPS measures, as many 

December 14, 2010 88 of 127



 

 

 

have discussed in the run-up to the November meeting, and remain higher today than they were 

during the summer.  One thing about the five-year measure is that I think we should be able to hit 

our implicit inflation target over a period as long as five years—that has usually been a goal of 

the Committee, so I think that’s a reasonable expectation. 

Still, actual core inflation measures are low, as many have pointed out—measured from 

one year ago, nearly all inflation measures are below 1 percent.  This is a concern to me—I 

would like to see this disinflation trend turn around.  Until it does, I would advise remaining with 

the current course of asset purchases.  Therefore, for today I support alternative B.  I suggest one 

minor change.  I would omit, as I have argued before, explicit reference to the $600 billion 

figure.  We could interpret the $600 billion as a form of forward guidance based on current 

forecasts of the Committee, but I think it’s an inferior way to give forward guidance and 

unnecessary.  I think that a big figure like that lumps us in with other types of stimulus programs 

that have been enacted over the last couple of years, when, in fact, this is ordinary monetary 

policy, the purchase and sale of Treasury securities.  So instead I would simply state that the 

pace of purchases would be at $75 billion per month and that we are likely to continue this pace 

of purchases through the second quarter of 2011, and then I would let the financial markets do 

the math—they’re supposedly good at doing the math. 

In a way, that would be no real change, but it would have, to me anyway, some 

advantages going forward.  We can and probably will adjust the program on the dimension of the 

pace of purchases, that is, we might slow or increase the pace of purchases, and we might adjust 

the program along the dimension of its length, so that we could say, for example, that we’re 

going to continue through the third quarter or only through April or something like that.  So 

those are the two dimensions we’re likely to change, and we can do so without putting the big 

December 14, 2010 89 of 127



 

 

 

number in the statement.  I think that might be a bit helpful at this juncture.  I think it would also 

help to reinforce that the program is, indeed, adjustable and state-contingent and, above all, that 

monetary policy is a continuous process, not a series of temporary actions.  I think it would also 

help to eliminate the talk of QE3 and QE4 that is reverberating around financial markets and 

instead get markets to think in terms of a policy rule for the Committee.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I listened to the discussions today during 

the first go-round, it does appear that many have revised up their forecast, as I have.  I also 

expect inflation, as others have said, to start low, but I do expect it to increase slowly over time.  

I join those who would like to see immediate stronger growth and lower unemployment.  I 

continue to judge that additional monetary stimulus carries more long-term risk than short-term 

advantage to our economy. 

The economy is undergoing a major and necessary rebalancing that includes the 

deleveraging of consumers, financial institutions, and state and local governments.  The process 

will take time, and shortcuts are costly.  With the amount of stimulus in place and the extended 

size of our combined balance sheets, the effect on expectations, confidence, and asset prices will 

be significant once we initiate or hint at initiating an exit involving even the most modest steps 

from our current highly, in my opinion, accommodative policy.  Thus, the process of exit from 

an accommodative policy will be a major challenge, far more so than we’re willing to 

acknowledge today, in my opinion.  It starts from the very fact that we are easing into an 

improving economy because unemployment is too high.  Then there would be the obvious 

concern that, as we start to raise interest rates, the initial downward effect on asset prices and 

December 14, 2010 90 of 127



 

 

 

financial activity will be outsized.  The markets will despair.  As a result, I suspect pressure for 

the Committee to delay its exit from current policy will be significant. 

I suspect the challenge will only increase for the Committee going forward from here.  

I’m already hearing today that we can’t change because we’ve set this path for ourselves.  The 

funds rate is near zero.  Our balance sheet is growing, approaching $3 trillion, and excess 

reserves are approaching $1.5 trillion.  Accordingly, the longer the Committee delays in 

preparing for exit, the greater the difficulty of doing so in a timely manner, increasing 

systematically the likelihood that it will inadvertently invite future imbalances in inflation 

impulses because of the delay. 

Mr. Chairman, you mentioned 2003, and I remember it well.  We talked a lot about not 

wanting a repeat of Japan, being afraid of deflation and not having enough inflation.  So the 

Committee delayed, held back.  Unemployment was too high at that time, at 6½ percent.  I worry 

about our focus on unemployment even though I’m as concerned about it as you are. 

And when we exit, we’ll require time, I realize.  Nonetheless, we should begin that long 

process now.  We first should adjust talk of the need for further monetary stimulus.  We should 

indicate that sufficient stimulus is in place to attain over time long-run potential growth for the 

economy.  It won’t come quickly, but it will come.  We also need to reopen our dialogue about 

an exit strategy so that we don’t shock the market as we move forward from here. 

Of the options presented, I would take some combination of C and D, but I won’t go into 

that, because I know that’s not on the table today.  But I will, in summary, say that I believe that 

our current highly accommodative monetary policy is inconsistent with our long-run mandate in 

an economy that is recovering and shifting from transitory, I think, to sustained sources of 

growth and picking up some speed.  To maintain such a highly accommodative policy in this 

December 14, 2010 91 of 127



 

 

 

economic environment increases the risk of imbalances developing in the longer term and the 

risk of longer-term inflation expectations necessarily rising over time. 

We need to begin shifting our language to regain policy flexibility and avoid locking 

ourselves deeper into a long-term policy position that is becoming in my opinion, of course, 

increasingly difficult to reverse in a timely fashion with each additional step over the next six 

months.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  Nothing has changed 

sufficiently since our November meeting to suggest any other course of action.  Inflation is too 

far below our mandate and resource slack remains very large, and I don’t see either of these 

conditions changing very soon.  Risk aversion is still holding back spending.  Businesses 

continue to accumulate cash rather than undertake expansionary investment activities or increase 

staffing.  Households remain cautious in their spending plans and are further reducing debt. 

Lower real interest rates would reduce incentives to save and expand demand.  However, 

we can’t get there now through lower nominal rates because of the zero lower bound.  We 

continue to be mired in what I refer to as a liquidity trap.  Reducing real rates now would require 

inflation moving up closer to our mandate levels.  It is disappointing that longer-term Treasury 

rates have risen so much since we last met, but it seems clear that these increases reflect 

nonmonetary events as well as reduced expectations for monetary accommodation.  Others have 

spoken on this, so I’ll let those comments stand.  It seems clear that reducing our intended 

Treasury purchases now would only add to these negative influences in an unhelpful manner.  So 

I do support alternative B. 

December 14, 2010 92 of 127



 

 

 

With the risks that we face and the magnitude of our shortfalls, it will be important to 

continue evaluating our current programs and policies.  So I certainly agree with other comments 

on this matter.  As I look at 2011, I see we have several tools that could provide additional 

monetary accommodation if that proved to be necessary, and we are using two of them now.  I 

think the most powerful one is the FOMC’s commitment to keep short-term interest rates low for 

an “extended period” of time.  Stating that commitment more explicitly with a likely calendar 

date could be a helpful boost, if that were necessary, as in alternative A.  A second tool is our 

larger balance sheet.  It also signals a firm commitment to low interest rates as necessary relative 

to our dual mandate objectives.  We can add a third tool:  Strengthening our commitment to an 

explicit inflation objective would be an additional instrument to signal the future path of policy.  

President Plosser’s concerns about too much emphasis on the unemployment rate could be 

addressed in part by stating our inflation objective more explicitly.  I think it would be easier for 

us to navigate how much weight we’re putting on those two channels.  We would still disagree, 

perhaps, on where we stand, but I think that that would be, on balance, beneficial.  And fourth, it 

would be helpful to be willing to entertain having inflation at times come in slightly above our 

mandate.  This would be a natural feature of an unbiased policy based on symmetric losses about 

our inflation objective. 

I personally worry a bit about the language that has been used—“our goal is 2 percent or 

a bit less”—which perhaps suggests that 2 percent is a ceiling on inflation, and that could add 

additional policy cost.  I’m just not sure how people are interpreting that, and it bothers me a bit.  

I think it would be useful to discuss that at some point.  The Tealbook box on policy 

commitment and discretion is instructive on this issue about inflation rising a bit above 2 percent 

for a period of time.  When policy commits to achieving its goals by keeping interest rates low 

December 14, 2010 93 of 127



 

 

 

for an “extended period” and allowing inflation to go very modestly above the 2 percent 

objective, while not exceeding 2½ percent, the growth and inflation outcomes are better in those 

economic analyses. 

Finally, a number of people have mentioned political risks, and I agree that those exist.  

Will we be afraid to take further actions due to this criticism?  I think this cuts both ways, and 

I’m not really sure how to evaluate these concerns about policy risk.  I prefer to think about it on 

the merits of what the economy needs and take the heat that we’re supposed to take when that’s 

the best action. 

All that said, I find alternative B to be an acceptable policy today, although I think it has 

a stiffer dose of hope than I really prefer.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The data since the 

last meeting haven’t changed my outlook substantially, and I see little evidence of any 

significant financial market problems following our announcement of additional asset purchases.  

I favor a fairly high hurdle to make changes to the program.  In other words, it would take a 

surprising change to the outlook for inflation or output to cause me to want to make an 

adjustment to the announced program.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be very brief.  I, too, favor alternative B.  

I recognize that our eventual withdrawal of accommodation will, indeed, be challenging, but it 

seems to me that the fundamental fact for policy at this time remains that we’re likely to continue 

to fall short on both of our mandates, not just for a short period of time, but for the next several 

years.  Our announced asset purchase program is by no means a magic bullet, but it provides a 

December 14, 2010 94 of 127



 

 

 

nudge, if not a push, in the right direction and will provide some insurance against downside risk 

to the economy and inflation.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am in favor of alternative B, but 

I would like to expand on that to talk about what we should be doing in the next few months.  

I’m going to talk first about how we should structure further accommodation or tightening, and 

then offer some tentative thoughts about appropriate conditionality. 

When thinking about further easing, I find it useful to return to the three tools that you, 

Mr. Chairman, outlined last August in Jackson Hole:  the LSAPs, forward guidance, and the 

IOER.  I would recommend against doing another LSAP for a couple of reasons.  As I suggested 

in October, I think that we have relatively little control over its effects.  Its ultimate impact 

depends on the accumulated stock of purchases that markets expect us to undertake, and that 

dependence combined with its relative novelty leaves us at the mercy of outside influences.  

Indeed, even tweets from former governors of Alaska can end up affecting those expectations.  

[Laughter] 

I like the other two tools better.  The staff’s analysis on pages 7 and 9 of Tealbook Part B 

indicate to me that forward guidance can be an effective way to provide further accommodation.  

I think President Evans spoke quite eloquently about that in his remarks.  The work in the 

Tealbook is based on the FRB/US model, but it seems to me that forward guidance would 

emerge as a useful response to the zero lower bound in any economic model in which agents are 

somewhat forward-looking and the central bank is, in fact, capable of commitment.  These 

statements I’m making about the efficacy of forward guidance do not necessarily apply to the 

LSAPs, which do not have that same effectiveness in a wide class of economic models. 

December 14, 2010 95 of 127



 

 

 

I also like the idea of cutting the IOER rate, as President Plosser suggested last time.  

Now, I have to say that cutting the interest rate on excess reserves by 25 basis points is likely to 

have only a slight effect on the economy, but it would have the additional benefit of solving what 

I’m becoming convinced is a big communication problem for us.  When I give speeches, I’ve 

found that the public has a hard time understanding why we’re paying a positive interest on bank 

reserves when we’re trying to stimulate the economy.  They see a positive IOER rate as a sign 

that we’re willing to subsidize the banks even at the cost of not fulfilling our dual mandate.  So I 

think that in addition to providing some stimulus, it would have an effect of helping solve this 

communication issue. 

Having given some of my thoughts on the easing front, let me turn now to the tightening 

front.  My recollection is that last spring we reached a tentative consensus, though certainly not 

unanimity, on how to proceed in tightening.  I think it’s a good idea to reopen that conversation, 

as Presidents Lockhart and Hoenig have suggested.  My recollection of that consensus was that 

we should begin by draining reserves, then raising interest on excess reserves, and then 

beginning asset sales.  I was happy enough with that consensus—I can be flexible about how we 

would order things.  I’ve heard some suggest that we could tighten by using the regular review 

process in alternative B to curtail our announced LSAP, but I don’t think that’s consistent with 

my recollection of our tentative consensus about the structure of tightening.  So I don’t think of 

the regular LSAP review process as being the right way to initiate tightening.  Instead, I view our 

statement in November as being a strong commitment to buy $600 billion of longer-term 

Treasuries over the next eight months.  I’ve thought of the regular review process as necessary, 

given that we don’t really know the full range of downside risks of LSAPs because of their 

relative novelty.  For example, I thought there was a possibility, though not a high probability 

December 14, 2010 96 of 127



 

 

 

one, that the dollar could have fallen to 50 euro cents, and, if it had, then I think we all would 

have wanted to curtail the LSAP.  I thought the regular review process was a way to make clear 

to markets and the public as a whole that we stood on guard against such possibilities. 

Having talked about easing and tightening, let me turn to conditionality.  As I mentioned 

in the first go-round, my preferred estimate of the output gap is near minus 4 percent, rather than 

the Tealbook estimate of minus 6½.  If I take that number and plug it into the Taylor 1999 rule 

on page 37 of the Tealbook Part B, I get something like minus 180 basis points.  So let’s call it 

between minus 150 and minus 200.  Now, our target rate is between zero and 25 basis points and 

can’t be negative.  But suppose we assume that markets expected the accumulated stock of the 

Fed’s purchases of long-term Treasuries will grow to be around $2 trillion.  The staff estimates 

in the last Tealbook would translate those $2 trillion of purchases into a reduction in the fed 

funds rate of 250 basis points.  All of this obviously has confidence bounds around it, but 

anyway, that would be the translation.  So, if you put that plus 25 basis points of our current 

interest on excess reserves rate together with the reduction of 250 basis points, we get a policy 

stance right now of negative 225 basis points.  It’s a little low for me compared with my minus 

180, but in the right ballpark, I would say. 

So going forward I don’t believe we should be adjusting policy to every change in the 

output gap or realized inflation.  I view it as being a little less continuous perhaps than President 

Bullard sees it.  But I do think we should be adjusting policy to sufficiently large changes in the 

output gap or realized inflation in either direction, and I’m thinking right now that those would 

be changes in the range of somewhere between 100 to 150 basis points.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

December 14, 2010 97 of 127



 

 

 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think we should 

stay the course on the policy we announced in November and make minimal modifications to our 

statement.  We said that we intend to purchase $600 billion in additional Treasury securities by 

mid-2011.  This decision is subject to review, but I think the bar for stopping short of 

$600 billion should be set pretty high.  One relative consideration is whether the outlook has 

changed substantially.  I think the answer is “no.”  Inflation is still below the levels we consider 

consistent with our dual mandate, and it’s continuing to trend down.  Inflation surprises during 

the intermeeting period have been on the downside.  Unemployment is even higher than we 

anticipated it in November, although other measures of labor market performance suggest 

ongoing but very gradual recovery.  The outlook for growth in 2011 is slightly stronger due to 

the fiscal stimulus, but that stimulus is temporary, and the changes on balance are only marginal.  

Some downside risks to the outlook have abated, but others have increased.  On balance, I still 

consider the risks weighted to the downside.  So the value of the program in providing insurance 

against downside risk, something that’s especially important in the neighborhood of the zero 

bound, remains, in my view, a valid rationale. 

A second consideration is whether potential risks associated with the program appear to 

be materializing.  Again, I think the answer is “no.”  In particular, inflation expectations have not 

become unhinged, and the program has not generated noticeable flight from the dollar. 

The third consideration is whether asset purchases are actually efficacious in stimulating 

the economy.  Here the incoming data strengthen my view that they are.  We saw very 

significant movements in longer-term Treasury yields and equity prices between Jackson Hole 

and the November FOMC, and those seem clearly to have been conditioned on market 

expectations of the program.  That market response was consistent with the key assumption on 

December 14, 2010 98 of 127



 

 

 

which the program was premised, namely, that relative supplies of securities of different 

maturities matter to the structure of yields and term premiums. 

Of course, we’ve seen an enormous run-up in longer-term nominal and real yields since 

the announcement.  Strong data do appear to explain part of the backup; end-of-year positioning 

and convexity hedging likely also played some role.  But I agree with Brian and the staff that a 

significant contributor was the scaling back of market expectations about the likely size and 

duration of the program.  The evidence suggests that criticisms of the program and the ensuing 

political backlash contributed to this adverse market reaction and, at the same time, raised the 

degree of uncertainty concerning longer-term rates and Fed policy.  Higher risk premiums due to 

increased uncertainty may also be pushing up yields.  These market responses are unfortunate, 

but they serve to strengthen my view that asset purchases do matter in influencing financial 

conditions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given where the Committee finds itself 

today, I can accept alternative B.  Let me just make a couple of brief comments.  First, I’m 

comforted by the Committee’s commitment to subjecting the asset purchases to regular review, 

but I don’t think that that means that at every meeting we should be tweaking or micromanaging 

the asset purchase amount.  I think that, in all likelihood, the most important policy judgment this 

Committee will face next will be what to do after June.  Obviously, we’ll have to debate that well 

in advance of the end of the $600 billion purchases, but that is where the action is. 

During the intermeeting period, there were some interpretations of market chatter about 

whether this Committee would fulfill its stated goal of purchasing $75 billion of Treasuries a 

month and live up to the $600 billion headline number.  I think that is a serious misreading of 

December 14, 2010 99 of 127



 

 

 

what the market chatter and questions were about.  Markets have wondered during this period 

whether we would be doing more once the QE2 program ends.  That continues to be their 

question.  As a result, I think we should be very careful about not prejudging that question.  It 

will be tempting, particularly in the new year, as we’re all speaking and communicating to 

markets and giving our assessments on the economy, to put a thumb on the scale showing a bias, 

describing what we’re comfortable or uncomfortable about.  I think we’d be making a serious 

mistake by starting to influence what the asset purchase profile or other policy options that 

Narayana talked about might be once that period arrives.  I think we would do ourselves far 

greater favors by not being terribly newsy on what happens thereafter, and by being reasonably 

stealthy about what our dispassionate analysis is yet suggesting, giving it more time. 

And so what should we be doing during the period of January, February, and March?  My 

vote would be to describe what policy actions more broadly could be done by the U.S. 

government to help the economy grow at the level that we would all hope.  So that’s a hope and 

an expectation, because I worry that we could otherwise fall into a trap of again trying to make 

news in the winter when we really aren’t yet, at least in my view, in a position to be making any 

final decisions on what would happen in the post-June period.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It’s very difficult for me to determine what the 

effect of the $600 billion purchase announcement has been.  I confess I don’t see the success of 

the program, but I don’t see evidence of heightened risk either.  I never expected big results, but 

now I suspect that whatever the actual results of the purchases themselves were has been 

swamped by the uncertainty over the size of the program, given the public debate over our 

policy, including communications highlighting the differences of opinions on the Committee, as 

December 14, 2010 100 of 127



 

 

 

well as a surprisingly, to me, anyway, vocal outcry from economists, politicians, and foreign 

officials. 

Nevertheless, the near-term outlook is slightly stronger now than it was at our last 

meeting.  I don’t know whether the positive surprises occurred because, as it turns out, we were 

just going through a soft patch anyway, or whether the lower rates and higher stock prices we 

experienced between Jackson Hole and our last meeting were already having beneficial effects or 

whether something else was at work.  But I do know that right now our immediate economic 

future looks a bit brighter.  So I think we should hold very, very still and let whatever is helping 

continue to work, and I support alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Going to play possum.  [Laughter]  Thank you.  Governor 

Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as well.  For the 

reasons stated by Narayana and Kevin, I wish that it communicated rather more precisely than I 

think it does what the threshold for a change in our intended path ought to be, but it’s 12:35 p.m., 

and if we get into a discussion of that, we’re not likely to finish in a timely fashion. 

I would also reinforce Kevin’s caution about the impact of “FOMC chatter.”  We used to 

refer to that as what other people said about the FOMC.  Now it’s the FOMC itself that seems 

intent on chattering continuously in a way that I just don’t think is helping communications or 

the integrity and external perception of this Committee.  That’s it.  Everything else looks fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would support alternative B.  I also believe 

that the verdict on our latest round of LSAP purchases is still out.  I’m discouraged by the rise in 

December 14, 2010 101 of 127



 

 

 

the longer-term yields since our last meeting but am well aware that there’s no way of knowing 

where yields would have been if we had not acted. 

At the very least, we’ve learned that the communication of monetary policy is as critical 

to the conduct of monetary policy as is the actual decisionmaking.  I think more work has to be 

done in identifying up front the various audiences of our actions with an eye to considering how 

to tailor the message of our policy decisions. 

Regardless of the ultimate verdict on this round of large-scale asset purchases, I think it 

would be premature to reverse last month’s decision.  I believe it has been somewhat successful 

in moving us towards meeting our dual objectives.  In any event, the fact that there is a 

significant hole to dig out of suggests the need for no reversal.  In addition, and significantly, 

such a reversal would, at the least, cause confusion and could well threaten the Fed’s credibility.  

Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Governor Raskin just sort of took the words 

right out of my mouth.  I am not a fan of QE2, as you know.  I would balk at expanding it.  I see 

no economic justification, and I think it would be politically suicidal to do so.  That’s a little bit 

less erudite and academic than your presentation, President Kocherlakota, but I’m happy not to 

hear anybody advocate for alternative A.  I was going to suggest that, if they were, they had been 

living on Pluto and then I’d remind them that Pluto is no longer part of the official planetary 

system.  [Laughter] 

At the same time, I think it would be a mistake to pare it back at this juncture.  The strong 

economic growth that my staff and I envision has not yet been confirmed by the data, and I think 

December 14, 2010 102 of 127



 

 

 

correcting course after making the very tough decision that we made at the last meeting would 

make us look extremely indecisive and make us quite vulnerable. 

Now, I want you to bear with me for a minute here because I’m sympathetic to many of 

the arguments that President Hoenig and others have made.  At the last meeting I attempted to 

provide a sober assessment of the possible costs that should at least be considered alongside the 

surmised benefits of the LSAP, and I expressed skepticism about what likely happened on the 

foreign exchange front and warned about speculative activity in stocks and commodities.  I 

believe I used the term “monetary kudzu,” something that would be very difficult to cut back 

long term, and I concluded that we could possibly be prescribing the wrong medicine at the 

wrong time given the economic circumstance. 

But the most worrisome to me, as I stated, was the cost of possibly placing our 

quasi-independence in jeopardy, and I said that we know that once the central bank is perceived 

as targeting government debt yields at a time of persistent budget deficits, the concern about debt 

monetization quickly raises its ugly head, and I went on to say I expect the propensity to draw 

that conclusion has been enhanced by this congressional election—that we’d be waving a red 

flag in the face of those who are our most volatile critics.  So I wasn’t surprised, Governor Duke, 

at the reaction that we received. 

Now, I made my best arguments.  The Committee decided to pursue a course.  There 

were others who made similar arguments, but the Committee made a decision.  When I was an 

undergraduate I was disappointed not to receive a scholarship, and a friend of mine, who became 

a well-known folk singer named Tom Rush, gave me a great lecture about making the best of a 

bad situation.  I’ll summarize it and clean it up a little bit, but I think it gets to the point. 

December 14, 2010 103 of 127



 

 

 

He told me a story about a neighbor who would go to work every morning, very diligent, 

and 10 minutes after he left, the milk truck would pull up and the neighbor’s wife would come 

out in her kimono, and the milk truck driver would kiss her on the cheek and go into the house 

and come out two hours later.  It bothered the heck out of Mr. Rush, so he went up to his 

neighbor, and he said, “You know, it’s none of my business, but I want you to know what’s 

going on.”  And the neighbor said, “Well, yeah, but look at it this way.  We’ll never run out of 

milk or cottage cheese or yogurt.” 

I think we need to make the best of this situation.  The people who did voice concern 

mainly were coming not from theory, but from the marketplace or from the real economy.  

Remember that, in theory, theory and reality are the same, but in reality they’re not the same, and 

we have to be driven by the reality that we hear from people who come from financial market 

backgrounds or from the real economy or from the Districts.  I hope that one byproduct of 

making the best of the situation is weighing very carefully the input from the Banks and the 

Districts, as well as the theory that we try to put into practice. 

I would also say that we must not make the situation worse.  I do believe we are 

politically vulnerable.  I listened very carefully to the comments you all made recently, and 

there’s a subtext there.  I think we have to be very careful about what we say, and I think we 

need to unify as a team.  Otherwise those who mean us harm will take advantage of the 

cacophony that comes out of this Committee.  I confess that I may have been part of that 

cacophony.  I haven’t said a word publicly since November 8, and there’s a reason for it:  Once 

we make a decision as a Committee, I think we have to knit together and get our message very 

clear.  Of course, we should allow dissent, and I may well dissent in the future.  But knitting 

together and being very clear about our message are important because there are a lot of people 

December 14, 2010 104 of 127



 

 

 

just looking for opportunities to tear us apart, and I think there’s going to be a great proclivity for 

that, particularly going forward politically. 

So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, if I were a voter, I would support alternative B.  I’m 

sympathetic a little bit to the comment about the $600 billion, but the $600 billion is already in 

there.  Having looked at the chart we were given earlier by the Desk, if we took the $600 billion 

out and just talked about $75 billion, I think we’d see that number all over the place in terms of 

expectations.  As others have mentioned, I do take it seriously when you say that we’ll regularly 

review the pace of the securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program.  I 

learned earlier today that Bill Dudley and I had the same dreams when we were kids.  We both 

wanted to be physicists, believe it or not, and I do believe in the physical principle of— 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m not sure what to make of that. 

MR. FISHER.  We both would have been a disaster.  But I do believe in stochastic 

optimal control, and what that means in terms of a rocket launch is that you continually 

reevaluate the course you’re going through time, and I take the Committee at its word that we 

will do so.  But for now, Mr. Chairman, to change course and not embrace alternative B I think 

would be a serious mistake, and I hope that all of us, including myself, in terms of our future 

expression are able to convey the seriousness with which these decisions are made and support 

the Committee as a whole, even if we are tempted to dissent and even though at times we are 

uncomfortable with the decision that’s made.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m glad to see that Richard 

and I are on the same page today, just as we were when we were children.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  There’s a big space in between though. 

December 14, 2010 105 of 127



 

 

 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I do want to talk about how we communicate as a group 

to the market and the public.  I think we’ve done a very poor job relative to what we’re capable 

of, and I think that judgment is borne out in a number of ways.  One way is the low score we 

received in the recent primary dealer survey conducted by the Desk, even though the survey and 

its comments said the Chairman did a very good job on 60 Minutes.  That was cited by a number 

of the respondents. 

It is not helpful for opponents of any policy we embark on, whether asset purchases or 

other actions, to criticize the policy in public in harsh terms as soon as possible after an FOMC 

meeting is over.  I really do think there are right ways and wrong ways to disagree.  I think 

dissent is completely appropriate, and I’m not trying to discourage that.  I think the right way is 

to say that reasonable people may disagree, but this is the decision made by the Committee.  This 

is why the Committee is doing what it’s doing, and here’s how the Committee expects this 

particular policy action is likely to work in practice. 

I think the wrong way is to paint the consequences of the decision in more apocalyptic 

terms and/or to create doubts and fan fears about the ability and/or will of the FOMC to execute 

policy successfully.  In my opinion, some of the most recent comments we’ve seen have 

undermined the effectiveness of the most recent round of LSAPs.  I say this not only because of 

our poor communications score, but also because the evidence suggests that a good portion of the 

backup in bond yields is due to a higher risk premium.  When I ask myself how the higher risk 

premium got there, obviously it was the critique of the Fed by outside observers, but I think we 

also did a little bit of that to ourselves.  I think the higher risk premium stems from uncertainty 

about our commitment to the program—in other words, would we be cowed by the criticism—

and thereby represents a loss of credibility on our part. 

December 14, 2010 106 of 127



 

 

 

That being said, it isn’t the only reason that bond yields have risen.  I think there are lots 

of other reasons, and they’ve been talked about this morning.  First, expectations going into the 

last meeting were for a somewhat larger program than what we actually initiated.  Second, 

Treasury supplies likely increased due to the shift in fiscal policy, so the net supply held by the 

public is going to go up relative to what the public expected.  And, third, the economy looks like 

it’s on a more solid growth track.  So these three factors all interact.  More stimulative fiscal 

policy implies faster growth, and it implies more net supply, as well as a smaller expected LSAP 

program. 

Overall my policy view hasn’t changed.  The LSAP program still makes sense, and it’s 

helping at the margin.  We have damaged its effectiveness to some degree.  I think it’s important 

in reaching this conclusion to note that some of the primary risks of the asset purchase program, 

such as dislodging inflation expectations to the upside or causing a free fall in the dollar, have 

not materialized in any way.  Instead, the dollar has been strengthening, and the increase that 

we’ve seen in the yields have occurred entirely in real rates rather than in break-even inflation 

rates, at least as we measure them from November to today.  So I’m with pretty much everybody 

else, not quite everyone, in supporting alternative B.  I think we want to have a “low drama” 

meeting as Governor Duke said.  So I don’t mind playing possum either.  I think the small 

changes contemplated in alternative B are right.  They acknowledge some of the intermeeting 

data.  We still have a long way to go in terms of our dual mandate. 

A very accommodative policy stance to me is still fully appropriate.  Any retreat from our 

LSAP program at this juncture I would view as disastrous, not just because yields would back up 

further, tightening financial conditions, but also because such a shift would significantly 

undercut our credibility.  We would be viewed as weak and as intimidated by outside criticism 

December 14, 2010 107 of 127



 

 

 

and political pressure, and that would be, I think, devastating to this institution.  To my mind, 

this would cause our independence and our will to keep inflation in check over the longer term to 

be questioned.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and thanks to everyone for your comments.  

Substantively, of course, I am supportive of staying the course and alternative B—I gave my 

reasons earlier.  Notwithstanding the very welcome improvement in the tone of the data, the 

general contours of the recovery remain similar to what they were in the last couple of meetings.  

We are still missing our objectives by a wide margin, in expectation, not just currently.  I agree 

with President Kocherlakota that measuring the stance of policy is quite difficult and can be 

quite humbling, but I think it’s not at all clear that our policy is excessively easy given the state 

of the economy.  So I think we should stay where we are.  We should take more time to assess 

developments in the economy.  For those who mentioned it, I remain serious that we should 

continue to review the policy on three grounds:  What’s happening to the outlook, what’s 

happening to the efficacy of the policy, and what’s happening in terms of any side effects.  I 

think a responsible approach would involve all three of those aspects.  For today, I counsel 

watching and waiting to see how the outlook evolves.  It could change sharply—it has done so in 

the past, and in that case we would need to be willing to respond to that. 

I have two comments on communication.  Several of you have already spoken about it.  

The first is that we have multiple objectives in communication.  One, of course, is to give our 

views, which is very important, but we also want to convey the fundamental collegiality, comity, 

and mutual respect in this Committee, which I think we need to make clear to everyone.  Another 

is that we need to do everything we can to maintain the independence of this institution to make 

policy.  We should be free to make mistakes, and we need to convey clearly that that’s 

December 14, 2010 108 of 127



 

 

 

something we all share.  The main thing we can do that would be constructive, as far as I’m 

concerned, is to pull down the heat a little bit.  You know, I’m not asking for any real changes.  

Let’s just keep the heat down and give this policy some chance to work or not to work and give 

ourselves some time to make a better assessment, and I think that will work fine. 

The other aspect of communication was, I think, raised a bit by President Lockhart and 

President Evans.  It’s a little ironic that this Committee has spent years and years talking about 

inflation targets and similar kinds of structures, and one of the main issues has been whether we 

could succeed politically in creating an inflation target or whether there would be pushback from 

the Congress, etc.  I think we’re at a moment that if we wanted to do something like that, it 

would actually be welcomed by the political world.  I see absolutely no problem whatsoever 

from a political perspective if we want to go ahead and put some more structure, whether it’s an 

inflation target or some other kind of structure, on our policymaking.  Yet, in our video 

conference discussion of this, we just kind of talked ourselves out of it somehow, I think possibly 

because we couldn’t come to agreement on some appropriate way to talk about the other part of 

the mandate.  It seems to me that was kind of a shame.  I’m not suggesting anything specific, but 

maybe we can continue to talk about this informally, because I do think there would be very little 

resistance at this point.  In fact, a number of people would probably welcome it if we were to be 

more explicit about our inflation objective, and it might help with the communication issue going 

forward.  But that’s something for the intermeeting discussions and for future meetings. 

Turning back to the business of this meeting, I’d like to propose alternative B as it stands, 

and thank you again for a thoughtful discussion.  Debbie. 

MS. DANKER.  This vote covers the statement and directive for alternative B in the 

handout. 

December 14, 2010 109 of 127



 

 

 

Chairman Bernanke  Yes 

Vice Chairman Dudley  Yes 

President Bullard   Yes 

Governor Duke   Yes 

President Hoenig   No 

President Pianalto   Yes 

Governor Raskin   Yes 

President Rosengren  Yes 

Governor Tarullo   Yes 

Governor Warsh   Yes 

Governor Yellen   Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  The next meeting is Tuesday and 

Wednesday, January 25 and 26.  We will have a special topic at that meeting on structural 

unemployment, obviously a topic of great interest to all of us.  A number of the Reserve Banks 

are working very hard on this, and we thank you for your contribution.  The Board is also 

involved in this project.  So I look forward to that discussion.  There will be a lunch as soon as 

the meeting is adjourned, and Linda Robertson will provide us with a legislative update.  Thank 

you all very much, and have a safe trip home.  Meeting adjourned. 

END OF MEETING 

 

December 14, 2010 110 of 127




