











































FOMC Conference Call Transcript, November 28, 2011


 
 

 
 

Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
November 28, 2011 

 
A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Monday, 

November 28, 2011, at 11:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: 
 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Elizabeth Duke 
Charles L. Evans 
Richard W. Fisher 
Narayana Kocherlakota 
Sarah Bloom Raskin 
Daniel K. Tarullo  
Janet L. Yellen 
 
Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. 
Williams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 
 
William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 
 
James A. Clouse, Steven B. Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Kei-Mu 
Yi, Associate Economists 
 
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 
Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board 
of Governors 
 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
 
William Wascher, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisor to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 

November 28, 2011 1 of 40



 
 

 
 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors 
 
Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
 
Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 
Beth Anne Wilson, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 
 
Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analysts, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Jamie J. McAndrews and Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of New York and Cleveland, respectively 
 
David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, Geoffrey Tootell, Christopher J. Waller, and John A. 
Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, 
Boston, St. Louis, and Richmond, respectively 
 
Mary C. Daly, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
 
Mark A. Wynne, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
 
Anna Nordstrom, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

November 28, 2011 2 of 40



 
 

 
 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on 
November 28, 2011 

 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Thank you for joining us on 

this call.  As you know, our main topic today is Europe and our swaps agreements.  I thought I 

would take a minute at the beginning, though, to talk about FOMC confidentiality issues very 

briefly.  As you know, on Wednesday, there was an article in the Wall Street Journal on the 

question of access to Fed officials.  As is often the case, there was more innuendo than fact, but 

there were a couple of points.  One, it was noted that I myself meet with various economists and 

consultants periodically in an effort to get outside points of view and to hear what they’re 

thinking and so on.  And second, it mentioned that until earlier this year, the staff of the New 

York Fed had been providing information on the staff forecast to the Bank’s Economic Advisory 

Panel. 

Let me comment briefly on responses to those issues.  First of all, on my personal 

calendar, the article did reflect a point that the Chairman, like other members of the Committee, 

does need to have access to outside perspectives and information, which of course is why we 

have not only a Board, but also panels, advisory councils, and the like.  The article also 

published a long quote from Michelle making the very valid point that people who meet with me 

sometimes have an incentive to claim inside information, even if none such exists.  And finally, 

I’d like to note that my meetings are always in compliance with our policy.  In particular, I 

always have a staff member there taking notes, and of course I’d never disclose information that 

I don’t disclose in public.  So I do believe that our meetings have been in full compliance with 

the policies that we passed over the summer.  That said, the article illustrates that there is a 

reputational risk here, and so just for your information, we have canceled all similar meetings of 

November 28, 2011 3 of 40



 
 

 
 

this sort for the near term, and we’re going to look at whether there are any good alternative 

ways to get outside information, input, that don’t have that particular risk.  We’re taking that 

seriously and trying to figure out a solution. 

Second, on the New York staff forecast, this was something that had been going on for 

some time but was discontinued in June after the new policy on external communication was 

adopted.  So it was in response to that policy that this practice was discontinued.  And, in 

addition, you may be aware that the past forecasts were posted on the web last week in 

conjunction with an article by Simon Potter of the New York Fed on the ability of the Fed to 

forecast the recession, which of course was not very good, and the forecasts were put there as an 

illustration of some of the problems and issues that had come up.  Now, that said, when the 

reporter was researching her story and the items relating the forecast materials were shown to us, 

I asked Bill English and Scott Alvarez, pursuant to our policies, to take a look at it and see if 

there was anything in there that did raise issues concerning our policies, as is required by our 

approach.  Now, at this point, I think it’s rather moot.  But it is worthwhile for us to look at this 

episode briefly because we all deal with the problem of forecasts, have boards and councils, meet 

with outside individuals, and talk about the outlook in various ways.  So I think it would be 

beneficial for us to make use of this to try to clarify for ourselves how best to use staff 

forecasting information.  After Scott and Bill finish their look at this particular episode, I think 

we should maybe have a brief discussion at some point about how we treat forecasts and that 

kind of information—in dealing with our boards, for example. 

Finally, a third issue came up, which was not in the article in any way—it was not 

referred to—but I got requests from an FOMC participant to look once again at the issue of the 

dealer survey, which, as you know, we put out before each meeting to the dealers, confidentially 

November 28, 2011 4 of 40



 
 

 
 

asking them for their views on likely Fed policies, along with issues relating to the economy and 

so on.  And there’s been a concern raised in meetings that the dealer survey—which, again, was 

not mentioned in the article but nevertheless raises similar concerns—might provide or appear to 

provide preferential information to the recipients of the survey.  Now, I raised this with Vice 

Chairman Dudley and Brian Sack, and from their perspective, it’s perfectly fine to go ahead and 

start releasing the survey in real time, which we can do as early as Friday for the December 

meeting.  The alternative would be to have some kind of Committee process, which I think none 

of us are particularly excited about but which I’m willing to do if there’s a strong desire for it.  In 

a moment I’ll ask for comment, but the proposal is just to start releasing it, and of course we’ll 

look carefully at it to make sure that it doesn’t have any implied preferential information in it.  

We’ll start that on Friday. 

So those are just a few reactions.  Vice Chairman Dudley wants to comment, and then I’ll 

be happy to take any questions or comments on this particular issue.  Bill. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  To clarify on the release of the primary dealer survey, 

we’re talking about releasing just the questions, not the actual results of the survey. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that’s okay, but others can comment.  Does anyone 

have any reactions they’d like to share?  [No response]  Okay.  Seeing none, why don’t we turn 

to the business of the meeting.  I think the best way to do this would be to turn first to Brian 

Sack, who will give us, as background, some markets updates, and then Steve Kamin here at the 

Board will talk about what’s happening in Europe as they try to address the ongoing crisis.  I’ll 

say a few words about calls and contacts that I’ve had, and then we’ll open up the discussion of 

the particular proposal.  So let me turn it over to Brian Sack for an update on markets.  Brian. 

November 28, 2011 5 of 40



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Concerns about whether an orderly 
resolution to the European sovereign debt crisis can be achieved have intensified 
further, dominating developments in global financial markets in recent weeks. 

Investors have come to view the measures that were agreed to in October, 
including the possibility of leveraging the EFSF funds using private capital, as 
inadequate to provide a credible backstop to European sovereign debt markets.  The 
absence of this backstop, along with the decision to include a larger degree of private-
sector participation in the voluntary restructuring of Greek debt, has put considerable 
pressure on European sovereign debt markets.  Yields on Italian and Spanish debt 
have increased over 100 basis points over the past three weeks, with the 10-year yield 
approaching 7 percent in Spain and surpassing that level in Italy.  Liquidity in these 
securities has deteriorated significantly as the perceived risk has increased. 

At this point, the only backstop in the market is the purchases of sovereign debt 
by the European Central Bank under its Securities Markets Programme.  However, 
the ECB is seen as somewhat reluctant to perform this role, and its purchases have 
been paired with a constant reminder from European officials that the ECB cannot 
provide monetary financing to governments.  Many observers feel that the ECB will 
not take a more aggressive approach until there is greater clarity on a longer-term 
solution to Europe’s fiscal challenges, which will likely take some time. 

Given these circumstances, investors have increasingly considered the possibility 
of a more disorderly outcome for the euro area, including broader debt restructuring 
or changes in the composition of the currency union.  Reflecting such concerns, core 
European countries have increasingly been swept into the negative market dynamics.  
Ten-year yields in France, Austria, Belgium, and the Netherlands have all come under 
upward pressure, increasing by 50 to 150 basis points since the most recent FOMC 
meeting.  Even German debt yields began to rise last week, with investors’ concerns 
reflected in a very weak auction of 10-year debt. 

The anxiety about European sovereign debt is also apparent in the CDS written on 
that debt.  At this point, five-year CDS is at 555 basis points for Italy, 488 basis 
points for Spain, 408 basis points for Belgium, 245 basis points for France, and 
117 basis points for Germany.  Those compare with a CDS rate of just 59 basis points 
for the United States despite our own set of fiscal issues. 

The intensification of concerns about European sovereign debt has weighed on 
the prices of risky assets broadly, with the S&P 500 index off about 10 percent since 
the Friday before the most recent FOMC meeting.  Over that period, corporate bond 
spreads and other private debt spreads have widened notably, and Treasury yields 
have fallen.  The dollar has appreciated, including a sharp gain against the euro. 

The financial sector has been under the most significant pressure over this period, 
with equity indexes for U.S. banks and financial institutions falling 15 to 20 percent.  
This repricing appears to be driven by worries about direct exposures to European 
markets as well as by concerns about the indirect channels through which an 

November 28, 2011 6 of 40



 
 

 
 

unraveling of the situation in Europe could create difficulties for U.S. firms.  Equity 
prices of many European financial firms have fallen even more sharply than those of 
U.S. firms over this period. 

For European banks, investors’ concerns have transmitted into greater difficulties 
obtaining short-term funding.  These firms have faced increasing costs for borrowing 
euros in the market, with three-month euro LIBOR moving to a spread of nearly 
100 basis points above the OIS rate.  Moreover, some European firms have turned 
more heavily to the ECB for funding, causing euro-denominated funding provided by 
the ECB to increase sharply, particularly for Italian and French banks. 

European banks have also continued to face pressures on their short-term dollar 
funding.  As we have described before, consistent access to unsecured dollar funding 
has been limited to tenors of one week or less for most European firms.  Moreover, 
the implied three-month dollar funding rate that could be obtained by borrowing at 
euro LIBOR and using FX swaps to convert to dollars has moved up sharply, 
reaching 200 basis points last week.  Liquidity in the FX swaps market has worsened 
for horizons beyond one month. 

Based on these conditions, the ECB’s operations to provide 84-day dollar funding 
at a rate of 100 basis points above the OIS rate under the current swap arrangements 
would be well in the money.  Indeed, it is somewhat disappointing that the presence 
of these arrangements has not provided a more effective cap on dollar funding rates 
for European banks.  As Steve Kamin will describe, the staff is proposing a reduction 
in the pricing of the dollar swap lines to 50 basis points above the OIS rate.  The ECB 
and our other central bank counterparties hope that this repricing will encourage a 
greater willingness of firms to participate at the dollar funding operations, and hence 
result in a more effective cap on their dollar funding rates. 

The story for U.S. financial institutions is more positive, as these firms have not 
experienced notable difficulties obtaining short-term funding.  Dollar-based LIBOR 
rates have moved higher, even for the U.S. banks included in the panel, and forward 
rates suggest that this rise is expected to continue.  However, the increase has been far 
smaller than that in euro-based rates.  Moreover, U.S. banks are not borrowing much 
in the term unsecured funding market, as they generally have considerable liquidity 
from other sources. 

Another key consideration is that short-term secured funding markets appear to be 
holding their ground.  Indeed, repo markets continue to function normally for 
Treasury and agency debt collateral.  Even for nontraditional collateral, there has 
been no meaningful change in haircuts, and bid–asked spreads have moved up only 
slightly in recent months. 

However, even though short-term funding markets for U.S. institutions appear to 
be functioning fairly well, we see considerable risk that the funding situation could 
change abruptly.  The recent developments at MF Global serve as a reminder that 
funding can dry up quickly for a firm that is seen as having too much risk exposure.  

November 28, 2011 7 of 40



 
 

 
 

Such concerns may be more pressing when markets are as volatile as they have been 
of late, and it seems likely that this volatility will continue as investors have to 
contend with a wide range of possible policy outcomes in Europe. 

Moreover, the U.S. financial sector is still in the process of recovering from the 
events of recent years and adjusting to a changed environment.  A notable risk in this 
regard is that at least one rating agency is likely to take near-term actions to 
downgrade U.S. financial firms, reflecting a systematic review of its government 
support assumptions for these firms. 

Lastly, it should be noted that CDS rates and longer-term debt spreads for U.S. 
financial firms have moved up again, reaching very elevated levels.  Indeed, as of last 
Friday, five-year CDS rates were more than 500 basis points for Morgan Stanley and 
more than 400 basis points for Bank of America and Goldman Sachs.  These rates 
imply that it will be difficult, or at least quite costly, for these firms to roll over their 
longer-term debt as it matures. 

Overall, even though most U.S. financial firms have ample liquidity today and are 
not experiencing notable difficulties with short-term funding, the financial sector 
continues to face a range of risks going forward, and it could quickly come under 
significant pressure in response to a disorderly outcome in Europe.  Steve Kamin will 
now continue the presentation. 

MR. KAMIN.1  As Brian has discussed, the attempt by European leaders in late 
October to promote a comprehensive solution to the euro-area financial crisis has 
largely failed, and the crisis is deepening and threatening to spill over from the 
European periphery to the core.  In Greece, the government collapsed two weeks ago 
and was replaced by a temporary caretaker government headed by former ECB Vice 
President Lucas Papademos.  Greece’s main opposition party has generally signed on 
to the fiscal reforms Greece has agreed to with the IMF and EU, but in order to repay 
its creditors and finance its deficit over the coming couple of years, Greece is 
negotiating a new €130 billion program with the IMF and EU, and this new loan is 
contingent on Greece’s private-sector creditors voluntarily writing down the face 
value of their claims on Greece’s government by 50 percent.  However, the 
discussions between the Greek government and its private-sector creditors on this 
debt restructuring have been fractious, putting the new loan package in jeopardy and 
adding to speculation that Greece may soon default and possibly withdraw from the 
euro area. 

If the European leaders had succeeded in putting the financial backstops in place 
to protect Italy, Spain, and other governments from contagion, the Greek situation 
would be just a sideshow with limited potential to destabilize broader markets.  
However, efforts to strengthen the euro-area financial backstop have been stymied.  
The October plan was to leverage the remaining €270 billion in uncommitted 
resources of the EFSF with private-sector funds to achieve over €1 trillion in 

                                                 
1 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

November 28, 2011 8 of 40



 
 

 
 

capacity.  But with outside investors showing little enthusiasm for this scheme and 
the EFSF itself having difficulty raising funds, it appears unlikely that the EFSF, by 
itself, would be able to protect Italy and Spain from a major run on their debt. 

In the absence of a credible backstop, investor concerns about sovereign default 
have begun to snowball, as Brian has described.  In Italy, soaring borrowing costs, 
along with weakening economic conditions and calls for more budget cutting, led to 
the fall of the Berlusconi government and his replacement by former EU 
commissioner Mario Monti.  Although this change may bode well for future 
economic reforms, the political transition has been chaotic and has further roiled 
financial markets.  Indeed, investors remain uncertain as to whether Italy’s new 
government of unelected technocrats will be able to muster the political support 
needed to push through unpopular fiscal austerity measures. 

And now, alarmingly, market pressures are spreading to core euro-area 
economies, with France’s and Belgium’s borrowing costs rising, Belgium’s credit 
rating being downgraded by S&P, and, as Brian mentioned, even Germany having a 
poor bond auction last week.  Calls are mounting for the ECB to stem the panic by 
taking a more active role in funding vulnerable governments, possibly by channeling 
funds either through the IMF or the EFSF.  An alternative approach, involving greater 
fiscal centralization and the issuance of Eurobonds guaranteed by the euro area as a 
whole, is also mustering support, including most recently by the European 
Commission.  However, Germany and the ECB so far have continued to resist these 
options, increasing investor concerns that the financial crisis could deepen while 
European officials watch either helplessly or passively from the sidelines.  Moreover, 
the recently announced plans for the recapitalization of Europe’s banks are believed 
likely to promote deleveraging and contribute to a credit crunch that will further 
weigh on Europe’s economy. 

Turning to the economic outlook, our October forecast for only slight declines in 
euro-area GDP this quarter and next now seems optimistic.  Retail sales, industrial 
production, and new orders fell sharply in September; October surveys show 
continued declines in business and consumer confidence; and the euro-area composite 
PMI in October and November has fallen well into contractionary territory.  Given 
the escalating financial stresses, the troubled banking sectors, and ever-increasing 
calls for fiscal consolidation, we are currently anticipating that the recession in 
Europe will be more severe and prolonged. 

These conditions present a significant risk to U.S. financial systems and to the 
U.S. economic recovery.  With this in mind, the FOMC might want to consider 
changes to its liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks aimed at easing funding 
stresses and bolstering investor confidence.  Accordingly, as detailed in the proposed 
resolution circulated earlier this morning, we are seeking your approval of a 
six-month extension of the existing dollar swap lines through February 1, 2013, along 
with the establishment of additional swap arrangements with our central bank 
counterparties to support the provision by the Federal Reserve of liquidity in 
Canadian dollars, British pounds, Japanese yen, euros, and Swiss francs.  These 

November 28, 2011 9 of 40



 
 

 
 

foreign currency swap lines are not needed today, but they would be established as 
part of a broad network of bilateral swap lines intended to address potential future 
funding needs and to support market confidence by demonstrating cooperation among 
the major central banks.  Before the initial drawing on these new swap lines, the 
Foreign Currency Subcommittee would consult with the Federal Open Market 
Committee if possible under the circumstances then prevailing.  These new 
arrangements would also expire in February 2013. 

Both for the dollar swap lines and for the new lines providing other currencies, we 
propose that the Chairman establish the interest rates by agreement with the foreign 
central banks and in consultation with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.  He 
would keep the Federal Open Market Committee informed, and the rates agreed 
would be consistent with the principles discussed with the Committee.  In this regard, 
we have reached tentative agreement with our foreign counterparties on a reduction in 
the cost of borrowing through the existing dollar swap lines of 50 basis points—from 
100 basis points over OIS to 50 basis points over OIS.  The reduction in borrowing 
costs should help reduce banks’ aversion to using the swap facilities, thus 
strengthening their liquidity positions and reducing the pace of their deleveraging and 
associated impacts on credit conditions.  These actions, if approved, will be described 
in a coordinated announcement by the Federal Reserve and our five central bank 
counterparties—the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Swiss National 
Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of Canada.  That announcement is likely to be 
made Wednesday morning.  That concludes my remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there questions for Brian or 

Steve?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Steve, can you bring us up to date on what is likely to occur in the G-7 in 

terms of addressing solvency issues?  That’s the first of many questions I have, but it seems to 

me that we have to have a backdrop.  And I’m curious as to what you expect—or what we 

expect, Mr. Chairman—to come out of these discussions, in addition to our committing to 

addressing liquidity needs.  That’s question number one.  What do we know that is not in the 

press? 

MR. TARULLO.  Nothing. 

MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  On question number two, I do not believe we know that much that’s 

not in the press, but perhaps the Chairman can add to that.  On the issue of solvency, a couple of 

things.  First, clearly, the G-7 is engaged on this, and they have had talks recently.  But 

November 28, 2011 10 of 40



 
 

 
 

ultimately the role of the non-European members of the G-7 is really going to be to advise and 

perhaps pressure the European leaders on steps that need to be taken.  They are addressing both 

the liquidity and the solvency issues, and those do need to be addressed jointly.  The liquidity 

issue is quite obvious, which is that the possibility of a self-fulfilling prophecy of an investor run 

leading to default looms very large, and so you do need some backstops.  At the same time, 

particularly the European leaders are keenly aware that there are solvency issues involved.  They 

are very reluctant to put liquidity rescue measures in place if they cannot be assured that Italy, 

Spain, and other peripheral countries will put in place the fiscal reforms needed to guarantee 

solvency and sustainability.  In that regard, the most obvious option now on the table is basically 

that any rescue measures be done in conjunction with an IMF program to enforce the 

conditionality needed to provide comfort to the European leaders. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, before we begin our general discussion in 

just a minute, I can talk about some calls I’ve had.  On solvency, just to reiterate what Steve said, 

the clearest case of insolvency is Greece, which is being addressed in various ways.  Arguably, 

for example, the increase in the German interest rate is not a solvency issue; it’s a concern about 

the stability of the euro and about self-fulfilling panics.  So I think there is arguably, for many if 

not most of the countries other than Greece, a significant element of panic or liquidity issue, as 

opposed to a solvency issue.  But again, to reiterate what Steve said, the Europeans are very 

focused—some would say too focused—on the moral-hazard solvency issues and are addressing 

that from a number of different fronts. 

MR. FISHER.  Brian, am I correct that two-year Greek debt is trading over 100 percent?  

MR. SACK.  Yes, 120 percent. 

November 28, 2011 11 of 40



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, as I understand this—obviously, there’s a 

code among central bankers.  These don’t seem to be extraordinary.  I’m curious as to whether—

we’ll have a discussion in just a minute—part of this package is that we’re going to reduce the 

domestic discount rate as well.  In other words, what lies herein is extending swap arrangements, 

which we’ve all, for the most part, agreed to, and adding the new dimension of providing 

liquidity in Canadian dollars, British pounds, Japanese yen, euros, and Swiss francs if requested 

by the appropriate Reserve Bank—I presume that means Richmond, largely, or New York for B 

of A, and then the other big institutions, but it might include others.  The suggestion here, as 

stated in the current intention, is that we reduce the rate on existing lines to OIS plus 50.  OIS is, 

what, 12 basis points?  So that would be less than the 75 we charge domestic institutions to 

borrow.  Implicit in this is that we would reduce the domestic discount rate.  Or can we justify—

even though they are central banks—lending money to foreigners—to use the term that our 

overseers might use—at a cheaper rate than we lend to our highest-quality domestic banks?  Is 

that our intention? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s our current intention.  I was hoping to address that, 

though, before we begin our substantive round.  Would you allow me to do that? 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir—of course. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll come back to it. 

MR. FISHER.  And then the last thing is—and maybe this is a point you wish to 

address—in terms of adhering to Bagehot principles, not just regarding the rate we charge, but 

also regarding the collateral that is accepted, that this is an intra–central bank facility.  But to 

take an extreme example, if during the course of time we decide to roll it over between now and 

November 28, 2011 12 of 40



 
 

 
 

February 1, 2013, and the euro is no longer the euro that we know, I’m curious as to how this is 

actually secured.  How would they pay us back? 

MR. KAMIN.  On that issue, a couple of points are worth making.  First of all, in our 

bilateral agreement with the ECB, basically, they would be beholden, as per the contract, to 

return dollars to us in any event, even if the collateral that we were holding—the euros—no 

longer had the standing that they did beforehand.  So, first, from a legal perspective, we are still 

owed the dollars.  Second, presumably, the euro would still be exchangeable for the currencies 

that would succeed the euro if it came to that.  So, in that instance, too, there will be value.  And 

finally—and I think this is important—right now, we’ve got two different tenors of swaps, the 

one week and the three month.  Certainly, the one-week swaps are short enough so that we could 

foresee an event and not lend any of those.  Even the three-month swaps seem to have a 

sufficiently short time frame that if it looked as though the demise of the euro area were 

imminent, we could basically not participate in those swaps.  So I think we have a reasonable 

amount of comfort on all of those fronts that the demise of the euro area, while no longer as 

unthinkable as it once was, probably does not pose a threat to the safety of these swaps. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much.  I have other questions, Mr. Chairman, but I’ll 

defer them until we get into the discussion.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions for Brian or Steve?  President 

Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Will these be sterilized? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That had not been our plan.  But if they become large, I 

think we would have to consider that.  Up to now, of course, it’s been essentially irrelevant 

because the draws have been tiny.  And frankly, I don’t expect large draws.  I think this is 

November 28, 2011 13 of 40



 
 

 
 

viewed as a backstop rather than as a major source of funding.  But if they became large, we 

would have to consider that, yes.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Do we have in mind, Mr. Chairman, a limit in terms of the expansion of 

our balance sheet? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, as I said, this is technically an unlimited swap line, as 

we have had since 2008.  Of course, we do have to agree to each individual draw.  Is that correct, 

Scott? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If they became excessively large, we could either restrict 

them or sterilize them.  So, no, I wouldn’t anticipate that our balance sheet would grow 

meaningfully because of this, but that would be a decision for the FOMC to undertake. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Other questions for Steve or Brian?  [No response]  

Well, let me add just a few points.  President Fisher asked whether we had information that was 

not in the newspapers.  I would say that the answer in some technical sense is no, but we have a 

lot more, call it soft, information, which comes from extensive discussions with European 

policymakers and other policymakers.  I had the pleasure of taking two G-7 calls beginning at 

7:00 a.m. on Thanksgiving morning.  There were two calls.  The first was with both the G-7 

central bank governors and the finance ministers, and the tone of these discussions remains, I 

think, fairly discouraging.  A generous interpretation from the finance ministers’ perspective is 

that they are approaching this on two fronts.  One the one hand, they’re taking a longer-run 

perspective—they’re trying to address moral hazard issues, structural reform, building their 

fiscal union, and moving toward a long-term solution, which obviously is an important 

November 28, 2011 14 of 40



 
 

 
 

component of an overall solution—at the same time that they are taking short-run steps, like 

leveraging the EFSF, capitalizing the banks, imposing near-term austerity measures, and 

allowing the ECB to buy government debt.  I think the concern people are recognizing is that the 

process is too slow and that the short-run measures on this trajectory are not going to be 

adequate.  So there is, obviously, a lot of concern.  There are very important political constraints.  

The ECB, in particular, is in a very delicate position.  They have been quite frank with me that 

although they talk about legalities, they view their main constraints as political.  Essentially, 

what will the Germans allow the ECB to do?  Their position is quite delicate in that respect, and 

frankly, I think it’s kind of perverse that their strategy is to actually buy for their balance sheet 

Greek debt, as opposed to lending to some vehicle or to the European Investment Bank or some 

other bank to indirectly finance government debt.  But that’s where their arguments about 

monetary policy have led them.  So the main inside information I would share with you is that 

there’s considerable concern and a lot of pessimism among the policymakers in Europe. 

I think it’s also important to note—and I’m hearing this more on calls—the growing 

concern about the European economy.  As Steve mentioned, the indicators have deteriorated in 

just the past few weeks.  Draghi noted the risk of a mild recession in his first press conference 

recently, but on conference calls, he’s pointed a number of times to a burgeoning credit crunch.  

That is, the banks are deleveraging very sharply, and that’s beginning to have palpable effects on 

economic activity in Europe.  So it’s a stress situation.  I believe that this would be the thrust of 

what Brian was saying—that while short-term funding markets for banks and financial 

institutions in the U.S. remain reasonably stable, the movements in stock prices and swap and 

CDS spreads for U.S. financial institutions suggest that we are at some risk of having the stress 

imported here. 

November 28, 2011 15 of 40



 
 

 
 

The second call I had immediately consecutive to that was with the G-7 central bankers, 

and there I would just want to convey to you the sense that it’s really important for central banks 

globally to work together, to be seen to be coordinating and cooperating.  It was felt that 

cooperation in this particular matter would be another example that would be reassuring to 

markets in general.  In particular, there was very strong support across all of the central banks for 

taking additional steps on the swaps.  The proposal that has come from the group collectively—

this was not really the Fed’s initiative; it was partly our initiative, but it was a collective 

decision—has three parts.  One is to extend the swap lines.  Of course, we could do that later, but 

as part of a package, it seems to make sense.  And the February 1, 2013, expiration would take us 

over the year-end.  The second element of the proposed package that we discussed in our call 

was creating a complete network of swaps—every bilateral pair.  Until now, it’s been U.S. 

versus other counterparties; this would create a full, dense network of swaps between all bilateral 

pairs of the G-7 currencies.  In particular, that would mean that we would be signing up for the 

option, of course—which we don’t have to use and probably wouldn’t use—of reciprocal swaps, 

where we could access pounds or euros or yen if we so needed.  I don’t anticipate we would need 

that, but it does provide yet another element.  The third element, as you know, would be to 

reduce the swap rate to 50 basis points plus OIS.  As was mentioned by Brian, the swap line rate 

has just recently gone in the money at its current rate.  We’re not seeing any activity.  It’s 

obvious that there is a significant stigma issue, and if the stigma is strong enough, then 

essentially the backstop is ineffective.  It doesn’t have any impact on market confidence.  So 

there was a view that by reducing the swap rate, making it more economical, we would reduce 

the perceived stigma, and even if it were not heavily used—and I don’t anticipate it to be heavily 

November 28, 2011 16 of 40



 
 

 
 

used—it would have a stabilizing effect, or at least a positive effect, on European funding 

markets and then indirectly on U.S. credit markets as well. 

President Fisher asked about the primary credit rate, and he’s correct that on this 

proposal, the rate on swaps would be a little bit below the primary credit rate.  I discussed this 

with the Board, and I would have to say that our view is not strongly one way or the other.  I 

think that we could certainly take it up again.  Clearly, there is some risk, as President Fisher 

suggested, that we would be criticized for lending to “foreigners” at a lower rate than to U.S. 

banks.  There are a couple of arguments in the other direction, though, which I want to note.  The 

first is that we’ve been trying over time—and Dallas is one of the Federal Reserve Banks that 

has pressed this—to normalize the spread between the funds rate and the primary credit rate.  

And when we, in fact, moved up the primary credit rate to 75 basis points, it was actually quite a 

communications challenge and led to some market swings.  So, barring any need in terms of 

domestic market conditions to cut the primary credit rate, it seems as though if we did that—

besides possibly signaling more concern than we have—we would then be in a situation where 

we would have to again, in the future, move up the rate, and we would be further than ever from 

a more normal spread between the funds rate and the discount window rate.  So that’s one 

observation, not necessarily dispositive.  The other point, though, on the question of lending to 

European banks:  One advantage of keeping the primary credit rate where it is now is that it 

would be very clear that we would want European banks to borrow from the ECB with those 

additional credit guarantees rather than from our discount window.  And that’s something we can 

do with moral suasion, but this provides a market incentive for them to borrow from the ECB 

rather than from us.  I think that’s a good thing for us as well.   So those were the reasons that the 

Board—again, informally—seemed to have a mild preference for not cutting the PCR.  But 

November 28, 2011 17 of 40



again, this is something that we can certainly revisit, particularly if there’s a reaction that is 

negative.  But I guess my sense right now is that the benefits of leaving the PCR where it is are 

slightly greater than the costs. 

You’ve now heard the proposal.  I’m happy to now open the floor.  We don’t have to 

have a formal go-round, but, of course, anyone who has questions, comments, or reactions is 

more than welcome to speak.  This is, of course, a meeting, and so your expressing your views 

on policy is obviously perfectly appropriate.  Who would like to start?  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I really have an FYI that leads to a 

question.  I take it from remarks earlier about the idea of a network of bilateral swap 

arrangements that you would draw the line with the G-7 currencies.  552 U.S.C. (b)(4)

, who’s the governor of the central bank, and in a private 

discussion, he made an appeal.  Even though they have quite ample reserves at the moment, he 

made an appeal for a swap line because they are concerned about the turbulence that could come 

out of Europe that would affect hot money flows back and forth into 
552 U.S.C. (b)(4)

.  So that’s the FYI.  

Maybe the Board has already heard officially from 
552 U.S.C. (b)(4)

 or some other country, but I wanted to 

mention that.  The question, really, is the following:  Is the current thinking that we would draw 

the line with simply G-7 countries? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we have a lot of interest from emerging market 

economies in swap lines.  As you know, we were up to 14 counterparties during the crisis.  

552 U.S.C. (b)(4)  would very much like to have a swap 

line with us.  Obviously, today we’re talking about the G-7.  My own sense is that, first of all, 

there should be a higher bar to going to the emerging market counterparties, in part because of 

greater counterparty risk.  Second, the concerns they have are still prospective rather than actual 

November 28, 2011 18 of 40



 
 

 
 

for the most part.  Obviously, if we reached a very destructive situation, we would have to look 

at that again.  However, at this point in time, I am not planning to propose any further expansion.  

But, of course, again, this is an FOMC decision, and if conditions warrant and the FOMC wants 

to address it, that’s fine.  But there’s no current plan in place to go beyond the G-7.  Other 

questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess I’d advise against this.  I think that, 

basically, theatrics are important in a situation like this, and coordinated central bank action 

would more or less send a panic signal without doing very much to actually help the situation.  

We had the 100 basis point policy in place all the way through 2008 and 2009.  It actually 

worked quite well in that instance and did a lot to chase borrowers out to the market once 

conditions returned to a more normal status.  I like the 100 basis point penalty that we had 

before, and given that it is battle tested, I don’t really see a good reason to change it here.  I also 

think the 50 basis point backstop would be unlikely to address any stigma issues.  If there are 

stigma issues, there’s stigma.  And, as you point out, 100 basis points is already in the money 

right now, and it doesn’t seem to me that things would change that much if we moved that to 

50 basis points.  We’re going to be under a lot of pressure and a lot of criticism that we’re 

somehow bailing out the Europeans.  That’s a very dangerous situation for the organization.  

Also, I think that in Europe, the recent discussions of enforcing fiscal austerity at the EU level 

are the first serious signs I’ve seen of some kind of significant reform that would actually address 

the problem instead of piling debt on top of existing debt problems.  So I’d be very reluctant to 

take the pressure off the politicians in Europe on that process, however mild that might be, 

because we’re a long way away and this is relatively minor policy on that. 

November 28, 2011 19 of 40



 
 

 
 

On the extension, I would prefer to extend in some kind of regularly scheduled meeting, 

preferably the January meeting.  Then you could review swap lines every year in January and not 

review them in the heat of the crisis when you’re actually sending a signal in conjunction with 

the review of the swap lines.  I think we’ve often been reviewing these in the heat of the 

moment, and I’d prefer to review them at regularly scheduled times that do not contribute to the 

problem.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Just a quick comment.  I think there are a number of efforts 

under way to address moral hazard and fiscal reform issues.  The market situation is one that 

might not comfortably await a regular meeting.  We’ve also had these discussions with the 

foreign central banks, and they all believe that this would be a positive for markets and a positive 

for perception of cooperation and coordination.  But again, that’s a judgment you have to make.  

Other comments?  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I’m strongly supportive of this action.  I do think the financial 

markets are badly disrupted, and it does make sense to address it in a coordinated effort.  I do 

have two questions.  One is whether we have communicated with the other central banks about 

the moral suasion issue—that there is an expectation that banks would be borrowing in their 

home country when there is access to a swap line.  Has that communication occurred, and do we 

have a reason to believe that that moral suasion will be effective?  Because I would have a mild 

preference for actually having the rate at which both domestic and foreign banks borrow be the 

same if we thought that moral suasion would be effective.  My second question is on disclosure.  

One part is whether or not we would be disclosing who’s tapping the lines by central bank in our 

own releases.  And the second part is whether any other central banks have different disclosure 

requirements—in terms of banks borrowing from their central banks or in terms of them 

November 28, 2011 20 of 40



 
 

 
 

borrowing from us.  Have we thought through all of the disclosure issues?  Because when we 

think of stigma, disclosure is an important component of stigma, and given the Dodd–Frank 

requirements for providing more information, I’d be curious about how we were thinking about 

those disclosure issues across countries.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes—I’d be happy to get any help that’s needed—but let 

me just say that on the moral suasion issue, we’ve been very clear, not only in the context of the 

swaps, but also more generally, that the discount window is a very short-term facility, and that 

we expect the Europeans and their regulators and their finance ministries to make sure that 

European banks’ issues are being addressed by Europeans and not by the Federal Reserve.  

We’ve gotten a few troubled cases out of the window, as you know, and I don’t believe we 

currently have any significant lending to European banks.  So, yes, we’ve been very clear 

throughout that we don’t want the discount window to be used as a first resort for European 

banks. 

On disclosure, if I understand correctly from our previous practice, we would disclose 

regularly the amounts drawn by each counterparty—that is, each central bank.  We would not 

know necessarily to whom they were lending, and I don’t know about each of the five 

counterparties, but as far as I know, none of them disclose to whom they lend, although 

sometimes it’s either obvious to figure out or becomes known.  But, no, we would certainly not 

be doing that, because our counterparties are the individual central banks. 

MR. ALVAREZ.  If I could add something there, Mr. Chairman.  However, if we do the 

reciprocal lines, and, for example, we then do transactions in yen with domestic banks, that 

would be considered open market operations.  We would disclose those eight quarters after the 

transactions occurred. 

November 28, 2011 21 of 40



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is an interesting question—I should have asked you 

this before:  If we got yen, could we lend yen through the discount window, or would it be only 

an OMO type of thing? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  That’s a question of first impression.  Because the System has never 

lent any currency other than dollars, we’re looking into that.  We clearly can do open market 

operations with anyone in the market.  If we consider it that way, then we would buy and sell the 

yen, and we would treat that as open market operations for the Dodd–Frank Act.  That would 

involve eight-quarter disclosure. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  To get back to Eric’s question of disclosure, I’m trying to understand this.  

If someone draws down one of these swap lines—I’m talking about the dollar lines—we’d book 

it as a loan to a central bank.  Is that correct? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. FISHER.  Once it is lent out, then, from that central bank— 

MR. ALVAREZ.  It’s not a loan.  It’s a swap. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But the counterparty is the central bank. 

MR. ALVAREZ.  Correct. 

MR. FISHER.  Right.  Once that central bank lends it out, does it shift to a loan to 

depository institutions, or does it stay as a swap? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It stays as a swap. 

MR. ALVAREZ.  It stays the same. 

MR. FISHER.  So we have no way of knowing, to answer President Rosengren’s 

question, where this ultimately ends up.  It’s not disclosed.  Is that correct? 

November 28, 2011 22 of 40



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s not disclosed.  We could inquire, of course, but our 

counterparty is the central bank.  And they’re the ones who are responsible to us. 

MR. FISHER.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman Dudley. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I strongly support this.  I think creating a more effective 

backstop for dollar liquidity is important.  The way that it’s being proposed will signal 

international policy coordination; we’ve seen historically through the crisis that international 

policy coordination is perceived by the market very favorably.  And cutting the rate will 

encourage somewhat more usage, which will help destigmatize the facility.  A destigmatized 

facility is a more effective backstop than one that’s heavily stigmatized.  I think the outcome 

we’re trying to seek here is that by having a more effective dollar backstop, we’ll have less 

forced deleveraging by European banks of their dollar books of assets  How fast they deleverage 

those books of assets has real consequences for the United States’ economy.  That’s really the 

connection in terms of what’s in it for us; I think there really is something in it for us, and we 

shouldn’t lose sight of that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would commend to the group an article by my ex-

colleague at Princeton, Hyun Shin, which looks at the transmission of credit from U.S. dollar 

sources and other dollar sources through the European banking system.  Much of that dollar 

funding flows back into the United States.  This, in fact, is addressing a funding problem of a 

credit source, which in turn affects U.S. borrowers.  So there is a connection that we can point to.  

Other questions or comments?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m torn on this issue.  There is a code among central 

bankers.  I think Vice Chairman Dudley is correct from the standpoint that we’re most effective 

November 28, 2011 23 of 40



 
 

 
 

when we work together.  We’ve learned this from our own history.  I think we have a 

communications problem here, which I would ask you to address.  You made the correct point 

that we—and you used the term “we”—are trying and have been making efforts to normalize 

rates.  And you’re right—Dallas and one other Bank have been rather aggressive on that front.  

I’m very worried about what’s going on in Europe.  It’s a political mare’s nest, and the 

sovereignty issues are horrifically vexing.  I’m also quite concerned about where the European 

banking system is—the false stress tests that they put together before and now the real effort—I 

know we’re having an influence on them—to make sure that they get their capital ratios 

organized.  Obviously, we know how they’re doing it.  They’d like to issue tier 1 equity, but 

that’s not easy in these markets.  They’re cutting back, therefore, on their risk-weighted assets 

and on their lending.  The Commerzbank call to the analysts this past week had very clear 

instructions and a revelation that they’ve instructed their bankers to lend only to Poland and to 

Germany, and they’re just cutting out other activities.  So we know some deleveraging is taking 

place.  Shriveling up of other credits, including dollar-based credits, is happening, and I think 

Vice Chairman Dudley is absolutely correct.  We all understand this.  It comes back to bite us on 

the rear end. 

What I’m most concerned about here is the reaction to our lending to others at less than 

we lend to the highest-quality community, regional, and large banks in this country.  I wouldn’t 

understate or underestimate how that might reverberate negatively against us.  I’m a little 

concerned that we’ve agreed to OIS plus 50 basis points.  If it were OIS plus whatever equates to 

75, assuming OIS is 12, I’d be more comfortable.  And that just gives me pause.  I don’t think 

that just issuing this statement, which does not refer to the OIS plus 50, is problematic.  I do 

think it becomes problematic in terms of the execution and, again, in the minds of those on both 

November 28, 2011 24 of 40



 
 

 
 

sides of the aisle in the Congress.  There is a tradeoff here.  We do want to normalize rates, but 

we’ve been presented with a very difficult circumstance that poses risk to us.  And I think we 

need to noodle that through before we make a decision.  Again, I’ve been probably the most 

aggressive advocate for normalizing rates.  We’ve pulled back from that recently, but just 

because of the circumstance.  I don’t think we could easily answer those questions unless we 

deal with our highest-quality domestic credits.  I think it would be very, very difficult, 

particularly with the community banks, the regional banks—which are high quality, from which 

we demand substantial and measurable collateral to make a loan—to say that we’re trusting other 

institutions.  Again, they’re our brethren.  These are central bankers.  We understand the code. 

But it presents a huge communications problem, and the question is whether we should take 

action or just try to deal with it through communications.  And I’d leave that up to the rest of the 

group to decide, but I wouldn’t understate it.  I think the optics are not very good, particularly 

when we’re under the microscope—or certainly the magnifying glass.  That’s my biggest 

concern, Mr. Chairman.  I’m torn on whether or not I can support this, unless we have a clear 

understanding of how we’re going to deal with that.  It might be through a press conference on 

your part.  It might be through other efforts to communicate.  But it’s a hard sell.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make a couple of comments.  Others on the Board 

can speak to this if they wish.  As I said, while there was not a strong preference in this regard, 

there was the advantage of pushing European banks away from our window toward the foreign 

central banks, which, by the way, because they are our counterparties, you could argue that, from 

a credit risk perspective, they’re actually better risks than banks.  But I suppose that’s a different 

question.  I would say two other things, if I could.  One is that—and President Bullard raised this 

November 28, 2011 25 of 40



 
 

 
 

as well—while deliberation is certainly important, we are in a very serious situation, one that is 

changing quickly.  I don’t think we’re in a mode, of course, where we should be panicking or 

anything like that.  But obviously, I think speed is useful and preemption is useful.  I hesitate to 

make this argument, but I will anyway:  I personally negotiated some of these ideas with my 

counterparts in the other central banks.  And I do need to have a little bit of flexibility, I hope, to 

represent the Federal Reserve’s point of view in international discussions.  Now, obviously, if 

you’re opposed to this action, by all means, you should vote against it.  But if you’re close to the 

edge, I would ask that to be an additional consideration.  It’s very difficult for me to consult 

continually with the FOMC at the same time that we’re having calls and discussions and 

meetings with our foreign counterparties.  But to go back to your main point, President Fisher, 

rather than defend this to the death, if in fact we do run into problems, the Board can consider 

making a change.  We can do it in a few hours if we have to. 

MR. FISHER.  I think, Mr. Chairman, first of all, that nobody wants to undermine you, 

and I certainly personally never wish to undermine you.  And I do think you have to have the 

leeway you discussed.  I do find more convincing the explanation you gave us earlier, which is, 

we’re not lending through the discount window.  And we’ve had criticism of lending to foreign 

borrowers through the discount window, so we’re not changing there.  We’re lending to another 

central bank and within the fraternity and sorority of central banks around the world.  All I’m 

suggesting is that we really think through how this will be communicated, because we know—or 

at least I’m willing to surmise—that there will be tough questions asked, and we just have to be 

clear.  And that goes beyond what the statement said.  So the question is whether there is a 

vehicle for you to do that.  I’m not against the proposal; I have concerns about the proposal.  Its 

effectiveness will be dependent on how we communicate it.  I’m just raising that flag and asking 

November 28, 2011 26 of 40



 
 

 
 

us to think this through, as to how we get it done so we don’t end up pulling the rug out from 

underneath you or from the purpose of the exercise.  That’s my point. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I appreciate that.  I agree—communication is a big part of 

this.  President Bullard was next on my list. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On expected usage, I understood Vice 

Chairman Dudley to argue that usage would probably be up substantially because of the 

deleveraging in Europe, but I understood you to say that you didn’t think these swap lines would 

be used that much.  So I think we should try to get some clarity on where we really think usage is 

likely to go.  I’d also say that under the 100 basis point policy, we didn’t seem to have any 

trouble getting people to use the facility during 2008 and 2009.  So I’m wondering what’s 

changed this time.  And I’m a little concerned that at 50 basis points, if the dollar funding 

remains in the money, then you could end up with the addicted banking system in Europe that 

wants the dollar funding over the long term, and then we don’t really get out of the swap lines 

the way we did in 2008 and 2009.  The 100 basis point policy was very useful from that point of 

view, and you got those banks to seek other sources during that time. 

As far as the signaling goes, I disagree with the way the other central banks see this.  

They want to send a united signal, which I would interpret mostly as they want to get the Fed on 

board, but I don’t think that this is the way to go in this crisis.  What you’ve got are governments 

that are counting on central banks to bail them out, and you need to keep pressure on those 

governments to get the fiscal austerity that they need.  They’ve borrowed way too much, and 

they’re certainly hoping that central banks will somehow bail them out, so we’re sending exactly 

the wrong signal.  I can believe other central banks want to do it, but I don’t think it’s a good 

idea, and I don’t think it’s a good way to manage a crisis.  Again, I would prefer to review swap 

November 28, 2011 27 of 40



 
 

 
 

lines at regular junctures, not at particular moments of intense turmoil in markets.  That’s a better 

way to go, and then you get rid of the signaling problem of a panic mode and a signal that the 

central banks are all coming to the governments’ rescue.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On the exit problem, the fact is, of course, that all of the 

loans are for finite periods, and we can stop lending anytime we want, or we can raise the rate 

anytime we want.  So I don’t think that is a real issue. 

I don’t know how much the swap borrowing would increase.  Maybe Vice Chairman 

Dudley has a thought.  My thinking on why it would not be so large is that if it does create more 

assurance, it will ease the flow of private money, because of the backstop feature, so that the 

funding can take place through private channels.  But I obviously don’t know for sure.  Vice 

Chairman Dudley, you have a two-handed response to that? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  I think you’re absolutely right—we don’t know for 

sure.  We want some increase in usage because if we didn’t get an increase in usage, it would 

just show us that the swap lines were still very stigmatized.  So we want some increase in usage, 

which would serve to destigmatize the swaps, make them more effective as a backstop, and 

therefore keep more private-sector players in the game.  I think you’d see some increase in 

usage.  How much depends on how well we actually are destigmatizing the facility so it serves as 

an effective backstop.  I don’t know if it would be substantial or small.  All we can say is that 

reducing the rate from 100 basis points to 50 basis points does two things:  One, it increases the 

economics of using the swap facilities to a degree; and, two, it allows people who had been 

staying out to now say, “Oh, it’s now okay to use this facility.”  If you have a number of people 

use it rather than just two or three, then the facility becomes destigmatized, and so it becomes 

more effective as a backstop.  That’s how I see it. 

November 28, 2011 28 of 40



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support this resolution today.  I think that 

it’s a relatively small action given everything that’s going on.  As Vice Chairman Dudley just 

mentioned, I’m not sure if this will solve the stigma problem, but we can find out.  Showing 

coordination with the other G-7 central banks is helpful in the current situation.  Having listened 

to the discussion from President Fisher and President Rosengren, I am a little nervous about the 

discount rate alignment.  It might be worth thinking through more carefully whether or not 

reducing the discount rate to 50 basis points would be a good idea to align it with the overall 

borrowing incentives associated with this swap.  Trying to avoid any appearance that we’re 

attempting to skirt disclosure requirements might be helpful, but that’s for the Board to decide, 

obviously.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher, I had a lot of the same concerns about what 

this said in terms of the difference in the borrowing rates to our banks versus the foreign central 

banks.  But here is the reason I’ve come out on the side of doing nothing with the primary credit 

rate at this point.  First of all, I think there would certainly be some risk that in communicating 

the reduction in the primary credit rate, you could get some speculation as to what U.S. banks we 

were reducing it for and what the reason—changes in financial conditions in U.S. banks—for 

that was.  To the extent that it actually did encourage usage of our discount window at the same 

time, there’s always the speculation as to who’s in there using that rate.  Also, we will be 

reporting to the Congress who was using the discount window.  All of that seemed to me to raise 

a lot of questions that might actually be more harmful to U.S. banks than not.  Finally, if you 

haven’t lowered it yet, you can always lower it.  And if there does get to be a very public 

November 28, 2011 29 of 40



 
 

 
 

criticism about the difference in the rates, then you can very specifically respond to that criticism 

by changing the rate, and it seems to me that the communication challenge is a little bit easier 

then.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to respectfully recommend that 

we don’t pursue this course for many of the same reasons that President Bullard expressed.  I can 

understand how funding can suddenly dry up for a financial institution, as in the case of 

MF Global.  I can understand how funding pressures can emerge for a broad set of market 

participants.  But I don’t see us in a situation where there’s a deficiency of liquidity supply.  Just 

look at our balance sheet.  There’s plenty of liquidity in dollars available in the marketplace.  

What I think we see is a deficiency in the willingness to lend to particular institutions, largely for 

the reason that they’re viewed as riskier.  What we know both from public sources and from 

supervisory sources suggests that that reluctance in the marketplace lines up pretty well with 

differences in the riskiness of those counterparties.  I don’t see any evidence that it doesn’t 

reflect a difference in concerns about creditworthiness.  And so this doesn’t seem like a matter of 

market efficiency or functioning.  It seems as though intervention here would be distributional.  

More broadly, I think some financial strains are consistent with a well-functioning set of 

markets.  MF Global is a great example of that.  I don’t think that’s a case where we should have 

intervened, and I don’t see MF Global’s demise as a failure of market functioning, apart from the 

fraud they committed relative to the use of funds.  More central bank credit is always going to be 

seen as positive for markets.  So I don’t think the fact that markets would view this as positive is 

an argument for doing this.  A farm bill is always positive for agricultural land prices, but it’s not 

an argument that you want an infinitely large farm bill. 

November 28, 2011 30 of 40



 
 

 
 

My predecessors have a long history of dissenting on foreign exchange operations.  The 

reasoning is that, like other central bank credit actions, they essentially involve fiscal policy, 

they’re distributional, and they’re essentially end runs around constitutional appropriations 

policy, and that entangles us in political controversy.  I think that, as I said, applies to virtually 

all central bank credit extension.  That’s why we’ve declared, as a Committee, our intention to 

get back to a Treasury-only balance sheet as soon as we can.  And I’d argue that this dynamic 

has contributed to the hostile political environment that we currently face.  More broadly, an 

expansion of central bank swap lines is going to send the message of an implied backstop 

commitment that I think is too large.  It’s counterproductive.  It will contribute to financial 

instability rather than reduce it. 

So I remain respectfully opposed to additional swap arrangements to support our 

provision of liquidity in foreign currencies.  I agree with those who highlight the political risk 

that would be associated, I think, with offering these central bank swaps on terms that are more 

advantageous than those we offer at the discount window to domestic borrowers.  I would urge 

you, Mr. Chairman, if we go down this road, to consult with your colleagues and ask them if a 

straight 75 basis points would be acceptable, rather than 50 over OIS.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I have Governor Raskin next. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a couple of operational issues that are 

suggested by the text that I thought would be worth getting some clarification on.  First of all, I 

was wondering whether we know the timing of other central bank announcements, if we were to 

go forward with this. 

November 28, 2011 31 of 40



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All six banks will announce simultaneously before markets 

open on Wednesday. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you.  Second, in terms of the process that is suggested in the 

second paragraph of the resolution, there is a sentence in it that indicates that the “requests for 

drawings on the foreign currency swap lines and distribution of the proceeds to U.S. financial 

institutions shall be initiated by the appropriate Reserve Bank and approved by the Chairman in 

consultation with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.”  One question I have on that process is 

really about the statement of approval by the Chairman, and the question is whether that is an 

“approved or denied,” or is the implication that it would be, in essence, “approved”? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Scott, will you help? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  I think this would give the Chairman the latitude, after consulting with 

the subcommittee and informing the full Committee, to deny draws or approve draws. 

MS. RASKIN.  So it’s “approved or denied”? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  Yes. 

MS. RASKIN.  Okay.  And in that same sentence, the idea about “distribution of the 

proceeds to U.S. financial institutions”—to come back to the earlier part of the conversation 

regarding transparency, would the distribution of proceeds to U.S. financial institutions be 

disclosed? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  Yes.  Remember, there are two directions that these swaps would work 

in.  There are the swaps with the foreign central bank that they disseminate through their 

mechanisms and their countries.  The disclosure of that would all be done by the foreign central 

bank, if at all—not by us.  We do disclose that we’ve had the swap with the foreign central bank 

and how much draw there has been by that foreign central bank.  But the clause you’re referring 

November 28, 2011 32 of 40



 
 

 
 

to is the reciprocal side of the line.  So if we were to allow an institution in the United States to 

draw down yen that we had taken from a swap line, for example, then we would consider that an 

open market operation, the sale of foreign exchange in the open market.  We would have to 

disclose that eight quarters after the transaction had occurred.  We would make a disclosure of 

our counterparty and the amount and the rate, but it would be done in the future. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions, comments?  President Lacker has two 

hands. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes, I’d like to follow up on this point.  It says “initiated by the 

appropriate Reserve Bank.”  That seems to parallel the discount window and the way it works, 

and that Reserve Bank is essentially in charge of lending to an institution in its District.  But this 

is an open market operation?  Would this be administered through New York?  And, more 

broadly, should we go down this path?  Do you have in mind any protocol for deciding on an 

individual institution in a given District outside New York?  What if the Reserve Bank doesn’t 

initiate it? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  I’ll leave the policy issue to others, but on the operational side, the 

thought was that because each financial institution—bank, in particular—has accounts at its local 

Reserve Bank, it made sense for banks in particular to deal with the Reserve Bank where they 

had an account and then for the Reserve Bank—say, Richmond—to obtain the currency from the 

SOMA.  That was an easier operational method than having banks deal directly with New York, 

which wouldn’t have the account set up for the bank.  So they’re OMO transactions, but we 

would be dealing with counterparties beyond the primary dealers, which are normally who we do 

the OMO transactions with. 

November 28, 2011 33 of 40



 
 

 
 

MR. LACKER.  Would this just be with banks, or could it be with any affiliates? 

MR. ALVAREZ.  It could be done with any financial institution, the way the resolution is 

worded.  So that would include affiliates as well. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it’s important that we get these details straight, but I 

would hope we don’t get too far down this line because this is a pretty hypothetical situation.  

President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, the way the statement is written, there’s no mention of the 

rate we would charge.  It does say that “the Chairman shall establish the rates on the swap 

arrangements by mutual agreement with the foreign central banks and in consultation with the 

Foreign Currency Subcommittee,” and that you’ll keep us informed.  I assume that paragraph 

applies to both sets of swap arrangements—the dollar swaps and the foreign currency swaps—is 

that correct? 

MR. ENGLISH.  Yes, that’s right. 

MR. FISHER.  Okay.  And that it’ll be “consistent with principles discussed with and 

guidance provided by the Committee.”  Again, my guidance, for what it’s worth, as an individual 

on the Committee and as a voter, is that we not lend at less than what we lend to high-quality 

U.S. banks.  You will have the freedom under this, in consultation with the Foreign Currency 

Subcommittee, to make that decision.  I want to be extremely careful here in terms of not 

undermining authority.  You’re primus inter pares; you’re the Chairman.  But I do think it is 

inadvisable for us to lend—despite the counterarguments, which are helpful and should be 

articulated—at less than we lend to our domestic counterparts; I have real trouble supporting 

that.  I guess—and please don’t take offense—I don’t like the process with which this has been 

developed.  I think we should have had this discussion at some point to highlight what these 

November 28, 2011 34 of 40



 
 

 
 

obstacles are.  Obviously, you know us all well.  You’re making the best judgment possible, and 

you are the central bank in the eyes of our counterparts.  But that is a very tough one for me to 

swallow as an individual member of this Committee.  And then the second thing, which 

President Rosengren and President Evans mentioned, is the transparency issue.  I’m sure we’re 

going to get questions.  We have to be prepared to deal with that.  Again, when we release the 

statement, we’re not going to state the rate, as I understand it.  We are going to say that you will 

establish the rate in consultation. 

MR. ENGLISH.  No, I think there’s a distinction that you need to make between the 

resolution that the Committee will pass and the statement that will be released Wednesday 

morning before the opening of business, which is being negotiated. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  There will be a press release. 

MR. FISHER.  So you’re asking us to agree, then, on the 50 basis points—is that correct?  

And we would make that public? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, technically, you’re agreeing to delegate it to me, in 

consultation with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee.  But I’m informing you that it would be 

my intention, along with the other five central banks, to agree to a rate of 50 basis points plus 

OIS. 

MR. FISHER.  Would we record minutes of this meeting, where you had some concerns 

expressed about lending at less than we would have lent to the domestic banks? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course.  This is a formal meeting, and it’ll have minutes 

and transcripts. 

MR. FISHER.  Well, again, I’m worried about putting you in an uncomfortable position.  

There is a principle here that I’m worried about as well, and then there is the reactive aspect of 

November 28, 2011 35 of 40



 
 

 
 

this, which I’m concerned about.  If I may just put my cards on the table, in answer to Governor 

Duke’s question, I think it would be a mistake to cut the rate to domestic banks to 50 basis points 

and do it simultaneously.  I believe we would then panic the markets.  So, Governor Duke, I 

agree with you.  I think it would send a bad signal.  I wouldn’t close that door, depending on 

what happens in terms of economic developments.  Where I come down personally is that we 

should not have agreed to 50 basis points.  We should have agreed to 75 or 12 basis points less 

than that, wherever OIS is.  But this is a dilemma because, again, we don’t want to undermine 

our standing, and certainly we don’t want to undermine your standing.  So I’m just being utterly 

frank here.  I think that’s the biggest problem with this proposal—the 50 basis points.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman Dudley. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I just wanted to make the very simple point that we think 

it’s highly unlikely that we’d ever be lending foreign currencies to U.S. depository institutions or 

other financial institutions.  So all of this discussion about how these bilateral swap lines would 

actually work in practice is, as you said, hypothetical—extremely hypothetical.  My 

understanding of why the bilateral swap lines are even on the table is that this is just something 

that the other central banks would like to see to signal the greatest degree of international policy 

coordination, as opposed to a need that we think we actually are, under any reasonable scenario, 

likely to ever have. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions or comments?  [No 

response]  All right.  Well, I thank you for the discussion.  The reservations are noted.  I 

appreciate, Richard, the points you made.  We are somewhat reactive of necessity.  The world is 

changing quickly, and we are trying to coordinate with five other central banks, which makes it 

November 28, 2011 36 of 40



 
 

 
 

more difficult to do things with a long lead time.  My view is that this is a helpful step, not a 

major step.  But I am quite concerned about market developments in general, and I think we 

should be prepared to have another meeting should that be necessary.  As I said before, my 

concern is that it’s even worse than political.  I think the Europeans just do not, in some sense, 

get it, to use the vernacular.  I don’t believe they understand quite how dangerous the situation is 

that they’re involved in.  They are, of course, in a situation where politicians are making the 

decisions, and they have many concerns other than the ideal economic outcome. 

If there are no further comments, given that there were some concerns, I think we 

probably should take a roll call vote on this.  Debbie. 

MS. DANKER.  Okay.  This vote is on the resolution that was sent around this morning. 

Chairman Bernanke   Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley   Yes—a hundred times, yes.  [Laughter] 
Governor Duke    Yes 
President Evans    Yes 
President Fisher 

MR. FISHER.  This is just on the section in quotes, is that correct? 

MS. DANKER.  That’s correct.  It’s the resolution. 

President Fisher  Yes—thank you.  Reluctantly, yes. 
President Kocherlakota   Yes 
President Lacker  No—and I’d like to know if I can vote a hundred times, too?  

[Laughter] 
 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  By the way, President Lacker is voting in place of President 

Plosser, who was unable to join us today. 

Governor Raskin  Yes 
Governor Tarullo  Yes 
Governor Yellen  Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Thank you, again, and we will do our best to 

keep you well informed.  And, if not sooner, we will see you in a couple of weeks.  Thank you. 

November 28, 2011 37 of 40



 
 

 
 

END OF MEETING 

November 28, 2011 38 of 40




