











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, January 25-26, 2011


 
 

 
 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
January 25–26, 2011 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors in Washington, D.C., starting at 1:00 p.m. on Tuesday, January 25, 2011, and 
continuing at 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, January 26, 2011.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Elizabeth Duke 
Charles L. Evans 
Richard W. Fisher 
Narayana Kocherlakota 
Charles I. Plosser 
Sarah Bloom Raskin 
Daniel K. Tarullo  
Kevin Warsh 
Janet L. Yellen 

Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, John F. Moore, and Sandra Pianalto, Alternate 
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 

James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Nathan Sheets, Economist  
David J. Stockton, Economist 

James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, Simon Potter, 
David Reifschneider, Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, David W. Wilcox, and 
Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Economists 

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board 
of Governors 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 

January 25–26, 2011 1 of 282



 
 

 

¹ Attended Wednesday’s session only. 
² Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

 

 
William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Charles S. Struckmeyer,¹ Deputy Staff Director, Office of the Staff Director, Board of 
Governors 
 
Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 
Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 
Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 
 
Daniel M. Covitz, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Gretchen C. Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors 

Beth Anne Wilson,² Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 

Bruce Fallick,² Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

David M. Arseneau, Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors; Stefania D’Amico and Edward M. Nelson, Senior Economists, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Norman J. Morin, Senior Economist, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 

Mark A. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 

Patrick K. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

January 25–26, 2011 2 of 282



 
 

 
 

David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher 
J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, San 
Francisco, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively 
 
Julie Ann Remache, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 

 
Ayşegül Şahin,² Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

R. Jason Faberman² and Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Philadelphia and Richmond, respectively 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

² Attended Tuesday’s session only. 

January 25–26, 2011 3 of 282



 
 

 
 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
January 25–26, 2011 

January 25—Afternoon Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We will come to order.  The new members of the 

Committee this year are Presidents Evans, Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser.  First Vice 

President Moore is once again serving for San Francisco.  Is First Vice President Pat Barron 

here? 

MR. BARRON.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is Pat’s last meeting, because he’s retiring.  Let me 

congratulate you and thank you for your service in Atlanta.  [Applause] 

MR. BARRON.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  This is our organizational meeting, so we have our usual 

items.  The first item is electing Committee officers.  Governor Yellen, do you have a motion? 

MS. YELLEN.  I would like to move the nomination of Ben Bernanke as Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And I would like it to be known that I meet the residency 

requirement.  [Laughter]  Are there other nominations?  [No response]  In favor?  [Chorus of 

ayes]  Opposed?  [No response]  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  I would like to nominate Bill Dudley as Vice Chair. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Comments?  Other nominations?  All in favor?  [Chorus of 

ayes]  Opposed?  [No response]  Thank you. 

All right, we now turn to the nominated staff officers of the Committee.  Debbie will read 

the list. 

MS. DANKER.  Secretary and Economist, William English; Deputy Secretary, Deborah 

Danker; Assistant Secretaries, Matthew Luecke, David Skidmore, and Michelle Smith; General 

January 25–26, 2011 4 of 282



 
 

 
 

Counsel, Scott Alvarez; Deputy General Counsel, Thomas Baxter; Assistant General Counsel, 

Richard Ashton; Economists, Nathan Sheets and David Stockton; Associate Economists from the 

Board, James Clouse, Thomas Connors, Steven Kamin, David Reifschneider, and David Wilcox; 

Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks, Simon Potter, Loretta Mester, Daniel Sullivan, 

Harvey Rosenblum, and Kei-Mu Yi. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other nominations?  [No response]  It’s a very good group.  

All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed?  [No response]  Thank you. 

Next we have to select a Reserve Bank to execute transactions for the Open Market 

Account.  New York once again is willing to serve.  Any other nominations?  [No response]  All 

in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Opposed?  [No response]  Thank you. 

The manager of the System Open Market Account, Brian Sack, is once again willing to 

serve.  The New York Bank will have to ratify that if he is elected.  Other nominations?  [No 

response]  In favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed?  [No response]  Thank you. 

The next item is the proposed revisions to the Program for Security of FOMC 

Information.  This is the memorandum that was circulated to you from Scott and Debbie.  It 

makes two changes to the current Program for Security.  The most important change sets out a 

process for investigating breaches of FOMC security that involves an evaluation by the General 

Counsel and the Secretary in the first round, and then, if a second round is necessary, the 

Inspector General of the Board has agreed to investigate.  Just for clarity, my sense is that we are 

trying to address breaches related to the discussion of materials prepared for the meeting, such as 

the agenda, memos, briefings, and other sorts of things that are part of the background for the 

meeting, as well as descriptions of what happened at the meeting, characterizations of other 

people’s comments, and so on.  What we do not intend to address here is the expression of your 

January 25–26, 2011 5 of 282



 
 

 
 

own views, your own policy assessments, and so on.  So we’re trying to keep the meeting itself 

separate and not disclose the items I mentioned. 

Regarding the second change, the Chairman already has authority to make special 

exceptions for disclosure of information, and, obviously, there are legitimate reasons for this.  

The change now specifies that, in doing so, the Chairman should inform the Committee when 

those exceptions are made.  I would like to note that there are some routine, minor, 

administrative cases, such as allowing a noncitizen staff member to participate in producing the 

minutes or assigning the work to a transcriber who works with the tapes.  Of course, I will 

inform you of things like that if you so desire, but I hope that such minor administrative matters 

of that sort will be excepted. 

This memorandum was circulated, and there were no comments.  I’d like to open the 

floor for some brief comments now, and I hope that we can vote on it as part of the 

organizational section of this meeting.  However, if the Committee feels that a more lengthy 

discussion is necessary, we do have a longer period of time tomorrow on communications, so, if 

necessary, we can defer it until then.  Would anyone like to comment on the memorandum? 

MR. TARULLO.  May I ask a question about it, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Janet, could you give a little more context for the kinds of information 

that the subcommittee had in mind in thinking about the need for a better, more stringent 

process?  I am thinking of this more as a lawyer rather than as a member of the FOMC, so I think 

it would be helpful to make sure that everybody understands what actually is being proscribed 

and why it’s being proscribed.  For example, there’s a lot of information in the Tealbook every 

six weeks, and I don’t think any of us think that information needs to get Class I confidentiality 

January 25–26, 2011 6 of 282



 
 

 
 

treatment, certainly not as time goes on.  So my question, then, is how people, particularly staff, 

are to be able to distinguish what was intended by the Committee in making these revisions, on 

the one hand, as opposed, on the other hand, to the literal embrace of the language of the revised 

regulation. 

MS. YELLEN.  Our intention was consistent with what the Chairman just said.  We’re 

concerned about potential leaks of documents or their contents that are discussed in an FOMC 

meeting as well as leaks about the substance of discussions, such as who said what.  As far as 

publicizing past data that just happened to appear in the Tealbook, such as historical movements 

in the exchange rate, I wouldn’t think of that as a violation. 

We’re certainly not trying to be legalistic about this.  We wanted to add a procedure to 

cover what happens if there are violations.  It begins with a process of triage in which anything 

that’s reported to the Secretariat would be reviewed by the Secretary, the General Counsel, and 

the Chairman, and only things that are considered to be significant breaches would go to 

investigation.  I think that section VII tries to make that clear, namely, that things have to be 

judged to rise above a certain threshold. 

MR. TARULLO.  Can I give one concrete example?  I won’t belabor this.  Suppose a 

senior staff person is speaking to a group of academic economists and refers to the staff 

projections for housing prices over the coming year, something which I, at least, receive only in 

the form of the Tealbook.  Some other memo may produce that information, of course, but that’s 

where I see what the staff expects.  Is that information intended to be proscribed or not intended 

to be proscribed? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think that would be proscribed because it represents an 

official view of the staff.  However, if the staff member said, “here are some factors that suggest 

January 25–26, 2011 7 of 282



 
 

 
 

that house prices may decline,” without attributing it to the staff or to the Tealbook or to the 

FOMC, then I think that’s acceptable. 

MR. TARULLO.  Just out of curiosity, does that apply to us, too, for example, during 

testimony? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  As you know, the Chairman has some special 

responsibilities, for example, to report to the Congress twice a year and so on.  In such 

testimony, I have talked, for example, about the projections, which, of course, typically come out 

at about the same time as the testimony, and I described the objectives and the rationale of the 

Committee.  I would argue that that’s an appropriate thing to do. 

I think it’s also fine—and, in fact, desirable—for a member of the Committee to speak 

publicly along the following lines after, say, a decision made by the Committee:  “Here’s what 

we, the Committee, decided.  Here’s the logic behind this decision.  Here’s what we think this 

action may do.”  I think that is all fine.  Again, the things we’re trying to avoid are, first of all, 

the leakage of confidential materials, which are, obviously, not materials that could easily be 

replicated by any outsider using, for example, FRED from the St. Louis Fed, and, second, the 

leakage of characterizations of discussions taking place within the meeting, such as who said 

what.  In contrast, discussing the sense of the Committee and the goals of the Committee or the 

individuals’ outlooks and policy views is entirely appropriate. 

MS. YELLEN.  Suppose something came out in the minutes that described the staff 

projection, and it happened to say that in this round the staff lowered its forecast for house 

prices.  That would be fine, but anything that wasn’t in the minutes about Tealbook projections 

wouldn’t be. 

January 25–26, 2011 8 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  In the house price example, it’s pretty easy.  I usually just say that I’ve 

seen a number of analyses from the private sector where many people are calling for a further 

price decline of 10 percent or whatever, and I would assume that’s unobjectionable. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  My thought is a little different. I don’t get too confused on what I can 

say about data and what it may mean.  But when I read articles in the paper that say, “Inside the 

FOMC there were discussions, and so-and-so said this and so-and-so said that,” to me, that’s an 

obvious a violation.  In that case, you might call for a review or an investigation—whatever word 

you want to use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  There are news stories that say that the FOMC is 

considering options for what to do with their LSAP program, for example.  Now, that is 

something that a reporter could pull together from speeches and interviews that are entirely 

legitimate.  And I don’t think that that’s necessarily a problem.  However, a verbatim or nearly 

verbatim report of the debate at the FOMC with some of the specific arguments or numbers 

would clearly be a violation. 

MR. HOENIG.  Right.  It’s usually a judgment call, but the clear indicators are when they 

start going inside the meeting and saying, “This was discussed,” and, “here’s where so-and-so or 

such-and-such came out.”  I think that’s where you get the issues. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s correct.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  We submit projections for various meetings, but we also talk in public 

about the outlook, and I’m assuming that that’s fair game, namely, that I can report my 

projection in public and submit the same projection. 

MS. YELLEN.  I think so. 

January 25–26, 2011 9 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I’d like to pick up on Tom’s point.  It’s not just what’s said in the 

meeting; it’s also very importantly the materials that were prepared for the meeting.  I’m not a 

lawyer, as you know, so I view this as a sort of housekeeping issue—it’s restating an ethic, and 

the ethic is that we do our utmost to maintain confidentiality of things that others might profit 

from or otherwise use improperly.  I think you basically know what it is and know what it’s not.  

To me, this is just an updating—for example, we had to update the word Greenbook to Tealbook.  

We worked a lot on this, but the more I thought about it, the more it seemed to me that this is just 

a housekeeping matter and that we need to bring it into the modern era, particularly given the 

kind of scrutiny we’re getting.  I wouldn’t read too much into it beyond the fact that we clearly 

have an ethic here which I think (1) needs to be preserved and (2) needs to be as pristine as 

possible.  How you put a precise legal definition on that is probably beyond my capacity. 

MR. TARULLO.  Just to be clear, the reason I raise this question is principally because 

of the staff throughout the System.  They’re going to be reading something which they were not 

present at the creation of, and they just need to be able to understand what the implications of 

this are for them. 

MS. YELLEN.  Dan, it’s our intention to try to devise a set of guidelines for the staff 

after this is approved for the FOMC. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments?  [No response]  Are we okay voting on 

this now?  In favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed?  [No response]  Okay, thank you. 

We turn to the next item, authorization for Desk operations.  This is the annual 

authorization, right, Brian? 

MR. SACK.  Right. 

January 25–26, 2011 10 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me turn it over to you to introduce it. 

MR. SACK.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  At its first meeting each year, the 
Committee reviews the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, as well 
as the set of guidelines that governs foreign currency transactions. 

Regarding the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, I recommend 
that this authorization be renewed without amendment.  Even though I am not 
requesting any changes, I would like to update the Committee on several items related 
to the domestic authorization. 

First, I recommend that the Committee keep suspended the Guidelines for the 
Conduct of System Operations in Federal-Agency Issues, as it is unclear whether 
future transactions in these securities may be necessary to achieve the Committee’s 
monetary policy objectives. 

Second, the current authorization allows the Desk to transact in agency MBS for 
the SOMA through agents, such as asset managers and custodian banks.  The Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York continues to evaluate the extent to which some of the 
services provided by these agents could be brought in-house.  However, some 
external services are likely to be needed for an extended period, given the unique 
features of MBS.  I am thus asking that this authority be retained. 

Third, the Committee authorized the New York Fed, under a resolution passed on 
November 24, 2009, to conduct small-scale reverse repo operations as needed to 
ensure the operational readiness of that tool across all types of eligible collateral and 
with a broader set of counterparties.  We anticipate a need to conduct additional 
small-scale operations during 2011, particularly as additional counterparties are 
approved.  These operations are covered under the current resolution. 

Let me now turn to an item that will likely come before the Committee for 
authorization at a future date.  In June 2009, the Committee received an informational 
memo on a proposed policy to address the occurrence of daylight overdrafts in 
foreign central bank accounts at the New York Fed by providing intraday liquidity 
through daylight repurchase agreements, or DLRPs.  We have now settled on a 
proposed procedure for DLRPs, and the New York Fed hopes to obtain approval in 
2011 to commence implementation under Regulation N.  At that time, I will review 
the proposal with the Committee and will ask it for a change in the Authorization for 
Domestic Open Market Operations that would allow the New York Fed to provide 
DLRPs. 

With regard to the authorization for foreign currency operations, the Desk 
operates under the following set of guidelines from the Committee: the Authorization 
for Foreign Currency Operations, the Foreign Currency Directive, and the Procedural 
Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations.  I recommend all three be 
renewed without amendment.  Please note that the vote to reaffirm these documents 

January 25–26, 2011 11 of 282



 
 

 
 

will include approval of the System’s warehousing agreement with the Treasury.  
Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Questions for Brian?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Brian, how do the daylight repurchase agreement procedures that you 

settled on to implement this differ from collateralized daylight overdrafts that all the Reserve 

Banks make available to domestic banking institutions?  And if they differ, why? 

MR. SACK.  The intent of the policy is similar, of course, in that it’s to provide collateral 

on intraday credit extended.  In the course of business for regular FIMA accounts, daylight 

overdrafts inevitably occur, given the volume of transactions that take place in them.  The 

proposed procedure essentially identifies assets that are currently held in their accounts that will 

either be earmarked as collateral for these transactions or that, in some cases, could even be 

moved to a separate account for those who are heavier users.  Although it’s similar in intent, it’s 

also a little different, because we manage these custodial accounts already, which have assets in 

them, so it’s a slightly different procedure in terms of allocating that collateral for this purpose.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I wanted to introduce Julie Remache, who is sitting next 

to Brian Sack.  This is her first time at an FOMC meeting.  Welcome, Julie. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Welcome.  Other questions for Brian?  [No response] 

Seeing no further questions, are we prepared to vote on these two authorizations?  All in favor?  

[Chorus of ayes].  All opposed?  [No response]  Thank you. 

Now for the entertainment portion of our program, [laughter] the staffs of the Board and 

the Reserve Banks have prepared a special topic on structural unemployment.  I was very 

impressed with the amount of work and the range of research that’s being done on this topic, so 

January 25–26, 2011 12 of 282



 
 

 
 

I’m looking forward very much to hearing their overview.  Let me turn to Dave Stockton to start 

it off. 

MR. STOCKTON.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously the issue of structural 

unemployment has come up quite frequently, and discussions around the table in the last couple 

of years have involved trying to grapple with the implications of this really deep recession and 

the sort of imprint it might be leaving on labor markets.  Simultaneously, the research 

community of the Federal Reserve has been hard at work on this issue.  While we consider the 

work we’ve done thus far to be more of a progress report than “the final word” on the topic, last 

week we did post 10 papers and a rather lengthy summary memo, and I think the page length 

was roughly equivalent to that of War and Peace.  [Laughter] 

Today we have three presentations that could be characterized as a very intelligent set of 

CliffsNotes reviewing that work.  Bruce Fallick is going to introduce some of the key issues and 

discuss how the Board staff has incorporated some features of structural change in labor markets 

into the Tealbook projection.  Then Jason Faberman and Ayşegül Şahin will discuss and 

summarize the large body of research that System economists have been producing, looking at a 

number of specific aspects of how developments of the past few years may have affected the 

behavior of labor markets.  I’d like to express my appreciation for the very considerable efforts 

of Loretta Mester, Dan Sullivan, and Bill Wascher in organizing this session.  It was, needless to 

say, a very big job, and they executed it with their characteristic energy and insight.  Now I’ll 

turn the floor over to Bruce. 

MR. FALLICK.1  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the materials in the packet titled 
“FOMC Briefing on Structural Unemployment.”  Unemployment can be thought of as 
divisible into two components, one that I will refer to as structural unemployment, 
and the other as cyclical. 

 
                                                 
1 The materials used by Messrs Fallick and Faberman and Ms. Şahin are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

January 25–26, 2011 13 of 282



 
 

 
 

As outlined at the top of your first exhibit, structural, or frictional, unemployment 
can be thought of as reflecting difficulties in matching available workers to available 
jobs.  The extent of structural unemployment is determined by numerous factors.  
One is demographics; for example, young workers move into and out of jobs more 
frequently.  Another is the technology of job search and worker screening, which 
typically evolves only slowly.  Others include imbalances between the characteristics 
or locations of potential workers and those of vacant jobs.  These imbalances may be 
long-lasting, even generational. 

 

 

 

 

 

The other main component, cyclical unemployment, is the additional 
unemployment that arises due to a shortfall in aggregate economic activity.  This is 
the category most closely associated with the typical fluctuations in unemployment 
over the business cycle and is the most obviously amenable to reduction through 
policies aimed at stimulating aggregate demand. 

We generally view structural unemployment as determining a NAIRU.  On this 
view, inflation is most sensitive to cyclical unemployment, as wages and prices adjust 
to put underutilized resources back to work. 

The line between these categories is often blurry.  Consider, for example, a policy 
like extended or emergency unemployment insurance benefits.  Such benefits likely 
increase unemployment by changing search behavior, thus increasing what might be 
called structural unemployment.  However, the policy itself is a response to the 
business cycle and can be expected to disappear once labor demand improves 
sufficiently.  Similarly, recent geographic or industry imbalances between the supply 
of workers and the demand for jobs could be described as raising structural 
unemployment.  But recessions always affect some regions and industries more 
adversely than others, and these imbalances typically fade as aggregate demand 
recovers.  Each phenomenon requires its own evaluation.  However, we would 
usually not interpret those that regularly accompany recessions, and regularly cease as 
the economy recovers, as contributing to an increase in the medium-term NAIRU. 

The recent recession has raised numerous questions about whether the events that 
precipitated it, or the features of the recession itself, have raised the level of structural 
employment.  Several phenomena prompted this interest, examples of which are 
highlighted in the middle and lower panels of the exhibit. 

As illustrated at the middle left, the onset of the recession was marked by sharp 
reductions in employment in the residential construction and financial activities 
sectors.  If these reductions are permanent and the workers displaced from these 
sectors have a particularly difficult time finding new jobs elsewhere, these shifts in 
demand for labor could add to structural unemployment.  However, as mentioned 
above, in every recession some industries are hit particularly hard.  The panel to the 
right shows one measure of the dispersion in employment changes across major 
industry groups.  The red line shows the amount of dispersion attributable to normal 
cyclical variation, while the black line shows the amount of dispersion that cannot be 

January 25–26, 2011 14 of 282



 
 

 
 

explained simply by the cycle.  The black line suggests that the degree to which 
particular industries have suffered during this episode is not out of line with the 
overall depth of the recession.  And although the cyclical dispersion indicated by the 
red line is large, it appears to have disappeared as quickly as it did in previous 
episodes, as the large job losses in several industries came to an end.  For this reason, 
we do not view recent sectoral shifts as a significant source of increased structural 
unemployment. 

 
Another feature of the recent downturn has been the large increase in the number 

of homeowners with negative home equity, shown in the bottom left panel.  Being 
“underwater" may inhibit the geographic mobility of these households and thus 
reduce the speed at which the unemployed among them find new jobs.  However, 
based on the sort of evidence that Ayşegül will review in her presentation, we do not 
believe that this “house-lock” has, as yet, significantly limited geographic mobility. 

 

 

 

Finally, the red line in the bottom right panel shows the rate of permanent job 
loss; that is, the number of workers who lose their jobs each month with no 
expectation of being rehired by their previous employers, scaled by the level of 
employment.  This rate moved up sharply during the recession, and although it has 
moved down from its peak, the outstanding stock of persons unemployed following 
permanent job loss (the black line) remains high.  A permanent job loss will often 
require a worker to make significant adjustments—to sector, location, or wage—if he 
or she is to become re-employed, which usually entails a longer period of job search.  
As was noted in the September Tealbook, the elevated level of permanent job loss has 
been an important factor in our thinking about an increase in structural 
unemployment. 

Recognizing that these specific phenomena represent only a subset of the factors 
possibly in play in the current episode and that their individual effects on structural 
unemployment are both difficult to quantify and possibly overlapping, we have also 
looked to more aggregate relationships as guides.  One important relationship is that 
between job openings, or vacancies, and unemployment.  This relationship, known as 
the Beveridge curve, is the subject of your second exhibit. 

The top panel graphs this relation for historical periods that include the past five 
recessions and their early recoveries.  On the vertical axis is a proxy for the vacancy 
rate constructed from Conference Board data on help-wanted advertising.  On the 
horizontal axis is the unemployment rate.  As one would expect, over the business 
cycle the vacancy rate and the unemployment rate are negatively related:  In each 
recession, the economy moves along a curve down and to the right.  The graph also 
shows that over the longer term, the curve has shifted position.  Shifts in the 
Beveridge curve are often interpreted as reflecting changes in the amount of structural 
unemployment.  Indeed, the broad shifts observed over the past 40 years—outward 
during the 1970s, then inward in the 1980s and 1990s—are generally attributable to 
changes in the age composition of the labor force and the increasing labor market 
attachment of women. 

January 25–26, 2011 15 of 282



 
 

 
 

 
The lower left panel highlights the past decade, using data from the Job Openings 

and Labor Turnover Survey, which are not available for earlier years.  The decade can 
be conveniently divided into three periods.  The black dots are the period before the 
recent recession.  These data points describe an apparently stable and almost linear 
Beveridge curve—shown by the dashed black line.  The red triangles denote quarterly 
observations for 2008 and 2009.  During this period, the increase in the 
unemployment rate outpaced the decrease in the vacancy rate as judged by the earlier 
relation.  The blue squares are 2010; during this period, the vacancy rate rose, while 
the unemployment rate remained almost unchanged. 

 
The observations after 2007 are a striking departure from the straight line 

suggested by the data for the pre-recession period.  However, as noted to the right, 
there are reasons not to take these deviations at face value as measuring the increase 
in structural unemployment, a few of which I will discuss here. 

 
First are questions of the underlying shape of the curve.  As Jason will explain, a 

typical theoretical treatment in the literature bases the Beveridge curve on the 
technology of matching workers with jobs.  The properties of this “matching 
function,” as it is known, imply that the Beveridge curve should become flatter as the 
unemployment rate increases.  The green line shows the fitted value of a curve 
suggested by a typical matching function.  This shape for the curve implies smaller 
recent deviations than does the linear version. 

 
Second, the persistent increases in layoffs that occur during recessions could be 

expected to raise the unemployment rate more than the green line would suggest.  
This is not because the matching process itself has deteriorated, but because that 
process faces such a large pool of newly unemployed workers who need to be 
matched with jobs.  Whether this is best described as a further flattening of the curve 
at high rates of unemployment or as a departure from the curve, it is a regular feature 
of recessions that we view as an increase in cyclical rather than structural 
unemployment. 

 
Third, as one can see in the panel at the top of the page, as the labor market has 

improved following past recessions, the vacancy–unemployment locus has exhibited 
counterclockwise loops; that is, vacancies have improved in advance of 
unemployment.  Despite a lack of consensus on the source of these movements, they 
appear to be a regular part of the dynamics of recovery, which we would not tend to 
interpret as structural. 

 
However, remaining movements in the Beveridge curve could represent changes 

in the efficiency of the job-matching process, which we would view as changes in 
structural unemployment.  An effort by my colleagues Regis Barnichon and Andrew 
Figura to isolate these changes is illustrated in the top panels of exhibit 3.  The panel 
on the left shows a measure of job matching—the flow of persons from 
unemployment to employment.  The black line shows the actual flow, while the red 

January 25–26, 2011 16 of 282



 
 

 
 

line shows the flow estimated by a model that holds the efficiency of the matching 
process constant.  The gap between the two that opened up during the recession 
represents the decline in matching that cannot be explained by the other elements of 
the model and is therefore attributed to a deterioration in matching efficiency.  The 
panel on the top right shows the approximate contribution of this deterioration to the 
unemployment rate.  These estimates suggest that structural unemployment increased 
by about 1 percentage point by the middle of last year. 

 
Note that the Board staff estimates that the extended UI benefits have boosted the 

unemployment rate by as much as ¾ percentage point.  Some of this may show up as 
a decline in matching efficiency and thus contribute to the estimated increase in the 
top right panel.  As I mentioned earlier, whether to call this an increase in structural 
unemployment is not obvious.  In the Tealbook we have accounted for it separately 
from what we call the NAIRU, but included it in the “effective NAIRU,” which we 
use to define medium-term labor market slack.  In any case, we expect this element to 
wane as these programs expire. 

 
As noted above, one reason that we care about identifying structural 

unemployment is that it provides a benchmark for our estimates of the margin of 
slack in the economy that influences price and wage pressures.  That being so, the 
behavior of inflation to date ought to tell us something about structural 
unemployment.  As you know, both price and wage inflation have moved down since 
the unemployment rate began its sharp rise in 2008.  Does the extent of this price and 
wage deceleration suggest that part of the rise in the unemployment rate reflects an 
increase in structural unemployment? 

 
This is a difficult question to answer given our incomplete understanding of the 

inflation process.  My colleagues Charles Fleischman and John Roberts have 
developed a model that attempts to address the question by combining a number of 
economic relationships.  As noted in the middle left panel, the model treats the 
NAIRU and trends in output, productivity, the workweek, and labor force 
participation as unobserved components.  These trends and their observed 
counterparts are related to each other through such macroeconomic relationships as 
the Phillips curve and Okun’s law and by the assumption that the macroeconomic 
variables are influenced by a common cyclical element. 

 
Lately we have been looking at a variant of this model that allows for the 

possibility that the Phillips curve flattened in the mid-1980s.  Also, given the earlier 
evidence that the severity of the recent recession may have caused a relatively large 
movement in the NAIRU, it allows the NAIRU to be more variable than in previous 
episodes.  The middle right panel graphs the NAIRU estimated by this version of the 
model.  This estimate has risen roughly ¾ percentage point since the onset of the 
recession. 

 
The bottom left panel of the exhibit shows the current Tealbook assumptions for 

the NAIRU.  We assume that the NAIRU has risen 1 percentage point since the onset 

January 25–26, 2011 17 of 282



 
 

 
 

of the recession, to 6 percent.  Adding our assumptions about extended UI benefits, 
we put the effective NAIRU as of the fourth quarter of last year at 6.6 percent, 
implying an effective unemployment rate gap of about 3 percentage points. 

 
A crucial question is how persistent this or any increase in structural 

unemployment is likely to be.  As you can see, the Tealbook assumes that the 
effective NAIRU falls back to nearly its pre-recession level by the middle of the 
decade, as the extended UI programs expire, workers and firms adjust their behavior 
in reaction to imbalances in the labor market, and the general recovery of the 
economy resolve the structural issues currently in play.  We believe this assumption 
puts the current episode broadly in line with the experience of previous episodes. 

 
There are, of course, risks to this view.  For example, as shown in the bottom right 

panel, the average length of unemployment spells (the black line) and the fraction of 
the labor force experiencing long spells (the red line) have been extraordinarily high.  
These long spells raise concerns that the affected workers may find themselves less 
employable as their skills, reputations, and networks deteriorate, resulting in a 
persistently higher level of structural unemployment.  Although such effects do not 
appear to have been important in the United States in the past, we recognize that the 
current unprecedented durations of unemployment may reduce the relevance of 
historical experience.  Ayşegül will have more to say about this concern. 

 
Jason and Ayşegül will now turn to a review of Reserve Bank research on 

structural unemployment. 
 
MR. FABERMAN.  Thank you.  I’ll be continuing with the same set of exhibits, 

starting with exhibit 4.  As Bruce mentioned at the start of his talk, recently some 
have speculated that structural factors are a large part of the reason that the 
unemployment rate is still high. There is no universally accepted definition of 
“structural unemployment.”  When Ayşegül and I use the term, it will refer to the 
amount of unemployment that is not easily remedied by short-run monetary policy. 

 
In our briefing, Ayşegül and I will review Federal Reserve System research on 

factors that could potentially increase the amount of structural unemployment in the 
economy. These include extended UI benefits, changes in employers’ effort in filling 
their vacancies, the effects of geographic mismatch, or “house-lock,” and mismatch 
between the skills of the unemployed and the skills required for new job openings.  
The latter topic may be the notion of structural unemployment most people are 
familiar with.  Ayşegül will also discuss the state of the long-term unemployed and 
the prognosis for whether the U.S. labor market could fall into a European-style state 
of hysteresis. 

 
Before detailing the results of this research, we find it useful to couch our 

discussion within the framework of labor search and matching theory.  Central to 
such theories is the notion of a matching function.  A standard expression for the 
matching function is in the top panel of exhibit 4.  If it looks eerily similar to a firm’s 

January 25–26, 2011 18 of 282



 
 

 
 

production function, it is because the two constructs operate in very much the same 
way.  A production function maps how much output is generated using a given 
amount of capital and labor, given the production technology at hand.  Similarly, a 
matching function maps how many matches (or hires) are generated from a given 
number of job vacancies and unemployed individuals, given the matching 
“technology” at hand. 

 
The matching function is the theoretical underpinning of the Beveridge curve, 

whose behavior Bruce discussed during his talk.  You can have either movements 
along, or shifts in or out of, the Beveridge curve.  These will represent changes in the 
mix of vacancies and unemployment, or the amount of hiring that they yield, 
respectively.  Expansions are periods when vacancies are rising and unemployment is 
falling—they are movements up and to the left along the Beveridge curve, as the 
lower panel of exhibit 4 shows.  Recessions are periods when unemployment is rising 
and vacancies are falling, so recessions involve movements down and to the right 
along the curve. 

 
The topic of our briefing is structural unemployment.  Going back to the matching 

function at the top of the exhibit, changes in the amount of structural unemployment 
will occur through changes in the “matching efficiency parameter,” denoted by the 
Greek letter µ in the equation.  A rise in structural unemployment causes a decline in 
matching efficiency.  This, in turn, causes the entire Beveridge curve to shift out, as is 
shown in the lower panel of exhibit 4.  The shift implies that the economy now needs 
more vacancies to generate the same amount of hires from a given level of 
unemployment. 

 
People often interpret this as implying that all shifts in the Beveridge curve 

represent a change in the amount of structural unemployment in the labor market.  
This is not the case.  While all increases in the amount of structural unemployment 
are reflected as a decline in matching efficiency, not all declines in matching 
efficiency reflect a rise in structural unemployment. 

 
For one thing, as Bruce explained, a change in the pace of job loss can cause the 

Beveridge curve to shift out.  It increases the number of unemployed and therefore 
increases the number of people who must now search for new work.  As Bruce also 
noted, when the labor market moves to a new equilibrium, the Beveridge curve tends 
to exhibit a looping behavior, the start of which can appear as a shift in the curve 
when one looks at the data.  This is because firms can open new vacancies or close 
unfilled vacancies at essentially no cost, but it takes time for the unemployed to find 
new work and subsequently move to the new equilibrium. 

 
Another issue with interpretation is that matching efficiency, as measured in the 

data, will also capture all other things that are not specified in the matching function.  
This is a key caveat to keep in mind when trying to interpret how much a decline in 
matching efficiency, or a shift in the Beveridge curve, reflects an increase in 
structural unemployment.  For example, changes in the behavior of workers who quit 

January 25–26, 2011 19 of 282



 
 

 
 

one job for another can appear as a change in matching efficiency because they will 
affect how many vacancies are available for the unemployed.  This process is similar 
to what George Akerlof, Andrew Rose, and Governor Yellen referred to in a paper as 
a “vacancy chain.”  In these “chains,” one group of individuals can only find work 
after someone else moves further up in the chain and frees up their former position.  It 
is worth noting, though, that some search models address this issue.  For example, 
some redefine the “unemployed” as all individuals looking for work, regardless of 
their status.  As another example, changes in the search effort of either workers or 
firms will also appear as a change in matching efficiency, if they are not explicitly 
accounted for in the matching function.  When the unemployed search more intensely 
to find new jobs or firms recruit more intensely to fill their vacancies faster, it will 
lead to more matches for a given level of unemployment and vacancies. 

 
Using the production function analogy again, these examples imply that measured 

matching efficiency can operate like the Solow residual.  Macroeconomists use the 
Solow residual as a measure of technological change in the economy, but they are 
well aware that the Solow residual also captures changes in any factor that is not 
explicitly part of their production function. 

 
Now, let me move on to the empirical research.  An obvious policy that could 

affect the search effort of workers is the federal extension of unemployment insurance 
benefits.  The eligibility period for these benefits has been extended to unprecedented 
lengths.  Currently, individuals in most states are eligible for up to 99 weeks of 
benefits.  In normal times, they are eligible for 26 weeks of benefits.  There are 
concerns that these extensions reduce the incentive of the unemployed to search for 
work.  There are also concerns that extended benefits cause workers to reject job 
offers they otherwise would have accepted.  The extensions also provide support, of 
course; for instance, they can provide liquidity to individuals who have exhausted 
their assets while unemployed, and they can decrease the chance that an individual 
opts to drop out of the labor force entirely.  The result of these responses is that 
benefit extensions will end up increasing the amount of structural unemployment in 
the labor market, as we have defined it.  At the same time, this increase should 
dissipate once the policy of extended UI benefits expires. 

 
Several studies across the Reserve Banks have attempted to quantify the effect of 

extended UI benefits. While these studies differ considerably in their methodologies, 
they all generally find that extended UI benefits have added between about ½  and 
1½ percentage points to the unemployment rate, with most preferred estimates being 
just under 1 percentage point. 

 
One study, by Rob Valletta of the San Francisco Fed, exploits the differences in 

unemployment duration over time between job losers and other unemployed 
individuals.  Theoretically, only job losers are eligible for UI benefits.  The time 
series behavior of average unemployment duration for these two groups is illustrated 
in the top panel of exhibit 5, with the duration of job losers depicted by the red dashed 
line and the duration of the remaining unemployed depicted by the solid blue line.  

January 25–26, 2011 20 of 282



 
 

 
 

Average unemployment duration for job losers increased relative to the average 
duration for the second group during the recession, but it has since fallen in relative 
terms.  Valletta estimates that the total effect of the behavior observed in the chart 
was an increase in the unemployment rate of about 0.8 percentage points. 

 
Another study, by Shigeru Fujita of the Philadelphia Fed, exploits differences in 

the transition rates out of unemployment for individuals prior to and during the 
extended UI benefit period.  In doing so, he exploits the fact that there is a spike in 
the probability that an unemployed individual either finds work or drops out of the 
labor force right at 26 weeks of unemployment.  This is the time when UI benefits 
normally run out.  The spike for both types of transitions dropped precipitously 
during the period of extended benefits.  The bottom panel of exhibit 5 shows this.  
The solid blue lines denote transition rates in the pre-extension period and the marked 
red lines denote transition rates in the extension period.  Fujita estimates that the joint 
effect of both the lower job-finding rate and fewer exits out of the labor force worked 
to increase the unemployment rate between 0.9 and 1.7 percentage points. 

 
My own research, with Steve Davis of the University of Chicago and John 

Haltiwanger of the University of Maryland, examines the behavior of recruiting 
intensity over the business cycle.  Recruiting intensity in our setting refers to all 
efforts firms put forth in filling their vacancies, conditional on the number of 
vacancies that they post.  Increases in our measure reflect firms trying relatively 
harder to fill their vacancies.  This can involve relaxed hiring standards, increased use 
of informal networks, or job offers with a relatively generous wage.  Decreases in our 
measure reflect the opposite, including stricter hiring standards and a stingier wage 
offer. 

 
The top panel of exhibit 6 illustrates our measure of recruiting intensity over the 

2000–2010 period.  The measure is derived from an analysis of vacancy-filling 
behavior of individual establishments that we then relate to an aggregate measure of 
hiring.  As one can see, recruiting intensity has declined since the onset of the latest 
recession.  It stabilized following the end of the recession but at a substantially lower 
level, about 17 percent lower than its average over the period.  The lower panel of 
exhibit 6 shows the actual unemployment rate (the blue dashed line) and a 
counterfactual rate that holds recruiting intensity constant over the study period (the 
solid red line).  It shows that the persistently low levels of recruiting intensity led to 
higher unemployment.  We estimate that its effect added about 1.4 percentage points 
to the unemployment rate in 2010. 

 
Because the recruiting intensity measure does not isolate the effect of a specific 

policy (like UI extensions), it captures the effects of both structural and cyclical 
factors that can affect a firm’s recruiting behavior.  Therefore, while we can quantify 
the effect of its movements on the unemployment rate, we cannot say to what extent 
this effect reflects an increase in structural unemployment.  If the source of the 
decline in recruiting intensity were due to something like uncertainty about a specific 
policy (for example, a fear that the new health care legislation may permanently 

January 25–26, 2011 21 of 282



 
 

 
 

increase the cost of a hire), then one could consider its effect as an increase in 
structural unemployment.  If recruiting intensity were low because firms perceived 
the real wage to be too high relative to the qualifications they are seeking, then its 
effect should be considered cyclical.  Unfortunately, our exercise is silent on which 
cause is more likely. 

 
To sum up, changes in the search intensity of both workers and firms appear to 

have had a sizable effect on the unemployment rate, though their effects come with 
caveats.  The effects of extended UI benefits are likely structural but should dissipate 
once the policy expires.  Ayşegül will elaborate on this.  The effect of low recruiting 
intensity, while sizable, may be due to a mix of structural and cyclical factors, and the 
current evidence is silent on which cause may be more important.  With that, I turn it 
over to Ayşegül, who will review the evidence on the effects of mismatch and house-
lock on unemployment and discuss the prognosis of the long-term unemployed. 

 
MS. ŞAHIN.  Thank you.  I will now review some of the work within the Federal 

Reserve System that has examined mismatch.  Mismatch is a broad term that 
describes an imbalance between the characteristics of unemployed workers and of 
available jobs.  For example, there can be a mismatch between the skill requirements 
of vacancies and the skills of the unemployed or a mismatch between the location of 
jobs and the location of workers.  As discussed by Jason, greater mismatch in the 
economy can potentially lead to a higher level of structural unemployment. 

I start by reviewing Federal Reserve System research that has analyzed mismatch 
through comparisons of the experiences of different types of workers, some of whom 
may be more prone to mismatch than others.  To the extent that mismatch contributes 
to higher unemployment, workers more prone to mismatch should experience 
relatively worse labor market outcomes. 

In my own research with Mike Elsby from the University of Edinburgh and Bart 
Hobijn from the San Francisco Fed, we have calculated unemployment outflow rates 
conditional on the industry in which an unemployed individual was last employed.  If 
the need for reallocation across sectors causes a mismatch of skills, workers who 
were formerly employed in sectors undergoing a structural decline will have a harder 
time finding new jobs; that is, a rise in mismatch would imply a divergence in 
outflow rates.  As seen in the upper panel of exhibit 7, we have actually seen a 
convergence of these outflow rates rather than the divergence predicted by a rise in 
mismatch. 

Another way to examine whether there is an increase in mismatch is to look at the 
unemployment outcomes of different age groups.  Relative to their younger 
counterparts, older workers have lower mobility rates, and they are more likely to 
experience skill obsolescence.  If geographic and skill mismatch are important, 
younger workers should have relatively better labor market outcomes.  The lower 
panel of exhibit 7, which comes from work by Dan Aaronson at the Chicago Fed, 
shows that the unemployment rate of workers with at least a college degree who are 
under age 25 exhibits remarkable similarity to the aggregate unemployment rate 

January 25–26, 2011 22 of 282



 
 

 
 

during both the recession and the recovery periods.  Because young college graduates 
are a group who are less susceptible to skill and geographic mismatch than the overall 
labor force, this suggests little role for mismatch. 

The figures in exhibit 7 are suggestive, but they do not provide a direct measure 
of mismatch.  I will now focus on more direct measures of mismatch and summarize 
the results from my own work with Joe Song and Giorgio Topa of the New York Fed 
and Gianluca Violante of New York University.  To assess the importance of 
mismatch, we ask the following question:  Given the distribution of vacancies, would 
it be feasible to reallocate unemployed workers across markets in a way that reduces 
the aggregate unemployment rate?  This involves comparing the actual allocation of 
unemployed workers with an ideal allocation that assumes costless worker mobility 
across labor markets.  This ideal allocation requires vacancy–unemployment ratios to 
be equated across labor markets; therefore, any deviation of a specific market’s 
tightness from aggregate labor market tightness indicates misallocation.  Because 
frictions remain within each labor market, there will still be some unemployment, 
even under the ideal allocation.  The difference between the actual unemployment 
rate and the unemployment rate implied by the ideal allocation provides an estimate 
of the effect of mismatch. 

Based on this reasoning, we first analyze skill mismatch across 15 major industry 
sectors over the period 2000 to 2010, computing two indexes.  The first, Mu, which is 
the black line on the upper left panel of exhibit 8, measures the fraction of 
unemployed workers searching in the wrong labor market relative to the ideal 
allocation.  This index rose from around 0.21 in 2007 to about 0.32 in 2009.  It then 
declined to 0.25 in early 2010 and has since increased slightly.  The biggest 
contributors to the increase in mismatch were the construction, durable goods 
manufacturing, health, and education sectors. 

A more interesting question is what would the unemployment rate have been if 
these workers were allocated optimally?  Our second index, Mh, addresses this 
question.  In the presence of mismatch, the economy generates a lower number of 
hires for a given level of unemployment and vacancies compared with the ideal 
allocation, and this index measures the fraction of these lost hires.  The red line in the 
upper left panel of exhibit 8 shows Mh: the fraction of lost hires was 2.8 percent 
before the recession started, increased to 7.6 percent in 2009, and has declined to 
around 5 percent since then.  This index also allows us to compute a counterfactual 
unemployment rate that is purged of its mismatch component.  The upper right panel 
of exhibit 8 shows this counterfactual unemployment rate along with the actual one.  
Before the recession started, the difference between these series was 0.4 percentage 
points.  This is because, as the upper left panel showed, there is misallocation in the 
labor market even during expansions.  By 2010, this difference had risen to 
1.2 percentage points, implying that rising sectoral mismatch accounted for around 
0.8 percentage points of the increase in the unemployment rate from the start of the 
recession to 2010. 

January 25–26, 2011 23 of 282



 
 

 
 

One drawback of this calculation is that the industry classifications are very 
broad.  The sectoral measures do not capture any mismatch that may occur within 
these broad sectors.  To address this concern, we have computed occupational 
mismatch measures using the help-wanted online data from the Conference Board.  
The lower left panel of exhibit 8 reports results for the mismatch exercise for 2-digit 
occupations.  Both the Mu and Mh occupational indexes display patterns similar to 
those for the sectoral indexes, increasing from 2007 to 2009 and then declining.  The 
lower right panel of exhibit 8 shows the actual unemployment rate and the 
counterfactual rate implied by the occupational Mh index.  Before the recession 
started, the difference between the actual and the counterfactual unemployment rates 
was 1.3 percentage points.  By 2010, this difference had risen to 2.7 percentage 
points, implying that occupational mismatch accounted for 1.4 percentage points of 
the increase in the unemployment rate. 

It is important to note that the effect of mismatch on the unemployment rate tends 
to be higher during recessions.  Because the presence of mismatch results in fewer 
hires, it lowers the job-finding rate in the economy.  When separations are high, the 
pool of unemployed is large, which amplifies the effect of this reduction in job-
finding.  Our tentative conclusion is that while mismatch has contributed to the 
increase in the unemployment rate, its current pattern suggests that it is not likely to 
lead to a long-lasting unemployment problem for the U.S. economy due to its 
seemingly cyclical nature. 

As Bruce also noted, the decline in house prices that accompanied the recession 
may have caused job applicants to be more reluctant to apply for and accept jobs that 
would require them to move and sell a home that has negative equity.  This 
phenomenon, which is generally referred to as “house-lock,” appeared consistent with 
recent data that showed that the rate of interstate migration in the U.S. has reached a 
postwar low. 

However, as several studies within the System have shown, contrary to popular 
belief, interstate migration did not fall relative to the trend during the recession.  The 
upper panel of exhibit 9 shows the findings of Greg Kaplan from the University of 
Pennsylvania and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl from the Minneapolis Fed:  The significant 
drop reported in the interstate migration rate was a statistical artifact of changes in the 
Census Bureau’s procedure for dealing with missing data.  The non-imputed data 
show that interstate migration has been trending downward for many years.  Relative 
to that trend, there was no additional decrease in interstate migration during the 
economic downturn. 

Other studies have found that the house-lock mechanism has only a negligible 
effect on the unemployment rate.  For example, Chris Foote and Richard Ryan from 
the Boston Fed analyzed the relationship between falling home prices and individual 
unemployment experiences.  The lower panel of exhibit 9 shows their calculations of 
the average unemployment durations of renters (the red line) and homeowners (the 
black line) as a function of the percentage change in state-level house prices during 
the preceding 12 months.  While we see a sharp rise in unemployment duration when 

January 25–26, 2011 24 of 282



 
 

 
 

house-price changes move into negative territory, the difference between the 
price-duration relationships of owners and renters is relatively small.  Even though 
the house-lock mechanism operates in the right direction, its effect is quantitatively 
negligible.  This conclusion is also supported by my own work with Song, Topa, and 
Violante.  We calculate mismatch measures for 50 U.S. states and find only a minor 
effect of geographic mismatch on the increase in the unemployment rate. 

Finally, I want to discuss the risk of a European-style hysteresis problem for the 
U.S. economy.  Accompanying the big rise in the unemployment rate, the average 
duration of unemployment peaked at a record high of 34.8 weeks in June 2010.  A 
major concern associated with the rise in long-term unemployment is the possibility 
that long-term unemployed workers may become increasingly disengaged from the 
labor market.  The upper panel of exhibit 10 presents unemployment-to-employment 
flow rates for workers with different unemployment durations.  As you can see, 
individuals with longer unemployment spells typically have a lower outflow rate from 
unemployment into employment.  During the recession, these rates had fallen 
proportionately across duration spells.  Recently, however, the recovery of the 
unemployment-to-employment flow rate has been concentrated among the short-term 
unemployed.  Although this seems to suggest a relative worsening of the outlook for 
the long-term unemployed, as you can see in the figure, it is actually a pattern 
observed during previous recoveries. 

Overall, it is still too early to tell how the job-finding prospects of the long-term 
unemployed will evolve during the recovery, since their job-finding prospects have 
only recently started to recover.  In work with Sagiri Kitao of the New York Fed, we 
take a different approach and try to quantify the risk of hysteresis using a structural 
model similar in spirit to the seminal work on European unemployment done by Lars 
Ljungqvist and Tom Sargent.  Ljungqvist and Sargent argued that, at a time of 
increased economic turbulence, generous unemployment compensation might hinder 
the process of restructuring because it reduces the incentives of job losers to quickly 
search for and accept new jobs and therefore avoid further depreciation of their 
human capital.  Currently, conditions in the U.S. economy may appear to resemble 
the conditions described in Ljungqvist and Sargent’s study.  As Jason discussed, there 
has been an unprecedented extension of unemployment insurance.  Moreover, a 
disproportionate share of the unemployed has endured particularly long spells.  We 
ask whether these factors are likely to cause a permanent unemployment problem in 
the U.S. 

My analysis with Sagiri finds that even a permanent extension of unemployment 
insurance benefit eligibility from six months to two years would increase the 
unemployment rate by less than 1.2 percentage points, which is consistent with the 
empirical estimates Jason just reviewed.  Even under unfavorable labor market 
conditions, such as a greater layoff risk and accelerated skill depreciation, the effect 
will not exceed 1.7 percentage points.  If UI benefits were paid in perpetuity, then the 
unemployment rate could move permanently above 10 percent, but because the 
extension of benefits will likely expire once labor market conditions improve, this is 
not a likely scenario for the U.S. 

January 25–26, 2011 25 of 282



 
 

 
 

Finally, I want to emphasize that, while the jobless in the U.S. are exiting 
unemployment at a historically low rate, they are still exiting at a faster rate than 
those in continental Europe.  The lower panel of exhibit 10, which comes from my 
work with Elsby and Hobijn, shows the historical averages of unemployment inflow 
and outflow rates for selected countries.  As seen in the figure, the high rates of both 
make the U.S. an obvious outlier. Even the current record low outflow rates in the 
U.S. are still above the flow rates observed in continental Europe. 

As summarized in exhibit 11, our review of recent research finds that extended UI 
benefits, changes in the recruiting behavior of firms, and skill mismatch have had 
measurable effects on the unemployment rate over the period 2007 to 2010.  Studies 
found little evidence that geographic mismatch or house-lock has contributed 
significantly to the rise in the unemployment rate.  Finally, we do not view a 
European-style hysteresis a likely outcome for the U.S. labor market.  However, 
because of the high number of long-term unemployed workers, who tend to exit 
unemployment slowly, a quick turnaround in the unemployment situation seems 
much less likely than in earlier recoveries. 

When interpreting these findings, please keep in mind that these effects are not 
mutually exclusive and, thus, not additive.  For example, an increase in skill 
mismatch exacerbates the disincentive effects of extended UI benefits.  With that, I 
turn it over to Bruce to conclude. 

MR. FALLICK.  Thank you.  We asked the research staffs at the 12 Reserve 
Banks to provide estimates of concepts at least somewhat analogous to the Board 
staff’s estimates of the effective NAIRU.  The table at the top of the final exhibit 
shows these estimates, as well as the Tealbook assumptions, for three points: before 
the financial crisis in 2007, the current time, and 2015, as well as the increase 
between the first two points.  The numbers for the current period include the effects 
of extended unemployment benefits for the Board and for those Reserve Banks that 
thought them relevant and included them in their estimates.  The lower panels show 
the estimates graphically, with the larger bubbles representing a larger number of 
Reserve Banks.  The panel to the left shows the levels; the panel to the right shows 
the increase from before the crisis to the current time.  The pre-crisis estimates cluster 
around 5 percent, although they range as high as 7½ percent.  Most viewed structural 
unemployment as having increased since then, and many expect the increase to be 
mostly reversed by 2015.  The estimated increases are centered around 1½ percentage 
points, but they range from essentially zero to 2½ percentage points.  Moreover, I 
think I can say without fear of contradiction that a considerable range of uncertainty 
surrounds each of our estimates.  We would be happy to take your questions. 

 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much again for very thorough, 

comprehensive work.  Beth Anne, you’re available for questions, too, is that right?  Yes.  Beth 

January 25–26, 2011 26 of 282



 
 

 
 

Anne will take international questions. Are there any questions for our colleagues?  President 

Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  In the last table, it’s not clear to me whether those are our NAIRUs—or 

what are those numbers? 

MR. FALLICK.  That depends.  Each Bank was asked to provide an estimate of that 

quantity that the staff thought would be useful in this context.  We would describe that as a 

NAIRU; in other cases it was described as an unemployment rate consistent with price 

flexibility, or an unemployment rate that is not susceptible to monetary policy.  A variety of 

definitions were provided. 

MR. FISHER.  I would caution you that it depends on what your thinking was pre-crisis 

versus post-crisis.  For example, a lot of our thinking in Dallas has been conditioned by 

questioning the basic principle of the NAIRU because of globalization in terms of workforce 

capacity and the willingness of people to hire and where they wish to hire.  So, the Dallas Fed 

indicates a minimal increase in the NAIRU, but we’ve been thinking about it this way for years, 

before the crisis.  The work you’ve done is great, and this has been an illuminating discussion, 

but I just wanted to know what this table is purporting to show, and I would caution you against 

reading too much into the table. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I guess what I took from the table—and you can certainly 

build on this, Bruce—is that there was a considerable range and a considerable amount of 

uncertainty about each of these points.  Would that be a fair conclusion? 

MR. FISHER.  Well, that was his point.  Well-summarized. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Questions, comments?  President Lacker. 

January 25–26, 2011 27 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. LACKER.  This is a question for Ayşegül.  The notion of mismatch depends 

critically on the notion of heterogeneity among workers and among worker–firm matches.  In the 

literature on income inequality, there has been a fair amount of effort devoted over decades to 

the measured dispersion of income across workers.  A lot of that work uses detailed demographic 

data to explain some of those differences, but there’s still a fairly substantial amount of variation 

across workers’ incomes that’s not attributable to any observable characteristics.  My 

understanding is that the magnitude of that dispersion has increased, that is, the amount 

attributable to unobservable characteristics has increased.  I also have the impression from this 

mismatch literature and from the excellent introduction given by all of the staff papers that the 

number of observable characteristics of workers and firms that is used in these investigations is 

much smaller than in the inequality literature, where you have fairly extensive demographic data.  

Therefore, you’d expect the heterogeneity that is unmeasured by the econometrician to be much 

larger here than in the inequality literature results.  In your investigation, you’ve failed to find 

evidence for mismatch, but of course, there could be mismatch that you’re just not measuring.  

So I wonder if you’d be willing to characterize your sense of the extent to which available data 

sources, like JOLTS and the others that you’ve exploited, are able to capture heterogeneity that 

might be relevant to mismatch or the extent to which there’s unmeasured heterogeneity floating 

around that leaves us uncertain about the conclusion. 

MS. ŞAHIN.  That’s an excellent question.  We know from Mincer-style regressions, as 

you said, that we can only explain up to 35 percent of variation in wages by looking at 

observable characteristics.  So the approach that we took is to try to understand the 

characteristics of unemployed workers and try to match them with the job openings that we have 

been seeing.  Unfortunately, the biggest restriction while doing this exercise was on the worker 

January 25–26, 2011 28 of 282



 
 

 
 

side.  On the worker side, we could observe the industries and their occupations, but other than 

that, we could not really observe much.  So our hope is to get UI records—from certain states, at 

least—and try to use information about unemployed workers to come up with more detailed 

measures of mismatch.  We hope these will include demographics, locations of the workers, 

education levels, experience levels, et cetera. 

MR. LACKER.  That’s interesting.  I have another question, Mr. Chairman.  The 

presentation is titled “Briefing on Structural Unemployment.”  At one point in the discussion, 

you connected this to the NAIRU, and at another point there was discussion of a category of 

change in unemployment that was ruled out of your change in structural unemployment on the 

grounds that it was cyclical.  This has me puzzled as to whether there’s any reason to care about 

structural unemployment other than for its implications for policy dynamics and the NAIRU.  Do 

we have an independent interest in some concept called structural unemployment, or is this all 

about the NAIRU and I should just go back to thinking about economics the way I usually do? 

MR. FALLICK.  I was trying to represent only the Board staff’s view of the matter, 

which sees it in terms of a NAIRU. 

MR. LACKER.  I see. 

MR. FALLICK.  Obviously, as the previous discussion of terminology made clear, I 

think, there may be a variety of views around the System about whether that equation is 

reasonable. 

MR. LACKER.  You have this EDO model that’s in the class of post-1970s general 

equilibrium models, many of which have the property that any shock affecting economic activity 

affects the NAIRU, and thus, you would expect the NAIRU to fluctuate at a cyclical frequency.  

I’m wondering whether that property of that model has influenced the staff’s thinking about this. 

January 25–26, 2011 29 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. FALLICK.  I think it’s fair to say that the concepts that are inherent in EDO do not 

track well the description of structural unemployment that I’ve given here.  Of course, that’s only 

one input into the staff thinking, even in terms of econometric models. 

MR. STOCKTON.  But obviously we’ve devoted a great deal of resources to EDO.  

We’re looking at the forecasts of that model meeting by meeting and trying to understand the 

coherence between those forecasts and those of both of our other large-scale macro models, 

FRB/US and the staff judgmental forecast.  We are paying attention to EDO, looking at its output 

and thinking about what its implications are for our forecast. 

MR. LACKER.  Well, in that effort, there are two objectives that I would assume you’d 

be interested in.  One is just the pure forecasting, and the other is policy advising.  I think the 

implications are very different from models like your EDO model, in which the counterpart of 

NAIRU could be as high as 8.9 percent (which is where I think the St. Louis Fed has it and 

which is also close to my estimate—no matter what my staff said [laughter]) and from models 

where your reference level of unemployment—what you call structural unemployment or 

NAIRU—is, by design, filtering out business cycle frequency influences.  The urgency of some 

of our discussions around here obviously depends on that. 

MR. EVANS.  Could you remind us what the forces in EDO are that would have the 

unemployment rate move around the way that President Lacker is talking about?  I just don’t 

recall. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Why don’t I step in here?  First, different DSGE models have 

different shocks embedded in them, and EDO probably has more than your typical DSGE model.  

One of the things in EDO is an economywide risk premium shock—that’s how it’s labeled.  That 

shock explains the overwhelming percentage of the slump that we just experienced.  In the 

January 25–26, 2011 30 of 282



 
 

 
 

identification scheme inside of EDO, that shock doesn’t really represent a shock to potential 

output, so that, in EDO’s inflation dynamics, the falloff in output that’s driven by that shock is 

putting downward pressure on inflation.  There are other shocks in the model that are not. 

MR. LACKER.  What other shocks? 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, there are various shocks in EDO, such as preference 

shocks, as there would be in any DSGE model.  You might say that those are shocks to demand, 

for example, and those would shift the concept of potential output such that they would tend to 

minimize the gap.  But the biggest thing going on in EDO, the shock that is causing the gap to 

open up and to be very wide, is, again, this economywide risk premium shock.  In other words, 

the way EDO tells the story is that a very big increase in slack has opened up, and that is putting 

downward pressure on inflation.  A different DSGE model might parse the data very differently:  

It might say that, indeed, a lot of what we might think of as a falloff in demand in this cycle is 

having an effect on a flexible-price concept of output, or something like that.  I guess the point I 

want to make is that the identification assumptions used in DSGE models, and one’s 

interpretation of what they would imply for inflation, can yield very different results when you 

do variations on those identification assumptions.  This is something that a number of people 

have commented on. 

If you ask whether a DSGE model would tell the story differently from, let’s say, 

FRB/US, the answer is “maybe—it depends on the DSGE model.”  So EDO’s telling of the tale 

in a lot of ways is not that different from FRB/US, but another DSGE model, like, say, the 

Smets–Wouters model, would tell the story very differently.  This is a cautionary tale about our 

ability, as far as econometrics goes, to identify exactly what is driving things. 

January 25–26, 2011 31 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. LACKER.  I understand the difference in the results you get from different models, 

but at a previous meeting you explained to us that you had EDO, a self-contained, general 

equilibrium model, and then outside of EDO you estimate a statistical trend to capture potential.  

So when you tell the story told by EDO, you’re talking about the story told by the combination 

of EDO and your ad hoc statistical trend for potential.  Am I right about that? 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  No.  I think that, when Mike Kiley was doing the briefing, he 

pointed out that, in some sense, there are three different concepts of “trend”—let’s call it that—

in EDO.  One is a smooth statistical filter, a Beveridge–Nelson type of thing.  Another is a 

production type of concept, and that would be closer to what’s in FRB/US.  A third is a 

flexible-price type of concept, which would be more like what’s in a lot of other DSGE models. 

Let me come at this issue another way.  We can ask:  What shocks should monetary 

policy try to offset, and what shocks should it not try to offset, in the sense that policy can’t do 

anything about them from a social welfare viewpoint?  The answer is:  It depends on the nature 

of the shock.  Even the economy-wide risk premium shock is an issue.  For example, if you 

thought in late 2008 that the shock represented households that suddenly really hated risk a lot 

more than they used to, then a policymaker might say, “Well, welfare is such that, if a whole set 

of household behaviors is changing, then it might be optimal to let that happen.  Monetary policy 

shouldn’t offset it.”  But if, instead, you thought households suddenly felt that the world was a 

lot riskier than it used to be, then monetary policy might want to offset that, particularly if doing 

so changes the risk distribution. 

Where I’m going—and, incidentally, I’m being pushed in my abilities, because I’m not 

the best person to talk about this—is back to the issue of the nature of these models.  I’m 

referring both to DSGE models and to models like FRB/US, which is more elaborate.  The nature 

January 25–26, 2011 32 of 282



 
 

 
 

of these DSGE models is that there’s a set of identification assumptions used in them from which 

people will draw welfare implications.  I think you could say that it’s really pushing the ability of 

those models in their identification assumptions to say, “Oh, I can draw welfare conclusions 

from that to say what shocks monetary policy should try to offset and what shocks it should not.”  

I think that’s taking it right to the limit.  Now, there are definitely different views on that. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Should that make us more or less comfortable with the view that is 

produced in FRB/US?  If it’s that hard to identify these things, the same problems occur in a 

different context with FRB/US, right? 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Oh, yes. 

MR. PLOSSER.  So you can’t really distinguish between these two based on this point. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Ultimately, I think it’s hard to say when economics would ever 

be at the point that it could actually make welfare judgments that you could really trust.  But 

there’s another way of looking at it:  Suppose the Committee is focused on one side of its 

mandate and asks, “What level of the unemployment rate or of GDP would be consistent with 

price stability?”  Eventually the answer comes out to be something that you just learn about over 

time, and, as you learn about it, you revise your views about what potential output or what the 

labor market slack would have to be.  That’s something you just have to observe, react to, and 

then adjust policy accordingly. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you.  I’m glad we cleared that up.  [Laughter] 

MR. STOCKTON.  That was somewhere between an answer and a filibuster, and I’m not 

sure which.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

January 25–26, 2011 33 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  Whenever we talk about structural unemployment—I realize that there are 

different definitions that probably are relevant to this—it seems to me that it’s inevitably about 

the limits of monetary policy.  There are at least a couple of different views that one could take.  

One is that you might think that monetary policy is not capable of improving the unemployment 

rate at any time, in other words, unconditionally that is not really appropriate for monetary 

policy.  If that’s your viewpoint, this discussion really is not very important at all, because these 

issues never come up.  Or you could take the view that unemployment is amenable to changes in 

monetary policy.  I take that view.  And you could worry about ineffectual attempts to reduce the 

unemployment rate through monetary policy, that is, the case where monetary policy gets to the 

point where it can’t reduce the unemployment rate without somehow spurring more inflation.  I 

would say that’s a very important issue, and that’s how I interpret these analyses.  If there’s 

another perspective, I’m not quite sure what that perspective would be, and I’d enjoy some 

discussion of it. 

My best assessment of these excellent and very broad analyses is that the contributions of 

mismatch are relatively small compared with the 9.4 percent unemployment rate, which would 

imply that there’s still room for monetary policy.  Another point that seems to come out of this, if 

I understood it correctly, is that mismatch is relatively transitory.  We brought this issue up as a 

potential obstacle to effective monetary policy actions, and if it were something that is 

permanent or at least persistent, that would be troubling.  But it seems that, as the unemployment 

rate begins to go down, it’s likely that this mismatch is going to decline, too, so the structural 

unemployment rate will go down.  Following that course, I don’t think it would have substantial 

inflationary effects if we were quite accommodative for quite some time.  If mismatch is higher, 

January 25–26, 2011 34 of 282



 
 

 
 

then we should expect to see inflation higher.  That’s a test for us, and we could respond 

appropriately. 

In terms of the analysis, I do have one question, and I’d enjoy hearing your perspectives 

on it.  I noted that there was not a lot about dispersion in wage growth.  There’s structural 

unemployment, and then there are wages, and the questions are how wages might respond and 

what role monetary policy could have in that.  If mismatch were a big deal—with some 

industries doing poorly, and other industries doing well but struggling to find qualified 

workers—I might have thought that would show up in wage growth dispersion and that there’d 

be some sectors where things are pretty strong, so we’d see big differences in wage growth 

across industries.  But my staff showed me data that says dispersion is lower than normal.  Do 

you have any thoughts or comments about that? 

MS. ŞAHIN.  First of all, I agree with your summary; we were actually surprised to 

uncover this cyclical component of mismatch.  Even if the level of mismatch stays constant, 

when the economy goes through high levels of separations and the unemployed pool gets bigger, 

this effect gets amplified.  So, as the unemployment rate starts going down, this effect will go 

down. 

In terms of wages, I haven’t done any work on that, but the San Francisco Fed’s memo 

written by Mary Daly, Rob Valletta, and Bart Hobijn actually looks at exactly what you said.  

They looked at the employment cost index and average hourly earnings series for different 

industries, and they tried to link this to quit behavior.  So the question is:  Do we see industries 

that are trying to hire and not managing to do so, and in industries where quit rates are different, 

do we see anything on wages?  They found that there are broad-based movements in wages. 

January 25–26, 2011 35 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. FABERMAN.  I would like to add to that, going back to some of the points I 

discussed—and let me note that this is another thing on which we don’t have very good research 

at this point.  Movements in the real wage are also going to affect the response of people 

collecting UI benefits, as well as how intensively firms go about filling their vacancies.  If firms 

feel the real wage is too high relative to what they’re looking for, that’s obviously going to affect 

how selective they are in whom they hire.  If workers collecting UI benefits view the real wage 

as too low, they may keep rejecting offers until they find a wage that’s acceptable.  So mismatch 

dispersion measures aren’t necessarily the only way to think about how wages are going to be 

affecting some of the things we’re looking at. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota.  

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the authors for their 

papers, and I want to thank Ayşegül, Jason, and Bruce, in particular, for their thoughtful 

discussion.  I learned a lot from all of the papers.  I think what affected my thinking the most was 

the treatment of the house-lock effect.  Before I read these papers, I would have said that was 

something to be really concerned about, but I came away convinced that it is probably relatively 

unimportant. 

I’m going to say a few words—actually, maybe more than a few.  I’m always asked, 

“What’s the biggest surprise since you took over this job?”  I don’t give the true answer, but I’ll 

give it now, knowing that it will not be revealed to anybody, because it’s FOMC-protected, for 

five years.  [Laughter] 

MR. TARULLO.  Unless it’s in the minutes, Narayana. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think this is not going to make the minutes. 

MR. TARULLO.  It depends on what you say.  

January 25–26, 2011 36 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think the biggest surprise to me was that I managed to be 

referred to as the “godfather of structural unemployment.”  Therefore, I think I have to say more 

than a few words.  First, I’ll say something about definitions.  This term “structural” goes back 

probably to the Cowles Commission, and maybe even before then.  Its meaning really depends 

on who you are and what you’re doing.  “Structural” means the things you can’t affect using the 

policy tool you have in hand.  So if I’m the Congress, you know, what I can do to the 

unemployment rate is a lot more than what I can do sitting here at the FOMC table.  I’ll talk 

about that in a second.  I guess I heard two different definitions of structural unemployment, one 

from Bruce and one from Jason.  I really liked Jason’s.  For us it’s about what we can do and 

what amount of unemployment is amenable to accommodative monetary policy. 

So how do you think about that?  I think the shock that hit our economy in 2007 is 

basically very much a demand-oriented shock.  There was a fall in net worth, there was a shock 

to borrowing capacity, and investment and consumption demand fell.  With a purely classical 

model, such as a model you’d draw in class, this is going to have very little effect on economic 

activity, because what happens is the real interest rate just falls immediately and sufficiently to 

ensure that investment and consumption return to their pre-shock levels.  Now, this assumes 

something about the shape of the supply curve, and I’ll come back to that in a second.  But if you 

have a vertical supply curve, that’s the way it’s going to work. 

Now, this is not the way the world works.  Why is that?  Well, there are three reasons that 

I can think of and probably more that others could come up with.  One is related to the fact that 

inflationary expectations have stayed pretty well anchored since 2007.  And with the zero lower 

bound on the nominal fed funds rate, this means that the real interest rate probably has not been 

able to fall enough to return consumption and investment to their pre-2007 levels. 

January 25–26, 2011 37 of 282



 
 

 
 

The second problem is that the classical story ignores changes in the demand for labor, in 

the willingness of firms to hire workers at a given real wage.  Some of these changes in labor 

demand are compositional effects that are lumped under the rubric of mismatch.  The work 

discussed today did a good job of going after this, but basically firms are looking for a different 

mix of tasks relative to the skills in the labor force.  Some of this is obvious; for example, we’re 

probably not going to need as many construction workers in 2015 as we had in 2007.  But some 

of it is, I think, much more subtle.  When we talk to firms, we hear over and over again that they 

have been led to adopt changes in their production methods that will lead them to use a different 

mix of workers going forward.  But some of the changes in labor demand are more aggregative.  

President Fisher has emphasized this in his speeches; for example, firms anticipate higher future 

taxes, and they’re concerned about regulation, health care legislation, and what kinds of costs 

those developments will impose on hiring.  These are all shocks to labor demand. 

Third, there are movements in labor supply, that is, the willingness of workers to supply 

labor at a given real wage.  And, again, there are multiple influences.  Higher unemployment 

benefits will deter labor supply.  When I work, I work to spend today, but I also work to spend in 

the future, so a decline in the real interest rate also leads to a fall in labor supply.  In conflict with 

that is the notion that a fall in net worth usually would lead people to supply more labor at a 

given real wage.  So I’ve identified three problems with the classical response of instant 

adjustment.  One is that the real interest rate doesn’t fall enough, and the other two are these 

movements in labor supply and labor demand. 

Monetary policy is about the real interest rate.  That’s our job, that’s our goal.  Our job is 

to get that real interest rate to go where it’s supposed to go.  We cannot shift these labor curves.  

Even if we could get the real interest rate to where we want it to be, that is, even if we could 

January 25–26, 2011 38 of 282



 
 

 
 

literally make it the minus 400 basis points, say, that the Taylor 1999 rule would call for, labor 

demand and labor supply changes could still alter the unemployment rate.  So, the 

unemployment rate that will prevail in the absence of price and wage rigidities is what I see as 

the natural rate of unemployment.  The papers that were discussed are about trying to get at this 

natural rate.  I think they do a good job of going after two particular sources of why that natural 

rate might have moved—the unemployment mismatch and the effect of extended benefits on 

unemployment. 

Now, people’s takeaways from this can differ.  You can clearly see that from our little 

chart at the end.  Taking into account the nonadditivity of all of these things, I would have said 

about 2 percentage points of the increase in unemployment could be attributed to these two 

sources.  There are a lot of uncertainties, up and down, so I’m not going to argue that.  And it can 

change over time.  We could think the long-term unemployed might lose some skills.  Also, 

unemployment benefits might be reduced.  So those go different ways.  It could be that the 

natural rate will go up or down in response to those things. 

But the papers are not informative about the other sources of change in labor demand or 

labor supply.  We don’t know how much unemployment is due to firms’ concerns about future 

taxes or regulation.  And then there’s the question of the real interest rate effect on labor supply 

that I mentioned earlier, namely, when real interest rates go down, people supply less labor, 

because they’re working for today and saving for the future.  Well, real interest rates have come 

down 200 basis points since 2007, if you look at TIPS yields.  But in the absence of price 

rigidities, according to the Taylor 1999 rule, we would have probably lowered them another 400 

basis points, some 600 basis points down. 

January 25–26, 2011 39 of 282



 
 

 
 

There are two sets of estimates about this real interest rate effect in the literature—the 

micro estimates, and the macro estimates.  I won’t even tell you how much of an effect on labor 

supply you could get out of the macro estimates—the employment-to-population ratio would fall 

by something like 700 basis points in response to the shock.  I think the more plausible estimates 

come from the micro data, and they would still imply that the employment-to-population ratio 

would fall by 90 to 150 basis points. 

What’s the takeaway from all of this?  I think Dave’s discussion with President Plosser 

and President Lacker really hit it.  You cannot rely just on unemployment.  However we try to 

correct it, using very careful work as our guide to the existence of inflationary pressures, we’re 

going to have to look at a lot of other indicators.  I’ll talk about some of that later when we talk 

about economics and policy. 

The second lesson is reflected in the Minneapolis Fed memo on improving data.  

Obviously, my staff members wrote it, and I really like what they did.  We talk a lot about it, and 

I think it’s absolutely true that unemployment imposes large losses on the citizens of this 

country.  But there are a lot of key questions that we are struggling to answer, and we struggle 

because we don’t have the data.  The right way to approach this is to collect the data.  The data 

might cost millions of dollars to collect, but it might end up saving the economy billions if we 

have a better idea of how to treat unemployment.  So the Minneapolis Fed memo provided some 

ideas about what kind of data you might want to go after. 

I have to say that all of the careful work, with all of the other uncertainties that are 

layered on top of it, merely convinces me that we’re going to have to look at a wide range of 

things besides the unemployment rate, however corrected, as a measure of inflationary pressures.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

January 25–26, 2011 40 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard.  

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought this was very nice work and a 

very nice presentation—I really enjoyed it and found it a pleasure to read.  I’m going to make a 

couple of comments, and I think they’re going to dovetail with the previous discussion here. 

I’d say that the takeaway from these ten memos is that the research on this question, as 

good as it is, is not yet able to provide a satisfactory answer.  I’m going to suggest that, to make 

progress, we have to move away from the partial equilibrium analysis emphasized here and 

toward more general equilibrium analysis with monetary policy explicitly included.  I’m going to 

give you a rundown of what I think that means and what I have in mind, because there is 

literature on this. 

The question is:  Should we analyze the labor market by itself or in the context of a fully 

articulated macroeconomic model with monetary policy included?  I think the answer is that 

you’ve got to have the fully articulated model in order to get the answer to the question that we 

face around this table, namely:  How much impact can monetary policy have on unemployment? 

Work in this direction does exist, although it was not stressed in these memos, so I am 

going to stress it here.  The literature began in the 1990s with papers by David Andolfatto in the 

American Economic Review, and Monika Merz in the Journal of Monetary Economics.  They 

used a very basic idea, namely, to take Diamond–Mortensen–Pissarides labor search theory and 

merge it into otherwise standard business cycle models.  If you go through all the pain of doing 

that, the model will produce a business cycle, but then there will be frictional search-theoretic 

unemployment, which will also fluctuate in response to shocks to the economy.  The 

unemployment in that model is an equilibrium unemployment rate, and it is bouncing around all 

the time as the economy gets hit by shocks.  But there are no other frictions in those models, and 

January 25–26, 2011 41 of 282



 
 

 
 

there’s no monetary policy at all.  I would say that those papers were moderately successful and 

surely pointed the way for future research—these authors were writing before the modern era of 

New Keynesian macroeconomics really got started. 

Since the publication of those articles, there have been a lot of contributions, in 

particular, the sticky-price New Keynesian macro models associated with Mike Woodford and 

others.  Therefore, the natural question would be, if you took that kind of a monetary policy 

model, but with no unemployment, could you put Diamond–Mortensen–Pissarides into it and get 

a sensible answer to these kinds of questions?  The answer, actually, is “yes,” and it has been 

done.  One example I know of is Mark Gertler, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari recently in the 

Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.  What do they do?  They take the same kind of exercise 

as in Andolfatto and Merz, but they put it in Woodford’s model of monetary policy.  In this 

model, then, there’s labor search-theoretic unemployment, and the level of unemployment is 

going to be fluctuating in response to shocks to this economy, so you might very naturally call 

this the natural rate of unemployment or the equilibrium rate of unemployment.  But in this 

model, because of sticky prices, the unemployment rate that you actually observe will not be 

equal to this frictionless or search-theoretic unemployment rate.  And, because there is a gap 

between those two unemployment rates, it is going to be the natural variable of focus for 

monetary policy.  It is what you would be trying to determine, and it is what you would be trying 

to reduce in the model. 

Gertler, Sala, and Trigari actually do calculate this, and, for those of you who have stayed 

with me this far and are interested, you can check their figure 7, which actually plots it pre-crisis, 

which is when they wrote the paper.  You could calculate it post-crisis—it’s an exact analogue of 

the New Keynesian output gap.  

January 25–26, 2011 42 of 282



 
 

 
 

I think this is the most promising way to think about this issue.  Of course, these 

calculations are complicated; furthermore, I think we heard Dave Reifschneider saying earlier 

that he doesn’t really trust these models yet, which is very sensible.  But, at the same time, 

conceptually, this is definitely the way to go.  We’ve got to get busy and work on this and go 

forward.  I think it is important to pursue this line of research and try to make further progress in 

this area. 

What is the bottom line intuition?  I think it works this way:  The economy is hit by a 

large shock, which generates a lot of unemployment, but that would happen whether prices were 

sticky or flexible.  So the relevant variable for monetary policy would be the difference between 

the sticky-price and the flexible-price levels of unemployment.  This difference is likely to be 

small, so I would look at the high level of unemployment as not being very informative for 

monetary policy at this point.  Also, there would be a great deal of uncertainty about the size of 

this gap.  If we do further research, we might be able to pin this down better—we might be able 

to reduce that uncertainty, and we might be able to change the intuition, because maybe the 

intuition is wrong.  That’s what research is for, and the assessment remains to be seen.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans, do you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I wanted to pick up on something very interesting that President 

Kocherlakota raised and that ties in to some commentary that President Fisher has made before.  

Narayana started off by talking about whether or not something is invariant to a monetary policy 

intervention.  As I have understood President Fisher’s comments, businesspeople are very 

concerned about new regulations, health care reform, and so on, in part because they don’t know 

exactly how much that is going to cost.  I have heard this from them myself.  These higher labor 

January 25–26, 2011 43 of 282



 
 

 
 

costs induce them to change their production processes, in part to go towards a higher-skilled and 

higher-wage worker.  That’s part of a capital–labor choice, and it depends on relative prices. 

My thought is that something that is perhaps not invariant to monetary policy is wages.  

There’s a lot of resource slack out there, a lot of people unemployed.  And if wages were lower, 

that would be an offset to these business costs, right?  I tried to engage my directors on this point 

at our last meeting.  I acknowledged the commentary about higher business costs and asked what 

if real wages were 20 percent lower—I purposely chose an outlandish number.  Interestingly, 

they just refused to engage in that discussion.  Instead, in their commentary, they talked about 

demand effects, saying that they really are not comfortable that the demand is going to be there.  

So I think that unemployment that is attributable to firms’ concerns about higher business costs 

is potentially amenable to monetary policy, in the sense that a hike in prices in an environment of 

sticky wages could lower real wages.  I agree completely the question is:  What is invariant to 

policy?  And I think that if you think about this more carefully, there are a lot of things that can 

be affected by policy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I agree with this wholly, that is, that rationing shows up in the 

labor market because the real wage is too high to hire more people.  Indeed, I have this same 

conversation you described having with your directors, and the response is, “Wages?  Wages 

don’t matter.  What matters is the quality of human being we’re hiring.”  To be honest, I think 

they think this because they have a nominal wage set in their heads for a particular job, and that’s 

it, that’s the end of the story.  The tenor of my remarks is not to say, nor do I believe I have ever 

said, that sticky nominal wages are not part of the issue.  I think that that is captured in our 

ability to adjust the real interest rate.  If we can get it down far enough, then basically the real 

January 25–26, 2011 44 of 282



 
 

 
 

wage will adjust to clear labor markets as well.  We have one instrument—with large-scale asset 

purchases added on, et cetera. 

MR. EVANS.  My own view is that we’ve been in a liquidity trap, and we’re stuck at this 

interest rate, so higher inflation is one aspect that would lead to a solution. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’m sympathetic to that—you and I agree on the concepts.  

The question is the quantities, and, unfortunately, those are hard to come by, and I suspect it will 

remain hard to do so even if I looked at the Gertler, Sala, and Trigari paper. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a comment? 

MR. FISHER.  I have asked the same question.  I think the answer is that employers find 

lower-wage workers outside the domestic workforce.  So that’s the release valve.  Nobody wants 

to say, “Well, you know, I’m willing to pay someone a substantial fraction of what we paid them 

before.”  It’s socially unacceptable, and it’s not necessary, because they have options.  This is 

what globalization is all about.  So I think it is effected by looking to other workforces. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  

MR. FISHER.  Maybe it’s not the world we want, but that’s the world that we live in.  

Whether you like the social philosophy or not is not the issue.  It’s a question, Mr. Chairman, it 

seems to me, of another source of friction, but you have pointed out that this is just one source of 

friction.  If you are trying to allocate capital, it affects the capital allocation decision.  That’s the 

simple point that I’ve been trying to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, you have identified a concept economists have talked 

about called efficiency wages, which is that people’s effort may depend on the wage they 

receive, so cutting wages may not be a good strategy.  Anyone else have a question or comment? 

January 25–26, 2011 45 of 282



 
 

 
 

I’d just like to say a few words—and I’m going to regret this.  [Laughter]  What President 

Bullard, as well as, I believe, President Kocherlakota and President Lacker, described was a 

much more complicated machine with all of the pieces—that includes monetary policy, it 

includes the real side, it includes labor supply, and so on—which recognizes that if there’s a big 

shock, then everything is going to move to some extent, including what we would think of as the 

natural rate of unemployment.  But I think that, even though the terminology is different, the 

concepts are not unrelated.  In particular, the point that you’re making is that what FRB/US calls 

U* depends on lots of things, and it can move around.  And these studies were trying the best 

they could to get an empirical grip on how much it has moved.  Knowing how much it has 

moved is important, because, as Charlie was saying, it helps us estimate how much space we 

have in terms of monetary policy expansion, what the unemployment rate will likely be five or 

ten years from now, and what the determinants of inflation and other things will be.  But, as you 

point out, there are a lot of factors affecting U*, so all the presenters can say is that they have 

tried to identify some of the important ones and tried to give quantitative estimates of how big 

they are.  But, clearly, as in all of the problems we face, everything is moving, and that makes it 

more complicated, certainly.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I certainly agree with everything that you said, Mr. Chairman.  

When I hear people talk about this, there’s a distinction between structural things, that is, things 

that are moving more long term, and cyclical things, that is, things that are moving at a cyclical 

frequency, or medium term, shall we say.  I think some of the things that happen at a cyclical 

frequency are not so amenable to monetary policy, and they pose challenges for us to correct 

using our main instrument, which has been the real interest rate, so I’m not sure that’s the right 

distinction. 

January 25–26, 2011 46 of 282



 
 

 
 

In the discussion today, the story was, “Well, mismatch is small, so that means there is 

clearly room for monetary policy to be accommodative.”  That step in logic is not clear to me, 

because many other factors can move U* around.  Let me note that I absolutely don’t want to 

undercut the value of the work that was presented:  The papers were very good, and I learned a 

lot from them.  It’s just that there are lots of other factors, that’s all. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  I agree, as well, with everything you said and with what President 

Kocherlakota said.  Just to cast this in a different light, let me note two things.  First, the 

exclusion of cyclical from a definition of “structural” is to some sense a priori.  And what we’ve 

learned from the models we’ve developed and explored and done a lot of research on since the 

1970s is that that’s a poor assumption and that there are a lot of models in which that just isn’t 

true.  I think that is part of the fault line here.  Second, I would point out the distribution of 

estimates of how much room we have.  We’re at 9½ percent unemployment, and we have 

estimates that we’re anywhere from 4¼ percentage points to 0.6 percentage point away from our 

mandate-consistent unemployment rate.  There’s a substantial difference in the sense of the 

urgency one would attach to conducting policy in a way to reduce unemployment.  So it’s 

consequential for policy.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can also define “structural” and “cyclical” in a 

statistical sense.  Whatever model you can write down, unemployment in the real world tends to 

come back to more or less the same level after a business cycle is over.  There’s a very sharp 

pattern of rise and slow decline back to a normal level. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But there’s nothing in a statistical approach that connects that, 

without any other assumptions, to what we can do with policy.  Right? 

January 25–26, 2011 47 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, there are the relationships with that to inflation, for 

example.  Any other comments?  Yes. 

MS. ŞAHIN.  I would like to make a quick comment about the DSGE models with search 

frictions.  In my opinion, they have two major shortcomings.  The first one is that generally they 

assume complete markets, and, in a model where we assume complete markets, policies like 

unemployment insurance are completely irrelevant, so we can’t really understand their effects.  

The other shortcoming is that generally workers are homogeneous, which makes it harder to 

study issues like mismatch.  These were the two main reasons that we wrote the papers as we 

did. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. 

MR. FABERMAN.  I just wanted to add to that.  I agree that moving towards models that 

incorporate search frictions into a New Keynesian or any other type of DSGE model is a great 

way to go.  But there is one note of caution about search models in general—regardless of 

whether they’re embedded into an RBC [real business cycle] model or some kind of New 

Keynesian model—that I’d like to bring to the Committee’s attention.  People who write down 

theories of labor market search incessantly fight each other about how the wage is determined in 

the bargaining between workers and firms.  Dozens of models have different ways to do it, and 

those ways vary quite a bit in the flexibility of that wage in the aggregate.  Some are completely 

flexible, such as the standard Mortensen–Pissarides type models.  Other models, such as those in 

work by Rob Shimer and Bob Hall, incorporate wage rigidities, both in a nominal sense where 

the price is actually sticky, and in what the workers’ outside options are relative to what they’re 

being offered. 

January 25–26, 2011 48 of 282



 
 

 
 

My main point is that, in terms of thinking about policy and the real interest rate and 

what’s going with the real wage, in these models, the definition of the real wage is very muddy.  

I don’t know how much simpler it’s going to make your life to use them, because, while they 

helped introduce search frictions and some heterogeneity and new ways to think about the labor 

market, they also add new complications precisely in the wage, the one thing you want to think 

about the most with monetary policy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If the Senate had had the good sense to confirm Peter 

Diamond, we could have wrapped this up in 10 minutes.  [Laughter]  All right, I understand that 

coffee is ready, so let’s take 20 minutes for a break. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  For the next item on our agenda, let me turn to Brian Sack 

for an update on financial conditions. 

MR. SACK.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the materials labeled 
“Financial Market Developments and Desk Operations.”  Over the intermeeting 
period, financial markets continued to develop in a manner that reflected an 
improving economic outlook and that, in turn, should provide support to economic 
growth. 

As shown in the upper left panel of your first exhibit, Treasury yields largely 
leveled out following their sharp increases in the last two months of 2010.  On 
balance over the intermeeting period, Treasury coupon yields moved up 5 to 15 basis 
points, with the 10-year yield now trading around 3.4 percent. 

With yields having stabilized to some degree, it may be a good time to look back 
and assess why yields moved up so sharply in the period following the November 
FOMC meeting.  To a large extent, the sharp selloff in Treasury securities over that 
period was driven by greater optimism among investors about economic growth 
prospects and the anticipated policy response from the Federal Reserve in terms of 
both short-term interest rates and its balance sheet. 

As shown to the right, investors brought forward the expected timing of increases 
in short-term interest rates, with the implied policy path from federal funds and 
Eurodollar futures rates now approaching 50 basis points in the first quarter of 2012.  

                                                 
2 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

January 25–26, 2011 49 of 282



 
 

 
 

Although the Desk’s survey of primary dealers indicates that they see the first rate 
hike as most likely to occur later in 2012, investors apparently see enough risk of 
earlier tightening actions to pull up the futures curve significantly by the first quarter 
of next year. 

At the same time, market participants have reduced their expectations for the 
cumulative size of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase program.  As shown in the 
middle left panel, the primary dealer survey suggests that expectations have solidified 
around $600 billion for the size of the program.  According to the survey, no dealers 
expect the program to stop short of that amount, and only five dealers expect the 
program to extend beyond it. 

These two developments—the shift in short rate expectations and the scaling 
down of expected asset purchases—were cited by the primary dealers in the Desk’s 
survey as the most important factors lifting Treasury yields over the past three 
months.  Our own empirical modeling suggests that these two factors explain a 
substantial amount of the increase in yields but not the full magnitude of the increase. 

Another potential factor is that the term premium may have simply reached levels 
that were lower than could be justified, even taking into account the effects of the 
asset purchases, in which case some upward adjustment was inevitable.  Indeed, as 
shown to the right, the Kim–Wright model estimated by the Board staff suggests that 
the term premium at the 10-year maturity point had moved below zero and that the 
recent selloff has returned it to within its historical range. 

The rise in longer-term yields did not seem to reflect unusual concerns about 
inflation prospects.  Indeed, market participants generally believe that the expected 
paths of short-term interest rates and the balance sheet will deliver inflation outcomes 
that are consistent with the FOMC’s objectives.  As shown in the bottom left panel, 
the five-year, five-year forward breakeven inflation rate moved modestly lower over 
the intermeeting period, remaining at levels consistent with moderate inflation over 
the longer term.  The five-year breakeven inflation rate instead continued its upward 
trend over the intermeeting period, as further increases in energy prices and a stronger 
cyclical recovery are expected to pull inflation up from its relatively low level. 

Before leaving this exhibit, let me highlight one other risk that has come into 
focus in the Treasury market, which is the statutory debt ceiling.  As shown to the 
right, without any changes to the Treasury’s Supplementary Financing Program, the 
debt ceiling would be projected to become binding by mid-March, as indicated by the 
light blue line.  To provide it with additional room under the ceiling, the Treasury 
plans to announce on Thursday its intention to reduce the balance of its 
Supplementary Financing Account from $200 billion to $5 billion, which it will 
achieve by allowing nearly all of the bills that fund this account to mature without 
replacement beginning in early February.  With that adjustment, the projected point at 
which the debt ceiling will be reached moves back to mid-April, as shown by the 
dotted line.  Of course, the Treasury has a set of other tools that it can employ, which 
by our estimates would push back the timing of hitting the debt ceiling until late June. 

January 25–26, 2011 50 of 282



 
 

 
 

Your next exhibit focuses on recent developments in U.S. asset markets more 
broadly.  Equity markets continued to advance at a robust pace, with the S&P 500 
index gaining another 3½ percent over the intermeeting period.  The equity market 
has been buoyed by improving prospects for economic growth and continued strength 
in corporate earnings.  As shown to the right, the S&P 500 index has now gained 
more than 20 percent over the past five months—a pace that has only been matched 
on a few occasions over the past 15 years.  Despite these gains, the staff is not 
unusually concerned about valuations in the equity market, largely because this rally 
began from a point at which valuations, by many measures, looked relatively cheap.  
Nellie Liang will go through some of the staff’s measures in detail in her portion of 
the chart show. 

Corporate bonds also advanced notably, with yield spreads narrowing for 
investment-grade and high-yield issues, as shown in the middle left panel.  This 
advance was driven in large part by the same factors supporting equity prices.  In this 
case, however, some valuation measures are starting to look stretched, and sizable 
further gains from this point might be cause for concern.  Corporate bond issuance 
remained robust over the intermeeting period, as it picked up following its usual lull 
at year-end. 

Investors also showed increased appetite for other fixed-income instruments, 
including a range of securitized credit products.  As shown to the right, spreads on 
commercial mortgage-backed securities narrowed significantly, and a decent pipeline 
of CMBS issuance is lined up for the first quarter.  Private-label residential mortgage-
backed securities also experienced better pricing in recent months as well as some 
improvement in liquidity, but of course this market remains inactive in terms of 
funding new issuance.  Investor demand for consumer-related ABS was also strong, 
with the yield spreads on those instruments, the blue line in the panel, remaining at 
low levels.  Lastly, investors continued to show increased appetite for syndicated 
loans, and the terms of such deals have loosened modestly. 

While investors are seeking additional return by moving into these asset classes, 
this shift does not appear to be accompanied by the leverage trends that occurred 
during the credit boom, as reviewed in the financial stability memos circulated to the 
FOMC ahead of the meeting. 

Despite the better sentiment about U.S. growth prospects, the dollar depreciated 
against most currencies.  The decline in the dollar in part reflected the fact that 
foreign growth prospects also improved notably and that investors were shifting into 
riskier assets.  In addition, the euro received a boost against the dollar from an 
improvement in investor sentiment in response to the successful rollover of 
government debt by some peripheral European countries and the anticipation of a 
more comprehensive policy mechanism for achieving stability.  The improved 
sentiment resulted in some easing of the pressures on dollar funding for European 
financial institutions.  Indeed, as shown to the right, the dollar funding rate that can be 
achieved through FX swaps declined notably. 

January 25–26, 2011 51 of 282



 
 

 
 

Overall, financial markets have been incorporating an increasingly optimistic 
outlook for the economy.  However, it should be noted that a number of significant 
risks remain.  The primary risks recognized among investors today include the 
ongoing stresses in the euro area, the concerns about credit risk in the U.S. municipal 
bond market, the prospective policy responses in emerging market economies—
notably China—to rising inflation and heavy capital inflows, and the range of 
regulatory and financial uncertainties facing the U.S. financial sector.  Many aspects 
of these risks will be covered by Nellie Liang and Steve Kamin in their presentations. 

Your third exhibit summarizes recent Desk operations and market expectations 
for future balance sheet actions.  As of last Friday, the Desk had conducted 
$236 billion of purchases of Treasury securities since the schedule released after the 
November FOMC meeting.  That total includes $167 billion of the $600 billion 
expansion of the portfolio that was announced in November, and $69 billion 
associated with the reinvestment of principal payments on agency debt and mortgage-
backed securities.  As planned, the maturity distribution of the Desk’s purchases, 
shown in the upper left panel, has resulted in an average duration of about 5½ years 
for the securities obtained. 

The operations continue to go well.  Dealer participation has remained robust, and 
we have purchased a fairly wide range of securities.  In several recent operations, 
though, we have ended up purchasing larger amounts of on-the-run issues, which 
could be a sign that dealers are beginning to find it more challenging to source off-
the-run issues to offer to us. 

We continue to feel that our purchases are not causing significant strains on the 
liquidity or functioning of the Treasury market.  The deterioration in market liquidity 
that was seen late last year, evidenced by the decline in the depth of market quotes 
shown to the right, turned out to be a year-end phenomenon, as we had expected.  
Quote depth has moved back towards its previous levels, and other measures, such as 
trading volume or bid-asked spreads, suggest that market liquidity remains decent. 

Going forward, under the current directive from the FOMC, the Desk intends to 
continue purchasing at a pace that will expand our security holdings by about 
$80 billion per month.  The overall pace of purchases will also incorporate 
reinvestment flows, projections of which are shown in the middle left panel.  We now 
expect those reinvestments to be somewhat slower than previously expected because 
of the effects of the backup in interest rates on MBS prepayments. 

In terms of other operational efforts of the Desk, I should note that CUSIP 
aggregation of our MBS holdings has gotten under way.  So far, we have finished 
exactly one aggregation—CUSIP number 31419A3T2—which combined 47 of the 
CUSIPs we hold.  Because we are consolidating about 30,000 CUSIPs in total, we 
still have a ways to go, but at least the first one worked without a glitch. 

The final three panels of the exhibit present some results from based on the 
Desk’s primary dealer survey on how policymakers are expected to manage the 

January 25–26, 2011 52 of 282



 
 

 
 

Federal Reserve’s balance sheet going forward.  As shown in the middle right panel, 
market participants expect the FOMC to gradually shrink the SOMA portfolio over 
time.  The median respondent thought that the size of the portfolio would begin to 
move down slightly in 2012 and would then decline by about $1 trillion over the 
subsequent three years, bringing it to just under $1½ trillion by the end of 2015.  
While there was a range of responses around that path, all of them showed a gradual 
decline. 

To achieve that gradual decline, market participants thought that the FOMC was 
likely to employ some combination of redemptions and asset sales.  The bottom left 
panel shows the probabilities assigned to halting reinvestments of principal payments 
in each of the asset classes.  As can be seen, the odds assigned to halting 
reinvestments within the next two years were sizable.  The interquartile range of the 
responses (shown by the light blue bar) ranged from roughly 50 to 90 percent for 
agency debt and MBS, with a median response (shown by the tick mark) at around 
75 percent.  The range of responses for Treasury securities was much wider but also 
reached quite high levels.  In all cases, the perceived probabilities were considerably 
higher for the five-year horizon. 

Respondents were asked the same question about the likelihood of asset sales for 
each type of security.  As shown to the right, the perceived odds of asset sales 
occurring within the next two years were much lower, with the median respondent 
seeing only about a 20 percent chance of sales for each asset class.  Over the five-year 
horizon, though, the chances of asset sales were seen as much more substantial.  
Interestingly, the odds placed on selling Treasury securities were generally higher 
than the odds of selling mortgage-backed securities. 

Your final exhibit presents a brief summary of the staff’s forecast for Federal 
Reserve income and its assessment of the risks surrounding that forecast, drawing on 
the memo that was circulated to the Committee last week. 

To project the income from the SOMA portfolio, the staff had to make 
assumptions about how the portfolio would be managed and how market interest rates 
would evolve.  For the portfolio, the baseline projection follows the Tealbook 
assumption that the FOMC completes the $600 billion in purchases and does not 
begin redeeming maturing securities or selling assets until 2013.  Accordingly, as 
shown in the upper left panel, the size of the SOMA portfolio levels out at 
$2.6 trillion until early 2013.  At that time, the FOMC is assumed to begin redeeming 
maturing holdings of all asset types and then, later that year, to begin a process of 
gradually selling its MBS holdings over five years.  Under those assumptions, the size 
of the portfolio begins to decline and returns all the way to its steady-state level by 
2016.  At that point, the Federal Reserve begins to purchase Treasury securities in 
enough size to offset the reduction in agency debt and MBS and to increase the 
portfolio as needed to meet currency demand. 

The panel to the right shows the interest rate assumptions under the baseline 
scenario.  The federal funds rate is assumed to begin increasing in March 2013 and to 

January 25–26, 2011 53 of 282



 
 

 
 

rise about 400 basis points over the subsequent three years.  The 10-year Treasury 
yield instead begins to rise immediately and moves up by a considerable amount, 
reaching about 5 percent by the end of 2014.  In the long run, the yield curve settles 
down with the federal funds rate at around 4½ percent and the 10-year yield at around 
5¼ percent. 

The baseline results for the income from the SOMA portfolio are shown in the 
middle left panel.  This chart shows the total net income from the portfolio as the red 
line, and the major components of that income as the bars.  As can be seen, net 
income from the SOMA portfolio remains elevated through 2013, driven primarily by 
the coupon income generated by the size of the portfolio.  SOMA income then falls 
notably through 2016 as a result of several factors.  First, coupon income (the dark 
blue bars) begins to decline as the size of the portfolio shrinks.  Second, the funding 
cost of the portfolio, which is essentially the interest paid on the reserves created (the 
light blue bars) begins to increase as short-term interest rates rise.  Note that this cost 
peaks in 2014 and begins to decline thereafter, even though short-term interest rates 
continue to rise, because the amount of reserves in the system is declining.  And third, 
the SOMA realizes capital losses (the green bars) on the securities that it begins 
selling.  Once we get past 2016, the coupon payments from the portfolio begin to lift 
total net income, even though capital losses continue to be realized through 2018. 

The total net portfolio income is repeated in the panel to the right, only now 
expressed as a range to reflect the alternative modeling methods used in the memo.  
To translate this portfolio income into remittances to Treasury, we have to adjust it 
for other sources of income, operating expenses, dividends, and additions to capital.  
The path of Treasury remittances associated with this baseline scenario is shown in 
the chart.  As can be seen, even at their lowest point, remittances to Treasury are 
projected to remain sizable, at over $25 billion.  That trough is comparable with the 
average level of annual remittances over the 10 years preceding the balance sheet 
expansion. 

Thus, the expected path of Federal Reserve income and remittances to the 
Treasury are favorable under the baseline scenario.  In fact, asset purchases turn out 
to be quite profitable in that case, adding about $70 billion to Federal Reserve income 
over the 10-year period shown.  Nevertheless, there are considerable risks to the path 
of Federal Reserve income. 

The bottom left panel focuses on the effects of higher interest rates.  As described 
in detail in the memo, we consider an alternative scenario in which the federal funds 
rate begins to rise in June of this year and follows a path that is roughly 200 basis 
points higher than the baseline scenario.  The 10-year Treasury yield accordingly 
rises more quickly, moving roughly 100 to 150 basis points above the baseline over 
the next several years.  As can be seen in the bottom left panel, remittances to the 
Treasury in this scenario fall to near zero.  The downward pressure on income results 
from higher funding costs for the portfolio and larger capital losses on the assets sold. 

January 25–26, 2011 54 of 282



 
 

 
 

The bottom right panel focuses on the effects of faster asset sales.  The scenario 
assumed in the memo involves selling all of our MBS holdings over an 18-month 
window instead of the 5-year window in the Tealbook baseline.  This policy approach 
would be aggressive, as it would necessitate MBS sales at an average pace of about 
$40 billion per month.  The resulting increase in the supply of securities to the market 
is roughly equal to the average pace of net issuance of agency MBS generated by the 
entire market at the height of the housing boom.  The more aggressive sales, if begun 
at the same time as in the baseline scenario, would return the size of the SOMA 
portfolio to its steady-state level about a year earlier than in the baseline scenario. 

Treasury remittances under the more aggressive sales scenario decline more 
quickly, as shown by the red line.  The primary reason is that selling more quickly 
compresses the capital losses that would be realized over five years into a shorter 
period.  As a result, remittances to Treasury suffer sharply in those years, but are then 
higher in the latter parts of the forecast period.  Under the specific assumptions made 
in this scenario, remittances remain positive. 

Not surprisingly, the most significant effects on Federal Reserve income occur if 
faster MBS sales were to take place under a scenario of high interest rates.  In that 
case, the capital losses are larger and, hence, compressing them into a shorter period 
can easily push Treasury remittances to zero.  In the memo, we presented an income 
projection under the high interest rate path described earlier and asset sales that are as 
fast as the one just described but that are accelerated to begin this year.  Under those 
assumptions, as shown by the light blue area, remittances to Treasury fall to zero for a 
period of two years, and a deferred credit asset of between $5 and $35 billion would 
be realized on the balance sheet. 

In closing, it should be noted that there is a wide range of possible outcomes for 
Federal Reserve income, as markets and policy decisions can evolve in a number of 
directions that can differ from the scenarios presented in the memo.  Our intention is 
to provide you with a few potential outcomes to serve as useful reference points.  
Thank you.  That concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, Brian.  Are there questions?  President Plosser.  

MR. PLOSSER.  Brian, you mentioned changes to the Supplementary Financing 

Program, and you said it was now something like $200 billion.  Is that right? 

MR. SACK.  Right.  The current balance is $200 billion. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Is that reflected in the balance sheet scenarios that you work out later? 

MR. SACK.  In the income projections?  Yes. 

January 25–26, 2011 55 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m referring to income and size of the balance sheet going forward, 

and I ask because that will raise the size of our balance sheet by $200 billion, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It raises only the reserves. 

MR. ENGLISH.  It doesn’t change the size of our balance sheet.  It changes the 

composition of our liabilities. 

MR. SACK.  It would have a modest effect on the funding cost of the portfolio, because 

that balance would reduce the amount of reserves in the system by that amount.  We assume it 

does run down.  And does it return? 

MS. REMACHE.  It returns.  It declines to zero at the time that the portfolio resumes its 

steady-state growth.  So it stays at $200 billion throughout the projection, and then is run off as 

reserves return to $25 billion. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Okay.  Thank you.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.  

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, regarding the Treasury purchases, you 

noted in the memo that we had, ex ante, understood that we would be breaching the old 

35 percent rule of thumb, and in certain issues you found that we might be as high as 70 or 

75 percent.  My question is:  Are those higher percents clustered in a certain place along the 

Treasury curve, or are they randomly around the areas that we’re buying?  I ask, because there 

would be greater concern if they were all around a particular term that would be of interest to 

investors, for example, if they were all seven or eight years, whereas, if we were making the 

market but doing so with issues spread more broadly over the curve, it would be less worrisome. 

MR. SACK.  First of all, the concentration of our holdings isn’t quite as high as you 

suggested.  Our highest holdings right now are at 60 percent, and, under the new thresholds that 

January 25–26, 2011 56 of 282



 
 

 
 

the Desk published, we will only move up in 1 percent increments per operation, so that will 

slow how quickly we move up.  We have two issues at 60 percent and two others that are above 

50 percent.  If we look at our top ten holdings in terms of concentration, all of them are old 

bonds except one, so, certainly, that’s the group for which this is relevant.  The maturities of 

those holdings range from 2015 to 2020, so it’s mostly in that 5- to 10-year sector.  But it’s not 

overly concentrated in any particular year. 

MR. FISHER.  Excuse me, Brian, can you explain “old bonds”?  Is it in terms of price 

gains over book value?  Or does “old” mean that we bought them some time ago? 

MR. SACK.  “Old” means “issued a long time ago,” so that they’re carrying a high 

coupon.  They tend to be less liquid and less desirable to market participants, which makes them 

appear cheap in our relative value analysis, so the method we use inclines us to purchase those. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In essence, we’re buying the bonds that people don’t 

want, as opposed to buying the bonds that they really want to hold. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, did you have a question? 

MR. FISHER.  Actually, I have a statement, Mr. Chairman, because I want to thank 

Brian and Bill English for pulling together that memo.  I don’t know how many people read it 

thoroughly.  It’s a subject I have been pestering you about for a long time, and I know it has been 

an annoyance.  But I learned a great deal from it, in addition to the exhibit you just presented.  It 

does condition our deliberations; for example, if we decided to have more rapid asset sales 

combined with an adverse interest rate scenario, it might result in nonremittances to the Treasury 

for quite an extended period.  So I want to thank you and your staffs for putting this together.  I 

think it’s a very important memo. 

January 25–26, 2011 57 of 282



 
 

 
 

The other point I would make is that it’s the kind of memo I wish we had had before we 

entered into the program, in that it would have informed our decisionmaking.  Sensitivity 

analysis is so critical in understanding the consequences of what you do.  And when you commit 

to buy $1.25 trillion worth of any asset, it is helpful to have this kind of analysis in place.  I 

gather you have had to build this from the ground up, almost from CUSIP up.  It’s great work, 

and, at least from this corner of the table, much appreciated.  I’m sure it is by everybody, and I 

want to thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, I know we have had memos like this 

before. 

MR. FISHER.  Brian and I have talked a great deal.  This is a very complicated piece of 

work—there are so many moving parts—and I don’t recall, at least in my six years, something 

this thorough.  But, of course, the programs have changed, the way we conduct monetary policy 

has changed.  Even though we have had work like this before, I still think this group deserves a 

big pat on the back, because this was a very difficult exercise.  I don’t know how many hours 

you spent on this.  I’m trying to impart a compliment, Mr. Chairman.  I think Brian needs 

compliments every now and then. 

MR. SACK.  I’ll take it.  [Laughter]  Of course, we presented an analysis of the risks on 

several occasions along the way, but it is true that we now have the machinery in place to do a 

much more comprehensive analysis of a wider range of scenarios. 

MR. FISHER.  Good. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The Vice Chairman has a two-hander. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a quick question:  How should you think about 

the asset sales piece, because that’s different from the interest rate path?  The interest rate path, 

January 25–26, 2011 58 of 282



 
 

 
 

presumably, reflects the pursuit of our dual mandate and the financial markets’ reactions to the 

economic environment.  The asset sales piece is, in some ways, discretionary—we could do it or 

not do it, and we could do it quickly or do it slowly.  How do you think about that when you’re 

doing this analysis? 

MR. SACK.  First of all, if we believe that the balance sheet has had effects on financial 

conditions, then the primary consideration for you in how to manage the balance sheet and 

whether to sell assets would be the effects on financial conditions and the economy.  In terms of 

income effects, selling assets can concentrate returns.  It’s possible that, say, long rates would 

move up, but they do so because of greater optimism about the economy and an expected higher 

path of short-term interest rates.  In that sense, the higher rates, or the capital losses that would 

be realized by selling assets, are essentially just the present value of the future costs that the 

portfolio would face.  So, to a large extent, the asset sales are just reallocating the timing of when 

losses are realized, which is probably another reason not to make that income stream the primary 

objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It is not completely invariant to the losses you realize, 

because there’s a term premium that you earn if you hold it until maturity and that you don’t earn 

if you sell the asset early. 

MR. SACK.  That’s exactly right.  You are giving up a term premium, and you can see 

that in the projections.  In fact, we did a scenario, which wasn’t reported in the memo, where 

there were no asset sales, and the total effect on income over ten years was on the order of 

$100 to $125 billion.  So there’s a sense that because of a term premium we’re earning an excess 

return.  And if we sell assets and shrink that, we’re giving up some expected income.  In 

addition, we’re affecting the timing of when it’s realized. 

January 25–26, 2011 59 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under the worst-case scenario, the high 

sales/high interest rate, you have a deferred credit asset accruing.  First, is there precedent for 

that?  And, second, has that been discussed with Treasury? 

MR. SACK.  That was an official accounting change, and, in effect, that deferred credit 

essentially allows us to use future SOMA earnings to offset losses today.  There is no precedent 

in the U.S., because it’s a new treatment. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  It’s exactly analogous to a deferred tax asset in U.S. corporate 

accounting, I believe. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh.  

MR. WARSH.  As I understand it, the losses that could ultimately generate this deferred 

asset would be losses that eat through the income and are the realized losses on the assets that are 

actually sold.  This doesn’t account for imputed losses on assets comparable with those that were 

sold, if they were somehow marked to market at that point.  The question that comes out of this 

is:  Do you think markets would, if we are in that sale mode, look through the assets that are not 

marked to market and query whether or not there are higher embedded losses that they should 

look through in order to evaluate the capital adequacy, to the extent that it matters, of the Fed’s 

balance sheet? 

MR. SACK.  Let me note a couple of points.  First, we do report the market value of the 

portfolio on a quarterly basis, so the amount of unrealized gains or losses would be apparent to 

the market and, indeed, is already apparent to the market, regardless of what sales regime we’re 

in.  Second, I think it’s very important for markets to understand the message that these income 

January 25–26, 2011 60 of 282



 
 

 
 

streams and these losses, whether realized or unrealized, have no operational consequences for 

the conduct of monetary policy.  They don’t compromise our ability to tighten financial 

conditions or do whatever other operations we need to.  If that message is understood, it’s not 

clear to me that this results in any significant credibility problem for the Federal Reserve. 

MR. LACKER.  I’d just like to qualify that point.  Given the current magnitudes, that’s 

true as a practical matter, but it’s not a universal principle.  For example, we could run out of the 

ability to reduce reserves and reduce the base if our asset values fell.  So, in theory, it could 

impede our ability to withdraw stimulus, but, at the current magnitudes, we’re pretty far away 

from that, right? 

MR. SACK.  Yes, that’s exactly correct.  I was ignoring that for the purposes of 

simplifying the discussion.  It affects the value of our collateral that we can use to drain reserves 

through reverse repurchase operations.  But the value of the collateral would have to fall 

dramatically, given that we have more than $700 billion of currency out there.  Also, of course, 

we can drain without collateral by using the Term Deposit Facility. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’d like to restate my question about the SFP a little more precisely.  

When SFP goes away, we transfer out of the Treasury, and they become excess reserves, in 

effect.  Right?  We’ve just entered a program where we’re going to blow excess reserves up by 

$600 billion, and the transfer I just mentioned is going to increase excess reserves by another 

$200 billion in the process.  I was trying to get at the notion that, in part, that’s an effect on 

income, because now we’re actually paying income out on the excess reserves that these are 

converted to, which reduces our net income. 

January 25–26, 2011 61 of 282



 
 

 
 

The policy question is:  How does that affect our ability to drain reserves when the time 

comes, given that reserves are going to be $200 billion higher because of this action?  This action 

may end up affecting what we face in terms of the pace of asset sales or our ability to drain using 

reverse repos and other things.  In other words, the end of SFP could make the draining problem 

bigger than it otherwise would have been. 

MR. SACK.  You’re right about the income effects, but, given the level of short-term 

interest rates, that’s trivial today. 

MR. PLOSSER.  But as interest rates go up on interest on reserves, we’re going to be 

paying more and more out. 

MR. SACK.  That’s correct.  And in terms of affecting our draining, if the SFP balance 

goes down to $5 billion, then $195 billion of reserves will enter the system for that reason 

between early February and early April.  If the SFP balance were not taken back up at some 

point, then that would increase draining needs by that amount.  I will note that the Treasury 

intends to emphasize the flexibility with this program in its statement.  The last time the debt 

ceiling became binding, the program was taken down to $5 billion, but then, once the debt 

ceiling was raised, it was brought back up.  I don’t think we want to prejudge what’s going to 

happen, because it will depend importantly on how the debt ceiling is raised, but the Treasury is 

at least retaining that flexibility and could bring the program back up in size. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I’m just curious about the market’s perception that we’d be more likely to 

sell Treasuries than the MBS.  It seems to me that the last time we talked about this we talked 

entirely about selling the MBS.  Maybe that was because we had proportionately more of them at 

January 25–26, 2011 62 of 282



 
 

 
 

the time, but we kept talking about getting back to an all-Treasury portfolio.  So the market’s 

perception seems a little odd to me. 

MR. SACK.  That was, for me, one of the more surprising aspects of the survey results, 

and, unfortunately, we didn’t ask any questions that would allow us to understand that result 

better.  In some of the written comments, though, a few members noted that Treasuries were 

easier to sell and would be less disruptive to the market, so, for at least a couple of respondents, 

that seemed to be the reasoning.  But we could explore that in more detail, and I agree with you 

that it was surprising. 

MS. DUKE.  My question is partly why, but the other part is whether, at some point, 

there is anything we should do about that?  In other words, whenever we start talking about exit, 

should we be talking more about getting back to all Treasuries? 

MR. SACK.  Well, in general, I think it’s appropriate.  If and as the Committee moves 

towards a well-defined strategy, that could be communicated at some point to allow markets to 

prepare and adjust. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll say one thing about the 

remittances.  I think it’s important not to view this purely as an operational issue or purely as a 

communication issue with markets.  I think we can all agree that it’s going to be solved.  

However, I think the challenge is communication with the broader public.  We’re going through 

a high revenue period right now, and it’s often advertised as, “Boy, the Fed is doing great!”  The 

flip side of that is if remittances fall to $5 billion, then stories are going to be written about the 

Fed saying that it’s facing challenges, that it has been running irresponsibly, and so on.  I’m not 

saying that this challenge should influence policy, but it should influence communication. 

January 25–26, 2011 63 of 282



 
 

 
 

My second point is also about communication.  It strikes me that, when we ask questions 

of the dealers, we, in some sense, tip our hand a bit about what the realm of policy choices might 

be.  I admit that I don’t know how to get around this.  We do want to have information from 

markets, but asking the questions of markets is also transmitting information.  I’ll put this issue 

on the table as something that perhaps we can talk about when we get to the discussion of the 

work of the subcommittee on communications that we’re going to have later. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me comment on both issues.  On the first issue, you’re 

right, there are going to be communication challenges.  In most scenarios, the projections strictly 

dominate our non-quantitative easing income stream.  Even in these worst-case scenarios, 

though, over a five-year average, we’re still doing about the same.  So I think we can manage 

that, except in the most extreme scenarios. 

On the second issue, Brian and some of his staff raised the question of whether we would 

want to release publicly the questionnaire that we give to the dealers.  The idea would be to do it 

before the meeting—at the same time that we circulate it to the dealers—which has the 

advantage of putting everybody on the same footing.  My own thought was that we should wait 

and see, partly because I was concerned that circulating it would just create more speculation.  It 

seemed to me the better thing, if that really was becoming a problem, would be just to stop 

circulating the questionnaire at all.  You have identified a problem that Brian and his staff have 

looked at, and it may be something we need to discuss as a Committee. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, both extremes seem unsatisfactory.  I don’t know in my 

own head where I stand on this, but I think it is something we should try to solve. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we agree to think about that? 

January 25–26, 2011 64 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  Can I just say a word?  We believe that the survey does not reveal 

information to the respondents, and we try to be very careful to construct it so that it does not.  

But public release is still an issue, in that doing it would eliminate any perception of asymmetric 

information. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  If it’s truly not revealing information, then I guess it would be 

okay to release it publicly.  We can talk more about this. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  Any further questions?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My question for you, Brian, has to do with a 

couple of things related to the difference between the path that our asset purchases induced for 

the asset side of our portfolio and the path that reserves and the monetary base have taken.  The 

discrepancy has been pretty large in the last couple of months.  For example, in December we 

bought a lot of assets, but reserves went up just $2 billion and the Treasury general account went 

up a ton.  Then, in January, we had AIG repaying the New York Fed—as an aside, I’d like to 

congratulate the New York Fed on the repayment of the AIG credit—which is almost a 

$50 billion reserve drain.  Then, in February and March, with the Treasury running off the SFP, 

it’s going to add $200 billion.  Then, it wasn’t clear from your documentation what the Treasury 

is planning with the TGA. 

I have a granular question:  What’s the Treasury thinking about the TGA?  They used to 

peg it at $5 billion back when we sterilized stuff.  It’s sort of a pain.  At the magnitude of our 

balance sheet, this is, perhaps, not likely to be material, but it’s bordering on a material effect on 

our reserve position.  When we get to the point where we’re running off reserves, maybe a 

couple of years from now, we could get into situations where the management of the TGA makes 

a material difference in what happens to reserve balances.  So I’m wondering how we should 

January 25–26, 2011 65 of 282



 
 

 
 

think operationally, in the Committee’s deliberations, and whether the Treasury is giving you 

any more color about its intentions for the TGA and whether it’s worthwhile to try to influence 

Treasury to provide us with a little more surety about its TGA strategy. 

MR. SACK.  Let me say a few things about what’s been going on with the TGA and then 

say a couple of things about what I think it means for policy implementation.  You’re right that 

the TGA has been unusually large and very variable—it has been swinging between $10 billion 

and $100 billion, which is very different from the old regime, where it was very steady at a low 

level, like $5 billion.  The reason is that the Treasury used to use its accounts in the private 

sector, the TT&L and TIO accounts, to absorb those fluctuations in its cash balance because it 

could get a higher return.  That return is tied to short-term interest rates.  With short-term interest 

rates having moved to near zero, and given that those programs have some operational costs, 

they’ve taken those programs down to a very trivial level, and they’re just letting the cash 

balances in our account fluctuate. 

In terms of policy implications, we don’t regard that as a problem, given our current 

directive, which is to manage reserve conditions consistent with a funds rate from zero to 25 

basis point.  We have so many reserves in the system it doesn’t matter much if they’re 

fluctuating by $100 billion because of this factor.  But, as we move into a regime where it 

becomes more important to manage reserves more precisely—for example, that might be the 

case when short-term interest rates begin to rise—then we’ll have to come to a solution.  Of 

course, if short-term interest rates are rising, it will be very natural for Treasury to start to move 

funds back to the banks, and we’ll see a return towards the old regime, but, depending on the 

exact timing and the exact directive we’re given, we could come back to this issue with Treasury. 

January 25–26, 2011 66 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. LACKER.  Part of my question was motivated by the discussions we had in 

December 2008 and January 2009 about the fact that in the past the SOMA had a one-for-one 

relationship with reserve conditions and the funds rate, and yet we were embarking in early 2009 

on programs that would break that relationship.  I thought we agreed to take a cohesive approach 

within the Committee, even though, as a governance matter, there were separabilities in the 

governance of some of those things.  We sit around here and talk about adding $600 billion to 

assets under the assumption that it’s going to add $600 billion to reserves, and it turns out that, 

under some scenarios, reserves are going to go up $800 billion because of the debt limit.  So 

there’s a bit of a disconnect in focusing on just the asset side, and that’s what I was suggesting 

that we could be thinking about going forward. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, if we determine that it was creating problems or 

distorting our policy, we certainly could talk about sterilizing some of the differences.  Certainly 

we’re technically able to deal with that.  Any other questions?  [No response]  If there are no 

further questions, then we need a vote to ratify domestic open market operations. 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any objections?  [No response.]  Thank you.  The next item 

is the economic situation.  I’ll call on Dave Reifschneider to lead off. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Steve Kamin, Nellie 
Liang, and I will be referring to the material titled “Staff Presentations on the 
Economic Outlook.”  Overall, the data that have become available since the 
December Tealbook closed suggest that the economy expanded somewhat more 
rapidly late last year than we anticipated.  As shown in the upper left panel of your 
first exhibit, real consumer spending accelerated noticeably in recent months, 
accounting for much of the upward surprise in aggregate demand.  However, because 
the fundamentals continue to look less impressive, we have carried only some of the 
recent momentum into the current quarter. 

                                                 
3 The materials used by Messrs. Reifschneider and Kamin and Ms. Liang are appended to this transcript 
(appendix 3). 

January 25–26, 2011 67 of 282



 
 

 
 

As shown to the right, manufacturing output rose steadily over the second half of 
last year, although at a somewhat more subdued pace than earlier in the recovery.  
But with light vehicle sales up and dealer inventories relatively lean, we expect IP to 
be boosted this quarter by a step-up in motor vehicle assemblies; in addition, new 
orders data suggest that factory output outside of the motor vehicle sector is likely to 
post solid gains.  Overall, we expect manufacturing IP to increase at an annual rate of 
nearly 7 percent this quarter. 

In contrast, the housing sector remains moribund.  As illustrated by the black line 
in the middle left panel, single-family housing starts have remained roughly flat, in 
the neighborhood of 450,000 units per year since mid 2009.  And while the latest 
sales data (the violet line) came in a touch stronger than we expected in December, 
housing demand remains depressed.  Finally, house prices (not shown) have moved 
down further in recent months under the pressure of foreclosures and distress sales. 

The improvement in labor market conditions remains slow.  As shown to the 
right, monthly payroll gains averaged about 130,000 in the fourth quarter, little 
different from their pace earlier in 2010.  But other recent indicators, such as initial 
claims and hiring plans, point to modest gains in coming months, and, with overall 
output expanding at a solid rate, we anticipate that monthly payroll gains will average 
about 160,000 in the current quarter. 

The bottom left panel summarizes the near-term GDP projection.  As shown in 
line 1, we now estimate that real GDP rose 3¾ percent in the fourth quarter, a little 
more than a percentage point faster than we projected back in December, reflecting a 
sizable increase in private domestic final purchases (line 3).  As Steve will discuss, 
net exports also appear to have made a large arithmetic contribution to real GDP in 
the fourth quarter, although that boost is likely to be largely offset by a marked 
slowing in the rate of inventory investment. 

Finally, as shown to the right, underlying inflation remains subdued, with both the 
core CPI (black line) and core PCE prices (red line) increasing only ¾ percent over 
the 12 months ending in December.  We judge that transitory factors held down 
consumer prices a bit in the fourth quarter, and therefore expect core PCE inflation to 
edge up in coming months. 

The medium-term outlook is the subject of your next exhibit.  As shown in the 
upper left panel, our forecast for real GDP remains largely unchanged.  In particular, 
our current forecast (the black bars) continues to show a sustained acceleration in 
aggregate output this year and next, as the headwinds restraining the recovery 
gradually diminish in an environment of persistently accommodative monetary 
policy. 

Even with the pickup in real activity, the recovery in the labor market is likely to 
be painfully slow.  As shown to the right, we project that the unemployment rate will 
not fall below 8 percent until late 2012.  Not surprisingly, considerable uncertainty 
attends this forecast.  As indicated by the shaded regions, the 90 percent confidence 

January 25–26, 2011 68 of 282



 
 

 
 

band for our forecast encompasses everything from rapid progress toward restoring 
full employment to essentially no progress at all.  [Laughter]  I didn’t figure that as a 
laugh line, actually. 

As shown in the middle left panel, we project that core PCE inflation will average 
about 1 percent this year and next.  As before, we continue to expect stable long-run 
inflation expectations to prevent the considerable amount of economic slack from 
pushing underlying inflation lower.  Reflecting recent increases in food and energy 
prices, overall PCE prices are likely to increase about 1¼ percent this year but to rise 
1 percent in 2012, in line with core prices.  As with the unemployment rate forecast, 
the inflation outlook is highly uncertain, and we cannot rule out the possibility that 
core PCE inflation could fall to zero or rise to 2½ percent. 

Although uncertainty about the outlook for real activity and inflation is 
considerable, we nevertheless are a little more confident about the durability of the 
recovery than we were last summer when the economy went through a soft patch.  
Indeed, we now see the risks to our forecast of economic activity as roughly balanced, 
as opposed to skewed to the downside.  Other forecasters also appear to have become 
more confident about economic recovery.  As indicated by the blue bars in the middle 
right panel, the dispersion of year-ahead projections of real GDP in the Survey of 
Professional Forecasters—an imperfect proxy for uncertainty—has retraced its jump 
during the financial crisis.  In contrast, the dispersion in SPF forecasts of inflation has 
been rising and late last year reached the highest level seen since the early 1990s. 

In assessing the prospects for continued recovery, one important factor is the 
stance of monetary policy.  As shown in the bottom left panel, the real funds rate is 
now quite low by historical standards—albeit not to an unprecedented degree, as can 
be seen by comparing the current episode to the period following the deep 1975 
recession.  In addition, joint research by Hess Chung, Jean-Philippe Laforte, John 
Williams, and me suggests that the FOMC’s asset purchases are providing important 
support to both real activity and inflation.  As indicated by the red line in the panel to 
the right, we estimate that the original 2009 LSAP program is substantially reducing 
unemployment.  And, as indicated by the blue and black lines, your subsequent 
moves to reinvest principal payments on your holdings of longer-term securities and 
then to expand your holdings by an additional $600 billion, are judged to have 
boosted this effect further.  Overall, we estimate that the program will hold down the 
unemployment rate in 2012 by 1½ percentage points.  Although these are our best 
estimates, we readily admit that the range of uncertainty surrounding them is very 
large. 

Your next exhibit reviews some of the other forces influencing the pace of the 
recovery.  As noted in the box, capital demands are among the factors working to 
support a rebound in activity.  Business outlays on equipment and software contracted 
so sharply during the recession that the real stock of this category of capital—the 
black line in the chart to the right—actually began to contract.  If business capital 
stocks are to resume expanding at a more normal rate, investment outlays will need to 

January 25–26, 2011 69 of 282



 
 

 
 

continue increasing at a solid pace through next year.  Similar considerations apply to 
consumer durable goods, the red line. 

The economic recovery also should continue to be supported by a diminishing 
drag on consumer spending from past declines in wealth, as illustrated by the bars in 
the middle left panel.  Finally, we anticipate that a gradual increase in credit 
availability will help to boost investment and consumption over time.  Indeed, 
readings from the latest SLOOS suggest that conditions have already eased 
somewhat. 

However, as indicated by the second set of bullets in the upper left box, other 
factors are hindering the pace of recovery—most importantly, the ongoing troubles in 
the residential and nonresidential construction sectors, and a fading impetus from 
fiscal policy.  The middle right panel provides some perspective on the importance of 
these three factors.  As shown in the first line, real GDP typically increases almost 
10 percent during the first eight quarters following the trough of a recession, but, in 
this recovery, we anticipate an increase of only 6½ percent.  One reason for the more 
subdued performance in this cycle is the lack of any contribution to output growth 
from residential construction, line 2, whereas housing usually contributes 
1¼ percentage points to overall growth.  Similarly, nonresidential structures 
investment is expected to subtract ½ percentage point from GDP growth during this 
recovery, rather than playing its typical “neutral” role.  Nellie will have more to say 
about conditions in the real estate sector shortly. 

Looking forward, fiscal policy is also likely to be a restraining influence on 
economic growth.  As illustrated by the teal bars in the lower right panel, federal 
fiscal policy provided an important boost to real GDP growth in 2008 through 2010.  
But this impetus to growth should fall almost to zero this year and is expected to turn 
sharply negative in 2012 as the stimulus grants to state and local governments are 
exhausted, extended unemployment benefits lapse, and the payroll tax holiday ends.  
The swing in the stance of federal fiscal policy will be partly offset by developments 
at the state and local level.  Excluding spending out of federal grants, fiscal impetus at 
this level of government (the red bars) should turn modestly positive, as tax revenues 
continue to recover.  Indeed, as shown to the right, receipts rose noticeably during 
2010 and are expected to increase further over the next two years. 

Your next exhibit considers another area of substantial uncertainty—household 
saving.  As indicated by the black line in the upper panel, the personal saving rate, 
which hovered around 10 percent in the early 1980s, trended down markedly over the 
next 25 years, but then rebounded during the recession to about 6 percent.  As 
indicated by the red line, which shows a dynamic simulation of a simple reduced-
form model of consumer spending, most of these historical movements in the saving 
rate can be explained by movements in income, wealth, interest rates, and consumer 
sentiment, the key variables included in this model.  That said, the model has 
persistently underpredicted the saving rate since 2006.  Looking forward, we expect 
that the saving rate will roughly parallel the trajectory predicted by the model and 

January 25–26, 2011 70 of 282



 
 

 
 

remain close to 6 percent this year but then step down to 5¼ percent next year after 
the end of the payroll tax holiday. 

A downside risk to the saving rate forecast, and thus an upside risk to the strength 
of the recovery, is the possibility that consumer spending will fully realign itself with 
the predictions of the model.  Such a development could occur if the gap seen in 
recent years reflects the transitory effects of heightened uncertainty, tight credit 
conditions, and impaired household balance sheets.  But other considerations suggest 
upside risks to the saving rate projection as well.  As shown in the middle left panel, 
we have conditioned our forecast of the saving rate on an appreciable rise in 
consumer sentiment this year and next; if households remain downbeat, then the 
saving rate would likely be rising over time, not edging down. 

We also expect credit availability to continue to improve.  As shown to the right, 
banks’ willingness to make consumer loans has increased in recent quarters.  
Similarly, credit card solicitations—shown in the bottom left panel—have recovered 
somewhat from their lows in 2009.  These indicators of improving credit supply to 
households may reflect greater confidence on the part of lenders about the future as 
well as the progress households have made in deleveraging.  As shown in the bottom 
right panel, both the ratio of household debt to income (the red line) and the debt 
service ratio (the black line) have fallen noticeably from their pre-recession peaks, 
and we expect these ratios to continue to decline through next year.  I now turn the 
floor over to Steve. 

MR. KAMIN.  As with the U.S. economy, the foreign outlook appears reasonably 
bright, but that depends critically on the financial stresses in Europe remaining 
contained.  As indicated in the top left panel of exhibit 5, in the wake of the rescue 
package for Ireland last November, peripheral European sovereign spreads have 
remained high and volatile.  They moved up toward year-end amid expectations that 
Portugal would be forced to seek financial assistance, but came down more recently 
following stepped-up ECB purchases of peripheral bonds and several well-received 
bond auctions by Portugal, Spain, and Italy.  Stresses in dollar and euro funding 
markets have remained in check, and, so far, the core European economy appears to 
have been little affected by the financial turmoil in the periphery.  In Germany, where 
real GDP growth likely topped 4 percent last year, the stock market, purchasing 
managers’ index, and the Ifo survey of business sentiment continued to move up 
forcefully in the fourth quarter. 

All that said, financial stability in Europe faces a number of challenges over the 
next few years.  To begin with, as indicated in the middle left panel, the governments 
and banks of Spain and Portugal will need to finance the redemption of roughly 
€200 billion in maturing bonds both this year and next, as well as ongoing budget 
deficits, and this makes them highly vulnerable to shifts in investor sentiment.  
Second, as indicated in the panel on the right, Greece’s debt burden is most likely 
unsustainable, and, unless the European authorities decide to continue bailing it out, a 
restructuring of Greek sovereign bonds threatens further disruption to European 
markets; this event could come as early as 2012, when Greece is slated to return to 

January 25–26, 2011 71 of 282



 
 

 
 

the market for much of its funding.  Finally, if the peripheral European countries are 
to continue servicing their debts, their economies must begin to grow.  However, as 
shown in lower left panel, over the preceding decade, unit labor costs in peripheral 
Europe rose unusually rapidly, and this loss of competitiveness poses a clear threat to 
their economic growth. 

At present, the central strategy for containing the turmoil is to protect Portugal 
and especially Spain from speculative attack so that contagion does not leapfrog to 
Italy, Belgium, and beyond.  There is a good chance that Portugal will turn to the EU 
and the IMF for a financial rescue package in the near future, while Spain’s stronger 
fiscal position, combined with prospects of strong backing from the EU and the IMF, 
should keep financial pressures there at bay.  However, we judge that credibly 
backing the two countries will require resources totaling over €500 billion, whereas 
available resources of the EU and the IMF are only on the order of €375 to 
€400 billion.  So far, European policymakers have been discussing plans to expand 
their backstop capacity, and it is critical that they do so before market sentiment takes 
a further turn for the worse.  The authorities have also scheduled another horizontal 
review of European banks for the first half of this year.  This review must be more 
credible than the one conducted last summer:  A more severe adverse scenario must 
be assumed, more banks should be identified as requiring additional capital, and the 
authorities must be able to muster the resources to help recapitalize banks whose 
balance sheets are found wanting. 

Unlike the governments in the emerging market crises of the past, Europe has 
sufficient resources to address its problems, and in the final analysis, we expect that 
the authorities will likely do what needs to be done to prevent financial chaos.  Based 
on this admittedly uncertain assumption, our baseline outlook for the global economy 
is reasonably positive, as may be seen in the table at the top of your next exhibit. 

As in the United States, foreign GDP growth slowed sharply in the middle of last 
year as inventory cycles played out, the rebound in global trade slowed to a more 
sustainable pace, and policy stimulus faded in some countries.  In the emerging 
market economies, line 3, economic growth likely bounced back in the fourth quarter, 
led by near 10 percent growth in China, line 4.  As shown in the middle left panel, 
aggregate industrial production in the EMEs has stayed strong in recent months, and 
EME exports, the middle panel, have rebounded.  As shown on the right, our sense is 
that output in the emerging market economies has largely returned to potential, 
although such estimates are admittedly uncertain, and should stay in that range as 
output growth continues at about its historical trend. 

By contrast, we see output in the advanced foreign economies—the red line—
remaining well below potential, with the gap eroding only slowly.  Much of the blame 
rests with the euro area, line 8 in the table, where continued financial stresses in the 
peripheral economies, as well as strenuous fiscal consolidation throughout the region, 
will push economic growth down to a paltry 1¼ percent in 2011 before some 
normalization of conditions supports faster growth in 2012. 

January 25–26, 2011 72 of 282



 
 

 
 

Given the extent of the resource slack, policy interest rates in the AFEs, the 
bottom left panel, are likely to stay on hold for most of this year before being boosted 
gradually thereafter.  Although headline inflation rates (not shown) have been pushed 
up recently by energy prices, core inflation rates are below their pre-recession pace in 
the euro area and Japan, and their surge in the United Kingdom principally reflects a 
hike in value-added taxes and the steep depreciation of the pound.  The low policy 
rates do not appear, as yet, to be inspiring much speculative excess, either.  For 
example, corporate credit spreads remain well above pre-crisis levels in the euro area 
and the United Kingdom. 

Some observers suggest that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced 
economies are exerting tangible effects on emerging markets, encouraging capital 
inflows that are boosting currencies, exacerbating inflationary pressures, and fueling 
speculative excesses.  As described in your next exhibit, the real story appears to be 
more complicated.  First, flows to emerging markets have indeed been strong over the 
past year.  However, this strength likely reflects a reversal of the capital outflows that 
occurred in 2008 and the emerging market economies’ generally brighter growth 
prospects, in addition to accommodative policies in the advanced economies. 

Second, EME currencies have not risen as much as some discussion would 
suggest.  Much of their recent appreciation, again, merely reverses their plunge after 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and while some currencies, such as the Brazilian 
real, have breached pre-crisis levels, others, such as the Korean won, remain 
depressed.  In aggregate, the real value of emerging market currencies against the 
dollar is just a little higher than at the beginning of 2007.  Of course, the run-up in 
these currencies would have been higher in the absence of exchange market 
intervention, but by how much is difficult to say. 

Third, we have been scouring the emerging markets for indications of asset price 
bubbles, and, with the prominent exception of the run-up in housing prices in China, 
Singapore, and Hong Kong, we do not have much to report.  The memo on asset 
valuations distributed to the Committee last week flagged some richness in Latin 
American equity valuations (not shown), but it is not clear they reflect an inordinate 
degree of risk-taking as yet.  Notably, spreads on dollar-denominated corporate bonds 
remain quite elevated in Latin America and are still above pre-crisis lows in emerging 
Asia. 

Finally, inflation rates in EMEs have, indeed, risen above pre-recession levels, as 
shown in the bottom left panel, and this has been a source of considerable concern to 
policymakers.  However, much of the run-up reflects rising commodity prices, 
particularly for food, and we see headline inflation rates eventually settling down as 
these prices stabilize. 

Rising oil and commodity prices—shown on the right—could themselves reflect 
accommodative policies and low interest rates.  However, a surge in speculative 
demand for commodities caused by low interest rates would likely be associated with 
rising inventories, and, as we discuss in the Tealbook, inventories of commodities 

January 25–26, 2011 73 of 282



 
 

 
 

(not shown) generally have been coming down.  Rather, mounting oil and other 
commodity prices more likely reflect strong demand from rapidly growing emerging 
market economies such as China, as well as declines in the dollar.  Based on futures 
markets, we are projecting these prices to flatten out going forward as supply catches 
up with burgeoning demand.  However, given the strengthening outlook for global 
growth, we cannot fully preclude the risk of another steep run-up in oil and 
commodity prices such as occurred in 2008. 

Although inflationary and speculative risks may be less pervasive than some have 
claimed, EME authorities undoubtedly need to tighten monetary policy further to 
ward off economic overheating, and they will seek to do so in a manner that 
discourages further increases in capital inflows.  They will likely continue to rely on 
the same mix of measures, to greater or lesser degrees, that they have used in the past 
year or so:  measured increases in interest rates (as shown in middle right panel), 
allowing limited appreciation of their currencies, and various forms of capital 
controls.  These policies should keep inflationary and speculative pressures in check, 
thereby obviating the need for more strenuous policy tightening later, which could 
threaten the economic expansion.  However, that remains a discernible risk to the 
outlook. 

Assuming that our baseline forecast of solid, steady growth abroad materializes, 
the outlook for U.S. trade, shown in your next exhibit, should be encouraging but 
hardly eye-catching.  Admittedly, earlier last year we experienced a certain frisson—I 
had to look up the pronunciation—of excitement as the growth of imports, the green 
line in the top left panel, soared well above that of exports.  This led net exports, on 
the right, to subtract 2½ percentage points from GDP growth on average over the 
second and third quarters, raising concerns that inroads into U.S. spending by foreign 
producers could slow the recovery.  However, we were reassured by evidence that 
rising imports were not so much displacing spending on domestic production as they 
were being pulled in by mounting domestic demand.  As shown in the middle left 
panel, industrial sectors experiencing larger increases in production (the horizontal 
axis) also tended to experience larger increases in import penetration (the vertical 
axis). 

Turning to the right, we are inclined to believe that imports, having been 
unusually depressed during the recession, were simply rebounding to the level—
represented by the dashed line labeled “model solution”—implied by fundamental 
determinants, such as real GDP and the real exchange rate.  Exports were rebounding 
more slowly, perhaps because exports include many capital goods whose sales have 
been restrained by still-depressed levels of investment overseas.  In any event, data 
for October and November pointed to a pause in imports, and, going forward, we are 
projecting less exuberant import growth, even as exports pick up a little more quickly, 
buoyed by continued declines in the dollar.  In consequence, returning to the top right 
panel, after an outsized but transitory contribution to real GDP growth in the fourth 
quarter of last year, net exports make very slight positive contributions this year and 
next.  And the current account deficit, at bottom right, narrows gradually.  With the 
current account deficit less than half its size in 2006, our representatives at G–20 

January 25–26, 2011 74 of 282



 
 

 
 

meetings will be able to declare confidently that the United States is a full contributor 
to the effort to reduce global imbalances.  Nellie Liang will continue our discussion. 

MS. LIANG.  Your next four exhibits discuss the financial conditions underlying 
the staff’s forecast and highlight some key financial risks in domestic markets. 

As shown in the top left panel of exhibit 9, yields on 10-year Treasury notes are 
about flat since the last FOMC meeting, but are up nearly a full percentage point 
since the Chairman’s Jackson Hole speech in late August.  Yields on BBB-rated 
corporate bonds, the green line, have risen by less since August, leaving the spread to 
Treasuries about 30 basis points lower.  One measure of bond valuations is shown to 
the right.  Near-term forward spreads on these corporate bonds, the black line in the 
right panel, suggest that investors are still pricing in somewhat elevated losses in the 
next few years, but far-forward spreads, the orange line, are lower, suggesting an 
almost complete retracing of risk appetite for corporate bonds to pre-crisis levels. 

As shown in the middle left, stock prices have rallied sharply since late August, 
posting gains of more than 20 percent.  As a result, the expected real return on equity, 
the black line in the right panel, has fallen, though it remains elevated relative to 
historical standards.  Its gap to the real Treasury yield, a measure of the equity 
premium, shown by the blue shaded region, also remains quite wide, suggesting a still 
relatively cautious attitude towards U.S. stocks.  Broadly consistent with this attitude, 
as shown in the lower left panel, money has been flowing out of domestic equity 
mutual funds in the past eight months.  In contrast, as Steve Kamin showed, flows to 
emerging market equity funds have been strong.  In our baseline forecast, we assume 
that the equity premium will decline toward a more typical level as investors become 
more confident of a sustained expansion. 

Despite the gains in the value of some risky assets, use of dealer-intermediated 
leverage does not appear to have risen significantly.  For example, in the triparty repo 
market, the rise in the average daily volume (not shown) has been moderate in the 
past two quarters, and as can be seen in the bottom right panel, haircuts for corporate 
bonds have drifted down only slightly, although they are nearly back to mid-2008 
levels.  In addition, market participants have noted only selective increased use of 
leverage for funding equities.  Instead they have expressed greater concerns that 
traditionally unleveraged investors are feeling significant pressure to boost returns 
and are driving demand for some fixed-income products. 

As shown in the top left panel of your next exhibit, corporate bond risk spreads 
for A-rated financial firms have declined since late spring but remain above those for 
similarly rated nonfinancial firms, reflecting some lingering concerns about the credit 
quality of the financial sector. 

Meanwhile, the availability of credit for households and businesses continues to 
improve, albeit from depressed levels for some forms of credit.  As shown to the 
right, results from the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey show that a small 
net fraction of banks again eased lending standards for a composite of all loan 

January 25–26, 2011 75 of 282



 
 

 
 

categories over the past three months.  Moreover, as shown in the middle left, a large 
net fraction of banks reduced terms on C&I loans to both large and small firms.  The 
net easing of standards and terms on C&I loans may reflect competitive pressures 
from capital markets that have been increasingly accommodative.  As shown in the 
middle right, debt issuance by lower-rated corporations rose sharply in 2010:  
Issuance of high-yield corporate bonds, the yellow bars, was very strong, as firms 
took advantage of low long-term interest rates.  Issuance of leveraged loans to 
institutional investors, the blue bars, also increased, and market participants point to 
some loosening of covenants in leveraged loans, though from still fairly tight levels. 

As shown in the lower left, for households, growth in consumer credit recently 
turned positive, and we project a modest increase in the fourth quarter of 2010, the 
first quarterly rise since 2008.  Installment loans have risen with demand and an 
easing of credit conditions, but credit card balances continued to contract. 

Despite the pockets of improvement in recent months, total debt of nonfinancial 
businesses, plotted as the red line to the right, expanded only modestly in the fourth 
quarter, and we expect only a moderate pickup this year and next, as firms draw on 
their substantial cash holdings.  Debt growth for households appears to have stayed 
negative last quarter, and is expected to remain so this year, held down by a further 
contraction in mortgage debt. 

Turning to your next exhibit, conditions in the real estate sector remain quite 
weak.  As shown in the top left panel, residential house prices in recent months have 
been coming in lower than we had expected in the November and December 
Tealbooks, and recent readings indicate that prices now are modestly below their 
levels in early 2009.  Going forward, we now have prices declining a bit further 
before flattening out next year.  For commercial real estate, shown to the right, prices 
for non-investment-grade properties, the orange line, peaked about a year after 
residential house prices.  These property values have continued to decline, and we 
expect them to remain sluggish.  The prices of these properties likely reflect the value 
of collateral backing many CRE loans on banks’ books. 

There are some notable bright spots.  Prices on investment-grade commercial 
properties, the black line, appear to have found a bottom in 2010, consistent with the 
rise in CMBS prices in recent months.  In addition, in the residential mortgage 
market, fewer homeowners are moving into delinquency.  As shown by the red line in 
the middle left panel, for prime mortgages, the transition rate from current status to 
past-due status slowed notably in 2010, while, for nonprime mortgages, the transition 
rate, the black line, continued its two-year decline. 

Consistent with these trends, the middle right panel shows that the amount of 
residential and commercial mortgages that are delinquent or not accruing interest at 
commercial banks edged down slightly through the third quarter of 2010, although 
the percent in distress is very elevated, at more than 11 percent of real estate loans 
outstanding.  Thus, despite some signs of improvements in fundamentals, real estate 
losses at banks likely will remain elevated for a while. 

January 25–26, 2011 76 of 282



 
 

 
 

Expected credit losses estimated from aggregate models are shown in the bottom 
left table.  These models do not capture the heterogeneity of loans across banks, as 
could be done with supervisory data that currently is being collected for some of the 
largest firms.  As shown in the first column, aggregate CRE loss rates in the baseline 
forecast are estimated to increase in the next two years to an annual average rate of 
3.0 percent, as distressed properties hold down some property prices.  In contrast, loss 
rates for residential mortgages are expected to average about the same level as last 
year, and loss rates for other categories, notably consumer, are forecast to decline as 
unemployment falls.  Total loss rates, the fourth column, are on average about 
unchanged.  In the aggregate, current reserve levels, combined with projected 
revenues, would appear sufficient to absorb continued losses of this size. 

However, as noted in the box to the right, the real estate situation could play out 
worse than we expect.  For example, as illustrated by two alternative scenarios in the 
Tealbook, a greater-than-expected 10 percent decline in house prices would raise 
bank losses modestly, although it would not be sufficient to derail the improvement in 
economic activity unless other asset prices also dropped sharply and credit conditions 
tightened.  Another risk to banks is related to mortgage documentation practices.  The 
ongoing examinations by the federal banking agencies of mortgage servicers have 
revealed serious deficiencies, and the agencies have commenced enforcement 
proceedings and expect to take public enforcement actions against a number of the 
largest mortgage originators and servicers.  Other federal and state legal authorities 
also are exploring enforcement actions.  In addition, banks face risks related to the 
alleged violation of reps and warranties provided on loans in securitization trusts sold 
to the GSEs and other investors.  Supervisory estimates of losses from potential 
mortgage put-backs based on data for 12 institutions range from $25 billion to 
$75 billion.  While these estimates have been revised down sharply in light of recent 
GSE settlements with Bank of America and Ally, they could still be material for a 
few firms. 

Your next exhibit turns to problems in the euro area and the consequent risk to 
domestic money market funds.  As shown in the top left panel of your next exhibit, 
financial institutions based in peripheral European countries have had to pay a 
premium to issue dollar-denominated commercial paper.  Spreads on short-dated 
commercial paper issued by Irish financial institutions were very high in recent 
months, and spreads for Spanish and Italian firms also were elevated.  Firms have 
also had to shorten maturities, and some firms have lost access to the market 
altogether. 

Reflecting pullback by investors, outstanding CP and negotiable CDs issued in the 
United States by peripheral Europe financial firms, shown as the purple line in the top 
right, have dropped sharply in recent months.  As can be seen by the black line, 
holdings by money market funds indicate that they are the primary investors in the 
paper issued by these peripheral European firms in the U.S.  As shown in the middle 
left, while major money market funds have shrunk this paper to a very small share of 
their assets, paper from other European countries has remained quite substantial.  
These holdings of paper from non-periphery countries are a concern, because the 

January 25–26, 2011 77 of 282



 
 

 
 

banking systems of those countries have substantial exposures to peripheral European 
debt. 

As noted in the table to the right, our most recent data (now six months old) show 
that banks in France and Germany have extended large amounts of credit to Greece, 
Portugal, and Ireland, the first column, as well as to Spain, the second column.  While 
banks in France and Germany have reduced their exposures since year-end 2009, 
credit extended to these four countries still represents more than 100 percent of their 
tier 1 capital.  The credit from U.S. banks, the third line, is more modest.  
Nonetheless, U.S. banks could feel the effects of peripheral European problems 
because of their substantial ties to the large core European countries.  Another 
channel for risk to U.S. banks is that they sponsor roughly $650 billion of prime 
money funds and may feel pressured to support these funds if runs were to occur.  

In terms of domestic fiscal pressures, investors have recently become more 
concerned about the implications of budgetary pressures on U.S. state and local 
governments, as reflected in rising CDS spreads for general obligation bonds of some 
states.  Notably CDS spreads for Illinois bonds, the red line in the bottom left panel, 
rose sharply in recent months, and to levels above those for California, which have 
been elevated for some time.  After the recent passage of a budget with higher taxes 
in Illinois, CDS spreads for a number of states eased a bit, reflecting perhaps some 
relief by investors that state governments appear willing to step in to avoid defaulting 
on their bonds. 

While recent market jitters may have been overdone, the elevated spreads suggest 
investors are concerned about risks in this sector.  As noted to the right, some state 
and local governments now will have to pay higher rates to issue new debt, which 
could increase stresses further.  In addition, some could lose access to variable rate 
demand obligations (VRDOs), which effectively allow municipalities that issue long-
term bonds to borrow at short-term rates that reset frequently.  Nearly all VRDOs 
have explicit liquidity support from a bank.  Borrowing costs would increase for state 
and local governments if banks choose not to renew liquidity facilities or raise their 
fees because of higher risks. 

Banks also are vulnerable to heightened concerns about this sector.  Preliminary 
data for the largest banks suggest that credit losses from loans and securities would be 
modest.  However, banks have contingent liabilities from the liquidity support they 
provide to VRDOs.  Six major domestic banks and a large Belgian bank (one with 
high and rising risk spreads) provide liquidity support for about one-half of VRDOs 
outstanding; that market currently totals about $400 billion.  Thus, banks’ balance 
sheets could be pressured if investors, such as tax-exempt money funds, become 
concerned about the credit risk of the issuer or the liquidity provider and choose to 
put back the VRDO.  To date, such pressures are not evident:  While tax-exempt 
mutual funds have had unexpectedly large outflows in recent months, tax-exempt 
money market funds have not.  Joyce will continue with our presentation. 

January 25–26, 2011 78 of 282



 
 

 
 

MS. ZICKLER.4  Thank you.  I’ll be referring to the “Material for Briefing on 
FOMC Participants’ Economic Projections.” 

In broad terms, as shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, you are expecting a 
sustained recovery in real economic activity over the next three years, marked by a 
noticeable step-up in the rate of increase in real GDP this year followed by further 
gradual acceleration during 2012 and 2013.  Although you anticipate that the decline 
in the unemployment rate—the second panel—will remain relatively modest in the 
coming year, you project a more noticeable tilt down in joblessness as the expansion 
strengthens.  Regarding inflation—the bottom two panels—the central tendency of 
your projections shows total PCE inflation relatively stable over the next three years.  
However, your projections show a gradual uptrend in core inflation over the period. 

Exhibit 2 provides more detailed summary statistics for your projections and 
compares them with those that you made in November and with the staff Tealbook 
forecast.  Starting with the change in your near-term projection since November, as 
shown in the first two lines, you have marked up your expectations for the increase in 
real GDP this year, with the central tendency now nearly 3½ to 4 percent.  Many of 
you indicated that the stronger-than-expected data on production and spending that 
we have accumulated since November, along with the passage of the fiscal package, 
led you to view the recovery as having gained some strength that should carry 
through 2011.  A number of those who did not change their forecasts significantly 
noted that the recent news had led them to shift their assessment of the balance of 
risks surrounding their forecasts from weighted to the downside to broadly balanced.  
That said, the recent news did not alter significantly the central tendencies of your 
expectations for the pace of real activity in 2012 and 2013, which call for real GDP to 
increase between 3½ and 4½ percent in 2012 and between 3¾ percent and 4½ percent 
in 2013.  This general pattern of revisions is also reflected in the updates to the 
Tealbook forecast since November. 

Your projections suggest that real GDP will increase at above-trend rates over the 
next three years, supported by accommodative monetary policy and improving credit 
and financial market conditions.  A number of you noted that fiscal policy should 
provide some temporary stimulus this year but should be a drag in 2012.  Your 
narratives indicated that many of you believe that the ongoing expansion will be led 
by sustained increases in consumer and business spending, and a number of you 
suggested that improvements in household and business confidence and in labor 
market conditions should help to reinforce the rise in private demand.  Nonetheless, 
many of you commented that, while the recovery appears be on a firmer footing, the 
headwinds from the limited improvement in the labor market, lingering household 
and business uncertainty, and problems associated with the weak housing and 
nonresidential real estate markets are likely continue to exert some drag on economic 
activity over the forecast period. 

                                                 
4 The materials used by Ms. Zickler are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

January 25–26, 2011 79 of 282



 
 

 
 

Your projections for the unemployment rate—the second set of statistics—trace a 
steady downward path over the next three years that is quite similar to the projections 
that you submitted in November.  The central tendency of your forecasts calls for a 
decline from about 9¾ percent at the end of 2010 to 8¾ to 9 percent at the end of this 
year and then to 6¾ to 7¼ percent at the end of 2013.  The staff Tealbook forecast, 
which is also little changed since November, falls in the middle of your central 
tendencies. 

Turning to inflation—the bottom two sets of statistics—you can see that the 
central tendencies of your projections for total and core PCE inflation are similar to 
those you provided in November.  The same is true for the Tealbook, which continues 
to forecast inflation at the low end of your central tendencies.  As I noted earlier, your 
projections suggest an uptrend in core inflation over the 2011-13 period.  
Nonetheless, more than half of you expect that total PCE inflation in 2013 will 
remain below your estimates of its longer-run rate.  Some of you noted that the 
persistence of a wide margin of slack in resource markets would help keep inflation 
relatively low over the forecast horizon.  And a number of you indicated that 
appropriate monetary policy, combined with well-anchored inflation expectations, 
would help keep inflation in check. 

Your longer-run projections—detailed in the column at the right—continue to 
anticipate that, over time, the annual rate of increase in real GDP will converge to 
2½ to 2¾ percent, with an unemployment rate of 5 to 6 percent and total PCE 
inflation between 1½ and 2 percent.  Most of you indicated that this would most 
likely occur within five or six years, although a number of you noted that the decline 
in the unemployment rate could lag the convergence of the rate of increase in real 
GDP and inflation to their longer-run rates.  Moreover, the central tendency for your 
projections of the unemployment rate in the longer-run remains relatively wide—a 
result that is likely consistent with the range of views on structural unemployment 
expressed earlier. 

Regarding your monetary policy assumptions, half of you—a somewhat larger 
proportion than in November—conditioned your outlook on a less accommodative 
stance of monetary policy than assumed by the staff.  Specifically, those respondents 
indicated that they thought that the appropriate policy would involve an earlier start to 
normalizing the balance sheet than assumed in the Tealbook, an earlier increase in the 
federal funds rate, or both. 

Your final exhibit summarizes your assessments of the uncertainty and the risks 
that you attach to your projections.  As indicated in the two panels on the left-hand 
side of the page, most of you continue to judge that the uncertainty attached to your 
projections for both real GDP and inflation—as well as for the unemployment rate 
(not shown)—is greater than the level of uncertainty that prevailed on average over 
the past 20 years.  This judgment was attributed to uncertainty related to the nature of 
recoveries from financial crises, the effects of unconventional monetary policies, 
structural dislocations in the labor market, the sustainability of fiscal policy, and the 
global economic outlook. 

January 25–26, 2011 80 of 282



 
 

 
 

Although your level of uncertainty was little changed from the November SEP, 
you now view the risks to your forecasts—summarized in the panels to the right—as 
noticeably more balanced than in November.  In particular, almost all of the 
participants who previously saw downside risks to their projected increases in real 
GDP now view them as balanced, and several of you now see upside risks to your 
forecasts.  The most frequently mentioned upside risk to GDP growth was the 
possibility that the recent strengthening of private demand marked the beginning of a 
more normal cyclical rebound in economic activity.  To the downside, a number of 
you cited the recent declines in house prices and the problems in real estate markets, 
which could have greater-than-expected adverse effects on consumers and on credit 
availability, and the possibility of more serious spillovers from fiscal austerity and 
sovereign debt problems in Europe. 

On inflation, the shift in the distribution was similar to that for real GDP, with 
several of you moving your assessment from risks weighted to the downside to 
balanced risks and with one additional participant now judging inflation risks to be to 
the upside.  Several of you cited large resource gaps and the possibility of a slower-
than-expected economic expansion as downside risks.  However, a number of you 
commented that you saw the likelihood of deflation or further unwanted disinflation 
as having lessened.  Some of you noted that highly accommodative monetary policy 
posed an upside risk to inflation, and several saw another upside risk in the possibility 
that prices of energy and other commodities would continue to increase faster than 
anticipated.  This concludes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Brian Sack, you had a comment? 

MR. SACK.  I have a very brief one.  I want to correct a figure that I cited in my answer 

to Vice Chairman Dudley.  I had said that an alternative scenario without asset sales could raise 

cumulative portfolio income by $100 billion to $125 billion.  Unfortunately I was looking at the 

wrong column.  The effect relative to the baseline was actually $50 billion.  So the point is right 

that asset sales can reduce cumulative expected income, but I overstated the magnitude. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for our colleagues?  

President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Nellie—it’s not a 

fair question [laughter], so just try, if you could, to do your best to answer.  The middle right 

panels on exhibit 5 and on exhibit 12 deal with European exposure.  One of the things we learned 

in the crisis is that it’s not the first degree of separation, it’s the second—that is, it’s your 

January 25–26, 2011 81 of 282



 
 

 
 

exposure to the people that have the exposure to risky entities.  Steve commented that the Greek 

sovereign debt situation is probably unsustainable, which suggests that it’s moving toward some 

form of restructuring or default that may be managed or unmanaged, and it may trigger a lot of 

concern about other countries’ debt.  Do we have any sense of our system’s exposure to the 

people who have the exposure and the risk that could come from a contagion getting started? 

MS. LIANG.  In the table in exhibit 12, the middle right, the data are from the BIS 

consolidated banking statistics, and they are an approximation of the U.S. banking system’s 

exposures to debt in these countries.  As the table indicates, it’s estimated to be $67 billion to 

Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and another $52 billion to Spain.  Those are small amounts, but the 

exposures to France and Germany can be large—some of their large banks are big counterparties 

in transactions that we have.  I don’t know if we have strong supervisory data, but we have these 

data, which are not exactly the same.  If you give me a minute, I can get that. 

MR. KAMIN.  Nellie, can I make a few remarks while you’re looking? 

MS. LIANG.  Please go ahead. 

MR. KAMIN.  We do believe that the Greek sovereign debt is unsustainable, but a couple 

of points are worth making.  First of all, there is some chance that the European Union will 

decide to bail out Greece completely so that they do not have to default or restructure their debts.  

I don’t know what the chance of that is, but that is certainly in the probability space.  Second, we 

don’t place that high a likelihood on a full EU bailout for Greece, and instead we place a much 

higher likelihood on Greece’s undergoing some kind of restructuring.  It is our working 

assumption for our forecast, and it is also our hope, that this process occurs a bit down the road, 

when investors will have had a good opportunity to “ring-fence” Greece away from the other 

countries.  That is, investors understand that Greece’s situation is unsustainable, and when the 

January 25–26, 2011 82 of 282



 
 

 
 

restructuring occurs, they won’t be surprised, they’ll be ready for it.  If that, indeed, occurs, then, 

not only is our exposure to Greece close to de minimis, but the exposure of the other large 

Western European banks to Greece is not so great either.  Basically, as long as you can keep the 

investor sentiment stabilized, the direct exposures to Greece are probably small and can be 

maintained.  The problem that we had back in May was that we were in an atmosphere of very 

great uncertainty, where nobody had ever seen an industrial economy close to default.  In that 

atmosphere, expectations ran rampant, and all types of global financial markets were highly 

destabilized.  It’s our assumption that that will not occur if Greece has a restructuring, let’s say, a 

year or two down the road.  But, obviously, that’s a hope, not a certainty. 

MS. LIANG.  President Lockhart, I don’t have the BIS data on the U.S. exposures to the 

core Europeans through the banking systems.  These data are going to be updated, and we’re 

expecting to have a new set next week.  We can pass that along, and, as you might guess, there 

are significant exposures to, say, Germany and France, because they’re big countries. 

MR. LOCKHART.  As I said, I realize it wasn’t a fair question, but I was trying to get a 

sense of what the real risk might be.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions on 

fiscal policy.  First, in exhibit 3, I was a little surprised to see the state and local government 

showing a positive fiscal impulse this year.  It didn’t track all the articles I’ve been reading about 

big imbalances and layoffs, so I’d just like to understand what the source of that is. 

My second question is on the payroll tax holiday at the federal level.  How do you see 

that working through the economy in terms of the data?  Are people going to smooth that out, or 

January 25–26, 2011 83 of 282



 
 

 
 

could it show up in the first quarter as an outsized effect, since this is going to be concentrated 

there? 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Let me answer the second question first.  For the payroll tax, 

we do think there will be smoothing.  We’re thinking it will bump up growth in consumer 

spending starting in the first quarter.  But our view is that only about 30 to 40 percent of the 

reduced payroll taxes will show up in increased consumption in 2011, and some more will show 

up in 2012; consumers will be spreading the spending out over time.  People with much lower 

incomes will probably spend it right away, but a lot of people are not super constrained in terms 

of liquidity, and, in our view, they’re likely to spend it more slowly.  That lessens the degree to 

which spending gets pushed up in 2011 and then falls off a cliff in 2012. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I was worried that it might be hard to read the numbers 

over the next couple of months, because if you get strong consumption, you’re not going to be 

sure if that’s just a temporary factor or not. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, that’s definitely true, and even three years from now it 

will be hard to read the numbers and tell what happened, although we’ll do our best.  That will 

be a bit of a question mark as we go through 2011 and into 2012 as well. 

Now let me answer your first question.  In the bottom left panel of exhibit 3, that’s state 

and local net of their spending out of grants; so, if you calculated their total spending and 

included the federal grant effect, that would be a slight negative, not a positive.  But when you 

read the news accounts, and you see the trouble that Illinois and California and many states are 

in, it’s natural to wonder how this could be.  Part of the answer is to look back at what they did 

just this last year—while local governments were cutting their payrolls, the states themselves, 

January 25–26, 2011 84 of 282



 
 

 
 

interestingly enough, actually increased their payrolls a little bit, despite all of the pressures 

they’ve been under. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And the pressures could come from the spending side.  

They could be spending on pensions and health care. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  That’s true.  But they’re going to be under a lot of pressure, so 

they’re not going to be increasing their spending by any large amount, and, indeed, spending 

growth is going to be close to zero this year.  So states are by no means any significant 

contributor to the nation’s growth in this forecast. 

I think the positive fiscal impulse comes back to the room created by higher tax 

receipts—we do think tax receipts have been growing and that they’ll continue to grow at about 

the rate of GDP, which, of course, is not super fast.  As I understand it, in the mid-session 

reviews, states’ budget situations are coming in somewhat better in a lot of cases than was 

expected, and, in general, it’s not coming in worse than expected, although, to the extent that 

some of them kick the can down the road, it may be as bad as they expected.  Given that, we 

think that will enable those states to avoid massive cutting in real spending on purchases and 

things like that, but that is a risk. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo, did you have a comment? 

MR. TARULLO.  I just wanted to add a couple of things to what Nellie said in response 

to President Lockhart.  When we get the BIS numbers, there are three things to keep in mind.  

One, our experience has been that the BIS numbers tend to overstate actual exposures just 

because of the way they count and what they characterize as an in-country exposure as opposed 

to an exposure to a foreign subsidiary of your own country’s companies. 

January 25–26, 2011 85 of 282



 
 

 
 

Two, since May we’ve been tracking this pretty carefully through the LISCC, and it’s 

pretty clear that our large institutions have been reducing exposures not only directly to the 

periphery, but also to those who hold a lot of periphery debt.  How much?  That’s a little harder 

to get our arms around, but the trend has been clear.  In contrast, as Nellie pointed out, the 

money market funds don’t have a penny less exposure to Europe today than they did a year 

ago—they’ve just reallocated which countries the exposure is in. 

Three, if you look at credit default swaps for the large European banks, the big French 

and German banks have not seen that much of a run-up in their CDS spreads.  One assumes that 

that’s in no small part because of an assumption that the French and German governments would 

back those banks were they to take a significant hit from Spanish, Portuguese, Irish, and Greek 

banks, which is probably a reasonably well-grounded assumption. 

So, for all of those reasons, it’s really hard to come up with numbers, and most of us who 

have been puzzling over this for the last six or eight months are left with a sense that it’s a pretty 

big potential exposure if things really go south, but it has been getting somewhat smaller over 

that same period of time. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thanks, Dan.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  I’m going to follow up on this line of 

questioning from President Lockhart and Governor Tarullo.  It’s a question we’ve been puzzling 

over in Minneapolis.  It seems that if you look at the sovereign debt in Europe, the situation 

looks just as bad today as it did in April and May in terms of the spreads.  And yet there doesn’t 

seem to be any evidence of the contagion that alarmed us so much in May—I think the VIX 

January 25–26, 2011 86 of 282



 
 

 
 

popped over 40 at some point.  So that contagion story that was such a factor in our discussion in 

May doesn’t seem to be there now.  I’m looking for stories to explain it. 

MR. KAMIN.  Shall I start and you follow? 

MS. LIANG.  I’ll start this one.  Just to corroborate Steve’s remarks, in April, May, and 

June, when the European CDS did start rising, the correlation with U.S. asset prices was 

enormous.  The second time around, it just wasn’t visible at all.  In large part, it has to do with 

some of the facilities that were set up in Europe. 

MR. KAMIN.  Well, I think that’s the major element.  When this erupted in May, it was 

very novel, as I mentioned before.  We hadn’t really had the experience of an industrial economy 

coming close to default—though, of course, we had had many instances with emerging market 

economies—and there were no institutions in play to address the problem.  There was 

tremendous uncertainty about how far European authorities would go to put money on the table 

to backstop these economies.  So in that situation of tremendous uncertainty, you had dislocation 

throughout global markets.  Since then they’ve responded in a number of ways that have given 

investors heart. 

For example, they bailed out Greece in a somewhat ad hoc manner, and then they 

followed that up with actual institutions, such as the European Financial Stabilization 

Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Facility, which were established to backstop 

further sovereign runs.  They were used in the case of Ireland, and in fact, they came to Ireland’s 

rescue somewhat more readily than to Greece’s. 

More recently, recognizing that they still don’t have enough money in the kitty, they’ve 

been actively discussing enlarging it.  Ideally, that would have gone through this month, but in 

fact, it was postponed to a European summit in March.  In addition, it’s now recognized that the 

January 25–26, 2011 87 of 282



 
 

 
 

stress tests of banks that were done last summer probably were not severe enough, and they’re 

undergoing another round of tests.  All of these things together are giving investors some 

confidence that the situation is getting dealt with. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This question is for Nellie, and it refers to the 

real estate piece on exhibit 11.  You said that the estimated losses from potential mortgage put-

backs ranged from $25 billion to $75 billion and that they could be material for a few firms.  You 

then indicated that this estimate reflected a markdown in light of notable settlements with Fannie 

and Freddie.  My question is whether the markdown took into account future probable put-backs.  

In other words, did you look at the full universe of what those put-backs could be? 

MS. LIANG.  The estimate I cited comes from work by Mike Alix and staff at the New 

York Fed, so it was done in a pretty comprehensive way.  They literally looked at the private-

label securities that these firms had.  They had the loan portfolio of mortgages originated.  They 

had the firm-specific default rate for each bank.  They estimated how much of that might be 

attributed to deficiencies in the process, and then the strength of the securities.  On the basis of 

that, they then took estimates of the GSE put-backs—the recent claims give you some idea.  And 

then they had to assess how much the private-label investors would be able to claim.  So that’s 

why there’s a range, because they had to make some assumptions about how high those claims 

could be.  These current assumptions are that the private-label investors would not be more 

successful in putting back than the GSEs, which have a pretty sophisticated system.  To sum up, 

the estimate is based on the full portfolio of originations, firm-specific default rates, and firm-

specific put-back assumptions.  So I think it does incorporate the full view.  The $25 to 

January 25–26, 2011 88 of 282



 
 

 
 

$75 billion is a pretty broad range, though, because it’s hard to know how successful they’ll be in 

court, which is really the probability you have to write down. 

MS. RASKIN.  But leaving the private-label stuff aside, did you take into account the full 

range of GSE put-backs? 

MS. LIANG.  Yes, I think we have the estimates of the outstanding GSE put-back claims, 

plus an estimate of claims to come.  I think that’s all in there. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I’d like to ask a question about exhibit 7, the bottom right-hand corner, 

and, in particular, about commodity prices.  First, it’s uncanny that both lines moved straight to 

the right.  Also, I’m curious to know what your nonfuel index is based on.  You may have 

mentioned it. 

MR. KAMIN.  No, I didn’t. 

MR. FISHER.  Okay.  Would you kindly mention it? 

MR. KAMIN.  It’s based on a combination of indexes of different types of nonfuel 

commodity prices that are published by the IMF, I believe.  We take them with the IMF weights 

and we reconfigure them to match the weights that are based on United States imports.  Once we 

have those weights, we re-weight each group, and the groups are beverages, other food, metals, 

and agricultural materials.  We then get futures curves for some of the different commodities in 

each of those groups to create projections of these commodity prices for each group, and then, 

using the weights, we come up with the aggregate projection. 

MR. FISHER.  So it’s more model-based and it uses futures curves to the extent we have 

them. 

January 25–26, 2011 89 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. KAMIN.  Well, it’s much more futures-based than it is model-based. 

MR. FISHER.  And we know the record of futures curves. 

MR. KAMIN.  Right, exactly. 

MR. FISHER.  I point that out. 

MR. KAMIN.  It is exactly based on futures curves, which are highly fallible and yet not 

apparently more fallible than humans.  [Laughter] 

MR. FISHER.  Very good.  I have just a couple of points.  First, for certain key industrial 

commodities, such as iron ore and so on, I wouldn’t underestimate the impact of the Australian 

floods.  The backup in shipping and the short-term price pressures that seem to be emerging on 

that front are extraordinary.  Second, I still wonder about the substitution effects; maybe this 

could be the subject of another conversation.  I’m not talking about physical demand, which, one 

would assume, will grow over time as the economies improve and as China moves up the food 

chain, and so on.  I’m talking more about demand that’s financially driven.  For example, if I put 

on my old hat as an investor, right now I’d be looking for greater returns on my portfolio.  Of 

course, the U.S. stock market has done brilliantly, but, with my surplus liquidity, I’d be tempted 

to look to, say, Brazil or Russia with at least a portion of my portfolio.  As these countries erect 

more capital barriers—and the Brazilians have been a bit active here—a perfect substitute for 

Brazil, if you plot the two markets together, is the copper market, and there’s no carrying cost of 

copper futures.  A perfect substitute for the Russian market is the oil futures market.  My point is 

that I didn’t notice any discussion of how much of the trade is financially driven and how much 

of it is physically driven, and I think that’s something we need to contemplate.  I don’t want an 

answer right now, but I think it’s something we need to continue to think about in terms of 

driving prices upward and becoming a vicious circle. 

January 25–26, 2011 90 of 282



 
 

 
 

Third, I just want to say a word, for what it’s worth, about Chinese inflation.  What I’m 

hearing from my contacts is that, for retailers who sell nonfood goods in the United States and 

source in China, the demands are now 40 percent.  It’s a combination of labor inflation running 

about 15 percent per year as computed in their five-year plan, and transportation and other costs.  

The U.S. retailers hope to whittle it down to 8 to 10 percent through negotiation.  According to 

one CEO of a major retailer, who at one point ran the largest retailer, this is the worst inflation 

he’s seen in 25 years, and it’s sourcing out of China and alternative markets. 

MR. KAMIN.  Well, that’s very interesting.  I would just mention that, first of all, we are 

quite focused and eager to put more resources into looking at the effects from within China, such 

as wage pressures, on the prices of the goods we import from them.  Second, we have been doing 

and will continue to do a great deal of work trying to parse out the relative factors pushing up 

commodity prices.  We are very attuned to the role of futures market and financial demands in 

that regard, and we’ll continue to do work on that. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  [No response]  If not, I understand that 

there are drinks available followed by dinner, and there will be no business, just for your 

convenience.  Tomorrow let’s start at 9:00 a.m. sharp with the economic go-round.  Thank you. 

[Meeting recessed] 

January 25–26, 2011 91 of 282



 
 

 
 

January 26—Morning Session 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning.  Why don’t we get right to work and begin 

our economic go-round?  President Lockhart is up first. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The improved tenor of the incoming data 

has been clearly reflected in the comments coming from business contacts in the Sixth District in 

this intermeeting cycle.  The best characterization of those comments is more optimistic than 

before the December meeting but still a bit tentative, cautious, and reluctant to place significant 

bets on stronger demand.  As the data show, the pace of consumer spending has clearly picked 

up, but our conversations with retailers, some of which have national scope, convey little sense 

that they are preparing for a stronger year in 2011.  I draw this conclusion from our queries about 

inventory, store expansion, and hiring.  The inventory of unsold homes continues to weigh on 

residential real estate markets in the Southeast.  Reports from our survey of Realtors are 

consistent with the current Tealbook’s forecast of a modest drop in house prices.  The data also 

indicate that business investment in equipment and software remains buoyant.  Our contacts in 

the region tell us the lion’s share of this investment is oriented to further productivity 

enhancement and streamlining of supply chains and distribution systems, not a response to an 

improving economy.  Our directors and contacts pretty uniformly stated the view that gains in 

labor productivity have not been exhausted and will continue to take priority over hiring. 

Regarding labor market conditions and prospects for hiring, our most recent round of 

discussions with business leaders in our District evoked some widely held views that may be 

relevant to yesterday’s discussion of the NAIRU.  We heard a lot of comments to the effect that 

job descriptions have been, and continue to be, transformed to require broader skills, modern 

technology savvy, and generally a higher degree of versatility and flexibility, even in positions 

January 25–26, 2011 92 of 282



 
 

 
 

that are relatively low on the totem pole.  We heard such comments about truck and car sales 

personnel, truck drivers, and agricultural workers, to mention a few.  The CEO of a large auto 

retailer described the extension of the salesperson’s job into financing arrangements, warranty 

negotiation, and documentation.  This seems to be occurring across a spectrum of industries and 

occupational lines.  The message we heard is that the new employee is not so easy to find and 

that many of the unemployed lacked the skills and the attitude to fill these redefined jobs. 

Turning to my forecast, with some comparison to the Tealbook, my economic growth 

forecast has been revised up a little, but not materially.  In reality, my forecast for growth, 

unemployment, and inflation are really not much changed from my November submission.  I 

continue to hold the view that headwinds from a variety of sources will restrain growth to a pace 

a little under 3½ percent this year, keep unemployment elevated, and allow for only a modest 

rise in core inflation. 

My forecast for inflation is slightly higher than the Tealbook’s, and, as I mentioned, my 

forecast for GDP growth is slightly lower.  On balance, I don’t think the differences in the near-

term outlook between what I submitted for this meeting and what I read in the Tealbook are all 

that significant.  While I have not incorporated the recent rise in commodity prices into my 

inflation outlook, for largely the same reasons delineated in the Tealbook, my recent 

conversations with business contacts have introduced more caution into it.  These conversations 

reflect a growing sense that attempts to pass through higher commodity prices to the consumer 

are about to be implemented across a range of products.  I heard that price hikes in apparel, 

transportation and delivery services, household goods and hardware, and grocery products are in 

the works.  There is much uncertainty whether these price increases will stick, but this is the first 

indication I’ve heard that businesses believe they have pricing power.  Influenced by this 

January 25–26, 2011 93 of 282



 
 

 
 

anecdotal feedback, I have changed my assessment of the inflation risk from weighted to the 

downside to balanced.  I also think the specter of deflation is less likely today than it seemed last 

fall, in part due to the effect of our policies.  Regarding economic growth and employment, I still 

see the risks as broadly balanced.  However, if pushed to express a bias one way or the other, I 

am now tilting in the direction of the upside.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the intermeeting period, the tenor 

of the incoming data has improved.  Most private forecasters have been raising their estimates of 

the last quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011.  Like the Tealbook, I am expecting growth 

over 2011 to be between 3½ and 4 percent, somewhat above the most recent Blue Chip forecast.  

While the consumption and investment data have generally improved, continued problems in 

housing and state and local government spending should prevent the economy from growing 

much faster than 4 percent this year. 

The problems with residential investment cause me particular concern.  Boston staff has 

done some research that suggests that spillover effects from a weaker housing market are a 

significant risk and found that the magnitude of the risk was qualitatively very similar to the 

scenario in the Tealbook that involved an intensified real estate slump with spillover. 

Even with somewhat more robust growth, it is likely to be at least four years before we 

reach full employment.  While we have discussed issues with structural employment at length, I 

would highlight that both directors and members of my various councils have highlighted how 

easy it is to hire qualified workers.  And I would note that the New England labor market is 

much tighter than most other parts of the country, because only in Rhode Island is the 

unemployment rate above the national average.  I will give just one example.  A retail grocer in 

January 25–26, 2011 94 of 282



 
 

 
 

New England is planning on expanding by opening four additional grocery stores and needed to 

hire 500 workers.  He had more than 4,000 applications for the jobs, with lines extending well 

around multiple city blocks.  And he was struck by how many had previous experience running 

bakeries, butcher shops, other grocery stores, or had other skills particularly relevant to the 

grocery business.  Contacts expanding in high-tech, restaurants, and financial services have 

similar stories and have remarked on how many highly qualified candidates are available.  The 

problem remains too few jobs, not too few skilled workers. 

Given the excess capacity in labor markets and the downward trend in both core inflation 

and compensation, returning to a 2 percent core inflation rate in the medium term will certainly 

require years of much stronger data than we have seen to date.  We still see evidence of this in 

the inflation data:  Despite the increase in energy prices, many key areas have experienced price 

declines over the past year, including motor vehicles, household appliances, and apparel.  The 

low inflation rate and the likelihood that it will remain below our target over the medium term 

gives us ample room to encourage faster improvement in labor markets and to put the economy 

on a stronger footing. 

I would like to compliment the staff on the material they are providing in the financial 

stability report.  I also remain concerned that the European problems pose downside risks to the 

United States.  At the last meeting, I highlighted the risk that money market fund exposures to 

Europe could be a channel of transmission from Europe to the U.S. financial markets.  Some of 

the smaller money market funds over the past year have had exposure to peripheral sovereign 

debt, and, when worrying about the financial stability of money market funds, it is the smallest, 

rather than the largest, that tend to pose the greatest risk of breaking the buck and initiating 

another broad run. 

January 25–26, 2011 95 of 282



 
 

 
 

A second transmission channel I have not focused on in my earlier comments consists of 

European banks in peripheral countries.  The pictures in the financial stability packet show how 

much the CDS spreads have widened for Spanish banks, as more attention has been given to 

sovereign debt problems in Spain.  Banco Santander, one of the largest banks in the world, has 

had its CDS rise from 83 basis points at the beginning of 2010 to 292 basis points more recently.  

The CDS on the other large Spanish bank, BBVA, has risen from 85 in the beginning of last year 

to 314 more recently.  Investor concerns about some of these large European banks highlight the 

urgency of getting our own economy on a solid footing, so that we can withstand any additional 

significant financial shocks in the coming year.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook for the District economy is very 

similar to that for the U.S. economy.  We expect improvements, as others have said and others 

will say around the table.  Therefore, I’d like to  spend just a few minutes, if you will, being like 

a “broken record” again and focusing on asset values and some of the things that I see coming 

and some of the things that I am worried about from a broad perspective. 

Certainly, we have seen and discussed higher commodity prices, but we’ve also seen 

lower interest rates and lower exchange rates, which have fueled a surge in farmland values 

nationally, not just in my District, raising concerns for me about inflation in asset values in 

agricultural real estate markets.  Since June, for example, grain prices have doubled, and futures 

markets suggest that prices could remain elevated through 2014, but historically low interest 

rates and low cap rates are needed to justify the current farmland values that we’re seeing across 

the country.  By the beginning of 2010, U.S. farmland values had risen more than 25 percent 

from their 2005 levels, lifting the total value of U.S. farmland to north of $2 trillion.  Over the 

January 25–26, 2011 96 of 282



 
 

 
 

past year, farmland values have posted double-digit gains, with additional gains expected in 

2011.  While farm operators own the majority of U.S. farmland, nonfarm investors are buying 

more land now; according to a recent survey by Iowa State University, investors accounted for 

about a quarter of Iowa’s farmland sales.  Low interest rates, which have pushed capitalization 

rates down, contributed to the recent spike in farmland values as one asset class.  And I use 

farmland as an example, because other asset classes are being affected as well. 

Capitalization rates on U.S. farmlands have fluctuated over time, falling in periods of 

negative real interest rates, like the 1970s and the 2000s, and rising during periods of higher real 

rates, like the 1980s.  According to the USDA data, for example, Nebraska’s capitalization rate 

on cropland was 5.1 percent at the beginning of 2010, well below its historical average of 

7½ percent.  Despite regional variation, capitalization rates on farmland values have fallen to 

record lows across the nation, with rates below 5 percent in almost all states.  Oklahoma and 

Texas have lower capitalization rates due to mineral rights, inflating land values even further. 

Given the low cap rates, farmland values face significant interest rate risk.  For example, 

irrigated cropland in eastern Nebraska is valued at about $5,000 per acre.  A historically low 

capitalization rate of 5 percent is needed to rationalize this land value at current corn prices and 

yields.  If interest rates were to rise and lift cap rates to their historical average of 7½ percent, the 

capitalized value of irrigated farmland in eastern Nebraska would fall by a third, to $3,300 an 

acre.  If cap rates were to rise to 10 percent, as they did during the 1980s farm crisis, land values 

could drop by half.  Additional analysis suggests that other regions face similar kinds of effects.  

Rising interest rates could also cut farmland values by reducing farm revenues.  Historically, 

higher interest rates tend to raise exchange rates, thus limiting agriculture exports—even though 

January 25–26, 2011 97 of 282



 
 

 
 

we do have strong global demand right now—which, in turn, depresses commodity prices and 

farm revenues. 

In 1981, the spike in real interest rates led to higher exchange rates and contributed to 

lower agricultural exports.  Exports, commodity prices, and farm revenues dropped, which 

pushed farmland values to their 1985 lows.  If a similar event occurred today, farmland values 

could fall.  For example, if cap rates return to their historical average and corn prices drop to just 

$4 a bushel, which was the 2009 average, irrigated land values in eastern Nebraska would fall by 

almost 50 percent, to $2,700 per acre.  Other regions face similar risks.  In sum, rising interest 

rates could trigger a sharp decline in farmland values. 

Yesterday we talked about asset values for commercial and residential real estate, and I 

understand that situation.  But I’m also thinking about the future and what values we are going to 

distort.  About 450 community banks and regional banks across the country have high 

concentration levels of agricultural loans—above 300 percent of their capital.  That was the 

commercial real estate kickoff for us.  If you lower that threshold just a little, the number of 

banks with those exposures increases.  Some of the largest banks as well had agricultural loans 

and land loans, but had pulled back from those.  But as these values and this enthusiasm increase, 

I think you’ll see those large banks go back into making land loans or other operating loans in 

this sector.  Also, the Farm Credit System announced this morning that they were reducing their 

interest rates across the board by 35 basis points, because their profits are so good, their capital is 

rebuilding, and they want to provide this interest rate benefit to borrowers, because demand is 

back. 

My point is that we want to be thoughtful not just about the problems we have—and we 

have plenty of them—but also about the problems we may be buying across a number of asset 

January 25–26, 2011 98 of 282



 
 

 
 

classes.  It’s the unintended consequences that I’m concerned about right now.  Thank you very 

much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig, have you brought these issues to the 

supervisory group? 

MR. HOENIG.  Yes.  In fact, our senior person in Kansas City is working with the folks 

here at the Board.  We’ve suggested that we need to be thinking about how we deal with these 

banks on a national basis in terms of the underwriting standards that go with this situation.  What 

happens, of course, is that, when the asset values go up, the bank’s loan-to-value numbers go up, 

and the bank feels very secure.  But when developments start going the other way, the bank gets 

caught below the line. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I’d like to add to that.  I’ve talked to a number of community bankers, and 

they tell me that a large proportion of these sales are for cash, so they’re not necessarily 

financing them.  What they’re afraid of is that the farmers are using their cash in the purchases 

today, and that, a couple of years from now, when they have worse years, they’ll be back to 

borrow against the cash that they invested. 

MR. HOENIG.  Right.  There are strong cash flows coming off their property right now. 

MS. DUKE.  It’s not the financing of the property. 

MR. HOENIG.  But there is a lot of financing of the land part.  There are also a lot of 

loan repayments, because the cash flows are so strong right now.  But that’s my point:  Things 

are so good that you can move the price up, and then you are only borrowing 50 percent to 70 

percent against it and assuming that the value will go up further.  Of course, two or three years 

from now, you will get caught behind, and that’s the thing we’re worried about as we share this.  

January 25–26, 2011 99 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But the particular emphasis ought to be on the exposure of 

the financial institutions. 

MR. HOENIG.  Absolutely. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Many of my business contacts started off 

saying that things weren’t that much different from our last call.  As we talked further, it usually 

became clear that their attitudes continued to improve this month.  My inference is that their 

businesses are picking up in line with their rising expectations.  For example, manufacturers have 

been doing well recently and are saying they expect that to continue.  The Chicago purchasing 

managers’ survey rose sharply in December and picked up further in January to its highest level 

in more than 20 years—that result will be released January 31.  More firms appear to be 

expecting increases in demand and laying the groundwork to expand production when the time 

comes.  ArcelorMittal reported record sales to steel service centers who are building inventory in 

anticipation of demand, and this is coming on top of a good base of orders from automakers and 

other original equipment manufacturers. 

Many firms remain reluctant to make permanent additions to workforces.  However, the 

CEO of Manpower told me that many of their client firms have asked them to be ready to supply 

more temps in the next few months.  The clients are expecting a burst of demand, but they are 

uncertain about the timing, and, when it does materialize, they expect to have a hard time hiring 

workers quickly enough by themselves.  He also mentioned that a number of firms have 

openings that they are taking longer than usual to fill.  These companies feel that there are a lot 

of good people out there right now, and, with demand not fully recovered, they can afford to wait 

January 25–26, 2011 100 of 282



 
 

 
 

and make sure they get the best person.  This is probably consistent with the results that we saw 

yesterday on the drop in recruiting intensity. 

With regard to costs, although there is talk about higher commodity prices, few of the 

increases are being transmitted into higher prices for final goods and services at the moment.  

Manufacturing CEOs that I spoke with suggested that their planning for these cost increases was 

still adequate to avoid outsized price increases.  They do devote considerable resources to 

managing these costs, and, at the moment, they think things are okay. 

U.S. steel manufacturers are trying to decide how much capacity to bring back online.  

This is a difficult decision, given foreign competition.  Foreign orders today would hit the market 

in six to eight weeks, about the same length of time as domestic capacity would take to ramp up, 

so, if it came at the same time, that would be bad for prices, in their view.  Looking ahead, these 

forces are a potential dampening factor for currently high steel prices.  Pass-through is also an 

issue.  One of our financial contacts noted that hedge funds are shorting firms that are exposed to 

commodity price increases on the assumption that they lack the pricing power to pass these 

higher costs on to customers.  We’ll see. 

I see the anecdotes as being consistent with the incoming data, which show that activity is 

on a better upward trajectory right now.  I hope this momentum will build into more consistently 

solid growth than we saw in the first year and a half of the recovery.  We need it, because we’ve 

got a long way to go. 

The Board and Bank staff analyses on labor markets summarized yesterday have been 

helpful in honing my thinking about current resource gaps.  Undoubtedly, the baseline for 

unemployment has risen some, but there continues to be substantial slack in labor markets.  And 

January 25–26, 2011 101 of 282



 
 

 
 

if monetary policy can help ameliorate this unsatisfactorily slow decline in unemployment, that’s 

our policy job, in my judgment. 

Turning to the outlook, our forecast for economic growth and inflation and the rationales 

underlying them are broadly similar to the Tealbook’s.  With regard to growth, I’m more 

optimistic today than I was at our last meeting, but I need to see several more months of 

consistently better data—say, running through the spring—to be pretty confident that we’ve 

experienced the sustainable step-up in growth that’s in our forecast. 

With regard to inflation, our forecast has it rising some over time but still coming in 

under 1½ percent in 2013.  Our battery of statistical approaches to forecasting inflation continues 

to point primarily at further declines or, at most, flat inflation at a low level.  However, we 

decided to go with an inflation projection that rises somewhat over time on the basis of what 

appear to be inflation expectations that return towards a mandate-consistent level.  That’s what 

we need, but it still seems a touch speculative to me.  We’ll actually have to see underlying 

inflation move up in line with these forecasts in order to have confidence in these expectational 

effects.  In light of these forecasts, I see only a small risk that we’ll face an unpleasant conflict 

between our employment and inflation goals over the foreseeable future.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The most recent data have led me to raise 

my estimate of growth in the near term, but this morning I’d like to focus my comments on the 

more policy-relevant medium-term outlook.  My outlook is for less rapid growth in 2012 and 

2013 than the Tealbook baseline.  My outlook for inflation gradually heads higher through 2012 

and 2013 and is above the Tealbook baseline. 

January 25–26, 2011 102 of 282



 
 

 
 

Given the importance of this outlook for my policy perspective, I want to talk about the 

key aspects of my projection.  First, I see the economy as only slowly adjusting to the shocks of 

the recession.  As one of my business contacts noted, the recovery seems to be a “tale of two 

cities,” where parts of the economy are more or less recovering, while other parts are still facing 

considerable demand uncertainty and receiving little working capital.  I suspect the more positive 

aggregate data are masking some of the current unevenness of the recovery.  Major sectors of the 

economy are still facing significant headwinds that will only slowly abate. 

With the employment-to-population ratio still 5 percentage points below its pre-recession 

levels, it is important to look for clues about hiring plans.  The special Beige Book survey tells us 

that there are just as many firms seeking to expand their workforce this year as there are firms 

planning on holding their workforce steady.  That could be read as a pretty optimistic indicator 

for employment growth, but, based on what we’ve learned from our Beige Book respondents, I 

think these survey responses are unlikely to result in a dramatic increase in employment growth.  

Specifically, in follow-up questions we asked these respondents, we discovered that, while most 

of them anticipate some hiring, it’s not that much and primarily will be on a highly selective 

basis. 

The path toward higher aggregate employment is still complicated by the large fraction of 

small businesses that are not expanding.  For many of these firms, job growth is likely to be 

slowed by problems of credit availability.  My staff recently published some estimates using the 

New York Fed’s credit panel and other data sources to quantify an ongoing problem of credit 

availability for small businesses linked to home equity lending.  They found that roughly one-

quarter of small businesses rely on equity in their homes for financing, whether through personal 

guarantees or home equity lines.  As a result, declining home prices can reduce the amount of 

January 25–26, 2011 103 of 282



 
 

 
 

collateral and, hence, the amount of credit available for many small businesses.  The affected 

businesses are predominantly smaller firms, yet our researchers found that the aggregate 

reduction in credit through home equity is potentially quite large.  A banker on my board of 

directors confirmed that this was a critical issue for small businesses and that it would continue 

until the owners’ residential equity positions improved.  Thus, it seems likely that weaker credit 

availability for start-ups and other small businesses constitutes an ongoing headwind.  These 

tepid hiring plans and the small business credit issues are just a couple of examples of ongoing 

headwinds that I see dampening output growth over the medium term.  Partly for these reasons, 

my GDP projection is at the low end of the Committee’s range and below the Tealbook path. 

Even more critical to thinking through the policy environment is the medium-term 

outlook for inflation.  The Committee’s projections for 2013 range from 0.6 percent to 2.0 

percent, a range that’s wide enough to be associated with very different policy paths.  As I noted 

earlier, my projection for inflation is above the Tealbook’s, but it’s in the middle of the 

Committee’s central tendency.  PCE inflation statistics reveal that the typical U.S. consumer’s 

purchases have experienced a significant disinflation since 2008.  The good news in this area is 

that my staff’s analysis of the incoming CPI data point to a leveling-off of the underlying trend 

inflation rate.  Indeed, the median CPI was up 1 percent over the last six months of 2010 on an 

annualized basis after being up just 0.3 percent for the first six months in 2010.  A little over a 

third of the consumer’s market basket had prices that were lower at the end of 2010 than they 

were at the end of 2009.  However, the disinflation momentum was more prevalent in the first 

half of 2010. 

While these developments suggest that disinflationary pressures may be drawing to a 

close and that the risk of outright deflation has diminished, inflation clearly remains very low.  

January 25–26, 2011 104 of 282



 
 

 
 

At this point, in the face of continuing weak labor markets, labor costs are likely to increase only 

gradually, which should limit the upward momentum in inflation even if the recovery 

accelerates.  The BVAR model that my staff uses has the characteristic that inflation is quite 

sensitive to unit labor costs and not so tightly connected to GDP growth.  Inflation expectations 

are also a critical factor in the inflation forecast, but I see current inflation expectations as being 

consistent with my outlook.  In the Cleveland Fed model, which accounts for a time-varying 

inflation risk premium, inflation expectations are at or below 2 percent over the projection 

horizon.  Inflation expectations near mandate-consistent levels, but above current inflation rates, 

should support a gradual rise in inflation toward 2 percent.  And my projection has core inflation 

reaching 1.7 percent by the end of 2013. 

Given the improving data and stronger sentiment we have recently seen, it is tempting to 

boost the outlook for output and inflation.  But we’ve seen swings in the data before that have 

proven to be only temporary.  I prefer to think about the stronger incoming data as helpfully 

offsetting some of the downside risks to the economy that I’ve been worried about for some 

time.  Accordingly, my near-term outlook is now brighter relative to December, and I’ve shifted 

my balance of risks for both growth and inflation from being on the downside to being balanced.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Economic conditions in the Third District 

have continued to improve.  The regional economy has shaken off the summer doldrums and 

recovery is gaining some momentum as it enters the New Year.  Our business outlook survey of 

regional manufacturing showed strength in both December and January, and the general activity 

index is up to about 20 in both of those months.  Underlying that, the indexes of new orders and 

January 25–26, 2011 105 of 282



 
 

 
 

shipments both improved substantially in January.  Our manufacturers expect activity to continue 

to improve over the next six months.  Perhaps more encouraging is the jump in the employment 

index from 4.3 to 17.6 in January, the highest value we’ve seen for that index since April 2006. 

Third District retailers and auto dealers report increases in sales at the end of last year 

compared with year-earlier levels.  Although service sector firms gave some mixed reports, on 

balance, activity has been rising.  The health care and information technology sectors showed 

some growth, and activity related to real estate, construction, and finance, while not great, 

seemed to have firmed a bit and stopped declining. 

Payroll employment in the three states increased on a three-month moving average basis 

ending in December, based on data released yesterday.  The unemployment rate has been moving 

steadily down, falling to 8.7 percent in December for the three-state area, from a high of 

9.4 percent in July—a drop of 0.7 in less than six months.  This is consistent with the 

improvement in the employment readings we receive in our manufacturing survey. 

On the pricing front, we continue to see increased price pressures.  Many of our 

manufacturers continue to report an increase in input costs in January, and there are growing 

signs of an ability to pass these prices on to customers both in current prices and in expectations 

of future prices.  During the early part of the recovery, firms held back on price increases even 

though they faced increased costs.  That attitude appears to be changing.  For example, one of 

our directors is a national manufacturer of floor coverings; the company has suffered greatly 

through the housing bust and is putting through a 5 percent price increase in light of the 

continuing rise in materials costs.  This is his first price increase in two and a half years, and he 

reports that others in his industry are facing the same challenge, as margins continually get 

squeezed.  Another director, from a large national baking company, says that his industry and he 

January 25–26, 2011 106 of 282



 
 

 
 

will have no choice but to raise prices this year in light of higher food commodity prices—that is, 

flour, sugar, et cetera.  These two anecdotes do not by themselves constitute compelling evidence 

of the future path of prices, but they are illustrative of our business outlook survey’s prices-

received index, which has turned abruptly positive, rising from minus 3.3 in November to plus 

9.4 in December and 17.1 percent in January.  That’s the highest value it has taken on since 

August 2008. 

Thus, my sense is that, as the recovery picks up steam and firms become more convinced 

that demand increases are going to be sustained, they will feel more confident that they can put 

through price increases and have them stick.  Given how much ground these firms may feel that 

they have to make up, these price increases may move in a fairly nonlinear manner once they 

start.  Labor costs are not the only things that matter to these firms when it comes to pricing.  

Thus, looking at wages and unemployment may not be the most important key to understanding 

future price pressures.  Of course, our policy needs to focus less on what prices and inflation 

have done over the last year and focus more on what they’re likely to look like in the coming 

year, and on this score I see the risks clearly to the upside. 

Turning to the national economy, I’ve made little change in my forecast since our 

submission in October.  I’d been interpreting the summer slowdown as a soft patch, not the start 

of a cumulative decline in activity.  Thus, acceleration in activity seen in the fourth quarter was 

consistent with my outlook.  I expect economic growth to be about 3½ percent per year over the 

next two years.  I believe that the data are consistent with a self-sustaining recovery.  I think that 

firms are becoming more convinced of that as well.  My economic growth forecast is a bit 

weaker than the Tealbook, and Philadelphia’s DSGE model suggests that growth may be 

stronger than my forecast.  Thus, I believe that there are upside risks to my growth forecast, as 

January 25–26, 2011 107 of 282



 
 

 
 

the usual dynamics of an economic recovery could outweigh the drags from household 

deleveraging and the housing slump. 

I also see a somewhat faster decline in the unemployment rate and a faster acceleration in 

inflation than the Tealbook.  As I’ve said at previous meetings, I am very wary of basing policy 

on some notion of an output gap or an employment gap, because both have both conceptual and 

measurement problems.  One only needs to look at the range of estimates of the natural rate of 

unemployment we discussed yesterday and the error bands around those estimates to see that the 

unemployment gap measures are not very precisely estimated.  Output gaps suffer from the same 

measurement issues that the unemployment gap does.  Orphanides’s research shows that ex post 

revisions of the output gap are of the same order of magnitude as the gap itself, and it’s 

particularly hard to measure the gap near cyclical turning points.  This is probably one reason the 

gap gets little weight in empirical estimates of New Keynesian Phillips curves.  Indeed, the 

Philadelphia model suggests considerably higher inflation pressures than the Tealbook.  Again, 

my view is that inflation risks are to the upside in the medium term. 

I think we need to remember these risks as we contemplate policy in an environment in 

which output growth and probably employment growth are likely to be above trend.  In my view, 

if we focus on the growth rate of output and the growth rate of employment rather than the levels 

of gaps, we will have a better chance of staying ahead of the curve rather than falling behind it.  

Taylor rule formulations based on growth rates, for example, suggest that monetary policy is 

about right, and, thus, there’s no need for extended LSAP programs that seek to drive short-term 

real rates lower.  Given my outlook and my focus on growth rates, I believe we will need to 

begin removing policy accommodation considerably sooner than anticipated by the Tealbook.  

January 25–26, 2011 108 of 282



 
 

 
 

We need to begin preparing for that time by discussing what our exit path will look like and the 

communication strategies we will need to implement it. 

As a brief aside, I draw the Committee’s attention to yesterday’s handout of our 

economic projections.  The charts presented on the risks to GDP and inflation have flip-flopped 

fairly dramatically since November.  GDP and inflation risks were heavily weighted to the 

downside in November, and now those risks are marginally weighted to the upside.  We should 

make sure that the minutes and our statements are consistent with this change in direction, and 

I’ll have more to say about that in the policy go-round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the course of our discussion 

yesterday about the natural rate of unemployment, I mentioned that I thought it would be useful 

for us to consider a wide range of measures of inflationary pressures, in addition to the natural 

rate of unemployment and the gap between the current unemployment rate and the natural rate, 

and I’ll elaborate on that now.  In discussions with a number of our local contacts, we asked 

about their ability to raise prices, and the basic response was the same.  Many firms are facing 

input cost pressures because of the rise in commodity prices—some of these firms are actually 

producing those commodities, so they’re pretty pleased about that [laughter], and we should keep 

that in mind.  Other firms are trying to pass these input prices on to their consumers, but they are 

not finding, as a general rule, that the demand is sufficiently strong to support these attempted 

price increases.  As a result, firms are absorbing the input cost increases by cutting margins and 

not by raising prices.  In a similar vein, we heard from contacts about their plans for wage 

increases.  There are signs of labor shortages in North and South Dakota.  Also, in some 

high-growth areas, like health care and IT, wage pressures are starting to build.  All in all, 

January 25–26, 2011 109 of 282



 
 

 
 

though, wage increases were relatively moderate from 2010 to 2011.  So, if you look at the most 

granular level, inflationary pressures do seem subdued in the Ninth District. 

If you look at the national level, it seems to me that there are a number of possible ways 

to think about gauging inflationary pressures, that is, to think about the degree of slack in the 

economy.  One approach that we tend to emphasize is the difference between the current 

unemployment rate and the natural rate of unemployment, but as discussed yesterday, there are 

many uncertainties associated with that approach. 

So I’ll suggest three deliberately simple-minded approaches that we could add to that 

approach.  The simple-mindedness of these approaches should give us some confidence that they 

will be robust across a wider class of models, but, of course, it’s useful to augment them with 

more econometrically and theoretically sophisticated approaches as well. 

The first is a very simple NAIRU approach.  It just looks at the difference between the 

current inflation rate and lagged inflation, and it’s trying to get at the acceleration in inflation.  A 

lot of slack should lead the inflation rate to fall, and if there’s not much slack, then the inflation 

rate should be falling very little or rising.  Second is the New Keynesian approach.  It takes the 

current inflation rate and compares it with expected inflation.  If you look at a simple, simple 

version of the New Keynesian Phillips curve, this difference is proportional to the output gap.  

Third is a purely statistical approach, and here I’ll refer to the Stock-Watson recession gap that 

we heard about in Jackson Hole.  That’s a difference between the current unemployment rate and 

the minimal value of unemployment over the current and the past 11 quarters.   

Consistent with what I said about the Ninth District, all of these aggregative measures 

indicate that inflationary pressures in the U.S. are currently low.  Starting with the NAIRU 

approach, inflation decelerated in 2010, and core inflation decelerated by 90 basis points from 

January 25–26, 2011 110 of 282



 
 

 
 

2009 to 2010.  The New Keynesian measure gives a similar result.  If we look ahead at inflation 

forecasts, zero-coupon inflation swaps, the median Blue Chip forecast, the Cleveland Fed 

forecast—they’re all pointing to inflation of around 1.7, 1.8 percent in 2011.  So this measure, 

the difference between 2010 inflation and what we expect in 2011, is also negative, which 

implies that inflationary pressures are low right now from the New Keynesian perspective, as 

well.  Moving to the third measure, unemployment was around 5 percent in the first quarter of 

2008, so the Stock-Watson recession gap is large. 

But what about as the year progresses, as President Plosser emphasized?  I think it’s 

useful to contrast what I’m going to say to what President Evans said in his remarks.  Which one 

of us turns out to be right will be critical in thinking about policy as we go forward.  At the 

granular level, we received some information that firms were anticipating larger wage pressures 

by the end of the year.  Of course, we have to wait and see whether that transpires or not, but 

those kinds of wage pressures would be much more difficult for firms simply to absorb in their 

profit margins and would more likely to lead to price increases. 

What about at the more aggregative level?  The simple NAIRU approach is going to tell 

you that the forecasts—from the zero-coupon inflation swaps that I mentioned, the Blue Chip 

forecast, and my own projection, for that matter—are all for inflation to accelerate in 2011 

relative to 2010.  That measure would say we’ve got inflationary pressures building by the end of 

2011.  Now to the New Keynesian approach.  By the end of this year, the inflation forecast for 

2012 compared with the forecast for 2011 shows a relatively small difference, something like 

1.8 to 1.9 percent.  So by the end of 2011, the New Keynesian approach is going to be saying 

that there’s not much of a gap anymore, and, again, it will imply that inflation pressures have 

built by the end of the year.  Finally, the Stock–Watson recession gap says unemployment was 

January 25–26, 2011 111 of 282



 
 

 
 

near 5 percent three years ago, as I said.  By the time you roll to the beginning of 2009, 

unemployment is 8.2 percent.  So if unemployment is falling to near 9 percent by the end of 

2011, that gap has now shrunk from around 4½ percent to less than 1 percent.  Stock and Watson 

also proposed a similar gap in terms of capacity utilization, and that version of the gap seems 

likely to vanish completely by the end of the year. 

In my view, the expected paths of all three of these measures of inflationary pressures 

would point to a need for policy tightening by the end of the year.  But in all three, it really 

comes down to:  How is inflation going to behave over the course of 2011?  I think we should 

start to plan for various contingencies now.  My own prediction, as I’ve described, is that we 

would have to start to think about tightening by the end of 2011, which is more than a year 

earlier than the Tealbook’s projection—and I was interested to see that it’s only about six months 

earlier than what’s in the New York Fed’s forecast.  Monetary policy is all about contingency 

planning, and I’ll talk about one way to construct a plan for all of the possible contingencies that 

we face in the next go-round.  Thanks a lot. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota, I was a bit confused on one point.  

Stock and Watson in their paper actually projected inflation, and they suggested there was 

significant deflation risk.  Did you get a different result? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I think they’re going to turn out to be wrong on this point.  If 

you use the forecasting model that they talked about in Jackson Hole, they would have forecast 

significant disinflation from that point forward.  All I was saying is that, by the end of 2011, that 

model is not going to have those same pressures in there. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

January 25–26, 2011 112 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the 12th District, holiday sales for retailers 

generally exceeded expectations.  My contacts also noted a shift in spending away from generic 

products towards more luxury items.  My staff has discouraged me from describing these luxury 

items in any detail after my comments on Spanx at our last meeting [laughter], so I won’t do that, 

but I will say that this shift towards these luxury items suggests a more secure, less cautious 

consumer. 

The outlook is gloomier for state and local government spending.  In California, total 

general fund spending has been cut by almost 20 percent over the past three years, and further 

cuts are on the way as the state struggles to balance revenues and spending.  Among other 

effects, these cuts have squeezed public resources directed to nonprofit organizations.  Our 

contacts in these organizations have stated that this is leading to widespread consolidations in an 

attempt to salvage some semblance of services. 

Turning to the national economy, recent data have generally been quite favorable.  

Consumer spending and auto sales have picked up, business investment is rising, and exports are 

making a solid contribution to growth.  A downside risk to the outlook is the housing market, 

which the Tealbook describes as “moribund.”  One definition of moribund is “at the point of 

death.”  That might overstate the situation a bit [laughter], but it is certainly hard to detect much 

of a pulse in construction.  With 20 percent of current mortgages underwater and house prices 

still falling, there is no prospect of an imminent residential resurrection.  Continued house price 

declines could also lead to additional defaults and foreclosures, putting further pressures on bank 

balance sheets and credit availability. 

Still, the predominance of good news since our last meeting has led to a sizable upward 

revision to last quarter’s real GDP growth.  The greater momentum has also boosted our GDP 

January 25–26, 2011 113 of 282



 
 

 
 

growth forecast to 4 percent this year and 4½ percent next year.  However, fast growth for a 

couple of years is not enough, as unemployment is projected to remain stubbornly high.  

Analysis by my staff that was detailed in the FRB San Francisco background paper described 

yesterday suggests that the bulk of the increase in unemployment reflects weak labor demand 

and not a rise in structural unemployment.  In the special Systemwide survey on hiring plans, the 

number one factor restraining hiring was low expected sales growth.  Currently we put the 

effective natural rate of unemployment somewhere around 6¼ percent, but almost all of the 

recent increase in the natural rate should be unwound over the next few years. 

A key indication of the significant slack in labor and goods markets is the downward 

pressure on wages and prices.  Importantly, the weak demand for labor is evident in last year’s 

widely dispersed slowdown in wage growth.  Going forward, the downward pressure on prices 

from slack is offset by anchored inflation expectations and higher commodity prices. 

As noted in the Tealbook, higher commodity prices seem to be driven by greater demand 

and by supply shortfalls, not speculation.  In particular, after examining high-frequency data, our 

staff found no evidence that commodity prices jumped right after our announcements of large-

scale asset purchases and monetary accommodation that have taken place since early 2009.  Of 

course, only a small portion of the surge in commodity prices will pass through to core inflation.  

On balance, we expect core PCE inflation to remain at or a bit less than 1 percent both this year 

and next. 

Before wrapping up, let me say that, in light of yesterday’s discussion on structural 

unemployment, I’m now seeing the ongoing search process for a new 12th District president in a 

different light.  [Laughter]  For example, I’m no longer taking it so personally when people use 

the terms “mismatch” and the “12th District president situation” in the same sentence.  In 

January 25–26, 2011 114 of 282



 
 

 
 

addition, I realize I need to have a chat with our search committee about the concept of low 

recruiting intensity.  [Laughter]  In any case, I’m hoping, as I’m sure you are, that if the ongoing 

nature of the opening is the result of a structural problem, it’s the type that will dissipate soon. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And maybe the wage will move over time.  [Laughter]  

President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  A hard act to follow, so I’ll stick 

to business.  The data we’ve seen over the last couple of months is notably better than we were 

expecting just two or three months ago.  The cumulative effect for me is much more confidence 

that the recovery is firmly in place and has picked up speed. 

What we’ve seen in the Fifth District is consistent with this assessment.  I’ll start with the 

household sector.  Nothing is more central to the recovery than the revival of consumer 

spending, and, in our surveys, the diffusion index for retail sales has been notably weak 

throughout most of the recovery and, as recently as November, stood at minus 16.  In December 

it swung to plus 25, and the reading for January improved further to plus 33.  Our broader service 

sector index has shown improvement similar to that of the ISM nonmanufacturing index at the 

national level.  It rose to plus 21 in December, and that’s the highest level in several years.  It 

came to plus 12 in January, which is still a positive reading.  I won’t recite more of these District 

numbers, but, like the other regional diffusion indexes, our manufacturing measure was strongly 

positive for December and January—I think we’ve heard similar reports from Philadelphia and 

other Districts. 

Our anecdotal reports this month also support a more confident view about the recovery.  

One noticeable swing in recent months is current reports from some of our banking contacts, 

who are reporting improvements in loan quality and the emergence of new loan activity.  More 

January 25–26, 2011 115 of 282



 
 

 
 

broadly, outside of banking, we’ve also heard noticeably more positive reports and fewer 

negative reports than in the recent past. 

Turning to the national economy, I agree with the Tealbook that we’ve entered the new 

year carrying more pace than seemed likely a few months ago.  Several developments stand out.  

Consumer spending growth has picked up and now looks more solid than it once did.  Labor 

markets are improving.  Private employment continues to expand at a somewhat increasing pace.  

Initial unemployment claims continue to fall.  The NFIB hiring plans index surged, and real 

disposable income is on an upswing.  In addition, I think investment in nonresidential structures 

has not been quite as weak as some of us had anticipated, and that suggests we may have reached 

a bottom in commercial construction now. 

All in all, I think a more bullish view of the outlook is warranted.  In my projections, I’ve 

written down 3.9 percent for GDP growth for 2011—spurious precision, perhaps, but close to the 

Tealbook’s forecast.  Obviously one wants to be careful about reacting to the data in marking up 

one’s outlook, but I think the improvement in the outlook is unmistakable. 

The inflation outlook is also firmer now, I think, than it was several months ago.  The 

Tealbook estimates that PCE inflation was 2.3 percent over the three months ending in 

December.  Measures of near-term inflation expectations, both TIPS-based and survey-based, 

have moved up by roughly a percentage point since the summer—a fairly substantial move.  The 

surge in energy and commodity prices obviously has played a role, but our experience with such 

surges in the past several years suggest that they’ll show up soon in core inflation as well.  I also 

think there’s little doubt that deflation risks are notably reduced now and fairly minimal. 

In sum, I think this recovery is looking less in need of monetary stimulus than it did a few 

months ago.  Personally, I seriously doubt that our asset purchases have made a material 

January 25–26, 2011 116 of 282



 
 

 
 

contribution to the improvement in the outlook over the last few months.  If we continue to get 

economic reports consistent with stronger growth—two reasonably healthy payroll employment 

reports, for example—then I think at the March meeting we’re seriously going to want to 

consider scaling down our purchase program.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to 

improve at a moderate pace.  Many businesses report stronger revenue, better profitability, and 

improved household consumption.  Holiday retail sales were quite robust.  Some businesses plan 

to boost capital expenditures during 2011, and there are a few tentative indications that firms in 

the District may be more inclined to hire new workers this year.  This is the first time that I have 

heard even tentative indications of that. 

Residential real estate in the District remains weak.  Some parts of the District, in fact, 

seemed to experience renewed deterioration in conditions during the second half of 2010.  

Agribusiness in the District continues to be characterized by optimism for 2011, driven in part by 

higher prices for many of its products.  There seems to be increasing anecdotal evidence of land 

prices accelerating beyond what seems to be supported by fundamentals.  That’s something I’ll 

be keeping an eye on in 2011. 

Large businesses headquartered in the District continue to report brisk business and 

remain optimistic for this year.  Booming Asia continues to be an outsized factor for many of 

these firms, but most are also reporting good results for domestic business.  Europe, so far, 

remains a steady source of business for these firms.  I did not detect problems in the EU, at this 

point, from the perspective of these businesses. 

January 25–26, 2011 117 of 282



 
 

 
 

Nationally, prospects for the economy seem to have improved rather markedly relative to 

last summer.  I attribute part of the improvement to this Committee’s asset purchase program.  I 

think that this program did four things.  It put downward pressure on short-term real yields, it put 

upward pressure on expected inflation as measured by market-based TIPS, it contributed to a 

rally in equity markets, and it contributed to downward pressure on the trade-weighted value of 

the dollar.  In my view, these are classic signs of monetary policy easing.  They are exactly what 

you’d expect to observe had we been able to lower the funds rate substantially in reaction to 

weaker signs from the economy.  So, to me, this recent experience shows that the asset purchase 

policy can be used effectively to substitute for ordinary monetary policy, although, whether the 

Committee wishes to use this tool is, of course, dependent on the judgment of the members. 

I would also say that the asset purchase program has been very successful in getting the 

focus off of the federal funds rate and how long it will be at zero and moving the focus on to 

balance sheet policy instead.  So I think the signaling aspect has been extremely valuable to the 

Committee.  It is, of course, too early to make a complete assessment of the program.  In 

particular, most measures of actual core inflation from one year ago remain below 1 percent.  I 

would like these to move higher before I feel completely comfortable that the downside risk on 

inflation has been mitigated effectively, but we will have to see how these measures evolve 

during 2011.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m going to talk purely about the economy as seen 

through my own District and about my conversations with various CEOs.  Before I do, I want to 

thank President Hoenig for pointing out the need to contemplate unintended consequences as 

well as intended consequences.  I would say that is true not only when we enter into a program, 

January 25–26, 2011 118 of 282



 
 

 
 

but, as President Plosser commented, it is true also when we exit.  And I want to come back to 

try to pay a compliment to the New York Desk for the work that they did on the various exit 

scenarios, and I hope they will not interrupt me this time, because I think we need to contemplate 

what the cost of exit is and how we exit. 

Now I will turn to the economy and, in particular, to developments in my District, 

because it has been an engine of economic growth and employment growth.  We have looked 

closely at the data, and the Texas share of U.S. employment growth for last year amounted to 

19 percent of total nonagricultural growth—40 percent goods production and 60 percent 

services.  So Texas is not quite North and South Dakota, but I think it is not an unimportant 

indicator of where we may be going.  Let me just give you some summary statistics.  Our payroll 

employment rose at a 3 percent rate in December.  Our Texas manufacturing outlook survey is 

indicating expectations of capital expenditures and future business activity at a level that we have 

not seen for over three years.  Construction employment rose at a 3.6 annual rate.  And we are 

beginning to hear that convenience stores are reporting increasing traffic, which is usually an 

indication of a pickup in construction activity in terms of those workers’ consumption.  Service 

sector employment grew at a 2.3 percent annual rate in November; we are still looking at the 

December rate.  The key number that I wanted to mention is temporary employment, which rose 

at a 19½ percent annual rate—Charlie, I think you mentioned Manpower.  Our manufacturing 

outlook survey had a very interesting statistic.  We asked about the hiring intention six months 

out.  The ratio of firms expecting to hire versus those expecting to lay workers off is now at 

19 to 1—not insignificant.  So our surveys raise the prospect that this recovery might actually 

generate more jobs than we had expected. 

January 25–26, 2011 119 of 282



 
 

 
 

There are two offsets to what is happening in our District, but it is happening in all 

Districts.  One is that the state does have a fiscal shortfall.  In the typical Texas manner, I doubt 

it will be met by tax increases, but, rather, it will be met by continued severe cuts in social 

services.  In the state’s budget, 75 percent goes to education and health, and, unfortunately, I 

think the cuts are going to come out of the education side as well as the health side.  The second 

offset is in our Texas manufacturing survey, where the proportion of firms that expect to be able 

to pass on higher prices by midyear rose to 37.2 percent, the highest level in almost three years.  

And the prices received index is now running at the highest level in three years.  So that’s my 

District. 

I’d like to turn to what I have gleaned from the roughly 30 CEOs I speak with.  You’re 

the only one that has that list, Mr. Chairman, and I will summarize that quickly.  I think it’s fair 

to say that the view of that group collectively is that fears of a double-dip recession have faded 

into the rearview mirror.  Confidence is higher in the direction of final demand moving forward.  

The best summary quote is, “We are moving forward at 3 knots, not at 20, but it’s definitely 

forward motion.”  The same holds true even among small businesses, according to my contact at 

AT&T; he said the company is seeing the highest small business demand for connectivity and for 

services that they have seen in the last three years.  By the way, according to the casual dining 

industry—for example, Chili’s and the middle brands—despite GE’s withdrawal from the 

financing business, franchises are able to raise capital now, which is something they haven’t seen 

for three years.  Improvements in final demand seem to be more likely, liquidity is abundant, and 

many regard the prospects on the tax and regulatory front as potentially better—I stress 

“potentially,” because these are hard-headed people, who are hopeful, but wary.  I’m finding 

January 25–26, 2011 120 of 282



 
 

 
 

more that are saying they are contemplating expanded domestic cap-ex, and some are at least 

beginning to budget for domestic payroll expansion. 

On the inflationary front, those with rising input costs are planning price increases.  Many 

have the ability to pass through increases automatically, for example, the rails and others.  But to 

return to a point raised earlier, they are uncertain about their pricing power.  And I have tried to 

drill down with my interlocutors specifically on this issue.  Generally speaking, those in the 

bottom two quartiles in the retailing sector appear to be budgeting for 8 percent increases on the 

apparel side, particularly as we get to back-to-school season, because of the higher prices of 

inputs such as cotton.  And Mr. Tarullo will be very happy to know that that has also led to 

higher prices of polyester, because polyester is a substitute for cotton.  I noticed him nodding off 

during my statement—[laughter]—so I just wanted to make sure he was paying attention.  But 

when you really do press, they’re still uncertain as to how much, given the weak demand we 

have, they’ll be able to pass through.  Nonetheless, the intention is to pass through whatever they 

can get away with.  The business community has worked very hard to preserve the margins, 

which have become extremely taut, and they are quite worried about it. 

So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I would say there is more than enough liquidity in the 

system.  Businesses and financial intermediaries are flush with funds.  Money is burning a hole 

in the pockets of many, sensing that fiscal and regulatory policy might become friendlier.  

Businesses are beginning to budget for cap-ex, including, hopefully, more in the United States.  

And some additions to domestic payrolls may occur, although those additions and investments 

are still earmarked to drive productivity and, therefore, are likely to have less of an impact on 

unemployment than is desirable.  The outlook, according to the CEOs I surveyed across the 

January 25–26, 2011 121 of 282



 
 

 
 

country, is the most upbeat it has been in two years.  But inflation is a concern.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, speaking for myself, I 

have a very inelastic demand for cotton, and I don’t see any leisure suits in my future, regardless 

of what happens to cotton prices.  [Laughter] 

I think we all agree that the economy has regained some forward momentum.  It is now 

on more solid footing, and the prospects for a virtuous circle have improved.  In other words, 

faster final demand growth stimulates more rapid employment and income gains, which, in turn, 

provides further support for household and business spending. 

At the same time, I wouldn’t get too excited about all of this.  The pace of economic 

growth is still pretty tepid relative to the depth and duration of the recession that preceded it.  

And while the labor market is improving, the rate of private-sector job creation has not yet been 

sufficient to push down the unemployment rate in a sustained manner.  Even if we were to start 

to see more sizable employment gains, I think we should be inclined to let that run for a while, 

given the amount of slack that currently exists in the labor market.  This is going to necessitate 

some patience on our part.  I think policy should remain accommodative long after economic 

growth picks up to a more robust pace. 

In terms of the debate about the level of NAIRU, I thought the staff papers were 

excellent, and what I took away from it is that NAIRU probably is somewhat higher than it was 

before, due to the extended unemployment compensation benefits and increased mismatch.  But I 

think it’s important to stress that the effect of the extended unemployment compensation benefits 

is almost certainly going to be temporary rather than permanent, so I’m not sure that it’s that 

January 25–26, 2011 122 of 282



 
 

 
 

relevant over the longer term, and there is, as the papers point out, a cyclical component to 

mismatch.  More importantly, we probably shouldn’t spend too much effort trying to fine-tune 

our estimates of NAIRU today.  Whatever it is today, it’s likely far below the actual 

unemployment rate.  Thus, in my view, the mostly modest differences that we have in our point 

estimates shouldn’t have substantial implications for monetary policy currently.  Moreover, it’s 

important to emphasize that we will be able to fine-tune these estimates once we see how 

compensation and unit labor costs respond to faster economic growth and to the drop in the 

unemployment rate, which, I hope, will take place this year. 

On the inflation side, I think the big story in the news is the continuing rise in commodity 

prices, which is lifting headline inflation above core inflation.  However, I think it’s important 

not to overreact to this development either.  The pass-through of commodity price pressures into 

core inflation has typically been very limited in the United States, and headline inflation is still 

below nearly all participants’ estimates of the inflation rate consistent with the FOMC’s dual 

mandate.  Moreover, underlying pressures outside of commodities are still very subdued.  I 

would note that unit labor costs are still declining on a year-over-year basis, and profit margins 

are elevated relative to historical norms at this stage of the business cycle. 

One area that I do think we have to keep our eye on is inflation expectations.  Five-year, 

five-year forward TIPS measures are at acceptable levels, and survey measures still don’t show 

any meaningful increase in longer-term inflation expectations.  But if we did get a significant 

increase from here, that would be a concern.  To my mind, at this stage of the business cycle, and 

given the amount of excess slack in the economy, it would be a rise in inflation expectations that 

would be the most likely way that we’d get a sustained upturn in actual inflation. 

January 25–26, 2011 123 of 282



 
 

 
 

Therefore, I think we have to be mindful of our own role in influencing inflation 

expectations through how and what we communicate to market participants.  I think we need to 

emphasize our ability to exit smoothly from our enlarged balance sheet when the time comes, 

even if that time lies far off into the future.  And we have to emphasize our commitment to do so.  

I think we need to be very clear in our communications about why we’re keeping monetary 

conditions very accommodative—that is, because we’re so far away from our dual mandate.  But 

we also need to emphasize that our keeping conditions accommodative today does not 

compromise our commitment to keep inflation contained over the longer term. 

In terms of financial stability risks to the outlook, let me just discuss two areas briefly—

Europe, and state and local government finances.  With respect to Europe, I believe that the 

“muddle through” course continues to remain the most likely outcome.  The leadership of the 

core European countries is fully committed to the euro.  This means that, if expansion in the 

capacity of the EFSF is required, it eventually will be forthcoming.  But the road is likely to be 

bumpy, because this is a very complex bargaining game that makes it difficult politically for the 

necessary aid to be extended before it’s absolutely needed.  Right now, we seem to be in a sort of 

a peculiar place.  Market participants expect the resources will be supplied to protect Spain, but, 

because of these expectations, market conditions are generally stable, and this means that the 

policymakers aren’t under much pressure to provide this backing immediately. 

In terms of state and local government finances, the rise in municipal bond yields has 

sparked much discussion of credit risk.  However, I think the increase in yields is at least as 

much due to a shift in the demand–supply balance as it is to a fundamental deterioration in debt 

funding capacity.  The demand from the household sector has cooled as poor mutual fund 

performance had led to outflows from municipal bond funds.  In response, yields have had to 

January 25–26, 2011 124 of 282



 
 

 
 

back up sufficiently to attract so-called crossover investors, such as insurance companies, taxable 

income funds, and hedge funds.  And although many states have large deficit holes to fill this 

year, the aggregate amount of the shortfall is actually not that big.  If you sum it across all of the 

states, it looks to be about roughly 1 percent of GDP.  The much bigger problem for states and 

localities is really the longer-term unfunded commitments for pension and health care retirement 

benefits.  This may ultimately lead to a hard landing, but I don’t see that happening this year. 

Finally, the debt ceiling could become an issue this spring.  I know this usually turns out 

to be just theater, but it does strike me that there’s more capacity for mischief here than usual.  

Apparently, some members of the Congress are discussing how payments can be prioritized, so 

that the impact of a binding debt ceiling would constrain discretionary spending but would allow 

payment on Treasury debt to continue.  If we really go down that path, it would imply that the 

debt ceiling could be pretty messy.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen.   

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, am encouraged by recent news 

suggesting that, outside of housing and nonresidential construction—sectors which remain mired 

in gloom—private spending and production gained some momentum toward the end of last year.  

The improved tone of the data is mirrored in the anecdotal reports I hear.  Businesses seem 

slightly more optimistic about future sales and a bit more willing to hire and invest.  The more 

positive tone of the data improves my confidence that the recovery is on firmer footing and will 

gradually pick up steam going forward.  My modal forecast has changed only marginally in 

response to incoming data, but my assessment of the risks to the outlook for economic growth 

and inflation has become more balanced. 

January 25–26, 2011 125 of 282



 
 

 
 

The forecast I prepared for today’s meeting is very close to that in Tealbook and in my 

November projection.  I raised my forecast of economic growth in 2011 by a few tenths of a 

percent, reflecting upside surprises in consumer and investment spending and the enactment of 

the fiscal package.  But these positives were offset by developments since November, suggesting 

a deeper and more persistent housing downturn and steeper declines in house prices than I 

previously anticipated.  The large overhang of existing homes for sale, the bulging foreclosure 

pipeline, the inability of homeowners with negative equity to trade up, and continuing tight 

lending standards are depressing house prices throughout the country.  I expect the resulting 

negative wealth effects to take a toll on consumption. 

For 2012, I lowered my growth forecast a few tenths to reflect the shift from this year to 

next year in the onset of fiscal drag.  All in all, I now anticipate that, by the end of 2013, the level 

of real GDP will be a few tenths higher and unemployment a tenth or so lower than my 

November forecast.  The essential contours of my forecast are unchanged.  I envision a recovery 

that will strengthen but proceed slowly by postwar standards.  As a consequence, unemployment 

will decline only very gradually, remaining around 7 percent at the end of 2013. 

Turning to inflation, I have been surprised by the sharp upward movement in commodity 

prices, but data on core prices, compensation, and unit labor costs have been consistent with my 

previous forecast.  And I continue to project that inflation will remain notably below the 

2 percent level that I consider consistent with our dual mandate and will rise only minimally over 

the forecast period.  A key issue with which I grappled during this round was how much to revise 

up my forecast of consumer spending in response to stronger incoming data.  I ultimately 

decided that the staff’s decision to revise up the level of consumer spending, but not the growth 

rate beyond mid-2011, is a sensible and balanced response.  It seems dangerous to overblow the 

January 25–26, 2011 126 of 282



 
 

 
 

significance of the surprise when it is out of line with the fundamentals, particularly changes in 

employment, wages, and wealth.  As David discussed in his presentation yesterday, these factors 

have had a remarkably good track record in explaining fluctuations in consumer spending and 

the personal saving rate since the onset of the crisis. 

Of course, perceptions concerning current and future labor market conditions and 

income, and other factors, like access to credit, also influence consumption, and the staff tried to 

capture these influences with measures of sentiment.  Yesterday’s jump in confidence in the 

Conference Board survey suggests some improvement, but other surveys thus far reveal no 

significant or sustained rebound, even though most measures of sentiment are off their 

recessionary lows.  Moreover, as David noted, the staff forecast assumes that sentiment will 

improve going forward, and the Tealbook growth forecast stands well above the Blue Chip 

consensus and near the top of our own central tendency. 

On the labor market, in spite of December’s drop in the unemployment rate, the number 

of new jobs in recent months has fallen short of the number needed just to accommodate the 

growing population.  The decline in labor force participation, very modest gains in wages and 

compensation, and continuing perceptions in surveys that jobs are exceptionally difficult to 

obtain, all suggest that the labor market remains quite weak.  I interpret the quit rate—the 

fraction of employed workers who voluntarily resign their jobs to search, exit the labor force, or 

take another job immediately—as a good measure of fear and perceived opportunity.  Papers 

prepared and circulated for yesterday’s discussion show that the quit rate is exceptionally 

depressed.  The quit rate is now above the lows reached in the depth of the recession, but I take 

the very modest increase as a signal that improvement in the labor market is, thus far, quite 

modest. 

January 25–26, 2011 127 of 282



 
 

 
 

The most significant change in my forecast versus November pertains to my assessment 

of the balance of risks.  In November, I considered the risk to both economic growth and 

inflation as weighted to the downside, and I now consider them balanced.  On the downside, I am 

particularly concerned about spillovers to spending and financial markets from further house 

prices declines and consider the risks well illustrated by the two alternative simulations in 

Tealbook.  And, of course, spillovers to financial markets from European sovereign debt 

developments are a continuing source of downside risk.  That said, I see more upside risk now 

that the recovery will be stronger than my modal forecast.  For example, auto sales were quite 

strong during the fourth quarter, and this could foreshadow more robust spending due to pent-up 

demand for durables than is incorporated in the Tealbook baseline.  I was struck that that 

baseline envisions declining vehicle stocks per capita over the entire forecast period. 

With respect to inflation, like market participants, I am less concerned about deflationary 

risk than in November.  Spikes in commodity prices create upside risks, but I agree with 

Tealbook’s assessment that any pass-through to core inflation is apt to be quite modest.  And I 

read the anecdotal reports as suggesting that firms still have little or no pricing power. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like many of you, I am encouraged not only 

by the improved economic data but also by the new tone in Washington.  I’m sure many of you 

saw that last night the Congress had people sitting cross-party, cross-philosophy, and, in doing 

so, I think they’re following our lead.  After all, we’ve got Narayana and Charlie sitting next to 

each other, and Janet and me sitting next to each other.  As for Jeff, we’ve got him surrounded.  

[Laughter]  I’m not sure whether that new tone of civility is going to carry through the balance of 

our discussion today. 

January 25–26, 2011 128 of 282



 
 

 
 

In preparing my remarks, I had at first entitled them, “No Nation Is an Island.”  But then I 

realized that some nations actually are islands [laughter], so I put a new title to my remarks:  

“The U.S. Is Not an Island.”  Let me talk about the U.S. economy first as if it were an island, 

because my sense is that developments in the United States would be considered quite 

encouraging in that case.  We look a bit stronger and a bit more settled from the perspective of 

markets and the economy and politics.  But beyond the island, the rest of the world looks 

decidedly less settled, decidedly less strong.  Focusing first on the United States, the 

improvements on the real side of the economy appear to be real.  I take a little less momentum 

from recent data in the fourth quarter into my 2011 forecast, in part because of the arithmetic of 

the GDP forecast that staff rightly took us through regarding net exports and so on.  Still, there 

are encouraging signs that the Tealbook forecasts going back a couple of sessions seem to be 

more on point than off.  Having said that, I’m still a bit more cautious than they are.  Yet, I’m 

impressed by tax revenues that are flowing into the federal government and into states and 

municipalities, and I expect the deleveraging headwind to subside materially in 2011. 

I will spend most of my remarks, though, on the risks to this improving modal forecast, 

given the current global policy conjuncture.  Four risks come to mind.  The first is geopolitics.  I 

see an incredibly unhealthy brew of divergent recoveries across the world, increases in food and 

commodity prices, and, frankly, power vacuums in certain countries and certain regions.  

Second, as I will discuss in more detail, inflation—it’s getting hard and harder, in my view, to 

deny inflation risks, if not real inflation problems, among many of our trading partners, and 

that’s likely to lessen the flexibility that monetary policy has, at least in the eyes of many market 

participants.  Third, as I will also discuss in more detail, is sovereign funding costs.  The costs of 

capital for the countries that have been better prepared, better insulated, such as the United 

January 25–26, 2011 129 of 282



 
 

 
 

States, Germany, and France, might well be the story of 2011.  Fourth, as many people, including 

Vice Chairman Dudley, described, is the European crisis.  Before I get into those risks, I have to 

note the improvements in financial markets, which continue to be highly supportive of the real 

economy.  Now, if any of those trends were upset, I think the consequences for the real economy 

would be significant. 

If you view the Treasury yield curve as a rough and ready indicator for the state of the 

domestic, or even the global, economy, you would have to note a few remarkable things.  One is 

the run-up in yields and the steepness of the curve, which is probably mostly about good 

economic developments.  The spread between the 30-year bond and the 2-year note has reached 

its widest level in history in the intermeeting period, and that has certainly gotten my attention.  

At 398 basis points, that spread has surpassed the previous peak of February 2010 and has put 

peaks from earlier recoveries in the rearview mirror.  Now, at some level, this could mean a 

robust recovery.  It could mean that the markets are gaining confidence, that the risks of deflation 

and double dip recessions are de minimis, and that’s a view I share. 

Why do I worry?  Because it also could be something else.  It’s still hard for me to divine 

what the Treasury curve is telling us.  If term premiums were to move beyond the current levels, 

which, according to memos from Nellie Liang and the group, appear normal, it could turn out 

that sovereign funding costs for the advanced foreign economies like the United States move up 

in 2011, not just as a sign of improved economic fundamentals.  What else could cause the 

spreads to widen?  Inflation risk premiums could.  If they were to move up materially, output 

gaps notwithstanding, Treasury curve steepening could make the recovery harder to pull off. 

Let me turn to some of those global risks.  I would say, in sum, that the upside inflation 

risks in the medium term are materially greater than the risks around GDP.  Inflation risks are 

January 25–26, 2011 130 of 282



 
 

 
 

spreading from the smaller emerging markets to the BRICs and the advanced foreign economies, 

and the question is:  Will they spread to us?  Start some months ago, even quarters ago, with the 

situation in Vietnam and Indonesia.  Then, take the narrative through increases in inflation risks 

in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and, more recently, South Korea.  Think about the policy 

conundrums in the United Kingdom.  Think about policy risks for the European Central Bank.  

You see many policy authorities taking ad hoc measures, in addition to policy rate changes, to try 

to contain this surge in inflation.  Some are successful and some are likely to have far less 

positive consequences.  I think markets perceive that policymakers are losing the flexibility to 

respond should these inflation risks become more significant. 

None of the cases I’ve mentioned are perfect analogies to the situation in the United 

States, but choosing a country that actually is an island—the United Kingdom—might be the 

best example we can find.  In spite of large spare capacity, austerity in fiscal projections, and a 

series of one-off factors that are no doubt driving headline inflation, inflation risks have many 

worried.  Governor King gave a strident and, I daresay, strong defense of the United Kingdom’s 

monetary policy yesterday, but he was forced to acknowledge that, over the course of the last 

46 months, inflation has been above the Bank of England’s target for 41 of those months.  At 

some point, he seemed to acknowledge that that could likely move up expectations, and he 

would be prepared to take action.  He noted upside risks to inflation, and I think many in markets 

are taking that speech to suggest that he might need to do some modest monetary tightening, 

even though that involves huge communication challenges and could do some harm to the 

growth trajectory in the United Kingdom. 

I say this not because they’re in a situation that’s impossible.  I say this not because the 

analogy between them and us is perfect.  But if you think about the good, healthy debates at the 

January 25–26, 2011 131 of 282



 
 

 
 

Bank of England going back some months about whether they should engage in their own 

version of QE2 and how divided they were, I suspect that that option is, at least given the current 

set of facts, off the table.  I think that should remind us that we need to be cautious, that we need 

to be watching the data, and that the situation in front of us, even if the economy improves with 

the vigor that the Tealbook suggests, could be one that is quite a difficult challenge for 

policymakers. 

Finally, a risk related to continental Europe.  One challenge that has been touched on 

both by staff and many of you is the refinancings that are necessary in Europe over the course of 

2011.  They have $1.3 trillion that must be rolled over in the next 12 months.  Most of that is 

front-loaded, and most of that is funded in the short term.  Market commentators seem to have 

taken great comfort from the fact that many of those countries that need to roll over much of 

their funding have been “successful” in doing so.  But if you look closely at the successes in 

funding by some of the peripheral countries, you might take far less comfort.  First, many of the 

buyers of the securities are many of the same institutions that give us concern.  Second, many of 

those that are buying the debt are doing so based on the implicit guarantee that the stronger 

countries would be there to bail them out if anything went wrong.  A couple of you noted that, to 

the extent that the U.S. economy only slowly but surely improves, we could see the European 

problems find their way into our economy through financial markets.  I think that is the most 

likely channel for harm to the United States. 

Another takeaway for me from the European situation is that the core of Europe matters 

most in 2011, that is, the situation in France and Germany.  I think the reason that markets were 

so nervous in the spring about problems in the periphery is that they weren’t sure whether 

Germany was going to step up and foot the bill.  Markets have now become convinced that 

January 25–26, 2011 132 of 282



 
 

 
 

Germany has rededicated itself to the euro, that Germany has decided against some of the 

screams within the political classes, and that it will defend the euro, so that now markets are less 

nervous about problems in the periphery.  I think that will hold true unless German sovereign 

rates move away from them not because of improved economics, but because the contingent 

liabilities of the periphery have to be paid for by someone, and markets demand that out of the 

long end of the German yield curve.  If that should occur, I would expect that the German 

political leadership would have to revisit this cause.  I can’t predict that it will occur, but, if it 

does, I could see a scenario where sovereign rates at the long end move up pretty significantly in 

most countries around the world. 

In addition, it’s not just core countries that will matter in 2011, but also core banks.  I 

think Eric made proper reference to the “strong banks” in Spain as one example.  The CDS 

spreads for a couple of the strong banks have moved.  Regulators still seem to believe that they 

are going to be just fine, that the bank restructurings that are necessary in Spain and in Germany 

are not among the core institutions.  But if that assumption turns out to be faulty, if it turns out 

that these institutions do not have either the quality or the quantity of capital that they purport to 

have, I would say all bets are off and the situation in Europe could become very significant. 

With that preoccupation with the downside risks, I will end where I began by saying the 

data have been more comforting for us in the U.S., but our gaze will probably have to look over a 

couple of oceans to decide whether our 2011 projections come true as many of us hope.  Thank 

you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Credit quality continues to improve, with some 

banks showing quite dramatic improvement in the fourth quarter and most banks expecting 

January 25–26, 2011 133 of 282



 
 

 
 

continued improvement next year.  As credit metrics in the outlook improve, however, some 

bankers are already seeing the first signs of conflict between their accountants and their 

regulators over the proper level for reserves.  Running through major loan types, C&I lending, 

with the exception of small business, was never a major credit problem in this cycle.  Auto has 

returned to normal, with loans available across the credit spectrum.  Credit card charge-off rates 

are declining, in some cases sharply, and are expected to return to normal levels this year.  

Residential mortgage lending is the area of greatest concern.  Entry into delinquency brackets 

has slowed, but exit from delinquency has also slowed, with problems in foreclosure procedures 

across all major servicers.  In commercial real estate, the outlook is, oddly, brighter.  Banks are 

beginning to see reductions in the dollar level of problem loans.  When loans are restructured or 

extended, it takes 6 to 12 months of demonstrated performance under restructured terms before 

the loans can be upgraded, and some early restructures are now passing this threshold.  In 

addition, banks are aggressively selling troubled real estate assets and are finding ready buyers at 

or above their marks.  Fundamentals such as vacancies and average rents range from stable to 

improving.  Investors have lowered cap rates in line with interest rates, and more sales 

transactions are occurring.  Bankers did caution, however, that continued low interest rates hold 

the key to the outlook for commercial real estate.  Risks to the outlook for credit improvement 

more generally are declining house prices, unemployment, and interest rates. 

Loan demand is still quite weak.  Competition continues to heat up for C&I loans and is 

gradually moving down from large commercial lending well into middle-market lending, and a 

few banks reported seeing a brief but noticeable pickup in small business application flow in 

December, but no one was ready to call it a trend.  In our aggregate bank data, we have seen 

growth in C&I loans and in residential mortgages.  Banks are becoming increasingly focused on 

January 25–26, 2011 134 of 282



 
 

 
 

the need to generate assets.  The C&I growth is due to some increased demand primarily for 

transaction needs, such as the opportunity to buy something—equipment or mineral rights, et 

cetera—at a bargain price, or to fund mergers and acquisitions.  Bankers have yet to see demand 

prompted by business expansion, and, while they’re still adding to approved credit lines, usage 

of existing lines remains at historical lows. 

Mortgages held at banks are increasing, but overall mortgage debt is still declining.  

Banks are choosing to retain portions of GSE-eligible and non-eligible originations to offset 

declining portfolios and weak demand in other areas.  Similarly, credit card securitizations are 

extremely low, as banks elect to keep the production on their balance sheets.  Finally, bankers 

caution that they still have significant loan portfolios in liquidation or runoff mode that will mask 

new production for some time.  All of this leads me to believe that loan supply is not 

meaningfully constrained by capital or liquidity but rather by assessments of creditworthiness 

and prospects for recovery.  Meanwhile demand from creditworthy borrowers continues to be 

weak. 

The Small Business Lending Fund initiative that has been passed by the Congress and 

launched by Treasury allows Treasury to purchase preferred stock from banks with total assets 

less than $10 billion and is designed to incent them to increase small business lending.  The rate 

on the stock drops from 5 percent to 1 percent for banks that increase lending by 10 percent 

within two years.  Conversely, the rate increases to 7 percent for banks that do not increase 

lending, and the rate goes to 9 percent after four and a half years for all banks.  For healthy small 

banks that already have TARP capital under CPP, it would make sense to exchange that for 

capital under this program with the potential for lower rates and the elimination of compensation 

restrictions.  For healthy banks without TARP, it could serve as bridge capital until more 

January 25–26, 2011 135 of 282



 
 

 
 

permanent capital sources become available or in anticipation of the need to replace trust 

preferred as a source.  Less healthy banks that are in need of capital due to existing losses are not 

likely to be approved for the program.  As of January 10, Treasury reported 71 applications, of 

which 38 were non-TARP and 33 were TARP banks, and we’re working with the other agencies 

on approval processes.  However, the President doesn’t need to look very far for needless 

regulatory burden.  Under the legislation, for banks to receive credit for small business loans 

made, every small business borrower must certify that he or she is not a sex offender and must 

update that certification annually that he or she has not become a sex offender in the previous 

year. 

Finally, banks’ earnings are quite threatened by the loss of revenue from debit card 

interchange fees.  The industry had drifted into a model where checking account profitability was 

largely generated by overdraft fees and debit interchange income.  With both of these sources of 

revenue sharply curtailed, most banks are looking at restoring checking account fees and charges 

for debit cards.  In addition, many are rethinking branch networks and looking for ways to lower 

deposit delivery costs.  None of these measures is likely to offset the revenue loss.  Look for a 

significant hit to profitability upon implementation, and only slow recovery as new fees are 

implemented.  Also looming is the threat of credit card interchange restrictions.  With interest 

margins reduced by lower levels of earning assets and stronger competition for the assets that are 

available, as well as severe regulatory hits to noninterest income, banks are likely to struggle for 

core operating income.  The struggles may be masked for a time by improving credit costs and 

reserve releases. 

Turning now to the economic forecast, I subscribe to the staff forecast as described in the 

Tealbook and agree that downside risk is less than the last time we met.  I would offer two 

January 25–26, 2011 136 of 282



 
 

 
 

nuances based on my conversations about credit.  First, I fear that the outlook for real estate 

investment, even at the revised lower levels, might not materialize.  As I’ve said in the past, this 

concerns me because this investment is a much more significant fraction of the forecast for 

improvement of GDP growth than it is of the overall economy.  In addition, while employment 

in construction was less than 7 percent of overall employment at the peak, through December 

2010, net job losses in the construction industry are nearly 30 percent of total jobs lost. 

Second, as credit availability returns, there appears to be a bifurcation between the haves 

and the have-nots.  Large companies have credit; small companies have not.  Companies in the 

health-care or energy sector have credit; companies in businesses related to real estate have not.  

Consumers with high credit scores have multiple credit card solicitations; subprime borrowers 

are likely to be closed out for some time.  Homeowners or potential homebuyers with significant 

equity or down payments can get mortgages for purchase or refinance, while others cannot 

access the best rates even with good income and credit scores.  We could be surprised by 

continued strength in consumer spending if its recent improvement turns out to be driven by 

greater confidence among the haves, because that group may not be as credit-constrained as the 

averages would suggest.  While I’m seriously concerned about the ugly social consequences of 

such a bifurcation, I think it might provide some reason for optimism about growth in consumer 

spending.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With respect to the economy as a whole, I 

think what we’ve seen is characteristic of the kind of recovery that occurs after major financial 

shocks, which is to say it has been a gradual, somewhat jagged path of recovery.  Therefore, 

inferring from what many of you have said, the interesting question for 2011 is whether we’re 

January 25–26, 2011 137 of 282



 
 

 
 

going to break out of that pattern of some ups and downs and instead get a stronger, more self-

reinforcing recovery dynamic, or whether the continued drag from the housing market and more 

hope than realization of increased employment gains will once again pull us back down a bit and 

return us to a jagged pattern of recovery.  On those latter points, I would agree with what many 

have said already.  I just want to add a point on the housing market.  I think the problems with 

foreclosure documentation now look to be on the bad side of initial estimates of the delays and 

costs that will result.  Quite apart from irregularities at individual servicers, the MERS problems 

run very deep indeed and are almost surely going to result in some delays and quite a bit higher 

costs than I think many expected. 

With respect to the recoveries from financial crises, obviously this is a time when the 

economy is more susceptible to shocks than usual.  I think Bill covered the shocks quite well, so 

I would just associate myself with his comments. 

I’ll make a couple of remarks on the euro-zone problems.  I agree with those who have 

said the biggest short-term risk comes from the euro zone.  It’s relatively calm right now, both 

because of the rumors of more European-level initiatives and because of the ECB purchases of 

sovereign debt ahead of auctions.  Europe is not using this period of calm to get ahead of the 

problem, which they would probably be best advised to do by building a credible firewall in 

Spain through strengthening the European backstops for sovereign debt, accelerating the 

programs of disclosure for all banks, and presenting a credible plan for recapitalization of at least 

the cajas. 

However, Spain is moving ahead unilaterally on a variety of structural reform fronts.  

They also seem willing to address bank transparency and cajas recap issues, but I sense that 

they’re somewhat reluctant to go full speed ahead when European policies are proceeding at such 

January 25–26, 2011 138 of 282



 
 

 
 

a stately pace, for example, on stress tests at financial institutions generally.  I think at this point 

most, if not all, of the important policymakers throughout the euro zone believe that proactive 

steps are indicated, and they’re being held back by significant domestic political problems in 

both the stressed and the core countries.  As all of you know, Ireland’s government is endangered 

as Irish citizens see what the failure to regulate their banks is going to cost them.  The German 

ruling party has faced coalition problems as German citizens resist the idea that they should pay 

for what they see as fiscal irresponsibility in the periphery.  Portugal doesn’t want a program at 

all, notwithstanding the fact that officials in the core countries are trying to push it upon them.  

So the mantra that Europe has the financial and technical resources to contain the problems 

remains true, but I think there is some continued risk that, if it were to spread to Spain, a reactive 

ad hoc response might not be enough owing both to the size of sovereign debt and to some of the 

unknowns around Spanish bank liabilities. 

I want to turn now to the credit environment here in the United States or, more 

accurately, to the two credit environments that I think we currently have:  one where credit is at 

least perceived by many to be in unreasonably short supply, notwithstanding the positive 

developments in the economy as a whole, and another where we may—and I emphasize 

“may”—be seeing the early signs of some frothiness.  With respect to the first environment in 

which small and medium-sized businesses operate in particular, it’s clear that lending to such 

firms has been quite circumscribed, at least as judged by historical standards.  We have all heard 

complaints from representatives of such businesses that they cannot get loans that they say could 

be used to expand their businesses and create new jobs.  We have all also seen the surveys and 

analyses that suggest that the problem is, at its root, a lack of demand by these businesses based 

upon a lack of assurance about future demand.  I suspect many around this table share my 

January 25–26, 2011 139 of 282



 
 

 
 

frustration at not being able to reach conclusions based principally on data rather than 

impressions, though.  Again, I suspect that, like most of you, I’m inclined toward the lack of 

demand explanation. 

But when, in the course of conversations with labor economists and in anticipation of the 

discussion we had yesterday, some of them explained the still slow pace of job creation in part 

by what they characterized as a credit squeeze on smaller businesses, I decided to try, at least, to 

find some other sources of data that might put the issue in some perspective.  I looked at the BLS 

business employment dynamics data series, which breaks down job growth and destruction by 

size of firm to see how job creation in the present recovery compares to those following prior 

recessions.  Unfortunately, the series doesn’t go back to the major recessions of the early 1980s 

and mid-1970s, it’s pretty badly lagged (by almost eight months), and it still doesn’t give all of 

the information that would be useful.  Other than that, it’s actually a terrific data series.  

[Laughter]  Given all the qualifications on how useful this inquiry would be, I looked at the 

shares of gross job creation by small, medium-sized, and large businesses in the recoveries from 

the mild recessions of the early years of both of the past two decades and compared them with 

the proportion of job creation in the early stages of the present recovery—this is gross job 

creation, not net.  It’s interesting that the shares of gross job creation by the smallest 

businesses—that is, those with 1 to 10 employees, which I assume are generally excluded from 

borrowing from banks—and by the largest businesses—those over 1,000, which we know to 

have had good and cheap access to credit for some time now—are both modestly but noticeably 

higher than their shares in the previous two recoveries.  Therefore, the share of job creation by 

medium-sized businesses is several percentage points lower than in past recoveries.  This 

observation is consistent with the story of an unusual credit squeeze on small and medium-sized 

January 25–26, 2011 140 of 282



 
 

 
 

businesses, though it hardly validates that story.  And in truth, the biggest fact that jumps off the 

screen as one looks at this data series is how few total jobs are being created relative to any time 

in the last 20 years. 

Switching now to the other environment, that in which credit is not only readily available 

but perhaps so abundant and cheap as to invite a kind of domestic variant on a carry trade, it’s 

obvious how sustained low interest rate conditions can create such an environment.  Tom has 

been talking about them for well over a year.  But I, at least, have assumed to date that these 

risks are more likely once greater confidence in the likely trajectory of the economy has set in 

and, thus, certain asset classes are commanding more assurance about their future value 

trajectory.  So until recently, I hadn’t seen much in either the financial stability memos or 

elsewhere to raise concerns, but now I think there are at least a few potential warning signs.  The 

financial stability memo package that Nellie summarized yesterday identifies the leveraged loan 

market and farmland prices as worth watching—because Tom spent a good deal of time on 

farmland, I’m not going to say anything more about it.  The leveraged loan market, with its 

duration advantage for investors over junk bonds, seems to be growing rapidly.  I notice that just 

this month Prudential, PIMCO, and Nuveen have all started leveraged loan funds.  Of course, the 

loans themselves are still originated with banks.  So we can take advantage of our strengthened 

links between financial stability analysis and supervision to provide CPC teams and Board staff 

with some background and some things to watch for.  A similar exercise is clearly going to be 

useful for the banks that provide lending for farmland acquisition. 

While our supervisory function provides a good window onto developments in these 

specific markets—as well as potentially serving as a tool for affecting those forms of credit, if 

necessary—there may also be some new areas of leverage or financial engineering that don’t so 

January 25–26, 2011 141 of 282



 
 

 
 

closely involve our supervised institutions.  One interesting example of this is innovations in 

ETFs, including leveraged and synthetic funds.  Bill Dudley and I were at an FSB meeting on 

assessing vulnerabilities a couple of weeks ago, and there was a fairly interesting and extended 

discussion of the changes in the ETF industry.  Leveraged and synthetic funds are still a pretty 

small part of the ETF universe, but they’re growing rapidly.  It’s noteworthy, to me at least, that, 

of the five big U.S. players in this universe, only one is a bank holding company, and it is clearly 

grounded in plain vanilla ETFs and a classic asset management function, so that innovations are 

taking place outside the regulated sector.  We can inquire into whether any leverage is being 

provided by banks, of course, but it may be that other channels of monitoring, such as through 

the SEC, are needed.  This, of course, raises the question of what tools would be available were 

we to observe developments that we think are troublesome in any of those areas.  I think we can 

all agree that more-targeted tools are far preferable to monetary policy as a means of controlling 

any emerging asset bubbles, particularly when credit is still constrained in key parts of the 

economy.  Thus, as I suggested a moment ago, this question of tools for use outside regulated 

institutions could become quite significant over time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economy has entered 2011 with more 

momentum.  We’re seeing promising upticks in business investment in equipment and software, 

and potentially sustainable increases in industrial production.  Appearing positive but not yet 

definitively propelling are improvements in auto sales and net exports, which are also moving 

demand.  Conditions in the labor market have improved modestly, but considerable slack 

remains.  Despite these upward positive trends, the housing market, in particular, continues to be 

troubled and is exerting downward pressure on economic growth.  The housing market shows no 

January 25–26, 2011 142 of 282



 
 

 
 

signs of emerging from the significant overhang of real estate that is in foreclosure or entering 

the foreclosure process. 

I continue to be troubled by the failure of financial institutions to address 

comprehensively the underlying causes of mortgage documentation and related servicing 

problems.  Giving short shrift to these problems unnecessarily elongates the pace of sales of 

foreclosed properties, which contributes to lower priced and lower quality housing stock, both of 

which will result in weaker consumer demand and stunted national growth until addressed. 

In addition to these persistent operational risk factors in servicing, home foreclosure rates 

will likely be higher this year as financial institutions publicly assert that they have fixed their 

internal servicing problems and restart the foreclosures that had previously been halted.  In other 

words, the properties subject to foreclosure that were held back by financial institutions during 

the robo-signing period will most likely come to market, and these surges will increase the 

uncertainty of supply, resulting in further uncertainty regarding home values.  If more 

documentation and processing problems resulting from operational inadequacies come to light, 

the delays in the recovery in the housing market will be extended.  In addition to the elevated 

volume of home foreclosures, elevated inventories of unsold homes and high vacancy rates for 

commercial properties contribute to the overhang exerting downward pressure on home values.  

The quality of many homes also has deteriorated, resulting in more downward pressure on prices.  

In short, the day of reckoning, when institutions that service loans address the failures in their 

processes and systems, apparently has yet to come, and, therefore, the process of clearing the 

housing market will remain fitful and unpredictable.  All of these possibilities could depress 

house prices, discourage potential homebuyers, and depress housing starts. 

January 25–26, 2011 143 of 282



 
 

 
 

I’m also not certain that the allowance for loan and lease loss reserving that banks have 

done in response to foreclosure-related investigations and litigation is adequate for future losses.  

If such investigations and litigation entail significant cost, concerns could be renewed about the 

adequacy of bank capital.  There also could be further damage to the confidence of firms and 

households, leading to delays in purchases of business capital and consumer durables.  If severe 

deficiencies in reserves were to materialize, credit availability could again contract. 

Inflation expectations have remained anchored despite the fact that core inflation remains 

low.  This stickiness benefits the recovery by preventing the natural contraction in economic 

activity that would occur were real interest rates to rise more dramatically.  My previous forecast 

noted that reductions in employment, income, and wealth had left many households with the 

need to repair their severely distressed balance sheets.  In short, I don’t believe that consumer 

confidence has returned yet to the levels that would be necessary for a faster paced recovery. 

My previous forecast also noted continued uncertainty regarding the mortgage 

documentation problems, which, as I’ve described, act as a continuing drag on the resurgence of 

the housing market.  I believe these problems have not yet been resolved.  In fact, I think they 

could be exacerbated by related problems, such as the facts underlying the adverse ruling by the 

Massachusetts Supreme Court regarding mortgage assignments “in blank.” 

Neither my prior forecast nor my current one explicitly considers any additional, that is, 

beyond the baseline, effects of consolidation at the state level.  In particular, even after making 

deep spending cuts over the last two years, states continue to face large budget gaps.  At least 46 

states struggled to close shortfalls when adopting budgets for the current fiscal year, which began 

July 1 for most states.  Fiscal year 2011 gaps total $130 billion or 20 percent of budgets in these 

46 states.  To comment upon President Dudley’s observation that this shortfall is a small portion 

January 25–26, 2011 144 of 282



 
 

 
 

of GDP, I would add that these gaps come on top of the large shortfall that 46 states faced in 

fiscal years 2009 and 2010.  States could continue to struggle to find the revenue needed to 

support critical public services for a number of years, threatening hundreds of thousands of jobs.  

Even for those states whose gaps have been filled and whose budgets are balanced, this story 

may not be over.  Families hit hard by the recession will experience the loss of vital services 

throughout the year, and the negative impact on the economy could then be prolonged.  In terms 

of federal aid to states, about $60 billion remains to mitigate these 2011 fiscal problems.  By 

2012, this number will be $6 billion. 

Continued high unemployment could keep state income tax receipts at low levels and 

increase the demand for Medicaid and other essential services that states provide.  High 

unemployment combined with households’ diminished wealth due to fallen property values 

could continue to depress consumption.  Thus, sales tax receipts also would remain low.  These 

factors suggest that state budget gaps could continue to remain larger and last longer, themselves 

manifestations of a slow recovery.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for a very good go-

round.  It’s 10:55.  I understand coffee is ready.  Why don’t we take 20 minutes? 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  David, did you have any report to make on data? 

MR. STOCKTON.  We circulated a table on the new single-family home sales that came 

out this morning.5  As you can see, they rose a whopping 17.5 percent to 325,000 units.  

However, to place that increase in perspective, I would direct your attention to the lower left 

panel that shows the graph.  I think this constitutes something pretty darn close to “moribund” in 

                                                 
5 The materials used by Mr. Stockton are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 

January 25–26, 2011 145 of 282



 
 

 
 

our view.  We had been expecting some rebound at 315,000 units, so this is a little better than we 

expected, but not enough to change our basic story. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, David.  I’d like to thank the Committee again 

for the useful go-round.  Let me try, as usual, to summarize and then I’ll make a few comments. 

The tenor of the incoming data has increased most participants’ confidence that a 

moderate recovery is under way and will continue through 2011.  Consumption spending has 

been relatively robust recently, and investment in equipment and software and exports have also 

been relatively strong.  Payrolls are expanding only slowly, but other indicators in the labor 

market, including UI claims and surveys of employers, are more positive.  Regional and national 

surveys of producers remain encouraging.  However, overall the economy’s adjustment 

continues to be uneven and slow.  Residential construction is a particular weak point.  The fiscal 

compromise enacted in December will provide some additional stimulus, but state and local 

governments remain a source of fiscal drag.  Commodity prices have risen, but measures of core 

or trend inflation remain low.  Risks to both growth and inflation appear more balanced than in 

the past. 

As noted, household spending has picked up recently with a surge in auto spending, more 

luxury spending, and good holiday sales.  There are still some questions about the strength of the 

supports for consumer spending, for example, employment, income, and wealth.  In particular, 

the inventory of unsold homes, high rates of foreclosures, and tight credit continue to push down 

house prices, hurting household wealth as well as bank balance sheets, and unemployment seems 

likely to come down only very slowly.  Nevertheless, household confidence has improved 

slightly. 

January 25–26, 2011 146 of 282



 
 

 
 

Many businesses are expressing cautious optimism about the durability and strength of 

the recovery and are laying the groundwork to expand production when the time comes.  Much 

investment is aimed at productivity enhancement rather than expanding employment, however.  

Some participants reported that they had heard that skill requirements are being upgraded and 

that some of the unemployed are underqualified, while other participants suggested that workers 

at all skill levels still remain easily available.  Much hiring is focused on temporary workers.  

Uncertainty about domestic regulations and taxes may have declined somewhat.  Global demand 

is strong, but the divergent pace of recoveries around the world, building inflation in emerging 

markets, and sovereign debt costs pose risks to the global recovery.  Among key sectors, 

manufacturing, services, and agriculture are showing strength.  Construction remains weak, 

though commercial construction is showing signs of bottoming out.  Larger firms face no 

shortage of credit or liquidity, but credit remains tight for smaller firms. 

Financial conditions remain supportive.  European sovereign and banking problems have 

been more quiescent of late but remain unresolved and pose risks to the U.S. through money 

market funds and peripheral banks, among other channels.  U.S. banks have had better asset 

quality and are making more loans, but they face problems, including servicing and mortgage 

documentation issues, loss of fee income, tight interest margins, and weak loan demand.  There 

may be some frothiness in the leveraged loan market.  State and local finances do not appear to 

pose major short-term risks, but these risks could increase in the long run.  Rising farmland 

values are another risk to financial stability. 

Core and other trend inflation measures remain quite subdued, although indicators such 

as the median CPI suggest that the ongoing decline in inflation may have stopped.  Higher prices 

for commodities and for imported goods, especially from emerging market producers, have 

January 25–26, 2011 147 of 282



 
 

 
 

raised input costs for most firms, although unit labor costs remain very low and profit margins 

are high.  Firms will try to pass through some of these higher costs in some areas, but it is not yet 

clear whether they can make price increases stick.  Inflation breakevens have risen in recent 

months.  Overall inflation expectations seem to have normalized close to the mandate-consistent 

level.  Participants debated the value of resource slack as a predictor of inflation and suggested 

other measures, including the rate rather than the level of output growth, as well as a suite of 

statistical models.  There was agreement, however, that inflation risks have moderated and that 

inflation trends should be closely monitored.  Any comments?  [No response]  Okay. 

I would like to add just a few things.  Like all of you, I was pleased with the intermeeting 

data, and I think the economy is certainly making progress towards a sustainable recovery with 

fading downside risks, and that’s very encouraging.  In particular, I think the real news was the 

strength in household spending in the fourth quarter, which was about 4 percent growth.  Of 

course, it depends on how you look at it.  Under some theories, consumption spending is a 

perfect predictor of future income, and in that context that would be very encouraging.  But I 

think that I wouldn’t go that far, so the question remains, as Governor Yellen mentioned and as 

the Tealbook mentioned, about the extent to which we should carry through the innovation from 

the fourth quarter into 2011.  I think we should do so a little bit, but we also should be somewhat 

cautious.  First, consumption spending in the fourth quarter was heavily concentrated on autos, 

which could be a very positive sign, on the one hand, since durables are, of course, pro-cyclical, 

but, on the other hand, there could be some quirky elements to that, and it will be important to 

see if that strength persists.  The other point is that, as Governor Yellen mentioned, consumption 

fundamentals still remain somewhat weak.  In particular, labor income has been quite anemic.  

Real disposable income increased at only about a 1 percent annual rate in the second half of 

January 25–26, 2011 148 of 282



 
 

 
 

2010, reflecting very slow increases in hours, low labor participation, and slow growth in wages.  

Of course, we also see that—even though deleveraging has been going on—with declining house 

prices, wealth-to-income ratios have not really improved very significantly.  Higher gas prices 

also are a minor negative.  So I do expect households to be stronger in 2011, but I think it’s a bit 

premature to fully extrapolate forward the strength of their spending in the fourth quarter.  It will 

be somewhat more difficult at the next meeting or two to evaluate the underlying path of 

household spending because of the payroll tax cut that will cause a big surge in disposable 

income in the first quarter.  So that will be a challenge for us as we try to ascertain the durability 

of the recovery. 

I think what most of us are waiting for, and what I’m certainly waiting for, is to see a 

couple of strong employment reports.  That would do a lot to increase my confidence that firms 

are back in an expansion mode, and that they have increased their confidence about the recovery, 

and, in particular, that labor income will be forthcoming to support household spending as well.  

It has been disappointing to this point that, despite many straws in the wind, the job gains have 

still remained fairly limited.  So we’ll have to continue to watch for that. 

That being said, I think we should continue to remember, as I mentioned last time, that 

we are starting from a very deep hole.  The employment-to-population ratio, which is now less 

than 58 percent, is at the business cycle low and is as low as it has been in many years.  I noted 

in a newspaper column the other day the interesting fact that, for the first time in 30 years, the 

employment-to-population ratio of prime-age, that is 25 to 54 years old, workers in the United 

States is lower than in Western Europe.  This is a striking turnaround, given our image of 

Western Europe as having very low employment-to-population ratios.  Again, I look forward to 

January 25–26, 2011 149 of 282



 
 

 
 

one or two strong job market reports as an important indicator, recognizing that the situation is 

not going to turn around overnight. 

We had an interesting discussion around the table on inflation.  I think it’s pretty fair to 

say that there is essentially no domestically generated inflation.  All the inflation we’re getting is 

from abroad, that is, from commodity prices and from import prices.  And that, in turn, is arising 

from what I would characterize as deep problems in the international monetary system and in the 

global economic system.  In particular, the export-led strategies of emerging markets—

particularly China, but others as well—has led them to overheat.  They are, indeed, facing 

inflation risks, as Governor Warsh mentioned, and, as President Fisher has reminded us on many 

occasions, they can export those inflation risks to us via commodity prices and import costs. 

I’m not quite sure what to do about that.  The Federal Reserve Act says we should be 

making policy for the United States, not for the world.  So how are we supposed to respond to a 

situation where many countries are, in the old language, not playing by the rules of the game?  I 

think this is an area where we need a broader détente, quite frankly, and during discussions of the 

international monetary system in the G-20 under France’s leadership, I hope that we can make 

some progress.  In the meantime, we’re just going to have to figure out the appropriate tradeoffs, 

and, in particular, make sure that commodity prices and import prices do not begin to infect the 

domestic inflation rate.  I take that, of course, very seriously. 

As a bit of encouragement, I would note that some fundamental correlates of inflation in 

the United States remain very well controlled.  Nominal GDP growth, for example, which I’ve 

mentioned before, was less than 4 percent in 2010 and in the fourth quarter of 2010.  The 

Tealbook forecasts nominal GDP growth to be 4.8 percent for 2011.  It’s pretty hard to get 3½ to 

4 percent growth and high inflation and still have nominal GDP growth of less than 5 percent.  

January 25–26, 2011 150 of 282



 
 

 
 

So I think that’s an indicator we can continue to pay attention to.  Unit labor costs are another 

indicator—they declined for the entire year of 2010, and they’re projected to grow at a 

0.4 percent rate for 2011 and 2012, so that, too, will be an anchor on inflation.  Of course, I think 

we all agree that vigilance on inflation will be necessary, and one thing that would certainly 

make me seriously rethink our policy stance would be an upsurge in inflation expectations or a 

serious upsurge in commodity prices.  We would have to take those very seriously if, indeed, 

they occurred.  That being said, given the unique nature of where inflation is coming from, I 

think a bit of patience is probably a good idea. 

We had differing views on whether or not our current asset purchase policy is working.  

You may not be shocked to hear that I lean more towards President Bullard’s view on this 

subject.  [Laughter]  Of course, it’s always very difficult to know (as Barney Frank has said, you 

can’t put a counterfactual on a bumper sticker), but the evidence suggests, first, that, as President 

Bullard noted, the response of a wide range of financial indicators has been consistent with what 

you would expect in a monetary easing or in a situation where risk aversion had declined, both of 

which are outcomes of LSAPs.  In particular, I mentioned last time that the increase in equity 

markets, the decline in equity volatility, the pattern of interest rates declining first and then 

increasing as expectations for economic growth broadened, the rise in inflation breakevens, the 

decline in credit spreads, the decline in the dollar, the rise in commodity prices, and so forth, are 

all consistent with a monetary ease.  Then, since August or September, when I think this policy 

should really be treated as beginning, we’ve seen an improvement in the outlook.  So I think 

that’s all consistent with believing that there is at least some benefit emanating from the LSAPs. 

Of course, that’s one observation, so, to double my sample size, I asked the staff to 

calculate the same statistics for the months following March 2009, which was our previous 

January 25–26, 2011 151 of 282



 
 

 
 

attempt.  Without going through the details on all seven of those financial indicators, the patterns 

were exactly the same, and the lag between the action and the response of the economy was 

about the same.  So there is, I think, some evidence that this has been helpful, recognizing, 

though, that there are important costs.  President Fisher has been particularly assiduous in 

pointing out the balance sheet costs and expectational costs, and we’ll need to take those into 

serious consideration as we reevaluate this policy going forward. 

To wrap this up, I think the news basically has been encouraging.  The economy looks 

stronger.  This is still more prospective than actual.  We should continue to watch very carefully 

what develops in the labor market, and we need to keep a close eye on commodity prices and 

inflation expectations as possible indicators that the inflation situation is becoming more 

worrisome.  I’ll stop there unless there are any questions or comments.  Yes, President 

Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I didn’t catch what you said about 

prime-age workers.  Were the statistics you were quoting about prime-age males or prime-age 

males and females? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’ll check it for you, but my recollection was all prime-age 

workers. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  If there are no other questions or comments, let’s go ahead 

to the policy discussion, and I’ll ask Bill English to introduce this round. 

MR. ENGLISH.6  I will be referring to the package labeled “Material for FOMC 
Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives” that was distributed earlier.  The package 
includes the four draft policy statements and the associated draft directives that were 
distributed to the Committee yesterday. 

                                                 
6 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 6).  

January 25–26, 2011 152 of 282



 
 

 
 

As in December, the staff has provided three alternative statements, A through C, 
that are similar in structure, but which vary with regard to the size of the intended 
increase in Federal Reserve securities holdings—an unchanged level of $600 billion 
under alternative B, $800 billion under alternative A, and $400 billion under 
alternative C.  In contrast, under alternative D the Committee would announce the 
end of the purchase program and would make other changes to the statement to 
suggest that exit from the current extraordinary degree of policy accommodation 
could begin fairly soon. 

Turning first to alternative B, on page 3, Committee members may feel that the 
recent improvement in the data suggests somewhat better near-term prospects for 
economic growth, but does not fundamentally change the medium-term outlook for 
the economy.  As Joyce noted yesterday, your latest economic projections show a 
central tendency for the unemployment rate at the end of 2013 that is not far below 
the central tendency that you reported in November, when the asset purchase program 
was adopted.  Similarly, your outlooks for inflation are only very slightly different 
than they were in November.  With little change in the medium-term outlook for 
unemployment and inflation, the Committee may think that it is appropriate to 
continue the asset purchase program as announced in November in order to support 
the recovery and help move inflation back toward levels that it sees as consistent with 
its dual mandate.  Even if members were uncertain about the effectiveness of asset 
purchases as a monetary policy tool, they may judge that unexpectedly discontinuing 
or reducing the program could cause confusion about the Committee’s intentions and 
weigh on household and business confidence, making such a step undesirable at this 
time. 

Under this alternative, the changes from the December statement would be 
relatively minor.  The first paragraph would reflect the somewhat stronger growth in 
household spending of late and acknowledge the rise in energy and other commodity 
prices over recent months.  The changes early in the third paragraph are intended to 
make clear that the policy decision at this meeting is simply to continue the purchase 
program initiated in November.  As noted in the Tealbook, given the quantity of the 
Desk’s cumulative purchases since the November meeting, a pace of purchases of 
about $80 billion per month is now required to reach a total of $600 billion by the end 
of June, rather than the rate of “about $75 billion” reported in the December 
statement.  Alternative B offers two possibilities here—dropping the reference to the 
pace of purchases entirely or changing the words to reflect the $80 billion figure.  
Regarding the final sentence in the paragraph, in the Tealbook we suggested a new 
version that emphasized the regular review of, and the willingness of the Committee 
to make adjustments to, the asset purchase program.  However, some members were 
concerned that markets could mistakenly read such a change in the statement as a 
signal that the Committee was quite likely to reduce the size of the asset purchase 
program.  In your handout, we included both versions of the sentence as options—the 
first version is unchanged from the December statement, and the second version is the 
one that was offered in the Tealbook. 

January 25–26, 2011 153 of 282



 
 

 
 

Market participants generally expect today’s statement to update the Committee’s 
views on the economic outlook and to make no change to the asset purchase program.  
Thus, a statement along the lines of alternative B would probably have little effect on 
asset prices.  The version of the final sentence of paragraph 3 that emphasizes the 
regular review of the asset purchase program could put some upward pressure on 
rates and might also lead investors to be somewhat more sensitive to incoming 
economic information, leading to a modest increase in the volatility of asset prices. 

If members see the outlook for unemployment and inflation as unacceptably 
weak, they may be inclined to expand the asset purchase program by another 
$200 billion and to provide more explicit forward guidance regarding the likely 
duration of the period of exceptionally low federal funds rates, as in alternative A, 
page 2.  The central tendency of your SEP submissions still shows the unemployment 
rate three years hence significantly above the longer-run level you see as consistent 
with your dual mandate, while a majority of you anticipate that inflation in 2013 will 
be below your long-run objective.  Thus, you may believe that you could improve on 
these economic outcomes by providing additional accommodation—a conclusion that 
is consistent with the optimal control simulations in the Tealbook. 

The description of the economy under alternative A would be quite similar to that 
under alternative B but would suggest a bit less confidence about the outlook for 
economic growth.  The second paragraph of the statement would note that measures 
of underlying inflation are “low,” not just “somewhat low,” that progress toward the 
Committee’s objectives remains disappointingly slow, and that “there are still 
significant downside risks to the economic outlook.”  The fourth paragraph would 
provide more explicit forward guidance about the expected path for the federal funds 
rate by specifying that exceptionally low levels were likely “at least through mid-
2012.” 

A decision at this meeting to increase further the intended size of the Federal 
Reserve’s securities holdings and to strengthen the forward guidance would come as a 
surprise to market participants.  Longer-term real interest rates would decline, stock 
prices would rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely move 
lower. 

Alternatively, the Committee may see the improvement in the economic outlook 
over the intermeeting period as having reduced the benefits of additional asset 
purchases relative to their likely costs and so may choose to trim the intended size of 
the purchase program to $400 billion, as in alternative C, page 4.  Members may have 
read the incoming data over the intermeeting period as suggesting a stronger outlook 
for both economic growth and employment and a reduced risk of deflation, along 
with an associated reduction in the odds of a protracted period of economic weakness.  
Indeed, as Joyce noted yesterday, many more of you now see balanced risks to your 
economic growth and inflation outlooks than was the case in November.  Members 
may also be concerned about the possible effects of a larger balance sheet on Federal 
Reserve earnings and remittances to the Treasury that Brian outlined yesterday.  You 
may also feel that a very large balance sheet could complicate the withdrawal of 

January 25–26, 2011 154 of 282



 
 

 
 

monetary accommodation when that becomes appropriate and so could lead to a 
greater-than-desirable increase in inflation that would be costly to reverse. 

The statement under alternative C would provide an assessment of the outlook 
similar to that under alternative B but would drop the reference to factors constraining 
household spending and would note that “business investment is rising.”  The second 
paragraph would end by stating that “there are some indications that the economic 
recovery is strengthening.”  The final paragraph of the statement offers the option of 
providing an explicit numerical inflation objective, which might be seen as helpful if 
the Committee were worried that inflation expectations could come unmoored.  
However, the Committee may want to undertake additional preparatory work before 
taking such a significant step. 

A decision to slow the pace and reduce the intended size of the Committee’s 
securities purchases at this meeting would surprise market participants.  The result 
would presumably be an increase in longer-term interest rates, lower stock prices, and 
a rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.   

Finally, the Committee may feel that, with the economic recovery continuing, and 
probably gathering strength, further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s securities 
holdings is not necessary to achieve the Committee’s objectives.  In that case, 
members might choose to stop adding to the Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio 
immediately and signal a less accommodative policy path in the future, as in 
alternative D, page 5.  That approach could seem particularly appropriate if members 
judged that much of the current elevated level of unemployment reflects a rise in 
structural unemployment that cannot be effectively addressed by additional monetary 
stimulus, as you discussed yesterday afternoon.  In addition, some members may also 
be concerned that continued extraordinary policy accommodation could lead to the 
development of costly macroeconomic or financial imbalances. 

An announcement along the lines of alternative D would come as a very 
substantial surprise to market participants.  Interest rates would rise significantly 
across the yield curve, equity prices would fall sharply, and the dollar would 
appreciate.   

Draft directives for the four alternatives are presented on pages 6 through 9 of 
your handout.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That completes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions for Bill?  [No 

response]  Before we start the go-round, let me make a somewhat orthogonal comment.  In 

alternative C paragraph 5 there’s a reference in brackets to a numerical inflation target, which we 

put there as sort of a placeholder.  You may recall that we’ve been discussing off and on the 

issue of improving our communication and credibility by using a numerical target—we discussed 

January 25–26, 2011 155 of 282



 
 

 
 

it at the videoconference in October.  We have not yet come to any conclusion on that issue, 

despite the fact that there is quite a bit of interest in that approach around the table and that this 

may be a particularly good time from a political receptivity perspective.  So, as I mentioned last 

time, this might be something we want to keep alive as we go forward. 

After the last meeting, President Plosser came up to me and asked if he could be of any 

assistance on this, and I suggested that he might want to talk informally to a few people across 

the spectrum of the Committee to get a sense about whether there was any way forward on this.  

He said he’d be glad to do that, and he spoke to a few people during the intermeeting period.  I 

wanted to mention this to everybody so that you’d know that some informal discussion has been 

going on, and I hope that’s okay.  It seems we’ve had plenty of formal processes on this in the 

past, and maybe just a few informal conversations could be useful.  Everybody is, of course, 

entitled to have his or her own conversations or to contact Charlie, as you wish.  If we make 

some progress in terms of a proposal or an approach, then perhaps we could turn it over to a 

more formal process and bring it forward to the Committee once again.  In any event, we surely 

would not make any change to our communications strategy without a full formal review and 

Committee decision.  Any concerns, questions?  [No response]  Okay, then let’s turn now to the 

policy go-round, and I have President Lacker first. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  From the comments during the 

economic go-round, I think everyone acknowledges the extent to which the prospects for 

economic growth have improved over the last couple of meetings, although there’s also wide 

recognition of the need for a bit of caution about how exuberant one gets about them.  I’m in the 

camp of doubting that our asset purchases made a huge contribution to the improvement, 

notwithstanding your observations, Mr. Chairman.  I say that because I personally doubt that 

January 25–26, 2011 156 of 282



 
 

 
 

changes in long-term yields have been very important to firms’ investment and hiring decisions 

or to consumer spending decisions, which seem to have been at the core of the improvement in 

the outlook.  The way in which growth has strengthened has reduced my assessment of the likely 

benefits of our asset purchases.  I also doubt that we’ve had that much effect on yields so far.  At 

the same time, I think the stronger outlook brings forward the time when we’re likely to want to 

remove monetary stimulus.  To my mind, then, it has raised the risk that continued balance sheet 

expansion will prove excessive, in the sense that it sets back the starting point for us to remove 

stimulus. 

Let me note a couple of points.  One is that bank reserves have not changed much at all 

since we began this asset purchase program.  We’re about to see a $450 billion increase over the 

next two months in bank reserves, so that undergirds my sense that we haven’t seen much effect 

yet from what we’ve done, and we could well see a lot in the next couple of months.  The second 

point has to do with inflation, and I think you were correct, Mr. Chairman, in your comments 

about the importance of being careful with this surge in commodity prices that’s coming from 

overseas and affecting our headline inflation rate.  Our experience over the last couple of decades 

has been that there is a measurable effect on core inflation from these energy price surges, so 

that’s another justification for some caution about inflation going forward. 

For me, the case for continuing the program is eroding a bit.  I don’t think it’s reasonable 

to scale it back right now—in any event, we’ve done nothing to prepare markets for such a 

change, as is our well-established custom.  It does seem to me, however, that there’s a reasonable 

chance of data coming in over the next couple of months that are consistent with stronger 

economic growth.  And I think you’re right to highlight the employment report—if we were to 

get very strong employment reports in the next couple of months, I think that would change the 

January 25–26, 2011 157 of 282



 
 

 
 

whole tenor of the outlook markedly, both in markets and within our Committee, and I think 

we’d seriously want to consider adjusting our asset purchase program in March. 

In light of these thoughts, I see value in preparing markets for that possibility—not 

promising, but preparing them for that possibility through your testimony and through the 

minutes reflecting our concern about that possibility.  I actually liked the original version of the 

last sentence of paragraph 3 of alternative B, despite the fact that it seemed to imply that we 

didn’t review our program in December.  We used the future tense there and the present tense 

here. 

I also have concerns about other parts of the statement.  Paragraph 1 of alternative B 

seems more downbeat than I think we are around the table.  I think paragraph 1 in alternative C 

does a much better job of capturing where we are on the outlook.  In particular, this litany of 

factors restraining household spending seems a bit discordant, because, as you said, the big news 

in the fourth quarter was that consumer spending was stronger than we thought.  Therefore, I’d 

advocate substituting the first paragraph of alternative C for the first paragraph of alternative B. 

I have one more thing.  I applaud your initiating conversations and further discussions 

about an explicit numerical objective for inflation.  I would just add this observation about these 

four words, “or a bit less.”  In the past, I’ve brought up my brother-in-law sitting in front of 

retirement planning software and calling up his brother-in-law who is on the FOMC and asking 

him what number he should put in for inflation for the next 20 years.  And I’m wondering what 

I’d tell him if our objective was “2 percent or a bit less.” 

MR. WARSH.  We’re going to get to that in the communications section.  [Laughter] 

MR. LACKER.  Even though I’ve advocated 1½ percent, I’d be happier with 2 percent 

than with “2 percent or a bit less.”  

January 25–26, 2011 158 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B as written.  We 

should stay the course.  Inflation remains well below my inflation target and output well below 

potential through 2012.  With the very low inflation rate forecasted to continue for several years, 

we have ample room to be accommodative and encourage more rapid growth.  I expect to 

complete the entire purchase program.  Our purchase program is certainly consistent with our 

dual mandate.  In fact, it would be justified if we had a sole mandate of targeting 2 percent 

inflation over the medium term.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you. 

MR. FISHER.  Could you take a little bit longer, President Rosengren, with your 

summary?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will take up some of President 

Rosengren’s time.  [Laughter]  I support alternative B, but I would recommend some changes in 

language.  Like President Lacker, I prefer the first paragraph of alternative C, because I think it 

does a better job of reflecting the change in the data that we’ve seen in the intermeeting period, 

which is the point of that paragraph.  In paragraph 4 of alternative B, I would like to propose the 

following edit:  Change “stable inflation expectations” to “stable longer-run inflation 

expectations.”  I think short-run inflation expectations have not been as stable as longer-run 

expectations have been, and, since we’re probably more interested in longer-run expectations 

anyway, it’s worthwhile putting that in. 

January 25–26, 2011 159 of 282



 
 

 
 

If I’m being asked to choose between the last two sentences of paragraph 3, I prefer the 

penultimate one to the ultimate one.  My attitude is:  If we’re not changing our program, then 

why change the language? 

I wanted to say a few words about the future.  As I said earlier, I think monetary policy is 

an exercise in contingency planning and in risk management.  I think the Tealbook does a great 

job of identifying the key risks.  On pages 6 and 7 of Part B of the Tealbook, the staff leads us 

through a very imaginative scenario—I applaud them for taking it on, and I think what they did 

was really cool.  They take the NAIRU as actually being 6¾, but the central bank will only learn 

that fact slowly.  The analysis concludes with the following sentence, which I viewed as 

ominous:  “The inflation consequences would be much larger and more persistent if the public 

were to misread higher-than-target inflation as a sign that the FOMC had raised its long-run 

inflation target.”  Given the reaction to the second LSAP, this kind of miscommunication and 

misinterpretation is a real possibility, and we should be thinking about conducting monetary 

policy to manage our exposure to this risk. 

To that end, I’m going to describe three scenarios under which we’ll need to make a 

decision about our strategy.  For simplicity, I’m going to say that our next decision point is June, 

though, obviously, whether it actually is or not depends on what happens.  The first scenario—

and, by the way, I don’t think it’s the most likely case—is an adverse one.  Unemployment 

remains near 10 percent.  Quarterly and year-over-year inflation remains subdued at, say, 

1 percent or even less than 1 percent.  Short-run and longer-run inflation expectations remain in 

the 1½ to 2 percent range.  This basically describes the status quo.  In this scenario, I do not 

believe there’s a need to expand the LSAP or to contemplate exit in the near term.  I think the 

current monetary policy stance would be appropriate.  Of course, we can all imagine scenarios 

January 25–26, 2011 160 of 282



 
 

 
 

even worse than this, and, if they materialized, we would, I think, want to expand the extent of 

our accommodation.  Because of our conversations last fall, we have a pretty good understanding 

of how that accommodation might work, although I would recommend expanding our set of 

tools beyond the LSAP. 

Let me turn now to what I view as the most likely scenario.  Output growth in the first 

quarter is at least 3 percent, maybe closer to 4 percent.  Employment growth averages 200,000 

jobs per month for the next six months.  Unemployment gets down closer to 9 percent than 

10 percent.  That scenario sounds like the Tealbook, but I want to add a key element that I was 

stressing in my economic go-round statement:  Inflation has averaged between 130 and 150 basis 

points in the first half of the year, and market expectations imply that inflation will be about 

170 to 200 basis points over the coming year from June to June.  This scenario is consistent with 

my own forecast for inflation, and, perhaps more importantly, it’s also consistent with the Blue 

Chip and financial market forecasts.  If this scenario materialized, all three of the auxiliary 

measures of slack that I described in my economic go-round would have fallen in the first half of 

the year.  And, presumably, we should be thinking about them as being even more likely to be at 

or near zero by the end of 2011.  So the Committee would need to begin internal preparations for 

exit, and, in particular, we would need to decide whether we still liked the sequence of moves we 

seemed to have reached a consensus on last year:  First, remove the “extended period” language; 

second, start draining reserves; third, raise rates; fourth, start selling assets.  In addition, we’d 

need to decide the optimal time frame for the preferred sequence of moves.  Do we think about 

one, two, three, or even four meetings from initiation to get to the key step of raising rates?  I 

think both kinds of topics would be appropriate in June, given what I’ve described. 

January 25–26, 2011 161 of 282



 
 

 
 

The third scenario is the “good news” outcome—and, like the first scenario, I think it’s 

unlikely.  However, I also view it as troubling, because I think we’re largely unprepared for it.  

In this scenario, things turn out very well compared with what we expect.  Output grows at close 

to 5 percent in the first quarter and looks just as strong in the second.  Headline inflation in the 

first half of 2011 is over 2 percent, and core is between 1½ percent and 2 percent.  Employment 

growth averages nearly 300,000 per month, although unemployment would still be above 

9 percent.  If this scenario materialized, we might need to initiate the first steps of our exit 

strategy as soon as August.  We might need to compress the time we take for the four steps that 

I’ve described. 

In considering the latter two scenarios, I think it would be very useful to have staff 

analysis to address two specific questions by our April meeting.  The first question is:  If we drop 

the “extended period” language, what do markets expect about when we’re going to raise rates?  

Is it three months, six months?  And what would be the consequences of moving faster or slower 

than markets expect?  The second question, and President Lockhart has stressed this point before, 

is:  How many reserves do we need to drain to be able to raise rates effectively?  And how fast 

can we possibly do it without adverse consequences?  I think that having this analysis in hand in 

April would put us in position to react to these last two scenarios in a thoughtful manner.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  I think that in 2004 there was an occasion 

where the language changed at one meeting and then there was an increase at the subsequent 

meeting.  So there was only a one-meeting delay between the language change and the action.  

Obviously we can work that through.  President Evans. 

January 25–26, 2011 162 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to start by talking about the Chicago 

Bears.  I was going to try to link this point somehow to President Fisher’s discussion of the 

Texas Aggies the last time, but, instead, I’m going to link it to paragraph 1.  I’ve been in Chicago 

now for almost 20 years, and I’ve reluctantly come to embrace the Bears.  This year, the Bears 

really weren’t that great of a team—the fundamentals weren’t really that good.  But, somehow, 

things picked up, and they made the playoffs, and they made the championship game.  Then, 

with all of the buzz in town, people got excited.  And if you lost your discipline, you could sort 

of convince yourself that the Bears were really quite good.  [Laughter]  And, you know, they 

were quite good.  However, they ran into a team that beat them, and that’s because the 

fundamentals really were not as good as everybody had come to believe.  And I think that the 

economy is a little bit like that.  We’ve had some good numbers recently.  That’s very helpful, 

but the fundamentals are not quite as strong as we’d like.  So I’d prefer paragraph 1 in alternative 

B as it is written—it’s closer, certainly, to the way I view things. 

Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B, and I view it as having several essential elements.  

Let me elaborate on my reasoning.  As I first began articulating in the summer of 2010, I 

continue to hold the view that the U.S. economy requires aggressive monetary policy 

accommodation in order to be confident that we will escape our current liquidity trap conditions.  

These conditions emerged following a recession of historic proportions, an unusually rapid fall in 

underlying inflation, and a financial crisis that erased $11 trillion of net wealth at current count.  

These lost funds represent savings that households were banking on for future consumption and 

things such as college and retirement needs.  I think the growth in the U.S. economy will be 

restrained by these losses for some time.  The fundamentals are still sort of weak.  Under your 

leadership, Mr. Chairman, our subsequent policies have been very helpful for improving the 

January 25–26, 2011 163 of 282



 
 

 
 

economy’s trajectory, and I fully supported them, and I agree with President Bullard’s 

assessment of the asset purchase programs, although, of course, others can disagree about that. 

However, my preferred policy course would have added an explicit and potentially 

substantial policy boost by adopting a state-contingent price-level target.  Such a 

communications tool would still add a welcome commitment that our accommodation will not be 

withdrawn prematurely—and I think we’re going to be talking about this all year long.  Still, our 

additional communications regarding mandate-consistent inflation objectives have been a 

welcome step in that direction.  In my view, our current approach is a pragmatic, second-best 

policy.  For me, it’s a compromise that I can embrace as long as the economic and inflation data 

continue to improve along the lines that we’re expecting and we move towards our mandated 

goals, and as long as our policy accommodation is not withdrawn prematurely. 

I recently stated publicly, while I was on a panel with Mike Woodford at the American 

Economic Association meetings in Denver, my view that our $600 billion of asset purchases 

helped to reinforce our policy statement that short-term nominal interest rates will remain 

exceptionally low for an extended period of time—that’s what our FOMC statement says.  It was 

a great pleasure to have Governor Yellen in the audience.  Professor Woodford, of course, has 

also advocated price-level targeting.  During the discussion, he agreed that committing to 

keeping rates exceptionally low was important, and, to his mind, more important than the actual 

asset purchases themselves.  Therefore, I think this continues to be a combination that has some 

attraction within the economics profession and is a mainstream view of the current U.S. 

situation, although it is not necessarily widely accepted. 

The other essential element is the target scale for our asset purchases.  My reading of the 

data continues to be that it is too early to make a judgment about whether $600 billion or more or 

January 25–26, 2011 164 of 282



 
 

 
 

less is appropriate.  Directional improvements in economic data have been very welcome.  More 

improvement is needed through the spring to add confidence to this assessment.  I won’t be 

surprised if the Committee’s ultimate judgment is for a total asset purchase of $600 billion—as I 

already stated, the more critical judgment is to keep short-term rates exceptionally low for an 

extended period.  I currently believe this will be important until actual data for broad-based, 

underlying, and sustainable inflation are coming in at at least 1½ percent year over year.  If 

President Kocherlakota is right and we do get that kind of reading on inflation, I really don’t 

disagree with his views on that scenario—but I view getting that reading as less likely.  In any 

case, the data will come in, and, as they play out, we’ll evaluate our strategy. 

In terms of commodity prices, there are certainly risks, and we’ve faced them before.  It 

seems to me that the analysis suggests that commodity prices don’t impart that much pressure on 

inflation.  Let me give you an odd example.  Before our board meeting last Thursday, Dan 

Sullivan came to me and said, “You know, we’ve got this inflation dashboard that a couple of 

our directors wanted us to put together, and it looks at different indicators.  And right now, 

commodity prices are flashing red.”  I said, “Oh, that’s surprising.  I didn’t know that inflation 

would be rising.”  And he said, “No, no, no, no.  The commodity price indicator is indicating 

lower than average inflationary pressures.”  That’s totally counterintuitive, right?  Let me tell 

you how this works.  We use an analytical approach that tries to convey the additional 

information contained in the commodity price indicator, that is, “additional” relative to the 

history of inflation.  Well, in a regression that looks at past inflation, those data are signaling low 

inflationary pressures.  When you tell the program to look at commodity prices, it basically says, 

“Thanks for calling.”  In other words, it doesn’t add anything, because it just can’t overcome the 

disinflationary effects.  Of course, we can have different views on the type of analysis, and 

January 25–26, 2011 165 of 282



 
 

 
 

outcomes can differ.  For example, the outcome was different in 2008, when we were somewhat 

worried about commodity prices.  Even I started worrying about commodity prices in August 

2008, and inflation ended up falling.  Now, if you like to put weight on Phillips curves, this 

analysis is not a hard thing to embrace, because unemployment went up—a lot of slack was 

created—and inflation went down.  If you don’t like to look at resource gaps, then it’s even more 

puzzling that inflation fell, but that’s not for me to talk about. 

So, on that basis I think that if inflation gets up to 1½ percent, then we’ll have to start 

worrying about it.  And, of course, we have to monitor it—no doubt about that.  We also have to 

look at the labor market trajectory and have confidence that it’s trending towards a path that can 

plausibly be characterized as consistent with our mandate.  I agree that a couple of strong jobs 

reports would help add that confidence.  So, Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B and the 

important elements therein.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Last fall when we deliberated whether or 

not to institute a new round of LSAPs I expressed my misgivings about that strategy.  In my 

view, the potential costs of such a policy, which I viewed as occurring in the intermediate to 

longer term, outweighed what I perceived to be the short-run potential benefits.  I still hold that 

view. 

Determining the appropriate timing of when to begin to reverse the path of policy always 

poses a challenge for this Committee.  By necessity, we have to make this decision with some 

degree of uncertainty, given the lagged effects of monetary policy on the economy, the 

imprecision and uncertainty surrounding our forecast, and even revisions of data at times.  That 

part is nothing new.  However, I view the risk of getting behind the curve this time as likely to be 

January 25–26, 2011 166 of 282



 
 

 
 

higher than usual.  Both the size and composition of our balance sheet complicate our exit 

strategy, raising the risk that we won’t be able to respond as rapidly as we should to curtail 

potential inflationary pressures.  My view is that our focus on the level of output and the level of 

unemployment gaps raises the chance that we will not act soon enough.  Thus, there are costs 

associated with the LSAPs that could loom large in the not-too-distant future. 

I will repeat the point that I made in the economic go-round.  From firms in my District, I 

hear a lot of talk about commodity costs, as well as a lot of talk about their reluctance to raise 

prices.  While in some cases firms are seeing solid profits, many firms perceive their margins as 

being squeezed by the rise in costs and they’re starting to consider seriously raising prices.  If 

those firms believe that they’re far behind the curve in that process, then we could be facing a 

time when those price increases may come fairly rapidly.  And we may find ourselves in a 

position where we have to react both quickly and perhaps aggressively. 

We talk a lot in this Committee about managing tail risk.  It seems that we focus more on 

downside tail risks than on the other tail of the distribution.  I’m simply pointing out that this is a 

risk we face and that we’d better be prepared for managing that risk or managing the outcomes if 

that comes to pass.  I think President Kocherlakota’s description of three scenarios is a good way 

to think about that. 

In the fall, I thought the potential benefits of the LSAP did not outweigh the potential 

costs.  I think economic growth began picking up in the third quarter of last year, not in the 

fourth—we had a 1 percentage point increase in growth rates from the second quarter to the third 

quarter.  Deflation risks, as we have all noted, seem to have subsided.  I think growth rates are 

going to be somewhat above trend for the next two to three years, and I believe that employment 

is going to pick up. 

January 25–26, 2011 167 of 282



 
 

 
 

However, mine was not the prevailing view in the November meeting, and the 

Committee decided to go ahead with the second round of purchases.  I accept that.  In 

considering policy today, I recognize, though, that there are costs to introducing policy volatility.  

We risk confusing the public about our policy direction if we change too much or too often, 

without sufficient justification or conditions to warrant it.  I think that source of uncertainty is 

something that we should try our best to keep small.  I think that is the situation we are in today.  

So I don’t think it would be prudent to begin curtailing the LSAP program today, even though I 

wasn’t in favor of instituting it in the first place. 

Moreover, I have never been a fan of trying to fine-tune policy when we are using the 

short-term interest rate as our policy instrument rather than asset purchases, so I think it would 

be a particularly bad idea to convey to the public that we can fine-tune LSAPs.  In my view, 

LSAP policy should not be viewed as business-as-usual monetary policy.  LSAPs are an 

unconventional policy tool, which should be reserved for times of economic crisis—when 

inflation expectations are falling, when there is a danger of sustained deflation, and when we are 

operating at the zero bound. 

I don’t think this is a policy we should try to fine-tune, because we do not have enough 

understanding of the effects that different amounts of purchases will have on the real economy in 

order to calibrate an asset purchase program to achieve our objectives.  This means, I think, that 

once we have instituted a program, then there needs to be a clear change in the outlook to justify 

a change in the program.  I don’t think that has happened at this point, but I don’t rule it out 

either.  For example, it is certainly possible that, over the next few months, the economic outlook 

will strengthen further, with inflation rising and employment growing at a more robust pace.  In 

that case, I would like us to be in a position to be able to curtail the LSAP2 program early.  Even 

January 25–26, 2011 168 of 282



 
 

 
 

if that doesn’t happen, if the forecast plays out as laid out in the Tealbook, I would not favor 

another round of LSAPs if the economy performs under that scenario.  In either case, I think we 

need to start planning for the eventual end.  This means our communications need to be 

sufficiently flexible so that we will be in a position to allow the LSAP program to end in June, or 

earlier if the outlook calls for it. 

We should also consider changes in the language that will allow us to implement other 

parts of our exit strategy, which may be raising interest rates, curtailing reinvestments in MBS, 

or other strategies we might want to consider.  Furthermore, stressing economic growth rates, 

inflation, and inflation expectations in our description of the economic conditions would help 

convey the types of information on which we will be conditioning a change in policy direction 

down the road.  By continuing to stress the level of unemployment, we risk creating expectations 

that this Committee will delay tightening until the level of unemployment reaches some desirable 

target.  That would make our task even more difficult and make it hard to act in a timely manner. 

Regarding the language, like President Kocherlakota and President Lacker, I think the 

tone of paragraph 1 in alternative B is too negative on the economy and is inconsistent, I believe, 

with the kind of language we have used here.  In fact, as I noted earlier, the chart showing the 

balance of risks in our own forecasts has switched dramatically since November, and I think that 

the minutes and our statements need to reflect that change.  I don’t think alternative B, which 

looks a lot like alternative B from the last meeting, reflects that change.  So I would prefer 

paragraph 1 of alternative C as a substitute in alternative B.  In particular, I think phrases like 

“Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls” are too negative.  It would be better to talk about 

payroll growth. 

January 25–26, 2011 169 of 282



 
 

 
 

In paragraph 2, I would prefer that we de-emphasize the level of unemployment.  We 

know that unemployment rates lag the economy and that the Committee will need to reduce 

policy accommodation before the unemployment rate falls to anything close to an acceptable 

level, regardless of what the natural rate is, which we don’t know.  If we continue to point out 

that the unemployment rate is high, it will be harder for us to explain why we are reversing 

course when unemployment is still elevated in many people’s eyes.  Instead of saying that the 

unemployment rate is currently elevated, I would prefer to say something like, “Currently, 

employment is growing, but at a modest pace.”  After all, there is a difference between 

employment and unemployment rates, though, of course, they are closely related.  But the timing 

and behavior of unemployment rates and employment have different cyclical properties, and I 

think we need to acknowledge that. 

I am fine with the proposed change in the last sentence of paragraph 3 in alternative B.  

However, given that we are making a change, I would like to convey more, again, about the 

conditioning variables that we will take into account when the time comes.  So I would prefer 

that we say, “The Committee will continue its practice of regularly reviewing the pace of its 

security purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program in light of incoming 

information,” and then add “on inflation, inflation expectations, and output growth.  It remains 

prepared to adjust the program as needed in the future.”  I think that gives a better signal about 

what conditioning factors we will be looking at and thinking about. 

Regarding paragraph 4, I am okay with maintaining the “extended period” language at 

this meeting, but I think that we will need to change that language as we prepare for exit.  This 

might coincide with the time when we decide that we will not continue the LSAP program, and, 

obviously, if we let it run until June, we will have to make a decision before June and signal 

January 25–26, 2011 170 of 282



 
 

 
 

whether we are prepared to continue it or discontinue it.  So we will have to think earlier about 

those sorts of language changes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  The data since the 

last meeting have been more positive, but I do not think the change has been significant enough 

to warrant a shift in our policy.  The economy is still facing substantial headwinds, and the 

inflation rate remains very low. 

I did find the mention of an inflation target in alternative C to be an intriguing addition.  

I’m quite supportive of more firmly establishing a numerical objective for price stability, and I 

look forward to being able to put a sentence such as the one that is in alternative C into our 

statement in the not-too-distant future.  But, as Bill English mentioned, I don’t think we are 

ready to take that step today.  We still have some work to do to prepare the public to understand 

why a numerical objective should be seen as an improvement in our policy framework and how 

we intend to operationalize the objective.  I also recognize that, before we can prepare the public, 

we need to work through some of our own differences of views on the role of the numerical 

objective in our policy process.  Nevertheless, I do believe that there is much common ground 

within the Committee on this issue, and I would be in favor of having a structured discussion of 

this issue very soon. 

Regarding the language options in alternative B, I favor adding the updated $80 billion 

pace of asset purchases.  And given that every word change is scrutinized, I have a slight 

preference for keeping the last sentence in paragraph 3 the same as it was in our December 

statement.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

January 25–26, 2011 171 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  I would 

counsel that we wait a meeting before adopting something like paragraph 1 from alternative C.  

Although I am sympathetic to that, I wouldn’t do it at this meeting.  I also think that the 

“continued its practice of regularly reviewing” clause is fine.  Basically, I think it is too early to 

consider deviating from our November decision at this juncture.  I would urge the Committee to 

take the idea that the program is reviewable and changeable very seriously, and I want to 

advocate that adjustments could be made in either direction, depending on the performance of 

the economy, and remind everyone that the economy does tend to be uncooperative with our best 

forecasts.  Adjustments could be very slight.  For instance, the pace of purchases could be 

slowed while simultaneously moving back the end date of the program, keeping the total amount 

of purchases unchanged.  This might be viewed as giving the Committee more time to assess the 

strength of the economy during 2011, if that was considered desirable. 

I agree with President Plosser that the March/April time frame will be the appropriate 

period to consider any changes to the course of action agreed to in November and, hopefully, to 

set, or at least to sketch out, an appropriate policy course for the second half of 2011. 

I would also stress that monetary policy is an ongoing process, and not a series of one-

time actions.  I would implore all of you to stay away from the idea that there is such a thing as 

QE3.  There is a continuing process of balance sheet policy.  Management of the balance sheet 

will remain important for some time, and I encourage the Committee to think in terms of active 

management, either higher or lower, for the foreseeable future. 

I think commodity prices bear watching, and I want to comment on President Evans’s 

notion of commodity prices.  President Evans said, “Maybe they don’t matter, because they do 

not seem to enter a regression once the regression has lagged inflation.”  My comment is as 

January 25–26, 2011 172 of 282



 
 

 
 

follows:  A good inflation-targeting central bank, which I, of course, think that we are, will find 

that only the inflation target matters.  You keep taking actions to keep inflation close to target, 

and then, when you run a regression, you find that it is only lagged inflation that matters, because 

the policymaker is taking appropriate action to keep inflation near target.  But that seems to me 

to be different from saying that you shouldn’t take the signals that the economy is sending you as 

a reason to take action. 

I also now think that the rise in commodity prices in the spring of 2008 badly damaged 

the U.S. economy, at least in retrospect, and exacerbated problems that already existed in 

financial markets, eventually leading to the collapse of many of the nation’s largest financial 

houses.  So we have to be very much on guard about this commodity price issue this time 

around.  I also agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that global interactions are a key concern going 

forward.  I have written on this.  I have strong opinions on this, but I am going to spare all of you 

my comments on this and save that for another day.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  A few minutes ago, 

President Evans used an analogy involving “da Bears,” but as a non-Chicagoan I wasn’t really 

fooled a bit by the Bears’ regular season success.  [Laughter]  To me, it was clearly noise and not 

signal, as it relates to the playoffs.  Then, a few days ago, President Fisher compared monetary 

policy with playing a higher level, multidimensional chess game.  I was never much of a chess 

player—even at two dimensions, I couldn’t figure it out.  So I thought about what analogy I 

might use, and I recognize that I do have a fondness for Formula 1 racing, which I learned the 

other night I have in common with President Lacker.  So that is where I’ll go today. 

January 25–26, 2011 173 of 282



 
 

 
 

The financial crisis was like an in-race accident, and our race car had to undergo major 

repairs.  Now we are back in the race, but facing a large gap that developed with the lead cars—a 

gap which I will equate to the resource slack in our economy.  I expect very fast GDP growth 

this year with the economy running on all cylinders.  But it is important not to confuse fast 

growth with full or near-full employment.  Just because you are running faster laps than the 

leaders doesn’t mean you are going to catch them soon when you are running from as far back as 

we are.  Even with fast growth, it’s going to be a long trip to full employment.  And this 

distinction between growth and levels seems crucial to me for our policy communications.  

Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today we have talked about evidence that 

the economy is growing at a more sustainable pace, and I certainly agree with that.  I also see 

further upside risk to current forecasts, as do the analysts in most of the recent Blue Chip 

surveys, and I do think that the first paragraph in alternative C is more appropriate than the one 

in alternative B.  The economy is undergoing a major and necessary rebalancing.  It is taking 

place, and I think it is risky to try to accelerate that.  We must be careful.  The process takes 

time. 

We should, therefore, begin to remove policy accommodation slowly to make it more 

balanced as the economy rebalances.  Obviously, an early challenge we face is to reduce the 

large and growing level of excess reserves.  I am not concerned with the ability of our reserve 

draining tools.  We have tested them, and I think they are sufficient.  My greater concern is the 

natural tendency of this Committee to delay the start of removing policy accommodation, leading 

to new financial imbalances and longer-term inflationary pressures. 

January 25–26, 2011 174 of 282



 
 

 
 

I very much agree with President Kocherlakota, in that I think we should begin to think 

about exit now, so that we can address it in a timely and systematic way.  Bill English 

commented today that if we change the language, we’ll upset the markets—I agree with that, and 

we’re going to hear it over and over.  That encourages us to delay our actions.  But the longer we 

delay, the greater will be the disruption, both expected and actual, to markets when we do move 

to tighten.  So we have to keep that in mind, and that’s why I think this analysis that President 

Kocherlakota outlined is so important.  The first step that we have to take will be to shift our 

public statements from indicating a need for more monetary stimulus to indicating sufficient 

stimulus is in place to attain our long-run goals of maximum employment and stable prices.  I 

won’t go into detail on the wording in the paragraphs, because I’ve already indicated that I agree 

with looking at this longer term. 

I also want to discuss price targeting.  My inclination is to favor it.  Rather than calling it 

a target of 2 percent or a bit less, we can talk about the central tendency of participants being 

2 percent or a bit less.  I know we think that’s the right thing, but I want to point out that this 

crisis we just went through was not caused by missing our inflation target.  It was caused by our 

fear of deflation, which caused us to push real and nominal rates down for an extended period of 

time, and that led to asset price bubbles and the consequences of their bursting.  Therefore, 

adopting an inflation target doesn’t mean we will not find ourselves causing other imbalances in 

the future, unless we take a look at our policy as more than inflation targeting.  I will end with 

that.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B.  I think the 

wording in paragraph 1, with the slight updates, is appropriate as presented.  I think President 

January 25–26, 2011 175 of 282



 
 

 
 

Fisher suggested in a note before the meeting adding a clause to the end of paragraph 2 that said 

something like: “though there are indications that the recovery is strengthening.”  I am 

sympathetic with that, because I think that most of our 2011 forecasts, including my own, have 

been revised higher, and I don’t think that is inconsistent with paragraph 1. 

I support keeping the “extended period” language in paragraph 4.  I think the phrasing 

still pertains, and I am wary of making a change at this juncture, given the intense attention this 

phrase has had in past months and the likelihood that dropping it or stating an explicit date would 

set off an unintended market response and certainly would mislead markets regarding how policy 

may play out. 

With respect to the addition of the numerical inflation target language bracketed in 

alternative C, paragraph 5, I am hesitant to support this in this statement.  I do, in general, 

support the notion of a more explicit inflation objective as part of our framework.  However, I 

think that further official policy communication moves in that direction ought to be taken only 

after the Committee has come to a more formal decision about whether and how to implement a 

more explicit inflation target. 

On the question of dropping or adding guidance on the quantity of purchases to $80 

billion—here comes a double negative, which I love—I see no reason not to include the language 

that was added yesterday that raises the number from $75 to $80 billion.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of things come through from 

listening to the conversation that we had earlier about the economy.  One thing that’s very clear 

is that things have shifted.  I think our words and our deeds need to recognize that the economy 

January 25–26, 2011 176 of 282



 
 

 
 

is much stronger.  It has moved forward, and it has more forward momentum and sustainability 

than was the case last summer and autumn when QE2 was proposed and formulated.  As a 

corollary to that, I think the economic expansion seems much less vulnerable to shocks.  Like 

President Plosser, I have made it very clear in my public statements and at this table that I would 

have not supported QE2, but QE2 is in place. 

One thing that is fairly clear to me is that inflation is at an inflection point.  It could—and 

I stress “could”—come under considerable upside pressure from what I consider to be reduced 

slack in the global economy and possibly less slack here in the United States than is generally 

appreciated.  And one could make the argument that a continuation of QE2 purchases will only 

add to this inflationary pressure.  I am concerned about the fact that businesses and banks seem 

to be drowning in liquidity.  I think it’s leading not just to speculative activity of the kind that 

President Hoenig and others have mentioned, such as farmland price appreciation, but also to the 

misallocation of resources.  So I am eager to normalize the allocation of credit as soon as it is 

feasible.  In addition, I do worry about the inclination I’m hearing from business leaders to want 

to exercise pricing power.  They will look for any excuse they can to do so, because their 

margins are so tight and because they’re eager to grow their top lines and sustain their stock 

values.  But I think we’re going to need a couple more months of data to confirm that directional 

shift. 

I also feel that there have been some negative consequences to QE2, some of which affect 

those most deeply in need.  It has certainly exposed many pension funds as the Ponzi schemes 

that they are, and it has hurt the small saver significantly, particularly in the lower income 

quartiles. 

January 25–26, 2011 177 of 282



 
 

 
 

I could argue for alternative C.  I could even argue for alternative D, but I won’t.  I’m 

convinced the economy is on a sustainable growth trajectory, but I could be too optimistic.  I 

think we need a few more months of evidence to support my convictions before reducing or 

stopping the additions to our balance sheet. 

I do think we should be communicating about our flexibility.  I do believe there is some 

value in our making more positive statements about the economy.  After all, we heard them at 

this table, and we believe them. 

With regard to the difference between alternative B and alternative C, I think reputational 

risk cuts two ways.  President Plosser referred to this in a different fashion, but some do argue 

that we damaged our reputation with QE2.  Some might argue that we shouldn’t have undertaken 

QE2, but I think shifting gears too quickly would indicate weakness, in that we would not be 

sticking to our conviction at least until we see the whites of the eyes of recovery.  So I am in 

favor of alternative B.  I listened very carefully as President Kocherlakota and President Plosser 

advocated substituting paragraph 1 in C for paragraph 1 in alternative B.  I think you could 

probably take care of their concerns without making that substitution by adding what President 

Lockhart just endorsed, namely, putting a comma at the very end of paragraph 2 after 

“disappointingly slow” and adding, “although the economic recovery is strengthening.”  

Alternatively, in the first sentence of the first paragraph you might say “confirms that the 

economic recovery is strengthening.”  So I don’t see a need for the substitution of the first 

paragraph from alternative C into alternative B if we don’t want to change too many words.  But 

I would suggest that we find a way to indicate the mood that was expressed at this table, namely, 

that the economic recovery is, indeed, strengthening even though it is still constrained.  And I 

January 25–26, 2011 178 of 282



 
 

 
 

believe President Lockhart’s endorsement of my suggested sentence is the way to do it rather 

than shifting those paragraphs. 

I would add one word in the first paragraph.  “Employers remain reluctant to add to 

domestic payrolls.”  In a sense, that’s one of the problems that I’ve been talking about for quite 

some time, and you point out the difficulty of differentiating between our role here as the U.S. 

central bank and other pressures that are developing worldwide.  But I still find employers are 

reluctant to add to domestic payrolls. 

With regard to the $80 billion sentence, I’m a little worried about that.  It is the truth, but 

at the same time, I think the markets will pick that up.  There will be much discussion about it.  

It’s much ado about nothing.  We’re still on a $600 billion pace, and that number could change 

as early as our next meeting—it could be 85 or it could be 75.  So I’m not in favor of pointing 

that out.  I would end the sentence with “securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011.”  

And I rather liked President Kocherlakota’s insertion of “longer-term” between “stable” and 

“inflation expectations.”  Those are my suggestions, Mr. Chairman.  I will support alternative B.  

I would like very much if we could improve the tone from the standpoint of economic recovery 

strengthening. 

Finally, I have a comment on your comment on inflation targeting.  I have argued at this 

table that, as long as we have a dual mandate, we have to be extremely careful with regard to 

targeting inflation because then that might impose upon us some more specific unemployment 

target.  I have come to conclude over my now almost six years of experience at this table—which 

is not much, but it’s certainly better than where I started—that the employment mandate is a very 

slippery political slope.  It’s also evident to me that there is some shift in sentiment in terms of 

those that have given us our franchise and given us that mandate, and I think it might be time to 

January 25–26, 2011 179 of 282



 
 

 
 

think about preparing to shift to a single mandate of inflation and letting the politicians worry 

about unemployment through fiscal policy.  So I welcome the discussion, Charles.  I look 

forward to talking to you about this and giving my ideas to you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  I’m comfortable with 

the wording of the first paragraph of B as it stands, but I could support a mild upgrading of the 

outlook along the lines that President Lockhart suggested.  Although incoming data have 

strengthened my confidence that the risks have become more balanced, my modal outlook has 

changed very, very little since our last meeting.  I continue to anticipate that unemployment will 

remain undesirably high and inflation undesirably low—below the 2 percent rate that the 

majority of the Committee has indicated is their preferred inflation objective—for the 

foreseeable future. 

With respect to policy, I’m comfortable for now with our current stance.  Optimal policy 

simulations and rule-based recommendations in Tealbook indicate that economic conditions 

continue to call for a highly accommodative policy.  By the various metrics in Tealbook, we do 

not have our foot too heavily on the gas.  With respect to our LSAP program, I continue to think 

that the bar for not completing the announced $600 billion of purchases should be high, and that 

hurdle has not been breached.  My reading of the evidence is similar to yours, Mr. Chairman.  I 

think the program has had a modest but positive impact on financial conditions, and it may 

deserve some credit for diminishing market anxiety about deflation.  Fears that the program 

could cause an outsized decline in the dollar or trigger a rise in inflation expectations have not 

materialized.  We should continue to evaluate the program in light of incoming evidence, but I 

don’t think the proposed change to the last sentence of paragraph 3 is needed or desirable.  Any 

January 25–26, 2011 180 of 282



 
 

 
 

change at all in the wording will arouse market speculation about our intentions, so I would 

prefer to keep the language identical to December. 

With respect to our external communications regarding future policy in the days ahead, I 

think we should be clear that we recognize the need to withdraw policy stimulus as the economy 

recovers and that we have the tools and commitment to do so.  I see an advantage in emphasizing 

the Committee’s commitment to a specific numerical inflation objective.  As the discussion in 

Tealbook makes clear, a well-understood and credible commitment would provide protection 

should the timing of our exit—in spite of our best efforts—turn out to be too late.  I think 

markets are aware of the Committee’s inflation goals, but it could be advantageous to strengthen 

this commitment by making it explicit, as in alternative C.  Clearly, we would need to lay the 

groundwork before adopting a numerical objective, but I support the efforts of President Plosser 

on this initiative, and I think this could be a good time to make progress on a longstanding 

communications goal. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  President Bullard said that he hoped there 

was no such thing as QE3.  I don’t think I heard that the way he intended it, but it did pique my 

interest.  [Laughter]  Not to re-litigate old battles here—I suspect many of us have not changed 

our ex ante views in light of incoming information—but my sense is that we would not be the 

first in Washington to declare a highly debatable policy an enviable success and end it in due 

course. 

On what basis could we say it was a success?  We could, I think rightly, look at the 

change in the deflation risks and—much more so than any great successes on financial markets 

or employment or GDP—take perhaps more credit for the change in inflation risks between the 

January 25–26, 2011 181 of 282



 
 

 
 

time we announced the program and the time that we pivoted away from it.  So I think that is the 

way we hope that the $600 billion program is “successfully” accomplished, and we move on.  

The name of the game strikes me as always having been about what’s next.  It was rarely a 

question of whether we were going to do what we said we were going to do.  I think we are 

going to live up to our word and do the $600 billion, but the markets are still questioning what 

happens next.  In light of that, Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative B. 

Regarding the language in paragraph 1, let me start by saying that I think President 

Kocherlakota described a sequencing we all had in mind some time ago as we were provisionally 

thinking about exit.  Perhaps at the March meeting, or at a meeting thereafter, we might want to 

describe the pivot in a way that markets could come to understand without adding unnecessary 

uncertainty.  One way to do this is to make the first paragraph quite a bit more upbeat than 

paragraph 1 in alternative B, even if the rest of the language in the statement were exactly as it is 

now.  That would, I think, be a very useful way to signal to markets that we have with some 

conviction changed our view to the upside on the status of growth, and would make them aware 

that there is a very serious debate about policy going forward.  So with that chess move in front 

of us, it strikes me, frankly, that alternative B as written might be a little more cautious than 

current market expectations.  Markets seem to be more enamored with the recent economic data 

than I sense that this group is.  If we left the first paragraph of B as it is now and the data come in 

on the upside, as we would hope between now and March, that might give us a very nice way to 

describe in some careful, methodical way our change in views.  Partly for that reason, and partly 

because I think the consensus in this room is closer to paragraph 1 in B than in C, I’d favor B as 

it is now with a view towards exit and next steps. 

January 25–26, 2011 182 of 282



 
 

 
 

On paragraph 3, Mr. Chairman, I think staff has now rewritten this $80 billion per month 

in a way such that it shows that the $80 billion is the arithmetic that comes out of the steady 

commitment to do $600 billion.  So I’m certainly open to the suggestion of President Fisher to 

end the sentence at “2011,” but if New York and Brian and the guys feel that the per month basis 

is the way in which they’ve communicated it and they’d rather that communication come from 

us than the New York Desk, I think we’ve at least mitigated the risk that they overread what the 

$80 billion per month is.  To the extent we do add that new red language with $80 billion per 

month, I think that’s additional impetus not to change another word in paragraph 3.  So I prefer 

the bracketed language to the new language therein.  I support alternative B with those 

suggestions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  The outlook looks a little 

brighter than it did the last time we met, and most around this table seem a bit more confident.  

Indeed, most of my conversations with bankers started with comments like, “Things look a little 

bit better,” and “people have a little more spring in their step.”  So there does seem to be a little 

more optimism. 

On the question about reserves, I’ve been paying a lot of attention not only to changes in 

our balance sheet, but also to changes in the aggregate balance sheet of banks, and I’ve been 

trying to think about what that might cause banks to do.  My conclusion right now is that 

reserves are unlikely to affect either the price and availability of credit, or financial conditions, or 

even the economy, unless there’s a significant change in either loan demand or deposit supply.  

Right now there is just so much liquidity that I don’t think the change in reserves is having much 

effect, so I’m not concerned about that at the moment. 

January 25–26, 2011 183 of 282



 
 

 
 

At the same time, the market seems pretty convinced that we’re going to purchase the full 

$600 billion in Treasuries, no more and no less.  So with all of the potential uncertainty in the 

outlook—whether it comes from house prices or commercial real estate or state and local 

governments or potential spillover from peripheral Europe—it makes no sense for us to tinker 

with the one thing about which there seems to be a little certainty. 

Turning to the language, I want to make sure that we don’t send a signal that we don’t 

intend to send—and I didn’t get the feeling that anybody around the table wanted to send such a 

signal.  Regarding the first paragraph, I could live with the version from alternative B or C, and 

I’m not sure which one I would vote for if you forced us to choose one or the other.  In 

paragraph 3, I have a strong preference for stopping the sentence at “second quarter of 2011” and 

leaving out the discussion about the pace of purchases forever.  The reason is that I think if 

we’ve given the total amount and we’ve given the time, then that calculation is left to anybody to 

figure out, whereas now we’re in a position of having to change from $75 billion to $80 billion, 

which might give the impression that we’re doing some tinkering and fine-tuning.  I think it 

points up the risk of having both the pace and the total amount in the statement.  But if we’re 

going to have an amount in the statement, I think it has to be the right amount.  I don’t think it 

makes sense to have an amount that we know to be incorrect. 

For all of the same reasons, I would go back to the original language and would not use 

“continued its practice of.”  The change in tense is not conveying any important information that 

I can see, and it might give people the erroneous impression that we’re intending to signal that 

we’re having more of a conditional discussion than we actually are. 

On the inflation target language, the problem I have with inserting that, first of all, is that 

I think it would be interpreted as much as a political statement about this whole discussion about 

January 25–26, 2011 184 of 282



 
 

 
 

our dual mandate as it would be any statement of our intentions.  Inserting ourselves into that 

question about our mandate seems to me to raise all kinds of questions about independence.  I 

think we have the right to independence about how we get to our mandate, but we don’t really 

have independence as to what our objectives are, so I’d be very uncomfortable about putting it in 

there.  Also, if we’re going to put a number on inflation and we have the dual mandate, it seems 

to argue for a number on unemployment, and in fact, I had the “2 percent or a little less” in a 

speech in January, and the very first question I got from the audience was, “Well, if that’s your 

number for inflation, what’s your number for unemployment?”  And I think that’s a little 

difficult. 

Finally, I’m still not certain that we can agree on what that number is, even if we decided 

to put the number in the statement.  Those are my comments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is easy.  I associate myself with 

Kevin on everything he said about the language in alternative B.  I associate myself with Betsy 

on everything she said about inflation targeting.  Thank you. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You beat Eric.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Trying to make yourself redundant, Governor?  [Laughter]  

Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, support the action described in 

alternative B and the statement in alternative B which reaffirms the intended increase in 

securities holdings and the pace of purchases that the Committee first announced in November.  

The economic recovery is, in fact, continuing.  The growth in household spending picked up late 

last year, and business spending on equipment and software is rising.  However, housing and 

January 25–26, 2011 185 of 282



 
 

 
 

labor markets remain weak, and the action described in alternative B, I believe, reflects that.  The 

actions and language of alternative B should reinforce investor confidence that the economic 

recovery is proceeding and that employment and inflation are evolving in a manner consistent 

with a gradual return to levels more consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. 

Adjustments to the program should not be made at this time.  The adverse consequences 

of unexpectedly discontinuing or reducing the current program would be unsettling to business 

and household confidence, and, given challenges in communicating, such a change would 

require great care.  In addition, there are significant benefits to waiting for additional information 

pertaining to the strength of the recovery and likely trajectory of inflation before deciding to 

make an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy. 

I also want to weigh in on the debate regarding the inclusion of the $80 billion.  President 

Lockhart stated it in the negative, seeing no reason not to include the language.  I think President 

Fisher has also raised some good points regarding the precedent it sets of always having to 

communicate in terms of what the monthly pace would be.  I just want to insert a somewhat 

different perspective on that language.  As the communications experts know best, there are 

several audiences listening and critiquing the performance of this Committee, and these 

audiences include financial participants on Wall Street as well as business participants on Main 

Street.  They include politicians of all ambitions.  In my case they include a neighbor who 

continues to corner me in the express lane at the grocery store right when I’m pinned in between 

the tabloids and the gum, asking for clarification.  [Laughter] 

I think we learned from the communications around the LSAP program that some of 

these audiences can only hold one number in their heads at a time.  That number, I think, 

currently is $600 billion.  So another perspective on this debate is that if we inject another 

January 25–26, 2011 186 of 282



 
 

 
 

number, in this case the number is $80 billion, to certain audiences it could appear to be 

something new, something that was recently decided, something that could be misinterpreted as 

a fresh round of money printing.  That is not at all what is intended, and that is not at all what has 

occurred or been decided at this meeting.  So, at the very least, I think putting in that number 

could encourage some kind of speculation about why the quantity of purchases implies a pace of 

$80 billion rather than $75 billion, and, given that this Committee has not made any change in 

the course of the LSAP program, we may need to consider whether the $80 billion figure will 

signal some kind of fine-tuning or something that we have not, in fact, decided.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I favor alternative B.  In 

terms of language, I think it’s okay to be a little cautious in terms of upgrading our economic 

outlook, as Governor Warsh suggested; if the news comes in good, then we can upgrade the 

outlook in the future, and I don’t see any reason to race ahead right now. 

In terms of the rest of the language in B, I think we should make the fewest changes 

possible.  I don’t see any reason to disturb the expectations that the market has that we’re likely 

to do $600 billion of large-scale asset purchases.  So I would not include the language about the 

$80 billion.  I just think that adds complication and detail that’s not really necessary, and I don’t 

think Brian thinks that’s necessary or helpful. 

MR. SACK.  The Desk wasn’t advocating putting $80 billion in the statement.  We’ve 

already moved to a purchase pace of $80 billion, and we’ve explained in our FAQs how to 

reconcile that with the FOMC statement.  I don’t think it has caused any confusion among 

market participants. 

January 25–26, 2011 187 of 282



 
 

 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And as far as the language about “will” or “continued,” I 

think it’s just better to leave well enough alone.  I just think there’s no reason for change.  If we 

make the change, people are going to be confused about why we’re making the change.  If the 

meaning is almost the same, what’s the point of making that small adjustment? 

In general, I just want to add two other thoughts.  I think we are a little bit at risk of 

getting ahead of ourselves here in the whole discussion about where we’re going.  If I remember 

correctly, there was a lot of excitement last winter about improvement in the economic outlook, 

and we shifted our focus away from other means we could take to make monetary policy more 

accommodative and shifted it toward exit, and that turned out to be premature.  So I think we 

have to remember that we haven’t gotten that much good data for that long.  We’re very far away 

from full employment, so I think a little bit of patience is appropriate. 

I think that’s also important in terms of our communications because we don’t want to 

give people the sense that we’re itching to exit just for the sake of exiting.  If we were to do that, 

it would cause people to tighten financial conditions, and that could actually potentially harm the 

economic growth outlook.  Obviously, if the inflation news turns worse, and if the economy is 

growing very robustly, then, of course, it’s appropriate to change.  But I think it’s very important 

not to get ahead of ourselves; we actually need to see economic information that warrants a 

change in policy. 

Finally, let me thank the staff for all their efforts preparing the material on the SOMA net 

income and the different environments for interest rates and the asset sale program.  I thought 

that was very useful for understanding the risks.  But I would emphasize that I consider these 

issues very secondary to the policy objectives of achieving our dual mandate.  In fact, I’d be 

quite happy if we had a very strong and sustained expansion that led us to tighten monetary 

January 25–26, 2011 188 of 282



 
 

 
 

policy and that resulted in a sharp decline in our net interest income.  In that case we’d obviously 

be a lot closer to achieving our dual mandate, but also the revenue-generating effects of a strong 

recovery would almost certainly overwhelm the effect of a drop in Federal Reserve remittances 

to the Treasury.  The goal here is not to maximize the Federal Reserve’s remittances to the 

Treasury. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Again, a good discussion. 

The economy is kind of like an ocean liner, which does take a while to move, and I think 

we have to be patient.  We are seeing signs of sustainable recovery, but they are still somewhat 

nascent; in particular, we haven’t seen any strong employment reports yet.  So I would advocate 

maintaining the status quo.  I do believe the policy has been helpful.  We can differ on exactly 

how much and in what way, but I do think it has been supportive of the recovery.  So I 

recommend alternative B. 

There was some discussion about strengthening paragraph 1 in B to make it like 

paragraph 1 in C.  I can make a quick proposal.  There are two differences between these two 

paragraphs.  One is that the paragraph in C strikes out the things that are constraining 

consumption growth, and the other is that the paragraph in C basically says business investment 

is rising and drops out the nonresidential part.  One proposal is the following, given that I think 

all the things that are affecting household spending are still relevant:  Where it says “business 

spending on equipment and software is rising,” insert a comma and then say, “though employers 

remain reluctant to add to payrolls.”  That drops a negative sentence, and that’s pretty consistent 

with the suggestion from President Fisher, for example, about firms investing in order to improve 

productivity rather than to improve employment. 

January 25–26, 2011 189 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  So the sentence would take out “while investment in nonresidential 

structures is still weak”? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  It makes it seem that the category of nonresidential structures is what 

has improved. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s a little weird to take it out, given that it’s still very 

weak and that it was in the last statement. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, C says, “business investment is rising.”  Do you think 

that’s more accurate? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, but I’m saying that in the December statement we 

had, “while investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak.”  To take that out 

implies that somehow that’s no longer the case.  And that hasn’t changed. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we had some indication that it was bottoming out.  

We do change the emphasis periodically.  Does anyone have a view on this?  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman, it’s the one thing, though, that hasn’t really changed.  

That’s where I think there’s a bit of dissonance.  If you think it’s a good idea to up the optimism 

level a bit, I think a lot of people around the table would be open to suggestions, but I’m not sure 

that one does it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, do we believe business investment is rising? 

PARTICIPANTS.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are we okay with that?  How about “business investment is 

rising, though employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls”?  We look to the Research and 

Statistics staff. 

January 25–26, 2011 190 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. STOCKTON.  It’s true. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  I don’t know if it accomplishes what you want, but it’s true. 

MS. YELLEN.  That still gets rid of the nonresidential portion. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Another option is to change the phrase “the economic 

recovery is continuing.”  Instead, we could say something like “the economic recovery has 

strengthened somewhat.”  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I’m willing to do that.  The only objection I had was 

that it would say “the economic recovery has strengthened, though at a rate…”  We’re confusing 

derivatives here.  It’s as if it’s strengthening but not strengthening fast enough. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, you could just say “and the growth rate is still not 

sufficient…” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, you could say it “strengthened, though the growth rate has ….”  That 

was one of my suggestions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. LACKER.  Though it is still insufficient. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Are we okay with “has strengthened”? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would say “has strengthened somewhat.” 

MR. FISHER.  It has either strengthened or it hasn’t strengthened.  But the Chairman had 

an interesting suggestion.  Could you repeat your suggestion, please, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “…has strengthened, though the rate of economic growth 

has been insufficient to bring down…” 

January 25–26, 2011 191 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  I think that’s a fair statement. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It is just a question of where you want to put it on the 

dial. 

MR. STOCKTON.  I have one small thing.  We’ll get the first reading on fourth-quarter 

GDP later this week.  We’ve written down 3.8, which is stronger than 2.6 percent, but the 

confidence interval around that number is really big.  And this current-quarter estimate of 3.8 is 

based on a 3½ percentage point contribution from net exports offset by a minus 3 percentage 

point contribution from inventories, both of which are poorly measured and subject to 

considerable uncertainty.  So while our reading of the economy is that things have strengthened, 

I just wanted to make clear that it’s not as if that number is written in stone at this point. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You could say “appears to have strengthened.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  May I ask indulgence to leave paragraph 1 in B 

as it is for now and to save changes in our text for next time?  I’d like to leave that paragraph as 

it is, if that’s okay, with the understanding that we will overcompensate in March. 

MR. TARULLO.  Kevin’s strategy. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That was Governor Warsh’s strategy. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  As long as we can use the word “rocking” in March, that will 

be fine.  [Laughter] 

MR. TARULLO.  But in which paragraph, Narayana? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman?  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR.PLOSSER.  One way to address this is to make sure that the discussion in the 

minutes gives a little more positive sense. 

January 25–26, 2011 192 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  There was a more positive sense at the table. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My summary of the discussion begins, “The tenor of the 

incoming data has increased most participants’ confidence that a moderate recovery is under way 

and will continue.” 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s a good summary of it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  

MR. LACKER.  That’s rocking.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I gave it a try.  I did consider the “strengthening” phrase at 

the end of paragraph 2.  But, if you’ll notice, that creates a zigzag sentence where we’re happy, 

but we’re sad, but we’re happy.  [Laughter]  In paragraph 3, I’ve heard very different advice on 

the $80 billion.  I’m hearing from New York, though, that you think this is worse for markets 

rather than better for markets. 

MR. SACK.  I just think it’s not necessary. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The advantage of putting it in is that this is a parameter that 

we can move at some point if we were to change the pace while keeping the total.  

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s highly unlikely, though, that we would want 

to do that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Let me give an impassioned speech for keeping it in. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Take it as read.  [Laughter]  All right, I take full 

responsibility for leaving it in.  I realize there’s a slight risk there, but there’s also a risk to 

dropping it.  It’s something that we could, in fact, vary if we taper or if we change the pace.  

Let’s leave the next sentence as it was last time, and let’s drop the other change.  The only 

January 25–26, 2011 193 of 282



 
 

 
 

change in the statement, therefore, is to add the phrase about the pace of $80 billion.  Everything 

else is as written.  Okay?  Any other comments? 

MS. SMITH.  Can I just make a comment? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MS. SMITH.  From a communications perspective, I really think that’s a mistake. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The $80 billion? 

MS. SMITH.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, explain why. 

MS. SMITH.  I think we’ve taught market participants to take every word of this 

statement seriously.  And I think it conveys a policy judgment that you all didn’t make.  So I’m 

comfortable that what is on the New York Fed website, as explained to me, has made this point.  

I’m afraid that if you do this, it’s hard for us to explain that it really doesn’t mean much, 

particularly if you want to use it later to fine-tune:  Now this signifies nothing, but later it may 

signify something important.  So I think you want to hold that in reserve until you are really 

communicating something important. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Did she convince you, President Bullard? 

MR. BULLARD.  I feel very strongly that this $600 billion number really hurt us, 

because it put us in the same category as a lot of others’ policy actions, and it got us away from 

the idea that this is ordinary monetary policy.  And I think the pace of purchases gets closer to 

saying it’s ordinary monetary policy. 

I’m a little miffed that we’re not at $75 billion.  It’s up to the Desk to keep us at $75 

billion—I know there are technical factors involved.  I would very much like to keep it in.  And I 

January 25–26, 2011 194 of 282



 
 

 
 

saw the fact that we had the pace of purchases and the total amount as a compromise, and now 

we’d be pulling back from that, in my view. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, I agree.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I feel equally passionately.  [Laughter]  So let us cancel each other out.  I 

would suggest that we listen to the good advice that Michelle just gave, because I think she is 

right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  I am going to take a straw vote, so I can share the 

responsibility.  [Laughter] 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I wasn’t sure what Michelle’s advice was. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Her advice was to drop the $80 billion. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  And to stop at “the end of the second quarter of 2011”?  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  All in favor of not having the $80 billion?  I count ten.  

All in favor of including the $80 billion?  Okay, we’ll drop it.  President Bullard, your concern is 

noted, and we’ll take measures to try to make sure that all of the dimensions of our policy are 

reflected in our discussions.  Brian. 

MR. SACK.  I just wanted to make it clear that the reason we’re in this situation is not 

that we haven’t been keeping pace.  It’s because the program didn’t start on November 1, but the 

“about $75” was calculated as if it did start November 1.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We should have figured that out. 

MR. SACK.  We thought “about” gave us enough flexibility. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Debbie. 

January 25–26, 2011 195 of 282



 
 

 
 

MS. DANKER.  This vote will encompass alternative B and the directive for alternative 

B from the packet.  I am going to read paragraph 3, just to make sure I’ve got it right, and we all 

know what we are voting on. 

Paragraph 3:  “To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that 

inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to 

continue expanding its holdings of securities as announced in November.  In particular, the 

Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities 

holdings and intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of 

the second quarter of 2011.  The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities 

purchases and the overall size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming information 

and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.” 

Chairman Bernanke Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
Governor Duke  Yes 
President Evans  Yes 
President Fisher  Yes 
President Kocherlakota Yes 
President Plosser  Yes 
Governor Raskin  Yes 
Governor Tarullo  Yes 
Governor Warsh  Yes 
Governor Yellen  Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  We have one more item, which is 

the communications issue.  We can try to do that now, or we can have a 20-minute lunch break.  

Is there a preference?  People have flights? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  How about during lunch? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We can do it during lunch, I suppose.  It’s only a question 

of speaking loudly, okay? 

January 25–26, 2011 196 of 282



 
 

 
 

MS. DANKER.  And keeping all— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  —the food away from the microphones.  All right, why 

don’t we break for lunch?  We’ll return here, and we’ll immediately go into this last item of 

discussion. 

[Break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let’s recommence the meeting, please.  Thank you.  I see 

Charlie coming, so we will just go ahead and get started.  The last item is on communication, and 

I want to thank the communications subcommittee for the work they have done and the ongoing 

discussions they have had.  So let me turn it over now to Janet.  

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to begin by thanking Governor 

Duke and Presidents Fisher and Rosengren for serving with me on the subcommittee.  And I 

want to thank all of you for the very helpful input that you have given us so far. 

As you may recall, the Chairman gave our subcommittee a three-part charge.  He asked 

us first to assure appropriate treatment of confidential FOMC information, including our contacts 

with the press; second, we were to develop policies to avoid the perception that individuals 

outside of the Federal Reserve System are able to gain inappropriate access to FOMC 

information that could be valuable in forecasting monetary policy; and, third, we were to develop 

policies to ensure that the public communications of FOMC participants do not undermine the 

Committee’s decisionmaking process or the effectiveness of monetary policy. 

After consultation with many of you, the subcommittee thought that the best way to 

accomplish the first objective was to strengthen the Program for Security of FOMC Information 

by adding an explicit enforcement procedure, and yesterday afternoon you voted on an 

amendment designed to accomplish that.  So I consider that aspect of our work complete. 

January 25–26, 2011 197 of 282



 
 

 
 

To make progress on the remaining two charges, we thought it would be sensible to take 

them up sequentially.  Today we are particularly seeking your thoughts on how to address the 

second charge.  What policies should the Committee put in place to avoid perceptions that 

individuals outside the Federal Reserve System are able to gain inappropriate access to valuable 

FOMC information?  We’d like to hear your thoughts on this topic, and our hope is that we can 

return soon, potentially in March, with a revised proposal, and then return to the third question 

for discussion. 

We circulated a set of questions that you should have in front of you to guide discussion, 

and we’d like to have a full go-round of the Committee to hear your views.  We ask you to 

address three questions.  The first pertains to access.  Should there be limitations on access 

between FOMC participants and individuals or firms that stand to gain financially?  And, if so, 

where would you draw the line?  The second question pertains to content.  Should there be 

limitations on the content of meetings and conversations, if access is permitted?  And, third, if 

limitations on access and/or content are desirable, should we establish a formal policy 

concerning these matters, or simply develop some informal guidelines? 

On that issue, you may recall that, in our memo to you dated January 6, our 

subcommittee suggested that contacts with financially interested outsiders should, at least in our 

view, be addressed by a formal policy.  We’re concerned that any perception, whether it’s based 

in fact or not, that financially interested outsiders have inappropriate access to FOMC members 

or information creates severe reputational risks for the Federal Reserve.  Our subcommittee 

thought it important for the Committee to have in place a formal policy, the important thing 

being that it would be binding on all FOMC participants and not just a guideline that’s voluntary.  

It would state, in effect, that it is not acceptable for FOMC participants to convey information—

January 25–26, 2011 198 of 282



 
 

 
 

whether it’s covered by the Program for Security of FOMC Information or whether it’s outside 

of that program—that would be likely to confer financial advantage on particular private 

consultants and businesses. 

In contrast, we proposed in our subcommittee memo to you that other matters should be 

addressed by informal guidelines, matters such as the blackout period, guidelines about staking 

out firm positions, and so forth.  But we’re seeking your input and reaction on this question 

today, so the third question to you is:  Do you agree with our subcommittee that we need a 

formal policy on this?   Let me stop there and begin the go-round. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the subcommittee 

for their work on this.  I tend to agree with what Governor Yellen has said.  Given the kinds of 

risks that are involved for the Federal Reserve System in this matter, I think a formal policy is 

something that we should be thinking about.  I have to admit, though, that, since I have not 

engaged in any of this kind of activity myself, I’m not sure exactly what the formal policy should 

consist of.  Certainly, in considering the issue of potential limitations on content, the point that 

says, “You should not be characterizing deliberations at FOMC meetings,” seems clear enough 

to me.  I think it’s reasonable to consider having another staff person at these meetings, which 

seems like a good check.  Beyond that, I guess I’m willing to be led by others’ judgments. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And thanks to the subcommittee—I really do 

appreciate the work you’ve done on this.  When these questions were circulated, it triggered my 

memory, so I went back and looked at FRAM, and I think it may have the essence of what we 

need.  It’s a matter of what you want to formalize, because right now these are voluntary 

January 25–26, 2011 199 of 282



 
 

 
 

guidelines.  In paragraph 5 of FRAM it says senior officials “should strictly preserve the 

confidentiality of System information that, if revealed, could benefit any person or impair the 

effectiveness of System operations and policies.”  I think formalizing that would put us all on 

notice.  The next one involves considering invitations to speak at meetings sponsored by profit-

making organizations.  “Such officials should carefully weigh the public benefits likely to be 

derived…against the possibility that their participation might afford such organizations a prestige 

advantage over competitors.”  I think that’s a good guideline for us to continue to follow.  

Paragraph 7 says, “In public speeches and relations with news media, senior officials should be 

particularly mindful of”—and I will shorten this part to “conflicts”—“and, in addition, should 

avoid statements that might suggest the nature of any monetary policy action that has not been 

officially disclosed or that might confuse or mislead the public with respect to the monetary or 

other policies of the System.”  And the last paragraph I will mention is senior officials “should 

feel free to express their personal views concerning questions of System or public interest, but 

they should carefully consider whether their remarks might create public misunderstanding of the 

System’s actions, or impair the effective formulation and implementation of System policies or 

lessen the prestige of the System.” 

So we have much of what we were talking about, and it’s a matter of formalizing the 

voluntary guidelines.  I would be in favor of formalizing them first. 

Another issue is whether we make this public, so that everyone knows we’re on notice.  I 

think this is something we ought to consider, because then it not only puts us on notice, but it 

also puts them on notice.  I think that pretty much reflects my comments relative to the 

questions.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

January 25–26, 2011 200 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I am on the subcommittee and I asked to go towards the end, and 

number 3 was towards the end.  [Laughter]  The subcommittee had to wrestle with wanting to 

make sure that there wasn’t undue access that provided the appearance of financial gain, and 

trading that off against the need to understand developments in the economy and financial 

markets.  So it’s really important to find the right balance.  I would highlight that, to the extent 

that we formalize things, the rules have to be clear and enforceable. 

Let me start with the second issue, which refers to the potential limitations.  I actually do 

think that FOMC meetings should be kept confidential other than what’s in the minutes, which 

provide the public recounting, so that we basically shouldn’t be talking about these meetings to 

anybody in public or in private. 

In terms of meetings with individual financial market participants, I have already 

instituted the practice of having somebody else in the room with me.  It can be the head of our 

supervision division, the head of the research division, or a communications officer, and the 

reason is to make sure that absolutely nothing is being conveyed that’s not already in the public 

domain.  And I have become much more careful about footnoting speeches that I’ve previously 

given to make it clear that it is already in the public domain, so that nothing being conveyed in 

our discussion is different from what has already been said publicly either by me or provided in 

the FOMC minutes.  I think those are all important things to think about.  I am in favor of them.  

I’ve already implemented them. 

In terms of the limitations to access, I do think some of it’s the frequency.  If the same 

person who potentially is closely monitoring the Fed is regularly meeting with you, even if 

nothing is conveyed during those meetings, I think the appearance of very, very regular meetings 

potentially is a problem.  So I’ve also changed my practice in that respect—even with somebody 

January 25–26, 2011 201 of 282



 
 

 
 

else in the room, I have tried to make sure that I don’t meet with the kind of regularity that would 

in any way provide an appearance of undue access to any one individual or organization. 

In terms of centralized reporting, I think that could become very cumbersome.  I’m 

actually not opposed to it, but I have talked to some others who are less comfortable with it.  The 

one area where it might be useful to report press contacts centrally is if it’s only to one individual 

news organization, or one individual reporter, just so that, if there is a leak, there will already be 

a record within the organization that highlights whom you talk to and when.  I wouldn’t expect 

that it would be necessary, but it would provide a way to make sure we could quickly refer to 

people’s logs and know who talked to what reporter when. 

In terms of interactions at conferences, I don’t think we want to limit that.  I think it is 

important to have social interactions.  And when it is in a group setting or when press is there, it 

is very unlikely to result in a problem.  So I think that either at conferences or when media are 

present, then I wouldn’t really be too concerned about who else is in the room.  And I certainly 

think that we should not speak to forums where there are only clients of an individual firm.  That 

definitely gives an appearance that you are giving financial gain to one organization.  So there 

have to be multiple organizations before I would be willing to do that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Can I just ask Eric to clarify something?  Did I draw the correct 

inference that you regard this as governing discussions with members of the general media, as 

well as people whose purpose is to generate direct or indirect trading profits from predicting 

monetary policy actions? 

January 25–26, 2011 202 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think the questions were focused on the individuals that can 

directly get financial gain, but I think that we should think about how it should apply potentially 

to reporters as well.  That’s my own personal view. 

MR. TARULLO.  Could you explain that?  My assumption had been that the reason we 

were not including talking to reporters here is because we had a shared view that whenever the 

reporter used whatever he or she got, it was immediately available to the world on the web.  But 

maybe I’m missing something. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  No.  In terms of financial gain, if I only talk to one Wall Street 

Journal reporter every other month, and I didn’t talk to a New York Times reporter or a Fox 

News reporter or a Bloomberg reporter, I think that would give an appearance of supporting one 

news organization over other news organizations.  So I do think that we have to be careful, to 

some degree, to spread our access to the press around, just as we spread our access to potentially 

interested financial parties around.  But that’s my own personal view. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the subcommittee for doing 

all of the fine work on this.  I have to agree with President Hoenig.  My experience being around 

the Fed was that I thought we were already doing most of this, and I thought there was a code.  

So maybe it’s a matter of reviewing that code. 

I’m going to make some general comments that may go in a different direction.  My view 

is that our discussions of communication tend to be very negative and very risk averse—in fact, I 

would say they exhibit extreme forms of risk aversion.  There is too much worry that something 

might be said to someone that might be inappropriate—and certainly we need to worry about 

January 25–26, 2011 203 of 282



 
 

 
 

that—but that should not be the primary concern of our communication policy.  Our 

communication policy should be a positive statement of what we are trying to accomplish with 

communications, and we should think in terms of broad strategic communication policy from 

this Committee.  Ideally, I would go so far as to adopt metrics about whether or not we are 

accomplishing our goals through our communication policy.  I think the general judgment over 

the last three years is probably that we are not accomplishing what we want to accomplish as a 

Committee. 

My feeling is that our existing strategy has too often allowed others to define the Fed and 

to define this Committee, and we need to have strategies and ideas about how to get our ideas out 

there.  To put everything in a narrow framework about whether somebody will make a misstep at 

some point is not helping that.  I think that, because we have this view, and it is a longstanding 

view around the Fed, it has allowed public relations problems and misinformation to fester, and I 

am very worried that this might do lasting damage to the institution. 

I do not think that rules can be written that encompass every situation in which we might 

find ourselves, and I also think that anyone we talk to, in principle, could profit from anything 

that we say.  So I don’t think you can have a prescriptive thing that maps out every single 

situation.  I don’t think that’s a good way to go. 

One general policy would be to convey the same messages in all forums and never reveal 

confidential information about what is going on in the Committee itself.  I think pretty much 

everybody adheres to that.  In general, I think that active engagement with all audiences should 

be encouraged.  That should be something that we are trying to do and trying to get done.  By 

“all audiences,” I mean financial markets, business leaders, the general public, and, in fact, I 

would greatly expand our contacts.  I would try to think about whether we’re doing enough and 

January 25–26, 2011 204 of 282



 
 

 
 

whether we’re communicating with certain audiences.  Obviously, we’re missing certain groups 

of people, and they’re going off and developing their own ideas about what we’re about and 

what we’re doing.  To put limits on that is going to impair our ability to get messages across and 

may damage the institution. 

So I would prefer a positive statement that emphasizes engagement with all audiences.  

We certainly do not want people to profit from what we’re doing, but, in some sense, any time 

you utter a word, I suppose somebody can trade on it.  I would, however, dispute the claim that 

you can trade successfully on very much of what anybody says around here—I certainly think 

not, but maybe people think that they can.  We’re giving our own views about where we think 

policy should go, but each of us is just one voice on a big Committee.  Certainly, the Chairman is 

different.  The Chairman has a huge megaphone, but the Chairman’s interactions are more 

prescribed, probably, than are those of the rest of us. 

Also, many of us talk to a variety of councils that come into the Banks.  Are we going to 

say that that guy on the council might turn around and profit?  I think this is just a very difficult 

thing.  So you have to follow this code where you say, “I’m giving you my own positions.”  I say 

the same things all the time.  I have the same messages all the time.  And I’m happy to try to 

communicate those messages.  But I don’t think that you can prescribe that such-and-such 

situation is out of bounds. 

MS. YELLEN.  Could I just ask a follow-up question? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure. 

MS. YELLEN.  Do you think it would be okay to talk to the clients of a financial firm 

behind closed doors about your personal views on monetary policy? 

MR. BULLARD.  Well, like everything else, I think it’s a judgment that has to be made. 

January 25–26, 2011 205 of 282



 
 

 
 

MS. YELLEN.  They could be benefitting. 

MR. BULLARD.  It’s possible that the audience is so large—I did one that was 

400 people, and it was basically the whole financial community in the town. 

MS. YELLEN.  Well, suppose the sponsor is a financial firm, and the firm has arranged a 

conference for clients, and you’re asked to be the speaker. 

MR. BULLARD.  In that case, you could insist that members of the public be allowed.  

Or, if media are there, then your comments are going to get reported anyway.  Also, we put our 

speeches and the Q&A on the web after the event.  So, given that, are you imparting special 

information to a select group?  I don’t really think so.  Are you giving the same messages you 

always give?  Do you want to communicate with this group?  Yes, you probably want to get 

certain messages across to this group. 

MS. YELLEN.  Okay. 

MR. EVANS.  Jim has got a good point.  I’m not quite sure how to define this.  There 

must be financial industry councils that the New York Fed or other Reserve Banks have, and you 

talk to them, maybe with more Fed people there.  But if it’s not open to the public, I’m not quite 

sure exactly how that’s different from the private meeting with a financial firm’s clients.  I think 

a little more definition of the examples that we’re contemplating would be very, very helpful. 

MS. YELLEN.  An example is that Merrill Lynch asks you to come to a client conference 

where you will be the main speaker. 

MR. EVANS.  I’ve never done that, but I think there are probably some examples that we 

all have shared where there might have been a dinner that felt a little uncomfortable. 

MS. YELLEN.  I know exactly what you’re talking about, and I would regard that, after 

having contemplated it, as something we absolutely shouldn’t do. 

January 25–26, 2011 206 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. PLOSSER.  But suppose it was a conference and, as Jim said, there were 300 or 

400 people there, and the press was there.  Would it matter?  If the press was there, which 

essentially makes it public, you would probably write your speech for that conference just as you 

would write any other speech.  

MR. FISHER.  But imagine this news article:  “Charles Plosser met today with selected 

clients of Goldman Sachs and said the following.” 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m asking a question.  I wasn’t trying to propose an answer. 

MR. FISHER.  You asked for an example.  It seems to me that the optics there would not 

be good. 

MR. BULLARD.  Okay, but we do something much worse than that—we meet with 

Goldman Sachs in private right now. 

MR. FISHER.  I don’t. 

MR. BULLARD.  I think we do. 

MR. EVANS.  Well, what about talking to 30 CEOs before every FOMC meeting? 

MR. FISHER.  I’ll tell you how I do that, because that’s important.  The ground rules are 

that I will impart no information, and I will only listen. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, you don’t have a conversation with them? 

MR. FISHER.  And they’re not financial firms.  I do not impart a thing, including my 

own views. 

MR. EVANS.  Well, you could talk to financial firms, too. 

MR. FISHER.  And if Toys R Us can make a profit off of my interaction, that would be 

something.  But we have very strict rules. 

January 25–26, 2011 207 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart, would you like to enter into the 

conversation? 

MR. FISHER.  I do think, though, that we have to think about the optics here as well. 

MR. LOCKHART.  First, let me say thanks to Tom for pointing out FRAM—I think it’s 

a good foundation.  Over and above that, I really favor an informal set of guidelines and 

principles that puts the emphasis on exercising good judgment and taking perhaps greater care 

going forward.  I think strict limitations on contacts who might—I emphasize the conditional—

generate trading or positioning profits is unworkably broad and, certainly, in my case, might 

interfere with the usefulness of many contacts.  Likewise, defining a strict frequency limit or 

rule, I think, goes too far. 

I don’t favor centralized reporting, but I do think it’s reasonable to assume that each 

participant will maintain a record of meetings and contacts.  And I do favor some tightening of 

elements of the guidelines.  For example, meetings with most parties, and certainly those with 

the press, should include, if possible, a public information officer as an associate or someone 

from the research department—a witness, if you will.  I think events in which businesses, clients, 

and prospects are the exclusive invitees, should be avoided or discouraged, even if the media are 

present, because I don’t think that changes the appearance of privileged access. 

I think participants should refrain from characterizing FOMC deliberations before the 

publication of the minutes, and then, after the minutes are out, they should characterize FOMC 

meetings in a manner consistent with the minutes.  And, of course, I think we all agree that we 

should adhere to a defined blackout period. That’s something I think should be strictly defined. 

January 25–26, 2011 208 of 282



 
 

 
 

On the question of expressing personal views on monetary policy that have not been 

stated publicly, again, I think this goes a little too far and should be left to judgment.  I accept the 

spirit of this guideline, because it does suggest privileged access to insider views. 

And, finally, if guidelines and principles are adopted by this group, I think they should be 

made public. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My views are a lot like Jim’s.  I think part 

of what makes policy good is transparency, and the more transparent we can be, the better off we 

would be in general.  Policies that are controlling can backfire on us.  Tom’s point about FRAM 

indicates that there are already guidelines in place about what we should and shouldn’t do.  I 

don’t think we can legislate good judgment here. 

I would note that this mostly refers to FOMC participants, not staff, whereas the 

guidelines in FRAM suggest senior officials— 

MS. YELLEN.  It’s our intention to develop corresponding guidelines. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m not accusing anybody, but staff contacts with the private sector and 

the media can also create these kinds of issues.  

MS. YELLEN.  We intend to address that. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I think one of the things that oftentimes gets us into trouble or 

misunderstood is when we go off the record.  My impression is that the Board, for example, 

gives very few on-the-record interviews, and, instead, the discussion is oftentimes on 

background. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Charlie, are you talking about contacts with the media at this 

point? 

January 25–26, 2011 209 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m talking about the media or some people who are Fed watchers. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Okay. 

MR. PLOSSER.  My own personal approach is never to say anything to anybody that I 

wouldn’t say publicly or haven’t said publicly, for example, in a speech.  I think there are lots of 

gray areas here.  I agree that it would not look good for one of us to speak at a Goldman Sachs 

venue, but, at the same time, all of us, I suspect, have spoken at banking conventions sponsored 

by a not-for-profit organization, such as the American Bankers Association, but basically the 

attendees include clients and donors and funders.  Is that acceptable, whereas something else 

may not be?  Or what about a university event, where alumni are raising money to support the 

institution?  There are lots of cases where it begins to get a little fuzzy, so I’m leery of trying to 

legislate that kind of controlling policy.   

I want to encourage communication.  I want to have more communication, not less, and 

have more open communication and less behind-the-scenes communication.  I think enforcement 

is going to be really, really difficult, and, again, I think we just can’t legislate good judgment.  I 

would prefer that we adopt broader guidelines that apply to everybody and then trust that we will 

use our best judgment, rather than adopt an attitude where we sow seeds of suspicion by trying to 

control behavior tightly.  That’s just my general philosophy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  First Vice President Moore. 

MR. MOORE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t have much specific to offer here.  I 

would just make the observation that I think the Federal Reserve System is perceived as being 

very cozy with the financial sector, and very distant from the general public.  And, in that 

context, I think anything we can do to suggest less coziness with the former and closer proximity 

to the latter, would serve us well.  Thank you. 

January 25–26, 2011 210 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also want to thank the subcommittee for 

their work on this important issue.  As I was developing my answers to the questions, I found 

myself gravitating to the second issue, which is the potential limitation on content.  By limiting 

what we communicate to information that’s already available to the public, we greatly minimize 

the actual or perceived problems associated with individuals who stand to gain financially from 

their interactions with us. 

There is an analogy in the private sector to this—the SEC’s fair disclosure rule.  That rule 

prohibits the selective disclosure of material and non-public information to selected persons, 

such as securities analysts or institutional investors, before that information is disclosed to the 

general public.  The regulation requires that, when material information is intentionally 

disclosed, it be disclosed publicly and not selectively.  That line of thinking helped me answer 

some of the questions. 

In question 2A in the subcommittee’s memo regarding content, I think the strict 

adherence to the Program for Security of FOMC Information that we approved yesterday is 

essential.  That means not sharing the views of others, or even characterizing the FOMC 

conversations, and letting the minutes provide the summary. 

In question 2B, I also don’t think that anyone should have non-public information, even 

about a Committee member’s own views.  Our own views would have to be presented publicly 

before they are given to any individual. 

Regarding question 1 on access, I think that FOMC participants should strive, as others 

have said, to avoid being in situations where it might appear that we’re giving confidential 

information or information that isn’t available to others.  That means paying close attention to 

January 25–26, 2011 211 of 282



 
 

 
 

the venues that we select, as we’ve been discussing, as well as to the frequency of questionable 

contacts, so that, again, we avoid the appearance of any favoritism. 

Finally, regarding whether this should be informal or formal, I agree with Governor 

Yellen that it should be formal, and I think that sharing it with the public will help us respond to 

requests and help us explain why we aren’t accepting some of the requests.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to thank the subcommittee for putting 

in a lot of hard work on a very difficult subject.  I did write a fairly detailed response to the 

subcommittee, so anything that’s in that response but that I don’t bring up in this discussion still 

applies.  I also appreciate the perspective that Tom brought to bear from FRAM.  That accords 

pretty well with what I would have hoped that we already had in place, so I agree with that. 

At times, I’ve thought that the reason we sometimes see questionable things from Fed 

staff in the newspaper could be that there is just not sufficient training for all of the staff and that 

we aren’t always very clear about what the security guidelines mean.  I know that, for 

information security and ethics training and so on, we have online guides and even certification 

exercises, so maybe we could do something like that every year on this issue.  At any rate, I think 

that training could help, and FRAM is already on point on a lot of the issues. 

I agree with Jim and Charlie and others in thinking that we need to communicate a lot 

more.  I think we’ve been undertaking very difficult monetary policies that are hard to explain.  

During a very difficult period, they’re susceptible to being picked apart, fairly and unfairly.  We 

need to make sure we have a policy in place that allows us to go out and explain, as best we all 

can, what we’re trying to accomplish and why it’s the right policy.  So, if we go down a 

January 25–26, 2011 212 of 282



 
 

 
 

particular path that ends up putting a lot of restrictions on how we’re supposed to talk, and so on, 

it will work against enhanced communication. 

As Charlie Plosser said, it’s really hard to legislate good judgment, so we’re counting on 

everybody to use their best judgment.  I’m not optimistic that we’re going to be very successful 

if we try to write the guidelines down in a legalistic fashion.  I think we need access to the kinds 

of parties, such as the financial sector, whom we’re concerned about.  I agree that talking to a 

closed meeting of financial clients is inappropriate, and we need to be careful about that.  But 

when I talk to people in the financial sector, if I ask the right questions and know what to probe 

for, I come away with something pretty useful for what we’re doing.  I don’t think it’s enough to 

count on New York and the Board of Governors to have a monopoly on that information without 

our having our own independent perspective.  So we need to figure out how to do that. 

I think having more examples of the bad choices would be helpful.  At the moment, I’ve 

just got a bunch of straw men on my list, and I don’t know if I should be very upset because it’s 

so proscriptive, or if instead I completely agree about talking or not talking to that particular 

group.  I guess we don’t really want to name the particular individual who might be responsible 

for a lot of this whole discussion.  Is it bad that we talk to certain people quite often?  I felt 

uncomfortable after I saw something that this person distributed to his clients, and I stopped 

agreeing to do that type of phone call for quite some time—even without the rules.  Sometimes 

financial groups have invited me to speak and, to assure me that it’s appropriate for a Fed official 

to do this, they’ve said, “Don Kohn came and talked to us.”  I know Don has good judgment 

about these things.  I know that he also knows how to talk to people and not say things he 

shouldn’t say.  [Laughter] 

MR. TARULLO.  He did it for 40 years, Charlie. 

January 25–26, 2011 213 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  Yes, that’s exactly it.  Don once told me, “The minutes come out 

tomorrow.  I always read the minutes very carefully, because that reminds me of the language in 

which we talk about various things.”  Do the rest of us do that before we talk to a group?  I know 

I don’t.  I think The Wall Street Journal is particularly effective at getting certain messages out, 

so we need to be careful about how restrictive we might be—I can talk to a whole bunch of 

people and not get any press. 

I think informal guidelines would be better than strict ones, and I, personally, speak 

openly anyway when I talk to people.  So I don’t think I am giving different messages to 

different people.  I just say what I want.  If I thought that the rules were pretty proscriptive and 

difficult, I might be tempted to regularly post my observations on how I thought things were 

going and have it in a nice place on a website.  That may or may not be in line with what you are 

actually trying to get across, but it would be in the spirit of communicating very openly to 

everybody. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  In 140 characters or fewer.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the subcommittee for 

putting in time and effort and good thinking to help us on this.  I strongly support an effort to 

come to a mutual understanding about the standards of integrity we expect of each other, and I 

think that’s really worth doing. 

I’ve been wrestling with this since the subcommittee sent out materials for us to review.  

I thought I had a grip on a number of principles, but I realized I hadn’t thought deeply about 

what they’re grounded on.  I think it’s difficult to draw bright lines, and that’s what I am struck 

with in reading what you have distributed.  Let me take this phrase as an example:  “individuals 

January 25–26, 2011 214 of 282



 
 

 
 

whose purpose may be to generate direct or indirect trading profits.”  I’m often at receptions 

around the District, where I talk to people who are members of the public.  As someone else 

remarked, virtually any of them could have a portfolio on which they could make a decision that 

might reflect what they thought they gleaned from what I said.  I think we all know what we’re 

trying to capture—the Macroeconomic Advisers of the world—but the net is drawn too loosely. 

The other issue is predicting monetary policy, and that stuck in my head for a bit, 

because, if you look at this from a broader perspective, we’ve been on a three-decade journey 

towards greater transparency, towards fuller communication.  I think we talk a lot more about 

our individual views than we used to.  I haven’t gone back and compared speeches, but my 

general sense is that, over the last 20 years, members of the FOMC—Governors and 

Presidents—say more in public about their own views than they used to.  We used to be much 

more guarded.  Central banks around the world over the last 20 or 30 years have become much 

more forthcoming, and I think there’s a really good reason for that.  I think that we all understand 

that we are more effective the more the public understands about how and why we do things.  

We want people to understand our reaction function, so, in some sense, we want people to be 

able to predict monetary policy.  That creates an inevitable tension.  Obviously, if markets expect 

a move of 25 basis points, and somebody tips them off that it’s going to be 50, that’s a problem.  

But, explaining macroeconomics to somebody presumably doesn’t prejudice a decision and helps 

what we’re doing going forward.  Between those two poles there’s going to be some fuzziness; 

for example, the elements of macroeconomics that you choose to enlighten people about can 

convey information about your views—in fact, this is a time-honored Fed communication 

practice that we use to hint about one thing or another. 

January 25–26, 2011 215 of 282



 
 

 
 

This is a hard issue to resolve, and it draws me strongly to the idea of dealing with it in 

terms of principles rather than prescriptive, detailed, legalistic rules.  Along the same lines, I 

think that centralized reporting is going to absorb a lot of time and effort on a small fraction of 

cases that are sort of blurry; for example, people will be spending time trying to figure whether 

they should report something or not, and it’s not likely to be worth the effort.  I think what we’re 

going for should be a mutual understanding of the general principles involved, which are 

selectivity of access and inappropriate disclosure, or the perception of those two things. 

I think what President Bullard said is really important.  Imagine that we adopt a formal 

policy on communications.  Imagine that it’s also secret.  So we adopt a secret policy on 

communication—well, that doesn’t seem right.  I think we’re going to be drawn towards 

releasing our policy.  And I think President Bullard is right that we want to frame it in the broad 

context of the value we see of communicating to American citizens.  I also think First Vice 

President Moore is right that we’re perceived as cozy with Wall Street when the reality is that we 

spend a ton of time with the citizens around our Districts. 

In sum, I think it would be useful to have that come through in a statement of what we 

think our communication is about, and how we do it with integrity.  I would urge the 

subcommittee to think about it from both the positive side and the negative side and try to craft a 

philosophical statement that starts things off and says something like, “Yes, communicating to 

the public is important, because they need to understand what we do, why we do it, how we do it, 

what goes into our thinking,” and so on.  Then, “At the same time, there are some things we need 

to keep confidential for the integrity of the process.  Here is how we constrain that.”  But put that 

as part of a broader, more positive message about communication.  These are my initial thoughts 

on this, and, at this time, it is all I have to offer. 

January 25–26, 2011 216 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, I have to leave, because I’m giving a 

speech tomorrow morning to the Armstrong Dad’s Club at a local elementary school—it’s not 

about monetary policy.  [Laughter]  I apologize for not being able to stay.  I do think this is a 

very good suggestion.  We have talked about this.  I don’t want to talk too much because I’m on 

the subcommittee, but we should frame it in the positive sense that President Bullard and others 

mentioned, that we’re attempting to communicate more broadly.  I think John hit the nail on the 

head—we’re viewed as being too cozy with Wall Street and too opaque to the public.  If we 

phrase it that way, we can also point out some things that we do not do, such as provide inside 

information to unnamed former Governors who are consultants, so that they can make a profit.  I 

think we could emphasize that within a positive context. 

I think President Lacker is right that having very bright lines is extremely difficult.  I 

think good judgment, in the end, is what is required.  What we are really talking about here is 

reaffirming an ethic that makes us an exceptional institution.  There are some bright lines, 

however; for example, Sandy referred to the SEC fair disclosure rule.  I’m also sympathetic to 

broadening the group, as Charlie said, because it’s not just principals at this table but also the 

staff that have access to inside information, and we have to be very careful not to allow anybody 

to trade on it. 

But the general principle that has been expressed here, which is fairly new for our 

subcommittee to hear, is to put it in a positive context.  Our job is to communicate as broadly as 

possible, to inform the public, and not to have certain subsets of the public have privileged 

information from which they either might profit or it might be interpreted that they are benefiting 

at the expense of others.  If I may be excused, I would be grateful.  Thanks. 

January 25–26, 2011 217 of 282



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Have a good flight.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I agree with Jeff on the 

communications.  We don’t want to make it look like we are trying to clamp everything down.  

In fact, we want to frame it so that we’re actually opening things up and communicating to 

people in a fair, transparent way, so that everyone has equal access to the information. 

It seems to me there are two broad guidelines that we’re trying to conform to.  One is not 

to communicate material, non-public information to privileged parties; we want to avoid that at 

all costs.  Included in that material, non-public information would be, of course, any talk about 

what happened at the FOMC meeting, because that is material and it is non-public; for example, 

one wouldn’t talk about what someone said at the FOMC meeting.  I don’t know that we have to 

define each of those little pieces, and, instead, if we use the category “material, non-public 

information,” I think we all know what that is and can make judgments about that. 

The second broad guideline is a bit more difficult—we shouldn’t participate in any forum 

or meeting that provides a commercial benefit to that party.  This is particularly relevant to 

accepting speaking engagements.  Therefore, for example, I shouldn’t go speak at Goldman 

Sachs and talk to their clients.  And I would never do this in a million years, believe me, and the 

reason is that Goldman Sachs benefits from that.  I’ll give you an example of how far this can go.  

I had a phone call from someone that used to be my boss who wanted me to give him a reference 

to another financial firm, and I refused, because I felt that if I gave him a positive reference, 

which he probably deserved, I was generating a commercial advantage for that person.  So we 

don’t want to do anything that provides a commercial advantage to a party. 

Now, the reason why this gets tricky is that it’s hard to say where it ends.  Speaking at a 

financial firm for its clients is obviously out.  Speaking at an advisory firm for its clients or that 

January 25–26, 2011 218 of 282



 
 

 
 

is going to use the information somehow, is obviously out.  But how about a university?  I gave 

the commencement address at New College.  Well, it’s probably beneficial to New College to 

have me as their commencement speaker, and that is probably creating some commercial 

advantage to them.  So does that mean I can’t be the commencement speaker at New College?  

Here’s another tricky example.  Let’s say you’re going to meet with the board of directors of one 

of the banks in your District.  Well, it’s good for that firm to have that contact—it probably 

makes the board of directors feel better about being on that bank’s board.  I think that’s probably 

okay, but there’s a gradation of cases, and I think it’s very hard to draw the line precisely at the 

point where the commercial advantage is significant enough that it’s out of bounds.  One that’s 

clearly out of bounds is talking to a firm that’s a Fed watcher—that person you spoke to is going 

to take that information and sell it for profit. 

I think the principle is clear, but exactly how far down you go is a little bit more difficult.  

Maybe we can specify examples that are very clearly out of bounds, specify gray areas, and then 

specify some things that we think are acceptable, say, doing a speech for a nonprofit 

organization. 

MR. LACKER.  A trade organization. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Trade organizations. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  A fundraiser for a nonprofit would be okay? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, that’s an interesting question—for a university, for 

example. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  If the organizer invites only wealthy alumni from a university for 

the sole purpose of raising the endowment of that university, do you think that would be okay? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don’t know. 

January 25–26, 2011 219 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. LACKER.  How is that different from a Chamber of Commerce? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Remember that you’re not disclosing material, non-

public information.  There are two separate things here.  But I think this is tricky.  I think the 

education one is the particular one that we need to spend a little bit of attention on. 

Let me just make a few other points.  I actually am in favor of reporting all meetings.  I 

think this is just a transparency thing.  If you don’t report them, then people are always going to 

be suspicious of whom you’re meeting with, and if we’re all doing the right thing and meeting 

with the right people, then we shouldn’t be embarrassed by whom we’re meeting with.  I just 

don’t think it’s that big a deal to report it. 

I think it’s useful, as others have said, to have a third party in attendance when possible, 

be it someone from research, communications, or the executive office.  That provides protection 

if you ever get into a “he said, she said” situation, because the third party can actually repudiate 

what the person reported you said if you didn’t actually say it. 

I would prefer to have a formal policy, even though the formal policy may just be these 

high-level principles.  It seems to me that we want to have something written down.  I’d much 

rather tell the Congress that I have a formal policy than an informal policy.  How could I justify 

saying, “Oh, we just have an informal policy about how we communicate”?  I think that would 

be hard to defend. 

Finally, on the staff issue, this is a red herring, in my opinion.  Speaking for the New 

York Fed, we went through the crisis for years and dealt with all sorts of special stuff.  As far as 

I’m concerned, nothing ever leaked from anybody.  So I don’t think it’s a staff issue.  I really 

think that’s off point.  I think it is about us, how we behave, how we talk.  I don’t think the staff 

is the problem.  I really, really don’t. 

January 25–26, 2011 220 of 282



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  Could I just add to your point on the formal versus the informal policy?  I 

don’t think it’s as easy as just sort of saying, “I call it formal.  You call it informal.”  I can 

imagine somebody saying, “Well, a formal policy is one where there’s some kind of audit trail, 

where there’s some check against what you’re actually doing.”  And I think that’s where we 

would trip up. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A written record of whom you met with would be part of 

that formal process, right? 

MR. EVANS.  Well, okay.  But, if it ends up being something that is an audit trail like 

our internal audit or something like that, then it’s going to take on a very different nature, and I 

think we’ll end up tripping over the little things.  It’s one of the things auditors do—they say, 

“Here’s a list of what you say you do, and here’s what you actually did, so you missed on a 

bunch of things.”  That could be embarrassing. 

MS. YELLEN.  Well, it seems to me that a formal policy could be a statement of ethical 

principles, possibly couched in the positive way that you and Jim and Jeff and others have 

proposed.  It could be a clear statement of what one’s ethical obligations are.  Obviously, there 

are gray areas when it comes to specifics.  But the idea is that, even though it’s not quite 

enforceable, a positive answer to the question “Do you adhere to high ethical standards” is not 

voluntary, it’s obligatory. 

MR. BULLARD.  I had one comment on Vice Chairman Dudley’s remarks.  I thought 

that the most out of bounds thing that you could do is to talk to a board of directors, especially of 

a financial institution.  I was taught in the Fed that that was the most out of bounds.  And you, in 

contrast, have the idea that, if that same bank has its clients in with a big group, that’s what’s out 

of bounds.  I think that difference shows how murky this is.  When you talk to the bank directors, 

January 25–26, 2011 221 of 282



 
 

 
 

you’re going right into the bank, and that could be perceived as giving inside information 

directly to the financial institution. 

MR. LACKER.  The context is that our supervisory staff frequently meets with boards of 

directors of banks we supervise. 

MR. BULLARD.  That’s different. 

MR. LACKER.  Occasionally, these are large, prominent firms.  The Reserve Bank 

President is invited along.  There are times when I accompany my staff for a particularly 

important meeting. 

MS. YELLEN.  But for supervisory purposes. 

MR. BULLARD.  To talk on supervisory matters. 

MR. LACKER.  Right, but it can happen that one is quizzed about macroeconomic 

information.  It hasn’t happened to me though. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Warsh. 

MR. WARSH.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few broad comments.  First, I view 

this subcommittee that Governor Yellen is heading as important and the successor to a long set 

of communications discussions.  I don’t view the discussion that we’re having or should be 

having as the “gotcha” committee because of particular ill things that we’re trying to root out.  If 

that comes out of a broader discussion of how we best communicate and what things are to be 

avoided, that’s fine, but I don’t think that this should be reflected as somehow catching bad guys, 

and that’s what is occupying our time. 

Second, I favor constitutions, not penal codes.  I think the penal code concept suggests 

somehow that there has been a grievous breach in decorum, respect, comity, civility.  I haven’t 

seen any of that, even in the big fights we’ve had over LSAPs.  I think we run real risks to the 

January 25–26, 2011 222 of 282



 
 

 
 

integrity of this organization if we decide that we’re going to set up controls, audits, systems, 

processes, and procedures.  We would look a lot like other agencies and a lot less like the Federal 

Reserve a couple of years after that.  So put me in the camp of constitutions.  Constitutions aren’t 

something that people can disobey.  Constitutions matter.  They impact people’s behavior.  

Views and interpretations of constitutions are important, but I think they’re very different from 

penal codes.  If you look at countries that start out with 10-page constitutions and then have 

thousands of pages—I’m thinking of particular countries in South America—you see republics 

that are breaking apart at the seams. 

Third, I think we’ve got different classes of counterparties, each of which demands a 

different set of judgments.  For example, regarding market participants, I agree with Charlie 

Evans that you can get a lot out of having a discussion with them, so it strikes me as a discussion 

that should be encouraged and not discouraged.  That doesn’t mean there shouldn’t be rules of 

the road.  Another class is the people who stand between us and the real world to communicate—

I get nothing out of those discussions, though I see what they get.  As a result, I would bring 

different rules of the road to the frequency and necessity of those sorts of conversations.  Finally, 

there’s the press.  I think that’s a different discussion from the one we’ve been having and it 

should be thought of differently with different rules.  I don’t have any perfect solutions but I 

wouldn’t conflate the press with intermediaries who stand between us and financial markets. 

I have just two more.  Fourth, the Chairman is different from the rest of us.  And it strikes 

me that not only is this Chairman different, but Chairmen are different, and we should think 

about the discretion they might need, because their communication of policy is fundamentally 

different from that of Governors and Presidents.  As a result, I think we wouldn’t want to 

constrain the Chairman with rules, particularly at times of crisis. 

January 25–26, 2011 223 of 282



 
 

 
 

Fifth, I think Bill rightly brings up the point of material, non-public information.  Let me 

combine that with the discussion about the need to communicate more, to tell people more about 

what we think.  In my view, the world hears from a lot of us all the time, and there’s a big 

difference between the frequency of communication and their understanding of how we’re 

thinking about policy.  I don’t happen to share the view that more is always and everywhere 

better.  If I can only say to group X what I said in a public speech, then, for those of us who tend 

to speak less frequently, you feel compelled to get your evolving set of thoughts on the record on 

a monthly basis, otherwise you run afoul of the penal code.  I don’t think that that’s necessarily 

good.  I trust everyone around here to make his or her own judgments about how frequently they 

should speak, and I wouldn’t want to tie private comments to the most recent things that were 

said in the speech to the local Rotary.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you.  I have just a couple of thoughts, and going through this process 

has opened my eyes to how difficult it actually is.  First, a number of people have talked about 

judgment, and in information security or control mechanisms, there’s always the basic tenet that 

your overall security program is only as good as the weakest link.  In this situation, our 

reputation is only as good as the weakest judgment among us, so the judgment calls that each of 

us makes will affect the reputation of us collectively.  I think it’s important to keep that in mind 

and continue to discuss it. 

Second, I think one thing we really are trying to guard against is sort of “synthetic” 

confidential information.  We all understand what the actual confidential information is—the 

written materials, what’s said in this room, and so on.  But what about the things that each of us 

is thinking, the things we’re talking to each other about not in a formal FOMC meeting, and the 

January 25–26, 2011 224 of 282



 
 

 
 

opinions that we have?  By talking to each of us, somebody could create confidential 

information.  Given that, I do think we need some coordination mechanism to understand who’s 

talking to whom in order to avoid the appearance, if not the reality, of somebody being able to 

create synthetic information. 

Finally, there’s a tendency to think of this communication issue as covering 

conversations in formal settings, but, in reality, each of us is always an FOMC participant, and, 

just as Governor Raskin gets caught between the tabloids and the gum, I’ve been tackled in bars 

and I’ve been tackled on the beach [laughter] by people wanting me to explain what it is we’re 

doing.  If I felt that the only answer I could give them was something I had already said in a 

public setting or in a speech, I would have to start tweeting, I really would.  So I think we have to 

be careful about prohibiting saying anything that you haven’t said in public.  Doing so could 

create an awful lot of noise from things being said in public just so that they could then be said in 

private. 

Finally, I come down in favor of formal principles with some suggested guidelines that 

go along with them, and I think it does make sense for those to be positively framed rather than 

negatively framed.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My first point picks up on something that 

Kevin said and a couple of people echoed, but it was notably absent from the beginning of the 

go-round, and that point is that there are discrete issues here.  The one that I think is front and 

center is that of exclusivity of access, particularly exclusivity associated with profit and trading 

for profit.  The issue of communication seems to me a different one—related perhaps, but a 

much more difficult one—and, as you said, Jim, one that has more affirmative elements to it and 

January 25–26, 2011 225 of 282



 
 

 
 

not simply negative elements.  As you could tell from my earlier question to Eric, I, like Kevin, 

think the issues of the press are perhaps deserving of some conversation, but they’re separate, as 

well, in part precisely because if the press itself is acting ethically, exclusivity is not an issue.  

They literally are speaking to the world whenever they repeat something that they have heard 

from one of us. 

My second point is a little hard to say, but I’m going to say it.  I disagree with Kevin on 

this notion that somehow the Federal Reserve is special and that the rules that apply to the rest of 

the government don’t apply to us.  I’ll be honest and say that’s one of the things that has 

concerned me about the Federal Reserve in the two years that I’ve been here.  I’ll begin with 

ethics.  There have been some things that I have seen—and, again, it’s hard to say this—

particularly associated with some of the behaviors of some directors at Reserve Banks that just 

shouldn’t be allowed, and I think we need to formalize things considerably more than they have 

been formalized. 

The third point is that rules are hard.  Rulemaking is difficult because you always have 

under-inclusion and over-inclusion.  This is why rulemaking processes are not a straightforward 

exercise, and why rules are not always the best approach to take.  But, Charlie, precisely because 

one cannot legislate good judgment, there are times when one needs to legislate behavior.  I think 

there are circumstances in which the potential for over- and under-inclusion is sufficiently 

circumscribed that one may need something approaching a rule, even though, in a lot of other 

areas, principles and examples and guidelines are more appropriate mechanisms.  In a way, some 

of this discussion was like a first-year law class.  People state a position, and some people create 

a hypothetical that’s at the edge of that position to show how you can’t possibly have a rule.  

January 25–26, 2011 226 of 282



 
 

 
 

Well, of course, you can have a rule, but you can’t necessarily cover everything with that rule.  

Several people have been explicit about this, and I agree with them. 

The most disturbing thing right now is the phenomenon of someone who comes in, talks 

to most or all members of the FOMC and then to a group of paying clients, essentially 

advertising that fact and suggesting that there’s a special kind of information.  This is not limited 

to one person, and this is not just Macroeconomic Advisers, although they have been mentioned.  

Way before I was at the Fed, I heard people going around town saying, “Oh, yeah, I have lunch 

with X and Y at the Fed, so I kind of know where they are, and this is where the Fed is heading 

on this.”  I think this problem is more serious than most of the people around the table think it is, 

and I have believed since I’ve been here that there was a real problem waiting to explode.  Now, 

we’ve had a lot of bad press, which has been about other things, but I really think there’s the 

potential for problems here.  And I have to say that it’s not just limited to, as I said, the Larry 

Meyer type of issue at all.  I think Larry is going to bear the brunt of a lot of this in some 

respects, but it really isn’t limited to him.  We’re not at the point of being able to write that rule, 

but that doesn’t mean we don’t need to be in favor of doing so.  I would add that I really think 

we need rules for the conduct of directors of Federal Reserve Banks.  I really do.  Thank you. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Regarding what particular things? 

MR. TARULLO.  There have been meetings where people are formally here in their role 

as directors and they have attempted to lobby me on applications dealing with their institutions 

and/or pending regulatory issues.  In one case, even when I suggested to the individual that it 

was inappropriate, he persisted with my colleagues and attempted to come by my office the next 

morning.  I just think we need a code of conduct to prevent that sort of thing. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

January 25–26, 2011 227 of 282



 
 

 
 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I, too, want to thank the members of the 

subcommittee on communications for helping to guide this discussion.  I have certainly learned a 

lot listening to everyone’s comments.  Certainly, the notion of having an overarching 

philosophical statement is a good one, so, in that spirit, I would offer the following.  In 

considering why central banks communicate with outside people, I start with the overarching 

principle that they do so to enhance transparency, and there are really two fundamental purposes 

in doing so.  First is accountability.  There’s enormous power inherent in a central bank, so the 

political process has the ongoing responsibility of evaluating whether our exercise of that power 

is meeting society’s goals.  In other words, the public has to have information to conduct an 

effective evaluation of our work.  The second reason we aim to enhance transparency is that 

we’re in the business here of managing expectations of inflation and of the future path of the 

policy rate.  In thinking about the second reason, which is essentially about the conduct of 

monetary policy, my evolving view is that we want to make sure that we remain accountable 

while at the same time we want to make sure that we are correctly managing expectations.  And 

we want there to be an explicit responsibility.  To use Governor Duke’s metaphor, we wear the 

FOMC hat when we’re in this room, and we wear it when we’re outside this room.  And, because 

we’re in the business of managing expectations, anything that we communicate is, in essence, 

communicating something about our personal views or the Committee’s views. 

If we believe in this second purpose of transparency, then we have a collective 

responsibility to make sure that our communications serve the policy paths that we have agreed 

to.  When we significantly depart from this responsibility, we undermine the Committee’s 

decisions, and we inject significant suboptimality into the policy decisions. 

January 25–26, 2011 228 of 282



 
 

 
 

So when you think through the notion of the optimizing the work that we do here, I think 

you can see guidance evolving towards one that includes some notion of timing.  We’ve been 

talking about content, but there’s also a notion, I think, of timing.  So in other words, we think 

through when it is, how long we’re going to give decisions time to play out, and at what point we 

let views come in that could be shaping, in essence, the policy decisions that are made in this 

room. 

I’ll summarize by saying that I think the FOMC is a collegial committee and is 

responsible for the conduct of monetary policy, and as such, its responsibility extends through 

the whole decisionmaking time line.  It extends to pre-announcement effects of prospective 

actions.  It extends to what goes on in this room and persuading colleagues of the views 

expressed when we do our deliberations, and it also extends to the effects of our policy 

statements and the minutes on market expectations.  I will stop there. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’d like to follow up on Governor Raskin’s comments 

because I thought you laid out a really good way to think about things.  I would just add one 

aspect.  I think another role in our communication is listening.  Communication is not just us 

talking and telling people what we want them to hear.  Part of our role is to listen to what’s going 

on in the economy.  That’s where you end up in these private settings, really.  It’s not so much 

that I have any interest in privacy, but rather that the person talking to me might have an interest 

in privacy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Would you like to sum up? 

MS. YELLEN.  It’s great that we’re all in agreement.  [Laughter]  I appreciate the wide 

range of views we’ve heard.  I think that, at a minimum, what I would try to accomplish is to 

January 25–26, 2011 229 of 282



 
 

 
 

articulate some overarching philosophy concerning communications that expresses both its 

positive value and the ethical principles that we need to adhere to in order to make sure that we 

don’t create undue private advantage.  How we get past there isn’t obvious; the gray areas here 

are immense.  I share the view many of you have expressed that these contacts are very valuable 

as we carry out our work, and I think our subcommittee really needs to think about whether we 

can devise any more-concrete guidelines about how the philosophy applies in specific situations.  

Again, I appreciate the views you’ve expressed, and, obviously, we have our work cut out for us. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you all very much.  The next meeting is March 15.  

The meeting is adjourned. 

END OF MEETING 

January 25–26, 2011 230 of 282




