











































FOMC Meeting Transcript, August 9, 2011


 
 

 
 

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
August 9, 2011 

 
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of 

the Federal Reserve System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, 
D.C., on Tuesday, August 9, 2011, at 8:00 a.m.  Those present were the following: 

Ben Bernanke, Chairman 
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Elizabeth Duke 
Charles L. Evans 
Richard W. Fisher 
Narayana Kocherlakota 
Charles I. Plosser 
Sarah Bloom Raskin 
Daniel K. Tarullo 
Janet L. Yellen 

Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. 
Williams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee  

James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel  

Thomas A. Connors, David Reifschneider, Daniel G. Sullivan, David W. Wilcox, and 
Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Economists  

Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account  

Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  

Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board 
of Governors  

Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors  

Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors  

August 9, 2011 1 of 162



 
 

 
 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors  

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors; Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Division of International 
Finance, Board of Governors; Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior Associate 
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors  

Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors; 
Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  

Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors  

David E. Lebow, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors  

Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary 
Affairs, Board of Governors  

Beth Anne Wilson, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors  

Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors  

John C. Driscoll, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors  

Carol Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors  

Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors  

David Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  

Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland  

David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, and Geoffrey Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively  

Chris Burke, Fred Furlong, Tom Klitgaard, Evan F. Koenig, and Daniel L. Thornton, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, New York, Dallas, 
and St. Louis, respectively  

Keith Sill, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  

August 9, 2011 2 of 162



 
 

 
 

Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  

  

August 9, 2011 3 of 162



 
 

 
 

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
August 9, 2011 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  This is a joint FOMC–Board 

meeting.  So I need a motion to close the meeting. 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Before we get down to business, we 

have a few people to whom we have to say farewell—first, Carol Low.  Carol, an FOMC 

specialist in the Secretariat, is retiring.  She’s worked at the Board for only 41 years, begun at 

age six.  [Laughter]  She has attended 222 FOMC meetings, which turns out to be the same 

number that Don Kohn attended.  So that gives you a measure— 

MR. WILCOX.  One Don Kohn unit. [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  One Don Kohn unit.  That’s right.  So that’s quite a record.  

Carol, you’ve been here for many, many years, and we thank you for your service.  [Applause] 

It was announced yesterday that Nathan Sheets will be leaving the Board to take a 

position in the private sector, and hence he recused himself from the last meeting and obviously 

has had nothing to do with this meeting as well.  I’m sorry he’s not here to accept our 

congratulations, but as you know, Nathan did a wonderful job piloting the Division of 

International Finance through some very choppy international waters over the past few years, 

and we’re going to miss him and his insights and understanding of the international situation 

very much.  Steve Kamin will be acting director as we try to regroup in International Finance, 

and we appreciate Steve taking on that responsibility.  For the record, let me acknowledge our 

thanks to Nathan Sheets for his many contributions. 

August 9, 2011 4 of 162



 
 

 
 

And finally, this is the last meeting for our colleague Tom Hoenig.  Tom began attending 

FOMC meetings in 1991 and has attended a total of 161 meetings, which exceeds the sum of any 

two other members around the table.  The only problem I’ve ever had with Tom is that I’m 

unable to get him to say what he really thinks.  [Laughter]  It’s a 20-year record of service 

through three recessions—I’m not implying any causality—and we have all benefited very 

much, Tom, from your perspective, your banker’s insights, and your wide range of experience. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  I will note to the Committee that I want to apologize.  I had 

no idea the markets were going to react this way to my leaving.  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we will have a chance to make jokes like that at a 

lunch in your honor after the next FOMC meeting, and I suspect that your retirement might get 

mentioned once or twice at Jackson Hole.  I’m just guessing. 

MR. HOENIG.  I would imagine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Tom, thank you.  You have our great 

appreciation and admiration. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  [Applause] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Without further ado, let’s go to item 1 on our agenda 

and turn to Brian Sack for a report on financial developments.  Brian. 

MR. SACK.1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the intermeeting period, financial 
market participants became very concerned about the prospects for U.S. economic 
growth and had to contend with significant risk events related to the fiscal situations 
in Europe and the United States.  These developments led to dramatic declines in 
equity prices and interest rates, and they prompted widespread discussion about 
whether the Federal Reserve will deliver additional policy stimulus. 

The increasing pessimism in the market about economic growth prospects was 
driven in part by the incoming economic data.  The data indicated that the economic 
recovery has been more anemic than had been appreciated, despite the degree of 
policy accommodation that the Federal Reserve has put in place, and raised questions 

                                                 
1 The materials used by Mr. Sack are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 

August 9, 2011 5 of 162



 
 

 
 

about the extent to which economic activity will pick up going forward.  Indeed, 
respondents to the Desk’s primary dealer survey revised down their GDP forecasts 
substantially, and most of them saw the risks around that lower forecast as skewed to 
the downside.  The dramatic movements in asset prices in recent days indicate that 
investors’ confidence in the economy recovery has deteriorated even further. 

Based on this shift in the outlook, investors lowered the expected path of the 
federal funds rate substantially, as shown in the upper-left panel (exhibit 1).  Current 
futures prices suggest that the federal funds rate will remain below 50 basis points 
through most of 2013.  A similar revision took place in the policy expectations from 
the Desk’s primary dealer survey.  As shown to the right, the perceived likelihood of 
the timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate target shifted back 
dramatically, with considerable odds now assigned to 2013. 

The revision to the economic growth outlook has also brought the possibility of 
additional policy accommodation back into the discussion among market participants.  
The primary dealer survey asked about the likelihood of various policy steps that the 
Chairman discussed in his June press conference.  As shown in the middle-left panel, 
many respondents placed meaningful odds on those steps over the next year.  In 
particular, changing the “extended period” language, providing guidance on the 
SOMA portfolio, increasing the size of SOMA, and increasing the duration of SOMA 
were all given about a 20 percent probability by the median respondent, while cutting 
IOER was given about a 10 percent probability.  The perceived chances of policy 
actions have likely shifted up notably since the time of the survey, given the 
deterioration in financial conditions over the past week. 

The revision to expectations for short-term interest rates and the possibility of 
additional balance sheet actions contributed to a notable decline in Treasury yields.  
As shown in the middle-right panel, the 10-year Treasury yield fell about 60 basis 
points over the intermeeting period to around 2.35 percent. 

The decline in the 10-year yield was driven entirely by its real rate component, as 
shown in the bottom-left panel.  The 10-year real interest rate fell to around 15 basis 
points—a remarkably low level that reflects the high degree of pessimism among 
investors about the growth prospects for the economy.  At the same time, 10-year 
breakeven inflation rates stayed relatively high, reflecting in part that inflation has 
remained elevated in this environment. 

The weaker economic growth outlook also caused an abrupt decline in equity 
prices.  As shown in the bottom-right panel, equity prices plunged over the past week 
or two, bringing the S&P 500 index about 14 percent lower since the last FOMC 
meeting.  Other risk assets also suffered, with high-yield corporate bond spreads 
widening notably and bank share prices falling sharply.  The share prices of Bank of 
America and Citigroup are down nearly 40 percent and 30 percent, respectively, since 
the last FOMC meeting, with much of that decline occurring yesterday.  Market-
based measures of uncertainty surged, with the VIX piercing 40 percent. 

August 9, 2011 6 of 162



 
 

 
 

Investors’ concerns about growth prospects were exacerbated by ongoing stresses 
in European sovereign debt markets, the subject of your second exhibit.  As shown in 
the upper-left panel (exhibit 2), pressures in European sovereign debt markets 
intensified over the intermeeting period.  This deterioration occurred despite major 
policy steps taken by European leaders, including the July 21 agreement to provide 
additional support to Greece and to expand the scope of the EFSF.  Mike Leahy will 
discuss this package and subsequent policy steps in more detail in his briefing. 

The initial market reaction to the package was positive, but this response was not 
sustained.  In particular, market participants began to question whether the package 
provides sufficient safeguards to stem contagion to Italian and Spanish debt markets.  
As a result, spreads on those securities began to widen sharply in recent weeks, 
reaching new highs.  These conditions led the ECB to begin purchasing Italian and 
Spanish bonds yesterday, bringing those spreads down significantly.  However, there 
remains a great deal of uncertainty about the strategy that the ECB will employ and 
the potential scope for those purchases.  These purchases are seen as a bridge to the 
expanded use of the EFSF, which will include bond purchases in the secondary 
market. 

The deterioration in sovereign debt markets once again translated into pressure on 
European financial institutions, given investors’ concerns about the exposures of 
those institutions to the affected countries.  These concerns were amplified by 
weaker-than-expected European bank earnings reports.  As shown in the upper-right 
panel, the equity prices of major European financial firms have fallen sharply in 
recent months. 

In addition, some European institutions have increasingly found it difficult to 
borrow in short-term dollar funding markets.  As shown in the middle-left panel, 
there has been a meaningful decline since late June in the amount of commercial 
paper issued by institutions from Spain, Italy, and France, as money market funds and 
other investors have reportedly pulled away from these firms.  The reliance on short-
term dollar funding remains sizable for institutions in France, but these firms 
reportedly have had to collapse much of this funding into overnight paper in recent 
weeks. 

The pullback of investors from providing funding to these institutions is also 
apparent in the upward pressure observed in dollar funding rates.  As shown to the 
right, the three-month LIBOR has remained low, but the rate obtained by borrowing 
in euros and swapping to dollars, a funding practice used by many European 
institutions, has risen markedly.  If the cost of dollar funding achieved through the FX 
swaps market continues to rise, we could see some use of the liquidity swap 
arrangements with other central banks, which provide dollar funding at a backstop 
rate of 100 basis points above the OIS rate. 

Overall, the strains on many European financial institutions are intense, and the 
liquidity positions of some of those firms have become more tenuous.  The 
considerable uncertainty surrounding the course of European sovereign debt markets 

August 9, 2011 7 of 162



 
 

 
 

and the outlook for these institutions has been an important concern for investors that 
has weighed heavily on financial markets. 

As shown in the bottom-left panel, the euro has held relatively steady against the 
dollar, as the negative effects from European stresses have been counterbalanced by 
the concerns about U.S. growth prospects.  However, the euro has weakened 
significantly against other currencies, such as the Swiss franc.  The strength of the 
franc prompted the Swiss National Bank to take actions last week for additional 
policy accommodation. 

Against the yen, the dollar has weakened notably, as shown to the right.  This 
movement led the Japanese Ministry of Finance to intervene in the market last 
Thursday on a unilateral basis to weaken the yen relative to the dollar.  The 
intervention was sizable and prompted the yen to fall more than 3 percent, although it 
has since retraced this movement to some degree.  In addition, to further support 
economic growth, the Bank of Japan moved toward additional policy accommodation 
last week by deciding to expand its securities purchase program. 

Financial markets also had to contend with sovereign debt risks here in the United 
States, the subject of your final exhibit.  As I noted in our videoconference last week, 
the lack of progress toward a credible fiscal package, and the uncertainty that this 
created about an increase in the debt ceiling, weighed heavily on investor sentiment 
and caused strains on the functioning of the Treasury market and money markets.  
Some of these strains improved substantially once the fiscal package was signed into 
law, but this did not exactly put the U.S. fiscal situation in the rearview mirror for 
financial markets.  Indeed, in recent days investors have been heavily focused on 
S&P’s decision to downgrade the long-term credit rating of the U.S. government. 

I will start with some of the dynamics that were observed around the time the debt 
ceiling was raised.  As I noted in our videoconference, concerns about the debt ceiling 
led money market funds and other investors to move out of Treasury bills, Treasury 
repo transactions, and some types of bank liabilities in favor of cash deposits at their 
custodial banks.  For the money funds, this decision partly reflected concerns about 
redemptions by investors.  As shown in the upper-left panel (exhibit 3), the outflows 
from money market funds from July 21 to August 1 were substantial, particularly for 
funds concentrated in Treasury securities.  Since August 1, however, those flows have 
begun to reverse. 

The shift in investor flows is also apparent if we focus on activity at the banks.  
The flight into bank deposits could be seen in the reserve balances held by some of 
the large custodial banks, shown in the upper-right panel.  Those balances surged as 
deposits grew, but they too have begun to reverse.  This surge in deposits caused 
some of these banks to worry about their leverage ratios, and one of them last week 
decided to impose a 13 basis point fee on deposit balances that exceed normal levels 
for all clients of their custodial services. 

August 9, 2011 8 of 162



 
 

 
 

This pattern of investor flows has shown through to short-term funding rates.  
During the uncertainty surrounding the debt ceiling, the Treasury bill curve became 
distorted.  Bill yields in general moved higher over the period through July 29, as 
shown in the middle-left panel, but the increase was disproportionately large for those 
bills maturing in August, as investors became concerned about the possibility of 
delayed payments on those securities and the range of operational and other problems 
that could result.  However, with the lifting of the debt ceiling, the bill curve quickly 
renormalized, with bill rates currently near zero for securities maturing over the 
remainder of the year. 

Similarly, the repo market has also recovered from the significant upward 
pressure on rates that was experienced during the debt ceiling impasse.  As shown to 
the right, the Treasury GC repo rate jumped from near 0 basis points to above 
25 basis points, driven by the withdrawal of money market funds and other investors 
that provide funds in this market.  Other short-term interest rates were also affected, 
with the federal funds rate also moving higher.  However, both rates have since 
moved down sharply. 

As I noted on the videoconference, the spike in short-term funding rates left the 
Desk on alert to the possibility of having to conduct repurchase agreements to keep 
the federal funds rate within the FOMC’s target range.  This was an extraordinary 
outcome, given that the financial system has about $1.6 trillion in excess reserves.  In 
the end, we did not conduct any such operations, as the federal funds rate remained 
within the FOMC’s target range. 

This episode caused some deterioration in market liquidity in the bill sector and in 
the Treasury repo market.  However, liquidity in the Treasury market more broadly 
held up fairly well throughout this period.  Indeed, as shown in the bottom-left panel, 
the bid-asked spread on the 10-year Treasury note remained narrow, although it 
jumped higher last Friday.  Other indicators, such as trading volume and depth of 
quotes, convey a similar message. 

Lastly, let me turn to the recent actions by the rating agencies.  The most notable 
development in this regard was the decision by S&P last Friday to downgrade its 
long-term sovereign rating for the United States to AA+.  The other major rating 
agencies, Fitch and Moody’s, have maintained a AAA long-term credit rating for the 
U.S. government.  However, Moody’s has the rating on negative outlook, and Fitch 
has described the conditions for its rating in a manner that also conveys downside 
risks. 

The decision by S&P appeared to further weigh on investor sentiment and raise 
concerns about the economic outlook.  Indeed, it came at a time when financial 
markets were already very sensitive to growth concerns and vulnerable to negative 
news.  As shown in the bottom-right panel, equity prices fell sharply yesterday, 
Treasury yields moved down notably, and the dollar was mixed—extending many of 
the trends that had emerged in recent weeks. 

August 9, 2011 9 of 162



 
 

 
 

To summarize, I will simply say that we have had better intermeeting periods than 
this one.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there questions for Brian?  President 

Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I want to go back to panels 1 and 3 in your exhibits.  In your view, from 

the standpoint of our New York Fed surveys, is there a substantial concentration of people who 

expect us to either raise rates or shrink our balance sheet in the foreseeable future?  When we say 

“extended period,” it appears to me that these are confirming the fact that it’s really an extended 

period, not the next one or two months.  Is that correct or incorrect from the standpoint of what 

you hear on the street? 

MR. SACK.  Well, certainly the path of the expected federal funds rate conveys that.  As 

you note, the dealer survey also asks about other steps in the direction of policy tightening.  In 

addition to what is shown in panel 3, there’s another side of that question, in which we ask about 

the probability of a number of exit steps.  Those probabilities are not that low, and they’re 

particularly high over the two-year horizon.  What you see is a relatively big difference between 

the probabilities in the one-year horizon and the probabilities over the two-year horizon.  So I 

think the Desk survey suggests that there are decent probabilities being assigned to exit options 

being adopted within two years, but more likely in the second year. 

MR. FISHER.  And do you sense that that has increased or decreased over the past few 

weeks?  Just in terms of your gut. 

MR. SACK.  I would say unchanged to slightly decreased, and perhaps decreased less so 

than I would have anticipated in the sense that the probabilities over two years are still quite high 

for many of these steps.  We initiated this question in a new form in this survey, and we intend to 

repeat it in this form.  So we’ll have a clear time series to see how it evolves going forward. 

August 9, 2011 10 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  And as to panel 6, where would you say we are in terms of historic 

valuation guidelines in terms of the S&P 500, even after this correction? 

MR. SACK.  Extremely cheap.  In fact, I think the dividend yield on the S&P 500 is 

about equal to the yield on a 10-year Treasury at this point.  In our models, the valuations are 

very cheap, although it’s hard to incorporate these abrupt shifts in expectations about the 

economy into the models.  So that makes it hard to assess how much of it is pessimism about 

growth and how much of it is valuation.  I think the big picture here on equities is, obviously, 

that the move has been very abrupt.  Many of us were puzzled by how well equities had held up, 

given how the macro outlook had been shifting.  I think what we are seeing in part is just a catch-

up to that more pessimistic outlook, but then one that has intensified as confidence has eroded.  

We have ventured into a very negative dynamic in the equity market that’s given us this very 

abrupt repricing. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’ll remark on that during my comments.  I just have one 

other question for Brian, if I may.  And that is, because there is a lot of the chatter in the market 

about substantial liquidity parked in excess reserves, I just want to understand the dynamics 

there.  Do we know what percentage or what amount of excess reserves is foreign banks versus 

domestic large banks? 

MR. SACK.  I believe what we’ve seen over the past month or two is the foreign bank 

holdings coming down and the domestic holdings going up.  I think this in part reflects some of 

the funding pressures that have been faced by the European institutions, and that rotation, I 

believe, has been around $200 billion.  And with that rotation, the level of reserves is about 

evenly split between domestic and foreign institutions. 

MR. FISHER.  So 50–50. 

August 9, 2011 11 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  Yes. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In terms of the stock market, I agree with Brian’s view, 

but there’s a different view as well, which is looking at the stock market irrespective of what 

bond yields are.  Just looking at 10-year trailing earnings, the P/E ratio is actually quite a bit 

above the long-term, historical average.  Someone like Shiller would say the stock market is 

actually very overvalued today.  I don’t think that’s the right way of looking at the stock market, 

but there is an alternative view of stock valuation that leads to a quite different conclusion. 

MR. FISHER.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, Bill makes a good point there.  This goes back to 

Ben Graham’s original analysis.  You know that Shiller did a substantial amount of work in 

terms of cyclical adjustment.  After yesterday’s correction, we’re at 19 times earnings, and I do 

want to remind the Committee that things can be worse.  The normal valuation is about 19 and a 

half.  We got down to 6.6 in August of ’82, 8.3 in ’74.  So— just to pump up the enthusiasm at 

this table—I think one of the arguments that might be made is that there is substantial downside 

left.  This is just one of many valuation models that we can look at.  I think Bill has a good point. 

MR. SACK.  Can I add a comment?  In terms of your question about reserves, as I noted 

in the briefing, we are seeing funding pressures emerge.  We are seeing a lot more discussion 

about the potential need for liquidity facilities.  I mentioned in my briefing that the FX swap 

lines could be used, but we’ve seen discussions of TAF-type facilities in market write-ups.  So 

the liquidity pressures are pretty substantial.  And I think it’s worth pointing out that this is all 

happening with $1.6 trillion of reserves in the system.  I think that if we had started without that 

degree of excess liquidity in the system, what we’d be seeing in terms of these pressures would 

August 9, 2011 12 of 162



 
 

 
 

be much more severe.  But even with that, we’re getting to the point where the market feels that 

additional liquidity injections might be needed. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Brian.  Thanks for your good work. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a brief question on exhibit 1, 

panel 1, which is “Implied Federal Funds Rate Path.”  I just want to make sure I understand this.  

If I’m reading this correctly, the market expects no action until June, certainly summer of 2013.  

And the other part I want to ask about is, why is this light blue line going down to zero at one 

year, whereas it’s above that today?  That seems odd to me. 

MR. SACK.  Remember that the futures rate is going to reflect the mean of the future 

distribution of short rates.  So, the futures rate moving above 25 basis points in the middle of 

2013, that appears to reflect a modal forecast that policy will be on hold and then some risk that 

that policy could be tightened.  Of course, the risks around the short rates are one-sided when 

you’re at the zero bound. 

MR. BULLARD.  I thought in the past, when we’ve looked at these, we’ve looked at the 

modal prediction, not the mean. 

MR. SACK.  I was just about to come to that.  The Board staff does look at a modal 

forecast derived from interest rate caps, and what it shows is that the modal forecast is actually 

farther out.  I believe it is unchanged through 2013. 

MR. ENGLISH.  It’s basically flat through 2013. 

MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Suppose you made a promise, then, to 2013.  Would it back up 

from what the modal expectation is?  The modal expectation is beyond that. 

August 9, 2011 13 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  If there were a statement that you were definitely going to tighten in the 

middle of 2013, then possibly.  If there were a statement that you weren’t going to tighten until 

then or later if appropriate, then I would think not.  In fact, that reassurance that you were willing 

to say, “There will be no tightening until 2013, and we’ll continue to evaluate”—I think that 

would probably, if anything, push down the expectations modestly. 

MR. WILCOX.  Even with a modal rate hanging close to zero through the end of 2013, if 

you made a promise not to raise by then, you’d be chopping off the upper part of the tail of the 

distribution.  As Brian was saying, all of the risk is to the upside. 

MR. ENGLISH.  So the mean would move down. 

MR. SACK.  As for why these rates are at zero, that point is where we splice from the fed 

funds to the Eurodollars.  We have to make a federal funds-Eurodollar basis assumption that’s 

probably a little bit too big.  So my guess is that the true implied rates are in the low single digits.  

They’re not actually zero.  If they were at zero, there would be a pretty good arbitrage 

opportunity.  But I just interpret that as policy being on hold. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Brian, I don’t know if I’ll ask this question correctly, but it follows up on 

President Fisher’s to some extent.  In the conversations we have with the market participants—

most markets, like anyone else, talk what they want, or it’s not so much about expectations, but 

the way they form their answers is to guide us to what they want.  What kinds of conversations 

do you have around that?  Are they looking for something specific right now—ease because we 

have to—or are they more up in the air themselves? 

August 9, 2011 14 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  We should keep in mind that dealers are not always long duration.  Their 

positions can be all over the place.  There’s no bias through which dealers should always want us 

to do more to lower the interest rate structure.  So I don’t think the conversations are distorted by 

their self-interest.  I think the conversations that we have reflect their views on what is 

appropriate for policy to do, given the macroeconomic outlook.  I think we’ve seen the perceived 

probabilities of all of these policy actions increase, and I would argue they’re probably much 

higher than reflected in panel 3 at this point because those dealers have become much more 

worried about the outlook.  They’ve seen the substantial tightening of financial conditions, and 

they think some kind of policy response is appropriate. 

MR. HOENIG.  But that’s not in their self-interest?  Or are they able to look beyond that 

in terms of longer-term outcome?  They are dealers and they are working on their own book, and 

I worry because some of the conversations I’ve had suggest that their focus is very short term 

and that they are trying to influence where we come out by how they skew the information 

toward us.  That gives me some pause.  But you think they’re more objective than that? 

MR. SACK.  I do because it’s not clear that they all have a self-interest in this direction.  

Dealers are actually short duration in recent months and have been scrambling to cover, 

according to some data.  I will also point out that there are other surveys.  Our surveys are 

limited to the primary dealers right now, but there are broader surveys conducted by others, 

including Bloomberg.  I just read a story this morning that 51 percent of the respondents from the 

Bloomberg survey expect some policy action this year.  So I think what we see in the dealer 

survey is also reflected in surveys with a broader set of respondents who wouldn’t have direct 

interest in their dealings with the Desk. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I have a two-hander from the Vice Chairman. 

August 9, 2011 15 of 162



 
 

 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  As someone who used to do this for a living, let me just 

say that the surveys are filled out predominantly by economists who sit on the trading desks.  

They’re basically going to write down what they think is going to happen as opposed to what 

they want to see happen, because they want to basically get it right, and getting it right is what’s 

important to them in terms of their call to the markets. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Brian?  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Brian, I’ve been hearing this 

story, and you had mentioned it as well, about how the downgrade on Friday triggered the 

decline in equities on Monday.  But I’m struggling with putting that together with the fact that 

Treasury yields went down so much.  Is there a story that’s going around that tries to rationalize 

all of that? 

MR. SACK.  I would actually like to argue that the declines on Monday were not entirely 

driven by the downgrade.  I think they were a continuation of the decline in sentiment and the 

concerns about economic growth that we had already seen develop very intensely over the 

previous week.  The downgrade did seem to add to those concerns.  There could be several 

reasons for that.  For example, one is that it just further reduces the chances of having a flexible 

fiscal policy response to economic weakness.  And I do think that a lot of the pessimism about 

the outlook is partly related to this idea that there aren’t many policy tools to address the 

weakness in the economy.  My point would be that the downgrade just added to that, but I think 

the primary driver of all this is really the revision to the economic outlook. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you. 

August 9, 2011 16 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Seeing no other questions, we need to vote to 

ratify domestic open market operations.  Can I have a motion? 

MS. YELLEN.  So moved. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Without objection.  Thank you.  Item 2, “Economic 

Situation.”  Let me turn to David Wilcox to begin the briefing.  David. 

MR. WILCOX.2  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will eventually be referring to the 
single exhibit behind the cover that says “Staff Report on the Domestic Economic 
Situation,” though I’ll warn you that it’ll take me a while to get there.  Coming on the 
heels of a seemingly unrelenting stream of negative news about the pace of the 
recovery that we received during the intermeeting period, Friday’s employment report 
provided a welcome respite.  The unemployment rate was one-tenth lower than we 
had expected on the eve of the report; private payroll employment increased a little 
more in July than we expected, and previous estimates for May and June were revised 
up modestly; and government employment seemed to be on a slightly shallower 
downtrend adjusting for the influence of the temporary shutdown of the state 
government in Minnesota. 

That said, Friday’s report looked good only relative to expectations that had been 
greatly beaten down in the wake of the previous employment report.  Taking a 
slightly longer perspective that may be more relevant for your purposes, Friday’s 
report portrayed a labor market that is weaker on nearly every important dimension 
than we expected as of the June FOMC meeting:  The unemployment rate was one-
tenth higher and the employment-to-population ratio three-tenths lower in July than 
we projected in the June Tealbook.  Private payroll employment increased 105,000 
less than expected over the three months ending in July, while for total payroll 
employment the shortfall relative to expectation was 150,000.  None of these changes 
are decisive, but they all run in the same direction. 

Perhaps the best metric of the net change in our assessment over the intermeeting 
period of labor market conditions is the fact that, even after taking Friday’s news on 
board, we have private payrolls increasing 70,000 less per month in August and 
September than we had in the June Tealbook, and we have the unemployment rate 
hanging up near its current level through the end of the year rather than edging down 
a couple of tenths. 

The upper-left panel in the “Forecast Summary” exhibit shows the outlook for the 
unemployment rate that we presented in the August Tealbook (the black line) 
compared with the June Tealbook (the dashed red line).  As you can see, we rotated 
up the trajectory of the jobless rate over the entire forecast period.  Had we known 
about Friday’s employment report in time for the Tealbook, we still would have 

                                                 
2 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 

August 9, 2011 17 of 162



 
 

 
 

shown most of this upward revision.  But I want to underscore one aspect of the 
projection that is not apparent from this chart.  Between now and the end of next year, 
our baseline outlook has the measured unemployment rate declining about 
¾ percentage point.  But the bulk of this decline does not represent an improvement 
in labor market conditions.  We expect the extended and emergency unemployment 
benefit programs to phase down next year, a development that would—by itself, by 
our reckoning—bring both the short-run effective NAIRU and the actual 
unemployment rate down about ½ percentage point.  Thus, in the August projection, 
the unemployment rate gap narrows by only about ¼ percentage point over the next 
six quarters. 

The upper-right panel shows our revised outlook for the growth of real GDP.  I 
will spare you a detailed recitation of the data that caused us to mark down the GDP 
outlook by as much as we did, and simply observe that the forecast revision reflects a 
more negative assessment on both the supply and demand sides of our projection.  On 
the demand side, the downward revision is concentrated in personal consumption 
expenditures and business outlays for equipment and software.  In those two areas, 
the news has run to the soft side of our expectations pretty much across the board:  
Recent readings on spending itself have been disappointing, income is on a lower 
trajectory than previously thought, and sentiment among both households and 
businesses has slumped.  Perhaps the most worrisome illustration of that slump is the 
July reading on consumer sentiment from the Michigan survey, which came in at the 
lowest level for that series since early 2009. 

In our August projection, we have real PCE accelerating from almost no change 
in the second quarter to a modest rate of growth in the second half of this year—a 
pattern that is heavily influenced by the swing in the availability of autos, especially 
Japanese nameplates.  On the business side, we now have outlays for equipment and 
software increasing at a more moderate pace than before, largely driven by the usual 
accelerator response to the more subdued outlook for overall activity and business 
sales. 

Turning to the supply side of the projection, the major event during the 
intermeeting period was the annual revision to the national income and product 
accounts, which showed that output growth over the period from 2008 to 2010 had 
been about three- to four-tenths of 1 percentage point slower, on average, per year 
than previous estimates had shown.  In thinking about how to adjust our estimate of 
potential output in response to these revised data, we started by assessing whether 
there were existing tensions on the supply side of our projection that might be 
addressed by the revisions.  In this regard, our assessment of the NAIRU from our 
analysis of Beveridge curves still seemed sensible to us, and there were no significant 
tensions in Okun’s law or in the relationship between the unemployment gap and 
inflation in the pre-revision data, suggesting that our previous estimate of the output 
gap provided a reasonable take on resource utilization in the economy at the end of 
2010.  In contrast, we were concerned that the downward revision to labor 
productivity implicit in the revised NIPA data would have left the level of 
productivity implausibly below its structural level in 2010 if we did not adjust down 

August 9, 2011 18 of 162



 
 

 
 

our estimate of the underlying trend rate of growth in multifactor productivity.  
Similarly, results from a more formal statistical analysis using a state-space model of 
the supply side of the economy that takes into account these relationships as well as 
others suggested that most of the downward revision to output reflected a lower level 
of potential.  Thus, without any compelling reason to alter our unemployment rate 
gap and given the results from the state-space model, we adjusted down our estimate 
of potential output in line with the downward revision to GDP, effectively preserving 
the output gap at the end of 2010. 

In this interpretation, the revised data also suggest that trend multifactor 
productivity growth has been more stable at around 1 percent than seemed to be the 
case before.  We carried that flatter profile into the forecast period and so are now 
showing potential GDP growth that is two-tenths slower in 2011 than before and 
three-tenths slower in 2012.  To a close approximation, these reductions in potential 
GDP growth show up one-for-one in our projections of actual GDP growth, and so 
they account for a significant fraction of the overall downward revision in real GDP. 

Had the spate of disappointments during the intermeeting period been the first of 
its kind in a while, we might have been more inclined to shrug it all off.  But as John 
Stevens highlighted in his briefing for the Board yesterday, the disappointments of 
the past few weeks extended a fairly lengthy run of bad news rather reminiscent of 
the losing streaks of the Chicago Cubs that I was used to while growing up.  So rather 
than shrugging it all off, we attempted a more thorough investigation of the 
mechanisms that might account for why the pace of real activity has fallen so far 
short of expectation this year.  We came up with several possible explanations, all of 
which are referenced in the Tealbook.  Of those, I want to highlight just one here—
the possibility that the shocks that hit the economy in recent years have had a much 
deeper and more persistent effect on demand than we have built into the baseline 
forecast.  For example, it could be that attitudes among households have changed in a 
way that is much more negative for their spending even than might be indicated by 
the usual measures of overall sentiment or confidence.  The lower-left panel in your 
exhibit shows one series that has captured our interest of late—a diffusion index 
created using responses to a question from the Michigan survey about expected 
household income growth over the next 12 months.  During the most recent recession, 
these expectations behaved in a manner far outside the range of previous experience.  
Most sobering of all is the fact that this index remains essentially as low as it was 
around the trough of the recession.  This index certainly raises the question as to 
whether pessimism among households might become, to some degree, a self-fulfilling 
prophecy, in which consumer pessimism begets weaker-than-normal spending, 
weakness in spending begets weakness in hiring, and weakness in labor markets in 
turn validates the initial pessimism among households. 

Since the Tealbook closed, the forces shaping the macroeconomic outlook have 
changed quite a bit.  As of last night, the stock market was down about 12 percent 
relative to our assumption, and Treasury rates had dropped a little more than ¼ of 
1 percentage point, oil and natural gas prices had plunged, and the dollar had either 
changed little or strengthened slightly.  A very, very preliminary reading is that these 

August 9, 2011 19 of 162



 
 

 
 

changes might have relatively little net effect on the growth of real GDP over the rest 
of this year as lower oil prices provide an offset to the lower stock prices.  But in 
2012 and 2013, the net effects turn distinctly more negative, as the wealth effects gain 
greater traction, perhaps on the order of one-fourth to three-tenths or four-tenths of 
GDP growth in each of those years.  I should stress, however, that this accounting is 
both preliminary and likely incomplete, as it does not account for any confidence 
effects that seem plausible to follow, unless the changes in the past few days are 
quickly reversed. 

Finally, let me briefly discuss the risks to the outlook.  In June, we saw the risks 
to real activity as skewed to the downside.  Today, one could ask whether, with the 
downward revision to the baseline, we might now see the risks as more evenly 
balanced than before.  I am inclined to think not.  While there is, without doubt, 
upside risk to the forecast that we put before you, the downside risks are surely easier 
to name.  As Mike will discuss in a moment, the potential for the situation in Europe 
to darken further seems more palpable today than earlier.  The fragility of our own 
financial system seemed all too transparently on display during the past few days 
before the debt ceiling deal was struck and then again in the past few days.  And the 
potential for the malaise among households to intensify and spread more decisively to 
businesses cannot be minimized. 

A different way of approaching the issue of downside risk is to focus specifically 
on the possibility that the economy might fall back into recession.  Stochastic 
simulations of FRB/US in which errors typical of the past 40 years are applied to the 
staff forecast suggest only an 11 percent chance that real GDP will decline in two 
consecutive quarters between now and the end of 2012.  A similar exercise calibrated 
to the historical accuracy of the staff GDP forecast over the past 30 years suggests a 
little more risk—a 16 percent chance of a two-quarter contraction in real GDP 
sometime during the next six quarters. 

But it’s also possible to generate more worrisome results.  For example, my 
colleague Jeremy Nalewaik has been working with a range of different Markov-
switching models, according to which economic activity spends most of the time in a 
“high growth” state but from time to time drops to a “low growth” state.  The models 
in Jeremy’s stable differ according to how many states he allows and what economic 
indicators he shows to the model.  The series that I show in the lower-right panel of 
your exhibit comes from a model in which Jeremy allows for three states—high, 
intermediate, and low—and the model forms its judgments about the pace of activity 
based on three quarterly series—the growth of real GDP, the growth of real GDI, and 
the change in the unemployment rate.  As you can see from the rightmost observation, 
this model puts the probability that the economy was in recession in the second 
quarter at a disquieting 25 percent.  Moreover, rolling the Markov chain forward one 
quarter, Jeremy finds that according to this model, the probability that the economy is 
in an NBER-type recession in the current quarter is 30 percent. 

My guess is that these probabilities from the Markov-based machinery are too 
high because the model isn’t aware that output was held down temporarily in the 

August 9, 2011 20 of 162



 
 

 
 

second quarter by the effects of the disaster in Japan.  But we ran a counterfactual 
experiment in which we told the model that real GDP growth had increased at the 
roughly 2 percent pace that we think would have prevailed in the absence of the 
disaster in Japan.  Even in that case, the model puts the probability of recession in the 
second quarter at 20 percent, only 5 percentage points less than the baseline result.  
At the same time, I would caution that there is a case to be made that the probabilities 
derived from FRB/US and the staff forecast errors may be too low.  For one thing, 
there are many quarters in which the NBER deemed the economy to be in recession 
and yet real GDP increased, so framing the issue to FRB/US in terms of two 
consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth biases the answer toward suggesting 
too few adverse events.  And for another thing, FRB/US may not sufficiently capture 
the kinds of nonlinearities that seem to emerge when the economy is headed into 
recession. 

Turning to the inflation side of the projection, core inflation once again surprised 
us slightly to the upside in the most recent reading.  With a logic that’s reminiscent of 
our behavior on the real side, we responded to this extension of the string of upside 
surprises by extrapolating forward into the next few months a little more of the bulge 
in inflation that we think has been induced by transitory factors, including commodity 
prices, import prices, and motor vehicle prices.  Nonetheless, we maintain the view 
that these pressures will ease through the second half of this year and into next year.  
As shown in the middle-right panel, with inflation expectations remaining well 
anchored, resource utilization remaining well below normal, and transitory upward 
pressures on inflation easing, we have core PCE price inflation drifting down to 
1½ percent next year.  At the time of the Tealbook, we had energy and food price 
pressures abating as well.  However, since then, oil and natural gas prices have not 
“abated”; they’ve plunged.  If those lower prices were to persist, they’d be enough to 
take a little more than ¼ percentage point off our projection for overall PCE price 
inflation this year, shown in the middle-left panel, bringing the four-quarter average 
down to about 2 percent.  For next year, we have top-line PCE inflation running 
roughly in line with core at 1½ percent.  Mike Leahy will continue our presentation. 

MR. LEAHY.  Thanks, David.  As Brian and David have already described, the 
prospect of slowing economic growth has been an important factor behind recent 
financial market developments, with disappointing news from the United States and 
the euro area dominating the formation of sentiment.  Elsewhere, however, the news 
has not been so bleak.  In aggregate, our outlook for foreign economic growth was 
revised down some from our forecast in June but still calls for solid growth going 
forward. 

The drama in Europe has shared center stage with the U.S. fiscal debate in recent 
weeks.  When you met in June, markets were awaiting votes on Greek fiscal austerity 
measures needed to secure EU–IMF disbursements and avoid a disorderly default on 
upcoming debt payments.  With the passage of those measures, peripheral European 
spreads narrowed in early July and financial markets rallied, but they soon turned 
down again as European leaders publicly debated the extent to which private creditors 
should contribute to a new financing package for Greece. 

August 9, 2011 21 of 162



 
 

 
 

Markets rallied temporarily once again around the time of the European leaders’ 
summit on July 21.  The plan announced at the summit provides some additional 
financial support for Greece, but it ultimately fell short of turning the tide of market 
skepticism, largely because it fails to provide for the much larger risks presented by 
Spain and Italy.  The plan offers Greece €109 billion in new official funds and calls 
on private creditors to contribute as much as €106 billion, on net, via debt exchanges, 
debt buybacks, or rollovers of maturing debt over the next nine years.  If implemented 
in full and if Greece’s fiscal and privatization targets are met, Greece’s need for 
market funding should be minimal until 2014.  In addition, the package substantially 
lowers the interest rate on official loans, thereby easing Greece’s debt service burden.  
And finally, by pressuring private creditors to extend and/or reduce their claims on 
Greece, the plan crosses the line into selective default but does so in a manner that 
avoids triggering CDS default clauses and adding that disruption to financial markets. 

Notwithstanding these strengths, however, we do not believe the plan will secure 
a lasting reduction of financial stresses in peripheral Europe.  For one, the plan fails 
to reduce Greece’s debt service burden sufficiently to ensure sustainability, meaning 
that further restructuring will likely be needed sometime down the road.  More 
importantly, however, the plan stops short of a measure widely viewed as crucial—an 
enlargement of the euro area’s emergency lending facilities sufficient to provide a 
credible liquidity backstop to Spain and Italy.  This shortcoming is particularly 
worrisome, as over the intermeeting period, sovereign spreads on Spanish and Italian 
debt rose very substantially, indicating a clear spreading of the crisis beyond Greece, 
Ireland, and Portugal.  As Brian has mentioned, these worries have now drawn in the 
ECB, which yesterday began purchasing Spanish and Italian sovereign debt in the 
secondary market, to help contain those yields, at least for now. 

With financial stresses in peripheral Europe now much deeper than in June and 
unlikely to abate substantially anytime soon, we have further downgraded our outlook 
for economic performance in the euro area.  The expansion of euro-area GDP slowed 
from an unsustainably fast 3.4 percent pace in the first quarter to an estimated 
1½ percent rate in the second.  With credit conditions still tight, consumer confidence 
sliding, and governments tightening fiscal policy in response to investor concerns, we 
now see euro-area growth falling further, to about 1 percent over the remainder of this 
year, and moving up only anemically thereafter. 

By contrast, we are cautiously optimistic about most other regions of the global 
economy.  To be sure, total foreign growth slowed markedly in the second quarter to 
an estimated 2¼ percent from 4¼ percent in the first.  But this slowing, while a bit 
more pronounced than we had anticipated in June, appears to reflect in part some 
transitory factors.  Many economies were growing well above a sustainable pace in 
the first quarter—for example, growth in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and India hit double 
digits—and some moderation was clearly in order.  On top of that, the catastrophe in 
Japan led to the disruption of supply chains and manufacturing throughout the world 
in the second quarter, but that effect will not persist.  Second-quarter activity was also 
held down by oil field fires in Canada and, of course, the Royal Wedding in the 
United Kingdom. 

August 9, 2011 22 of 162



 
 

 
 

Going forward, we see aggregate foreign growth rebounding to more than 
3½ percent in the current quarter and settling in at a little under that pace for the rest 
of the forecast period.  Japan’s recovery from its earthquake, including the positive 
effects on other economies from the restoration of global supply chains, accounts for 
nearly all of the 1½ percentage point rise in economic growth we anticipate between 
the second and third quarters.  We are reasonably confident about this part of the 
story, as Japanese industrial production and exports are rebounding more rapidly than 
we had anticipated in June.  It is also heartening that, even as economic growth 
slowed in many economies in the second quarter, domestic demand has held up:  In 
Canada, employment has been posting strong gains and investment intentions have 
remained buoyant, even as weak exports and disruptions in the oil sector have 
restrained output; growth in credit and retail sales remains brisk in Brazil; and the 
slowdown in China, where authorities have cracked down on bank lending, should 
still leave Chinese GDP growth skimming along at more than 8 percent this year and 
next. 

Nevertheless, we are hardly complacent about the foreign outlook.  Purchasing 
managers’ indexes around the world, even in emerging Asia, declined further in July, 
highlighting some significant risks to our projection of a rebound in growth abroad 
this quarter.  Moreover, another critical factor in the projected global rebound, the 
pickup in the U.S. economy, is somewhat tenuous, as David has emphasized.  In fact, 
the weaker outlook for the United States, along with the deeper financial strains in 
Europe, have led us to revise down by ¼ percentage point our projection of aggregate 
foreign GDP growth during the forecast period.  The turbulence in global financial 
markets, which became even more pronounced after we closed our forecast, 
strengthens the possibility that we may be downgrading the outlook further by the 
time you meet again in September. 

Largely reflecting concerns about global economic growth, the price of WTI 
crude oil fell another 13 percent during the intermeeting period, including the sharp 
declines of the past few days, putting it nearly 30 percent below its April peak.  
Declines in oil and other commodity prices have led to declines in headline inflation 
rates around the world in recent months.  With the combination of weaker prospects 
for economic growth and diminishing price pressures, expectations are that major 
central banks will delay their plans to withdraw monetary accommodation.  This 
includes, of course, the ECB, which had raised policy rates in July but left them 
unchanged at its meeting last week.  The ECB did expand and extend its offerings of 
special liquidity facilities in response to the tensions in financial markets last week.  
In addition, as Brian noted, the Swiss National Bank and the Bank of Japan, whose 
currencies have risen to record levels, each announced easing actions last week.  The 
Bank of Japan announcement came on the heels of Thursday’s massive intervention 
sales of yen in the foreign exchange market by Japan’s Ministry of Finance.  By 
contrast, central banks in several emerging market economies continued to tighten 
monetary policies to bring down inflation and ward off economic overheating. 

So far, the slowdown in foreign growth has left a relatively shallow imprint on 
U.S. exports.  Real export growth moved down from 8 percent in the first quarter to 

August 9, 2011 23 of 162



 
 

 
 

6 percent in the second, below what we’d written down in June.  But import growth 
also slowed, to only about 1 percent, so that the contribution of net exports to GDP 
growth was a still-solid ½ percentage point.  Going forward, we are projecting 
another ½ percentage point contribution in the second half of this year, as both export 
and import growth rebound, and ¾ percentage point in 2012.  These are much 
stronger net export contributions than are usually seen during U.S. recoveries, largely 
reflecting a faster bounceback in foreign economies and previous and prospective 
declines in the dollar.  Over the past year, the broad real dollar has depreciated 
8½ percent, and we are projecting it to move down at an annual rate of about a 
2¾ percent during the remainder of the forecast period.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What do we think is the GDP effect of the Royal Wedding?  

[Laughter] 

MR. LEAHY.  Well, I don’t have the exact numbers split out, but we did see GDP drop 

from about 2 percent to about ¾ percent between the first and second quarters. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Another failure of fiscal policy, no doubt.  [Laughter]  Any 

questions for our colleagues?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I have one question for Mike and one for David.  Mike, you talked about 

the widening of spreads.  You mentioned Italy and Spain.  You did not mention France.  This is 

something that I raised last time.  I believe the spreads have widened somewhat in France. 

MR. LEAHY.  Yes. 

MR. FISHER.  I’m hearing more noise about concern about the French fiscal situation, in 

addition to their bank exposure.  Could you take a minute to comment on France?  Is this 

something serious, or is it something that people are just piling onto as they look for other 

problems? 

MR. LEAHY.  Well, I think there may be a little of both there.  The spreads of French 

longer-term bond yields over German bund yields have gone up some.  There have also been 

rumors about downgrades for France circulating in the market.  I don’t really know how much 

truth there is to those rumors, but there are rumors.  We have seen some funding pressures for 

August 9, 2011 24 of 162



 
 

 
 

some French financial institutions— cutbacks on credit lines and such, and paying higher spreads 

in overnight funding markets.  The pressures are nowhere near the same degree that we’re 

seeing, say, for Italian or Spanish banks, but they’re creeping up and it’s something to watch.  

MR. FISHER.  Very quickly, David, we seem to be lurching back and forth—all of us, by 

the way; not just Board staff, but Bank staff as well—in terms of our outlook for the economy.  

And we’re constantly asking ourselves, what have we been missing, or what did we miss, and 

how useful are our various models, depending on their degree of sophistication, in terms of being 

of assistance to us in trying to get a sense of what’s developing in the economy?  I wonder if, at 

some point—we may not do it now, but it strikes me that one of the issues that I don’t think we 

understand very well—this is my working hypothesis—is how our models are affected by overall 

deleveraging.  Consumer sector deleveraging, for sure.  Certainly a releveraging has taken place 

in the business sector amongst corporate credits, and, right now, what I expect to be a significant 

deleveraging is happening in the fiscal sector—that is, with the federal, state, and local 

governments.  This is just really a request that we pursue this a little bit more.  I see by your 

nodding of your head, I think I may be correct.  But I do think it’s something that’s inhibiting our 

understanding—a better understanding of this would probably enhance our understanding of 

what’s going on with the economy. 

MR. WILCOX.  Yes, I think the only part of your statement that I would take exception 

to is the pejorative word “lurching.” 

MR. FISHER.  Well, I didn’t mean that in a pejorative sense.  I mean, we’re trying to 

come to grips, let’s put it that way. 

MR. WILCOX.  We’ve been marching determinedly in a negative direction.  John 

Stevens had a nice exhibit in yesterday’s Board briefing that showed just how much we’d taken 

August 9, 2011 25 of 162



 
 

 
 

the forecast down over the course of this year.  Also, I want to just emphasize that I think the 

gaps in our understanding of the interactions between the financial sector and the real sector are 

profound, and they have, over the past few years, deeply affected our ability to anticipate how 

the real economy would respond, and they are continuing to do so now.  This is an ignorance that 

we share with the entire rest of the profession, and I think one thing that is good to see is the 

enormous amount of work that’s going on at the Board, in the System, and in the profession at 

large in an attempt to develop a better understanding of the interactions between the real sector 

and the financial sector, operating in both directions.  But boy, I don’t know whether that 

literature is in its infancy, but I would not put it at any more beyond toddlerhood.  We’ve got just 

an enormous amount yet to learn and incorporate in that regard. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher, as I’ll mention at the end of the meeting, 

this is going to be part of a special topic for the FOMC coming up pretty soon.  President 

Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question for Dave Wilcox.  In 

your discussion of unemployment, do you have an explanation for the decline in participation 

that we’ve been seeing?  What are the underlying forces causing that decline? 

MR. WILCOX.  It’s hard to know.  We’ve been surprised how weak it’s been.  We think 

it’s importantly driven by demographic or structural factors associated with the aging of the 

population, but it’s also pretty clear that there’s an important cyclical component.  And there’s a 

lot of disagreement, some disagreement among members of the staff here at the Board, lots of 

controversy in the economics profession.  Getting that decomposition right is very difficult.  But 

I’d like to ask Bill Wascher to comment. 

August 9, 2011 26 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. WASCHER.  Well, I guess I don’t have a lot to add to what you’ve just said.  We do 

think there’s a significant downward trend in the participation rate that’s been associated with the 

aging of the population, and that’s been going on for a while now, for the past decade or so.  We 

think there’s a cyclical component to the low participation rate that’s associated with the lack of 

job opportunities and some people dropping out.  That’s offset to some degree by the extended 

unemployment insurance benefits, which we think are keeping some people in the labor market 

who would have dropped out in the absence of those benefits.  But that cyclical component is 

pretty big now.  The unemployment rate is quite high; the labor market’s very weak.  And I think 

a number of people have dropped out because they’ve become discouraged about job prospects.  

But as David noted, I think we’re a little surprised by how low the participation rate is, and we’re 

not quite sure why.  Much of the surprise is in the teenage categories, and that’s always been an 

age group that’s been difficult to understand.  [Laughter]  The participation rate is a few tenths 

lower than what we would have expected, given our models.  And we’re not quite sure whether 

that extra few tenths is just a bigger cyclical effect than we normally would see, given the labor 

market slack more generally, or whether there’s something special going on for teenagers or for 

some other particular age group that we don’t quite understand yet. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Just to follow up with that a little bit.  In terms of the people who are 

dropping out of the labor force, you mentioned teenagers.  What about the 55- to 65-year-olds?  

Are there people who have lost their jobs, with a large fraction of them just saying, “Well, I’m 

never going to get another job.  I’m going to go ahead and take retirement and move out”? 

MR. WASCHER.  For that group, the participation rate has actually edged up, I think, a 

little bit. 

August 9, 2011 27 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. PLOSSER.  Oh, is that right? 

MR. WASCHER.  That effect could be going on, and some people might just get 

discouraged and take early retirement.  I’m sure that’s true for many people.  But there are others 

who have lost a lot of wealth, for example, in their 401(k) retirement plans, and they can’t afford 

to do it, so they’re staying in.  And more generally, in terms of the longer-term trends, older 

people are healthier and, I think, more generally likely to stay in the labor market longer.  That 

has only a small offset to the aging of the population because their participation rates are quite a 

bit lower than for the prime-age individuals.  But that does go the other way in a longer-term 

sense, in general.  And those factors are offsetting, I think, in the current environment. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Mr. Chairman, a second question for Dave Wilcox.  I think I heard 

you mention that the rebound in auto manufacturing or assembly in this country in the second 

half that you anticipate is associated a lot with Japanese nameplates.  Was that the comment?  

And do you mean by that foreign nameplates?  Does that include Koreans and others?  Or is it 

really specific to Toyota and Honda? 

MR. WILCOX.  I think, and Larry can correct me, that it’s specifically Japanese 

nameplates.  We’ve seen days’ supply, for example, for Japanese models just plummet to 

extraordinarily low levels.  This is one of the relatively few aspects of our projection that’s 

actually stayed on track.  Toyota’s quite confident about its ramping up its production.  Honda’s 

been running a little behind, but on net, its ability to ship autos to the United States has come in 

about in line with expectations.  We don’t have final assembly data yet for July; we’ll get that in 

the next couple of days.  At this point, we’re expecting a 10 percent increase, not at an annual 

rate, in motor vehicles IP, so that’s going to provide an extra five-tenths to top-line IP growth in 

August 9, 2011 28 of 162



 
 

 
 

July.  It’s a big piece of our output projection for the very near term.  And we think that 

consumer spending in the second quarter was held back simply by lack of availability on dealer 

lots.  And one might have thought that they’d go next door and shop for a Chrysler or something 

else, but they seem not to have done that.  Those other domestic nameplates had very soft sales 

in the second quarter as well, so we’re still thinking that that story is in place for the moment. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a question for Mike Leahy about 

the international work.  Your description suggested that expansion of the European Financial 

Stabilization Facility was a key issue.  Stories that I’ve heard out of Europe are that that was not 

expanded on the grounds that it might incite panic.  Perhaps that was unwise, but can the fund be 

expanded?  If it is, would that solve the problem or not?  And what should we expect as a 

Committee going forward on that issue? 

MR. LEAHY.  I think the markets clearly were looking for, and many others were also 

looking for, some greater political commitment to resolving the debt crisis that seems to be 

spreading around the euro area.  That took the form, for the most part, of the EFSF.  Right now, 

it isn’t even fully funded at this point, but it’s slated to have €440 billion.  And the July 21 plan 

expanded the range and scope of operations that it could do to try to provide more assistance to 

countries, but they did not expand the size of the fund.  And €440 billion is just not enough if we 

run into problems in Spain and Italy, who seem to be the next in line. 

Ultimately, the European situation is just really difficult—the debt burden is too high, 

there’s going to have to be some losses taken, and they have to decide how they’re going to 

allocate those.  Is it going to be done in a disorderly default, and they recover from that, or is it 

August 9, 2011 29 of 162



 
 

 
 

going to be socialized, in a sense, through government support?  And the Europeans have said 

that they’re going to do what it takes to hold things together and provide the funds, but it’s not 

obvious that the political rhetoric is being supported yet by the political decisionmaking.  So 

there is a way out, perhaps, but it’s difficult in one respect because the governments have too 

much debt.  They need to cut back.  It’s the same situation for the United States, I suspect.  

Cutting back in the near term is going to slow economic growth and puts them in an even worse 

situation.  And it’s very difficult for them to commit to cutting back in the longer run, so it’s just 

very tricky.  And we’re in one of these multiple equilibrium situations, where if the markets can 

believe them, the rates might come down and they’ll get through, but if they don’t, it could be a 

little messier. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you.  Dave, I think I understand, but the equipment and software 

revisions that you did were pretty drastic, and given the balance sheets of some of the industry, 

this has to be, then, driven by confidence.  But my other question is, where are they redirecting 

this to?  Just Treasuries, or are they going overseas with it?  Because the BRIC countries still 

have demand growing—would they be investing there?  To see this kind of a drop-off, you 

wonder what their thinking is and where they’re going with this.  Do you have any sense of that 

in any discussions you’ve had? 

MR. WILCOX.  I don’t have a detailed sense of what they’re doing with the liquid assets 

that they’ve been accumulating.  We’ve spent a lot of time debating whether this is, to some 

degree, the new normal.  We think that those assets are substituting for other forms of liquidity.  

I don’t remember who it was who presented a nice briefing sometime in the past month or so that 

August 9, 2011 30 of 162



 
 

 
 

talked about the fact that these liquid assets that have drawn a lot of attention are a substitute for 

other forms of financial buffers that firms have been holding. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Bank lines of credit, for example.  Unused commitments. 

MR. WILCOX.  I guess I’d say that the downward revision to E&S is certainly notable, 

but by and large, it’s a pretty standard response to just a markedly softer general macroeconomic 

outlook.  The climate that businesses are facing is going to involve a lot less growth in business 

sales, and therefore we think they’ll be motivated to build a smaller stock of E&S capital.  That’s 

mostly what’s going on. 

MR. HOENIG.  You don’t think that much of it is going into foreign direct investment 

elsewhere? 

MR. WILCOX.  I don’t think so. 

MR. HOENIG.  I mean, if I were them, I’d be doing something with this stuff, especially 

given the growth in the BRIC countries. 

MR. WILCOX.  That could be part of it.  But if that is part of it, I don’t think it’s coming 

at the expense of domestic investment.  And you’re right, I think there has been, to be sure, some 

reduction in business confidence, as reflected in the purchasing managers’ surveys, at both the 

national level and the regional level.  So I think there’s been, for sure, some wind taken out of 

the sails there.  But we still have E&S growing, now in the mid-single digits, through this year.  

So to paraphrase President Fisher, it could be worse. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Stepping back from the recession and the slow recovery, it is 

true that well before we got into the recession there was a longer-run trend of very slow capacity 

growth in the United States in manufacturing.  And that was presumably—and in a lot of cases, 

you can track it down—growth in China and other places like that.  While that’s operated in the 

August 9, 2011 31 of 162



 
 

 
 

background, whether that shifting of production to other countries has really stepped up at the 

moment is much more difficult for us to say. 

MR. HOENIG.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don’t know if this is a question 

or a comment.  David, I thought this picture that you showed about households expecting an 

increase in income was extremely interesting.  I’m not sure that I’d be so quick to associate it 

with a change in demand conditions.  If households are expecting a slowdown in potential 

income growth, maybe even sharper than the markdown that’s occurred in the Tealbook, I think 

if you asked them this question, they would answer it in the same way—that they don’t expect as 

much income growth as they had in the past.  While I think it is consistent with the story you 

said about “Boy, this is showing up as a slowdown in demand,” it could also be a sign of the 

households realizing that potential is just not as good as it was in the past. 

MR. WILCOX.  Yes, again, this taken alone is not dispositive, but I think that the main 

takeaway for us from this series is, boy, it looks like there’s something going on in the household 

psyche that has very persistent characteristics. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’m sympathetic to that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions for our colleagues?  [No response]  Seeing 

none, we’re ready for the economic go-round, and I’ll start with Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me say up front that I asked to go first 

today, not to parse economic data so much as to talk about cognitive dissonance and, 

specifically, to make a plea to all of us and to remind myself audibly how important it is to resist 

August 9, 2011 32 of 162



 
 

 
 

the temptation that we all naturally feel to cling to our own past beliefs and predispositions, even 

in the face of a slew of dissonant data. 

For a year or more, I think that the implicit debate in these go-rounds during FOMC 

meetings has been between those who argued that we are in an economic recovery that would be 

steady, though unspectacular, with occasional soft patches, and those who argued that we are in a 

weaker, halting recovery that would take a much longer time to return us to trend points in 

growth and employment.  Well, I think that debate is over.  The side arguing steady but 

unspectacular growth has lost, but it’s by no means clear that the side arguing that the recovery 

was weak and halting has won.  I think the meaningful debate today is whether even a weak and 

halting recovery can continue or whether we’re already at or below stall speed and quite possibly 

slipping into another recession.  Equity markets—which, as Brian mentioned, seemed to reflect 

for quite some time some of the more optimistic sentiment—have, in the past couple of weeks, 

been marking down economic prospects.  Yesterday they appeared to be siding with those who 

think the most likely scenario is a recession, a probability assignment that strikes me as 

somewhat high, or at least it would have last week. 

Despite the past year’s debate in which we’ve had different views, every member of this 

Committee is united in having been too optimistic.  I think that the most pessimistic among us, of 

whom I was one, certainly did not expect that growth over the past four quarters would be only 

about 1.6 percent, and would not have thought so even if we had been told about the impact of 

Fukushima.  Who among us today would stand behind the projections we made last year for 

GDP growth during this year—and particularly in the second half of this year?  Almost none, if 

any, I suspect. 

August 9, 2011 33 of 162



 
 

 
 

Most of us, I’m sure, still expect some increase in Q3 growth because of the resumption 

of auto production that David mentioned a moment ago, but it seems plausible that this impact 

itself will be transitory.  And to the degree that expectations for a pickup in economic growth in 

the remainder of this year and into 2012 were dependent on some assumed momentum from a 

decent first half of the year, they are clearly unfounded.  It’s not immediately clear what other 

factors will contribute to an acceleration of the underlying pace of growth.  Even the most 

sanguine view of current conditions must acknowledge that the economy is now sufficiently 

vulnerable that a modest shock could send us back into recession.  Needless to say, the euro zone 

situation described by Mike Leahy a few moments ago could be considerably more than a 

modest shock.  Many of us have been saying for some time that the Europeans had the financial 

and technical resources to solve their problems if only they would exert the political will.  I fear 

we are fast approaching the point when this will no longer be the case.  Plummeting equity 

markets and tightening financial conditions, along with the blow to confidence they bring, could 

surely also be more than a modest external shock to what is at best now a fragile recovery. 

Like investors rethinking their market positions, each of us needs to rethink our analytic 

and policy positions to question the assumptions that lay behind our past expectations, and not 

just to try to fit the most recent data into our prior views.  We will, I am sure, spend a good bit of 

time in future meetings analyzing, in the Tealbook’s rather understated formulation, the “forces 

imposing greater-than-expected restraint on the expansion,” into which an honest inquiry is 

likely to yield challenges to premises and beliefs held variously by most, if not all, of us in the 

past year or more.  This inquiry and the debates around it will surely be important in shaping our 

policies and response to these forces and eventually in deciding when and how to exit.  But I 

would suggest that there is a more immediate task for us today—that is, to consider just how 

August 9, 2011 34 of 162



 
 

 
 

perilous the current situation is and then, in light of the dangers identified by that assessment, to 

consider what measures could be taken to reduce the probability of those dangers being realized.  

Given that the “steady growth” position has been thoroughly controverted and the “slow but 

halting growth” position seriously undermined, it seems to me that the cost–benefit analysis of 

additional monetary policy measures must have changed significantly.  After all, both the string 

of bad intermeeting data and the substantially reduced expectations, not to mention the recent 

declines in markets, suggest that the factual predicates for our policy dispositions during the past 

year were, to a greater or lesser extent, misplaced. 

Now, the economic go-round in a typical FOMC meeting is a pretty formal, almost—and 

sometimes literally—scripted affair, and even the policy portion of most of our meetings tends to 

play out in a fairly structured fashion, and properly so, since proposed language and alternative 

policy options will quite sensibly have been proposed, modified, and much discussed before we 

convene.  Today, I think, should be different.  The cumulative effect of the gathering evidence of 

stagnation, the psychological impact of the ratings downgrade, the growing concerns that euro 

zone problems may not be contained, and the global market drama of the past couple of days has 

made this a potential inflection point.  I hope that we can this morning operate in less scripted, 

less structured fashion so that we can formulate the most appropriate response to the delicate 

circumstances that confront us for actions that may be taken today or in the coming weeks.  I 

think we need to be a bit more nimble than we’re accustomed to being, and I hope that in the 

spirit of all of us questioning ourselves, we can do that for the rest of the day.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

August 9, 2011 35 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yesterday’s equity market selloff 

certainly gives pause, but I don’t think it obsoletes the views that I prepared as long ago as 

Sunday afternoon, the diagnosis that pertains to the context of policy.  I wanted to start by saying 

that President Bullard in an earlier meeting posed a good question when he asked if there was 

ever a time in the past 25 years when uncertainty did not seem higher than at other times, and he 

got quite a laugh when he asked about that.  I do think the context of this meeting really does 

present a lot more uncertainty than whatever the Committee could consider normal.  It seems to 

me that there’s simply a lot that we don’t know at the moment.  We don’t know if the growth-

restraining effects of the first half will fall away as expected.  I think the Tealbook nicely 

captures the central forecasting challenge of the moment, which is determining the forces 

responsible for what it calls the “greater-than-expected restraint on the expansion.”  We don’t 

know whether the consensus base-case forecast of a stronger second half and stronger 2012 will 

materialize.  We’re one month into the third quarter, a quarter that the Tealbook projects GDP 

growth at 3 percent, with little indication in the data of that level of growth.  We really don’t 

know how the European debt situation is going to play out in coming weeks.  We don’t know 

beyond yesterday’s developments and this morning’s, if we’re tracking them without 

BlackBerrys, how the market will sort out the implications of the downgrade.  We don’t know 

whether the projection of inflation settling out will come true, and we don’t really know whether 

there are underlying forces at work, forces captured in the Tealbook’s phrases “persistent 

spending weakness” and “supply-side corrosion and damage,” that portend a longer and deeper 

problem of sluggish growth. 

The outlook, of course, always involves a lot of uncertainty, but it certainly feels to me 

that the combination of uncertainties at this juncture is unusual.  And, at least going into this past 

August 9, 2011 36 of 162



 
 

 
 

weekend, it inclined me, obviously excluding extreme financial instability, to emphasize an 

agnostic view regarding the outlook.  So I am holding to the base-case outlook that I submitted in 

my last forecast in June of stronger economic growth and subsiding inflation in the second half, 

but with less conviction.  The BEA’s NIPA revisions somewhat changed the narrative in my 

thinking.  The revisions, along with the negative tone of the incoming data, make it harder to 

sustain my previous forecast.  When I submitted my projections in June, I was thinking of 

restraints on economic growth primarily in terms of commodity shocks and the economic fallout 

from the earthquake and tsunami disaster in Japan.  I think now the list has to be expanded to the 

uncertainties associated with the ongoing government debt messes here and in Europe.  Friday’s 

employment report somewhat took the edge off of accumulating doubts, but at this point, I’m 

reluctant to entirely dismiss the possibility of an outright contraction, which is also a change in 

my thinking since June.  The Tealbook also references the possibility that “the self-equilibrating 

tendency of the economy has been greatly weakened by the damage resulting from the financial 

crisis” and/or that “the economic weakness reflects structural factors” that have lowered the 

potential path of GDP.  I think these are plausible scenarios as well, and they imply much longer 

periods of relatively slow growth than have been reflected in any of the projections I or the 

Committee has published at this point.  In many ways, that’s Governor Tarullo’s point.  So going 

into the past weekend and before yesterday’s market instability, I felt that a wait-and-see 

approach to the incoming data over the next weeks or perhaps months is especially warranted. 

Now let me turn to input from my District, and once again, there is some contrast 

between anecdotal reports we’ve heard and the picture presented by the incoming data.  

Listening to reports from my directors and business contacts, I find it hard to identify major 

shifts in overall business conditions in my District.  Overall, activity appears to be growing at a 

August 9, 2011 37 of 162



 
 

 
 

modest pace.  Business sentiment has slipped a little since June, but I wouldn’t say there has 

been a significant deterioration in assessment of the near-term outlook of our various boards of 

directors and affiliated business contacts.  In fact, for the most part, the feedback across contacts 

was not qualitatively different from June.  Large firms are still reporting a favorable business 

environment, while small firms continue to struggle.  Improvements in residential real estate 

have been spotty by property type and region, though overall the housing market remains 

depressed.  Industrial activity is still expanding, but at a softer pace than earlier in the year.  Auto 

producers and sellers, however, are seeing a pickup in activity following tsunami-related supply 

disruptions, and the expectations for auto production and sales are reported to be favorable for 

the balance of the year.  Consumer spending has slowed, consistent with the national indicators.  

Retailers continue to note significant differences between upmarket spending, which has been 

reasonably good, and middle- to lower-income spending, which has been exceptionally weak.  

Many households appear to be reprioritizing their spending baskets in response to constraints on 

disposable income and heightened uncertainty.  The Atlanta Bank’s chairwoman, who represents 

the country’s largest home-improvement chain, reports strong sales across stores, with some 

emphasis on what might be called “home-value investment spending.” 

Wage and other compensation pressures in general remain very modest, and commodity 

price pressure evident earlier in the year has lessened.  The capacity to pass through price 

increases seems to be mixed.  The same home-improvement retailer expressed surprise at the 

willingness of customers to absorb price increases and noted that they expect to test the limits of 

that willingness over the second half of the year.  A firm that represents several thousand grocery 

products opposite supermarkets said their suppliers will be pushing through price increases in the 

coming months.  A major auto retailer, however, indicated that pricing power has largely played 

August 9, 2011 38 of 162



 
 

 
 

out in that business.  Although a few pieces of anecdotal feedback could cast doubt on the 

“subsiding headline inflation” scenario, on balance I detected no clear movement of price 

pressure in one direction or another. 

As regards the balance of risks, none of my discussions in the past several weeks have 

revealed sentiment that the economy is sliding back into a recession, but the tone of these 

discussions was decidedly cautious, and many acknowledged that the downside risks outweighed 

those to the upside.  I share the view that downside risks to the outlook for economic growth 

over the near term have risen, and regarding inflation, I still judge the risks as broadly balanced.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll start with some remarks about the Fifth 

District economy.  Recognize that all these are based on reports received before last week’s 

financial market events.  The indicators we have suggest Fifth District economic activity has 

softened in the past couple of months.  Our manufacturing index came in right about at 

breakeven in June and July, and that’s a level that’s retraced much of the improvement it showed 

earlier in the year.  In the services sector, our Fifth District retail index returned to positive 

territory, but our nonretail services index remained above even as well.  Of the two, the retail 

index has been more volatile, and comments from retailers in the District continue to suggest a 

high level of consumer caution.  For example, we heard from a supplier of waffle ingredients that 

while sales at the stores he services are up, average waffle size has taken a hit.  [Laughter]  

Presumably, that means people are ordering smaller ice cream cones and waffles on average.  

Construction, both residential and commercial, remains fairly weak in most of the Fifth District.  

Government contracts seem to be the primary source of new, nonresidential work in our District, 

August 9, 2011 39 of 162



 
 

 
 

and the construction industry is one where we often hear that uncertainty about long-range fiscal 

policy has a direct effect on them, damping their willingness to invest in equipment or to hire 

young workers who would need a few years to attain proficiency.  Measures of current price 

pressures in the Fifth District have eased a bit in recent months; expectations about future price 

trends have declined a bit in services but remain elevated in manufacturing.  So the overall 

picture we get from the indexes and our contacts resembles what President Lockhart reported 

about the Sixth District:  The economy’s still growing, but it softened a little bit recently, 

especially in the manufacturing sector.  Caution is widespread, but the mixed tenor of comments 

is very similar to recent months, and we didn’t see any signs of an imminent collapse in activity.  

However, as I said, these all came from before recent financial market events. 

At the national level, there’s no question the outlook’s deteriorated.  The GDP revisions 

were disheartening.  They showed that the contraction was deeper, and the recovery slower, than 

we had previously thought.  One reading is that they increased the odds that we’re not returning 

anytime soon to the trend line that characterized growth in per capita income in the 20th century.  

Nonetheless, what the revision means for economic growth might be hard to discern.  I think it’s 

striking that the Tealbook showed so much confidence in its estimates of the output gap that it 

translated the GDP revisions, I guess, about one for one in revisions in estimated potential 

output.  We’ve discussed the notion about output gap at several recent meetings, including 

during our presentation on DSGE models in June.  And how one thinks about the output gap is 

obviously closely related to the question of whether monetary stimulus is capable of increasing 

real activity, or offsetting declines in real activity, to any measurable extent. 

I don’t want to recapitulate that debate, but I want to mention a little bit of recent research 

at the Richmond Fed that has to do with the elevated level of long-term unemployment coming 

August 9, 2011 40 of 162



 
 

 
 

out of this recession.  The work is by Andreas Hornstein, and it’s based on work by Robert 

Shimer that used data on short-term unemployment, as well as total unemployment, to estimate 

rates at which workers enter and exit unemployment.  And Shimer, who’s focusing on short-term 

flows and short-term fluctuations, found that variations the rate at which workers exit from 

unemployment predominantly accounted for variations in unemployment.  But Shimer’s 

framework doesn’t allow for the negative duration dependence—the negative association 

between how long you’ve been unemployed and the rate at which you get out of unemployment.  

Specifically, his model significantly underpredicts long-term unemployment and overpredicts 

short-term unemployment.  What Andreas does is write down—I won’t call it a model—

essentially an accounting framework that allows for unobserved heterogeneity in the 

unemployed.  He allows two types in this framework, and if you use more data, you can allow 

more types.  And he does that.  But one type has a lower rate of exit from unemployment and is 

more prone, thus, to long-term unemployment.  And the other has a higher rate of exit and thus is 

more prone to coming in and out of the labor market more quickly.  The entry and exit rates of 

these can vary independently over time.  They don’t have to be proportional or anything.  And he 

allows for the short-term unemployed to change types and become long-term unemployed at a 

rate that can vary over time.  He uses the data on short-term unemployment, less than 5 weeks, 

and long-term unemployment, 26 weeks or more, to essentially infer all of these transition rates 

from the data we have. 

He confirmed Shimer’s finding that fluctuations in unemployment are due mostly to 

fluctuations in exit rates rather than entry rates.  But unlike Shimer, he’s able to match, more or 

less, the elevated level of long-term unemployment.  The interesting part of his analysis is that it 

nests two alternative explanations for the negative duration dependence—the negative 

August 9, 2011 41 of 162



 
 

 
 

association between how long you’ve been unemployed and a low exit rate.  One explanation is 

that exit rates simply go down because of the time you spend unemployed.  For example, skills 

are lost the longer you spend outside the workforce or there’s some scarring effect.  You might 

call this pure duration dependence, and he captures this with the flows between types—if you 

start as a good type, you might end up on long-term unemployment.  You might change types 

while you’re unemployed.  The other source of duration dependence is through unobserved ex 

ante heterogeneity.  When workers become unemployed, some have relatively high exit rates, 

some have relatively low exit rates.  Over time, the ones with the low exit rates are a higher 

fraction of those who have been unemployed for a long time, so it’s essentially a composition 

effect.  His model allows for both types, and he uses the data to just tell him which type of 

negative duration dependence is going on.  What he finds is that the transition between types is 

negligible, so pure duration dependence, just pure time being unemployed, doesn’t seem to be 

empirically important.  Duration dependence instead appears to be more attributable to ex ante 

heterogeneity among those entering unemployment.  Some enter the pool of unemployed less 

likely to find jobs, and they become a larger fraction of those who remain unemployed for a long 

time. 

So, why is this relevant?  Well, I emphasize that this is an accounting framework, so this 

isn’t a fully fleshed-out model of the economy.  But the most natural interpretation of ex ante 

heterogeneity is that it’s related to the characteristics of the worker, and the natural thing to think 

about is skills and labor market mismatch that is brought about by structural change in the 

economy.  And the idea here is that differences in exit rates reflect differences in the degrees to 

which workers’ skills are a good match for employers’ needs.  According to Andreas’s 

calculations, fluctuations in entry and exit rates for the long-term unemployed have accounted 

August 9, 2011 42 of 162



 
 

 
 

for three-fourths of the fluctuations in unemployment in the United States over the postwar 

period.  Moreover, the rise in unemployment in 2008 and 2009 is predominantly attributable to 

the increase in the rate at which long-term unemployed entered unemployment and to the 

decrease in the rate at which they’ve exited unemployment.  And as I said, between-type 

transitions are negligible and have made virtually no contribution to the increase in 

unemployment in this recession.  The takeaway is that the rise in long-term unemployment in 

this recession seems plausibly related to more labor market mismatch—“more ex ante 

heterogeneity” is the more precise way to say it.  Whether that’s skill mismatch or not is 

obviously just an interpretation of the data.  Others have made that argument, I realize, but the 

unique contribution of Andreas’s work is that he allows for the possibility of pure duration 

dependence and finds that its contribution is negligible. 

A digression of this sort might seem a bit odd in the midst of the apocalyptic market 

behavior of the past few days, but I think it’s still important for us to focus on understanding 

fundamentals.  A couple of times this morning, “our profound ignorance,” I think, was the phrase 

used about key aspects of how our economy behaves.  My guess is that the recent market 

movements were substantially driven—it’s just a guess—by concerns about growth prospects.  

That seems to be the likely leading candidate.  I found it surprising, but the work I described has 

bolstered my belief that unemployment is disappointingly high and economic growth is 

disappointingly low for reasons that are related to economic fundamentals rather than insufficient 

monetary policy stimulus—or insufficient fiscal policy stimulus, for that matter.  Right now, the 

European growth outlook has worsened in light of the political difficulty of constructing a 

sustainable fiscal regime for the euro area.  Amid all of this gloom, I think we can take some 

comfort from inflation trends.  Inflation seems to be headed toward a range of 1½ to 2 percent, 

August 9, 2011 43 of 162



 
 

 
 

and I think it’s worth pointing out that that’s quite a bit different—and, I think, better—than the 

situation we faced last year at this time.  And I think that has obvious relevance to our policy 

discussions, and I’ll leave my comments there.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I’ll take a chapter from Governor Tarullo’s opening monologue and 

dispense with the average presentation.  I do want to note from my corporate contacts that, 

regardless of the sector, whether it’s rail activity, electricity usage, cargo hauled through the air 

or on the seas, airline traffic advance bookings, restaurant pricing, or even one of my favorite 

leading indicators, elective surgery—which, by the way, has declined significantly nationwide, 

but showing the difference between my District’s performance and elsewhere, cosmetic and 

elective surgery is up in Texas [laughter]—there is no question that we are seeing, in the reports 

given by business leaders, a mystically stated “slowdown in the pace of play.”  Also, in terms of 

not embracing shibboleths that are dear to some of us, I think I have been reporting that 

inflationary pressure, particularly as we look at it from a trimmed-mean standpoint, certainly 

seems well contained and within reasonable bounds.  It’s not an issue that I find myself 

preoccupied with any longer. 

I must say, Mr. Chairman, I’m a little concerned when I hear people talk about the way 

the markets—and they’re talking about the equity markets, but I think we’re also talking about 

broader market phenomena—have behaved in the past few days.  And having been a market 

operator, working under the strong sense that markets are manic-depressive mechanisms, I think 

we have to be very careful not to overreact.  We do know—as we mentioned earlier in the 

previous discussion we had, particularly with Brian—that we’ve had worse periods:  ’82, ’74, 

August 9, 2011 44 of 162



 
 

 
 

March of 2009.  So there is substantial downside here.  I would simply say that I think things 

have gotten worse.  I think we have to call a spade a spade. 

One of the things that I believe firmly has compounded the pessimism or, put it this way, 

the lesser enthusiasm I am hearing from my corporate interlocutors—which is one difference I 

bring to this table; whether it’s valid or not is to be decided by others—is that we cannot ignore 

the fact that the debt ceiling negotiations were an absolute debacle.  And we have, if not an 

incompetent government—and I’m not referring to the Administration, I’m talking about the 

structure—then certainly one that does not give rise to confidence.  Now, I spent 10 days in Italy, 

away from the lead-up to the congressional vote.  By the way, full disclosure:  President Pianalto 

was in Italy also.  We were not together; we were in separate parts of Italy.  And I was reading 

the correspondence we had through encryption in terms of possible alternative actions that might 

be taken in the event of a default.  One thing I did not see was any television for 10 days.  When 

I got back, I got off the plane, went to exercise to get over my jet lag the night before the House 

vote, turned on the television, and scanned through CNN, the networks—even Fox, which I don’t 

ordinarily watch.  I was taken aback by the frenetic nature of the discussion, but most 

importantly by what I felt would be a signal that would be received by average consumers, which 

is having been told by their President, their congressperson of either party, and their senator that 

the sky is falling.  My immediate reaction would have been to turn to my spouse, if I were an 

ordinary consumer, and say, “My God, we cannot take this trip.  We cannot buy X or Y, and we 

cannot do this or that.”  If I were a business leader—and this is what I did hear in my subsequent 

discussions with CEOs—I’d be standing, arms crossed, legs spread, saying, “Show me.  Where 

is the tax regime going to change?  What about the subsidies that I hold so dear for my 

August 9, 2011 45 of 162



 
 

 
 

industry—that I’ve lobbied so hard over generations to get?  How are spending patterns going to 

change?  And very, very importantly, what are you going to do to me on the regulatory front?” 

Here’s my point:  The problem we have now is, there’s no question we’ve had very weak 

demand.  If you look at mall traffic, which is aspirational goods largely—nothing necessary is 

sold in a mall—and talk to the interlocutors I talk to, it has dropped to zero from a pace in the 

first quarter of 3 percent.  Off-mall traffic has dropped to 2.6 percent over the past three weeks, 

largely owing to sales of food, which is a necessity.  But there’s been weak confidence.  There 

has been a very tenuous—and Governor Tarullo used the term—a sort of “halting” one step 

forward, one step back; it’s not continuous.  But we all know it’s been somewhat tentative in 

terms of confidence, and confidence has been undermined.  It has not been undermined by 

monetary policy.  It’s been undermined by nonmonetary factors.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic news since our last meeting has 

been dreadful, and it is becoming more and more difficult to ignore the large cracks that have 

emerged in our monetary policy framework.  Accordingly, it’s almost impossible for me to 

present my economic reports in a business-as-usual manner.  I suppose that’s like 

Governor Tarullo—going first in a sympathetic fashion.  And my comments are based on 

economic developments that largely preceded the events of Monday and last Friday.  So I hope I 

am not overreacting, as President Fisher was suggesting. 

The weak incoming data indicate that it’s highly unlikely that the U.S. economy, in the 

foreseeable future, will achieve anything like a launch velocity, so I certainly agree with 

Governor Tarullo’s comments.  For me, the single most significant number was the downward 

revision to first-quarter GDP growth to 0.4 percent.  It now looks as though growth began 

August 9, 2011 46 of 162



 
 

 
 

slowing in the second half of 2010.  It seems to me that’s before the emergence of the various 

temporary factors that we’ve been pointing to as explanations for weaker growth in the first half 

of this year.  Most of our business and financial contacts are very concerned about continued 

weakness, both here and globally.  Again, that’s before Friday and Monday.  Many expect a 

considerable period of below-trend economic growth.  They’re quite concerned about what 

seems to be a broad decline in the confidence of almost everyone they deal with, spanning both 

the household and business sectors.  Some of the pessimism appears to be a reaction to the 

difficulties in Europe, and some has been a reaction to the messy political fight over the debt 

ceiling in the United States, which presumably has been reinforced by the S&P downgrade of 

U.S. Treasury debt.  And on the part of businesses, the recurring stalls in final demand seem to 

repeatedly validate their aversion to making significant forward commitments of resources that 

would result in new hiring or the expansion of capacity. 

I suppose there must be some good news somewhere, or else the economy would be in a 

full-fledged downturn at this point.  The Detroit Three automakers are enjoying a better profit 

environment, which is driven by a markedly lower cost structure, substantially improved sales 

relative to the depths of the recession, and strong retail prices that have been made possible by 

price discipline, better inventory control, and the competitive disadvantages accruing to their 

Japanese competitors.  However, the importance of cyclical demand is not lost on the 

automakers.  GM and Ford have already marked down their sales forecasts for 2012 by about 

half a million units.  Auto production plans that remain amenable to changing, like those for the 

fourth quarter, currently are being reassessed in light of economic developments.  Obviously, this 

includes making contingency plans in the event a new recession emerges, which at least one of 

them views as a significant possibility.  I got a similar message from the big temporary 

August 9, 2011 47 of 162



 
 

 
 

employment firms.  They saw some modest softening of demand in the second half of July, but 

so far nothing too far out of line with normal patterns.  Their main complaint continues to be that 

their clients remain extremely cautious about starting significant new projects.  Furthermore, 

they note that many firms are nervous about the outlook and are currently able to pull back on 

hiring on very short notice.  Recent developments also suggest that inflation risks over the 

medium term continue to recede.  My reasons for this assessment are unchanged—well known 

from past meetings—and, I believe, stronger given recent developments and greater forward-

looking risks.  I continue to believe that inflation over the medium term will underrun our 

mandate-consistent inflation objective. 

I said there were large cracks in our monetary policy framework.  The essence of my 

argument is somewhat simple:  Our legally mandated responsibilities are to provide monetary 

conditions to support price stability and maximum employment.  During less conventional times, 

our standard, Taylor-like approach to policymaking has served us well with respect to these dual 

mandate responsibilities.  This has been true even when inflation and unemployment were 

unsatisfactory but still within their more normal ranges.  And Mr. Chairman, it is my lasting 

opinion that no one could have navigated the Federal Reserve and the U.S. economy through the 

recent period of crisis any better than you did.  But today’s challenges are still severe.  A 

standard way to score our policy performance on our composite responsibilities is to use a policy 

loss function like the one the Tealbook, Book B, uses in its optimal policy simulations.  The next 

three sentences are somewhat tedious.  [Laughter]  The simulations put equal weight on squared 

deviations in inflation from 2 percent, and the unemployment rate from the effective NAIRU, 

with an Okun’s law coefficient of ½.  That’s equivalent to putting weights of 1 on the squared 

inflation gap and ¼ on the deviation in output from potential.  So I think that’s somewhat 

August 9, 2011 48 of 162



 
 

 
 

conservative in the central banker camp—¼ on an output gap relative to 1 on inflation.  With this 

context, here’s the simplest statement of our current policy crisis:  Today’s 9 percent 

unemployment policy loss is equivalent to an inflation crisis on the order of 5 percent.  Does 

anyone believe we would be sitting on our hands waiting for inflation to come down from such 

an elevated level as 5 percent?  I don’t think so.  I think we should have the same attitude toward 

an unemployment rate of 9 percent.  The fact that we don’t express that same revulsion exposes 

the very large cracks in our dual mandate policy framework, and I think we really need to discuss 

that more.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was struck over the weekend by how 

many articles mentioned the word “recession” while describing the economic outlook, and that 

was before the opening of financial markets on Monday.  The memo from Vice Chairman 

Dudley highlights how much the deterioration in incoming data since the spring has increased 

the New York Fed’s estimate of the probability of recession.  Many private-sector economists, 

using similar models, come to similar conclusions.  With real GDP for the first two quarters of 

the year averaging less than 1 percent, it is not surprising that these models are predicting an 

elevated recession probability, even ignoring intangibles such as congressional dysfunction, 

European political dysfunction, and the first downgrade of the United States in recent history. 

Recent data have been sufficiently downbeat that a relatively weak employment report is 

now viewed as a source of good news.  Yet, with the employment-to-population ratio the lowest 

since 1983, there should be little rejoicing.  It is interesting to note that even those with higher 

educational attainment had significant declines in their employment-to-population ratios.  When 

talking to people around New England, I hear that the only bright spot seems to be rental 

August 9, 2011 49 of 162



 
 

 
 

housing.  Buyers not convinced their home prices will increase, buyers with little or no equity for 

a down payment, buyers no longer qualifying for credit, and possibly a sectoral shift away from 

homeownership have all contributed to an improving rental market.  However, those same 

factors would indicate that the most interest-sensitive component of GDP, residential investment, 

is less sensitive to interest rate movements, requiring larger movements to have an effect. 

Housing finance is not the only area that has been disrupted.  Concerns about the debt 

ceiling and European financial difficulties have prompted investors to expand already substantial 

cash holdings.  As money market funds have significantly increased liquidity, indicators of dollar 

funding problems, such as the three-month currency swap rate, indicate an increase in dollar 

funding problems for European banks.  When European banks have trouble rolling funds with 

money market funds, they often return to the swap market to satisfy their dollar funding needs.  

Stock prices for European and domestic banks have declined substantially.  In fact, Bank of 

America shares yesterday closed at under $7 a share, a low not seen since the bad old days of 

2009.  Their credit default swap rate was over 200.  Note that with possible downgrades, 

uncertainty about lawsuits, and further deterioration in housing prices, there remains a possibility 

that the next financial shock could still be generated by a large, troubled domestic bank. 

Given the large degree of resource slack in the economy, it is quite possible that the 

inflation rate will soon be falling.  Businesses are worried and labor markets are weak—not an 

environment conducive to increases in prices or wages.  The Michigan survey measures of 

inflation expectations, both short term and longer term, were down.  In fact, the Tealbook 

forecasts that both total and core PCE inflation will hover at 1.4 percent by the end of 2012.  

Models at the Boston Fed expect inflation to be a bit lower.  The evolution of the forecast in the 

Tealbook since the spring has been striking.  The economic growth forecast has been materially 

August 9, 2011 50 of 162



 
 

 
 

reduced, and unemployment is now expected to remain quite elevated through the forecast 

period.  Inflation is forecast to remain well below 2 percent in the medium term.  I unfortunately 

concur with this outlook.  I fear that, in fact, we are currently underestimating the risk of a 

recession, given the change in domestic and foreign financial conditions.  I concur with 

Governor Tarullo that this may require a more flexible and innovative approach to our policy 

discussion.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  It’s 10:00, and I understand coffee is ready.  

Why don’t we take 20 minutes and come back at 10:20?  Thank you. 

[Coffee break] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don’t we recommence?  President Plosser, if 

you’re ready, you’re up. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Business conditions in the Third District 

continue to improve modestly since our last meeting, but the pace of that economic expansion is 

slower than earlier in the year.  Payroll employment growth for the region remains weak.  July 

employment data for the states won’t be released until the middle of August, next week 

sometime, but in June the unemployment rate for our three states moved up to 8.4 percent—still 

significantly below that of the nation as a whole.  Manufacturing activity in the region firmed a 

bit in July but remains weaker than we saw earlier in the year.  Our BOS general activity index 

moved back into positive territory after being at a rate of negative 7.7 in June.  It moved up to 

3.2 in July.  The indexes of future activity moved up considerably, indicating more optimism 

about future conditions on the part of District manufacturers.  One supply shipper I talked to on 

Friday said that volumes had fallen off the cliff after early in the year, particularly in May and 

June.  But she was somewhat encouraged by the last two weeks of July, when actually their 

August 9, 2011 51 of 162



 
 

 
 

volume of shipments was creeping back up again.  Although not to the level they’d like to see 

them, at least they were moving in the right direction. 

Turning to the nation, the incoming data have been weaker than I anticipated in June.  A 

month ago, I expected that most of the temporary effects of the shocks of the winter and spring, 

including bad weather, earthquakes, and political turmoil in the Middle East and Europe, were 

waning.  That was clearly premature.  The resurgence of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and 

the debt ceiling debate in the United States have damaged confidence and increased uncertainty, 

even as oil prices were stabilizing and industrial activity in Japan was returning to more normal 

levels.  To add insult to injury, we learned from the latest BEA revisions to output growth that 

the recession was deeper and the recovery weaker than we originally thought.  Payroll 

employment continues to underperform relative to the previous two recoveries, but this is 

primarily due to the government sector, which has shed jobs in this cycle.  Private-sector 

employment, in fact, has been on about the same pace as we saw in similar stages of the past two 

recoveries.  Despite the below-expected output growth in recent quarters, there are signs the 

economy is gradually improving rather than continuing to deteriorate.  For example, our research 

staff in Philadelphia maintains a high-frequency business conditions index called the ADS index, 

which is updated daily as new data become available.  This short-term, high-frequency index 

began to slide in late 2010 and early 2011.  However, beginning in June and into July, that slide 

has been reversed and the index is now beginning to gradually rise, suggesting that conditions 

are improving, not continuing to deteriorate. 

The reactions of the financial market, I think, are telling and important, and they appear 

to arise from three basic sources.  One is the failure of the European Union to deal with their 

sovereign debt crisis and that flared up, as we’ve talked about.  Another is the deterioration in the 

August 9, 2011 52 of 162



 
 

 
 

debates about U.S. fiscal policy and downgrades.  And finally, perhaps more important than 

anything, I think, are the BEA revisions to GDP growth.  I think that the market is reading in an 

assessment that this is telling them something about a reduction in longer-term growth, not just 

about cyclical patterns.  And with lower potential growth, you would expect the stock market to 

respond a lot if they’re discounting a longer stream of lower growth.  I don’t know that those are 

the right stories.  They seem plausible to me.  But if that is the correct interpretation of what has 

happened and what’s going on, it’s nothing to be very happy about.  It’s discouraging and 

something that is quite concerning.  And yet, it’s not clear at all, if that’s what’s going on, 

whether monetary policy can do much about those factors—either the fiscal policy challenges in 

Europe or the United States or the reductions in potential GDP growth.  We do have the potential 

to deal with liquidity problems and crises in the financial markets to retain financial stability.  

And we should be prepared to adjust those as needed.  It is not clear at this point whether 

financial markets are truly disrupted or dysfunctional, as they were in 2008, but clearly there is a 

lot of volatility. 

Much of the recent economic commentary is focused on weaker-than-expected real 

activity, but we’ve also seen higher inflation than many anticipated.  I remain concerned about 

recent movements in the economy’s broad-based price measures.  Headline inflation and core 

inflation measures have been on an upward trend for most of the past year.  Core PCE inflation 

ran a bit more than 2 percent in the second quarter and appears to be on track for a similar 

reading in the third quarter.  As the Tealbook notes, we’ve now had three months of upward 

revisions in prices for core goods and services.  Thus, while we are seeing weaker economic 

activity, we are also seeing rising inflation.  This is a quite different situation than we faced in 

the fall of 2010, when we resumed our asset purchases.  At that time, real activity was weakening 

August 9, 2011 53 of 162



 
 

 
 

and inflation was falling, and there were fears of deflation.  The recent stabilization and even 

retrenchment in the prices for energy and commodities hold a prospect for some reprieve in the 

near-term inflation rates.  I think we should be careful not to be too sanguine.  We have provided 

a great deal of monetary accommodation to the economy, and given the stubbornness of the 

unemployment rate and the potential for potential GDP to revise downward, the unemployment 

rate has been, despite all that, very stubborn in falling.  We should be cautious and vigilant that 

our previous policies, and perhaps easing actions we might contemplate in the near future, may 

translate into a steady rise in inflation over the medium term, even while the unemployment rate 

remains elevated.  If that were to occur, we would find ourselves in a very, very uncomfortable 

predicament. 

I think that as we contemplate any action today, we should, as Dave Wilcox indicated, 

take a longer-term perspective—at least longer term than what the actions of the stock market 

have been over the past three or four days.  And we must be careful not to leave the impression 

that we are reacting to stock market movements.  While we may not intend that to be the case, it 

could very easily be the result of any actions that we take when we act in the midst of such great 

volatility.  I would remind everyone of the story that they all know—the famous quote by Paul 

Samuelson that the stock market has predicted nine of the past five recessions—and we should 

not overreact to the admittedly very tumultuous times in the stock market.  I’ll save my other 

recommendations for the policy go-round.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Eighth District economy continues to 

grow at a moderate pace.  The general tone from business contacts is that business is broadly 

satisfactory, but there is also substantial anxiety concerning macroeconomic developments.  A 

August 9, 2011 54 of 162



 
 

 
 

few business contacts reported hard data confirming a slower economy during the May/June/July 

period, but not consistently, and the overall tone was actually mixed.  The Eighth District 

unemployment rate, for 16 District metropolitan statistical areas, increased during the spring 

from 8.5 percent to 8.9 percent.  Residential real estate markets continue to look very weak.  

Market participants were hopeful for 2011, but better results have not materialized.  Reports 

from around the District seem to confirm that automobile production will return to full strength 

sooner than previously anticipated. 

The national economy is in the middle of what may become a severe dislocation.  My 

view is that four uncertainties have held back growth during the first half of 2011.  First, Japan.  

But reports now seem to indicate a faster-than-expected return to full production.  This seems 

bullish for the second half of the year.  Second, energy and commodity prices.  This was possibly 

the largest concern in the first half of the year, but oil prices in particular have retreated 

substantially from their highs earlier this year, so I think this is another bullish factor for the 

second half of the year.  Third, the U.S. fiscal situation.  This is not a new issue.  From a 

macroeconomic perspective, there is very little news here and really no surprises in the way the 

debt deal was finally put together.  However, the long debate focused attention on the political 

intractability of the situation.  Still, so far, Treasury yields have remained extremely low.  There 

may be a crisis of confidence in U.S. governance, but it is not showing up in yields to date.  The 

real problem, in my view, is the fourth uncertainty, which is Europe.  The key news during the 

intermeeting period has been the blowout in Italian and Spanish debt yields.  This seems to 

indicate exactly the type of contagion that could turn the sovereign debt crisis into a global 

macroeconomic shock.  The most recent euro zone agreement is proving insufficient for the 

European policymakers to stay ahead of the curve.  I conclude that the risks from Europe remain 

August 9, 2011 55 of 162



 
 

 
 

substantial and are a key driver of the global selloff in equities.  If this is the main disturbance, I 

do not think we have a natural policy response.  I would expect U.S. Treasury yields to remain 

low on flight-to-safety grounds, which is exactly what seems to be happening. 

One additional factor, which has been mentioned many times already this morning, is the 

second-quarter GDP report, which showed very sluggish first-half growth and substantial 

downward revisions to earlier data.  In my opinion, this is causing many to rethink U.S. potential 

growth going forward.  Lower potential growth may reasonably imply a lower value for U.S. 

equity markets, which seems to be happening.  It also makes the U.S. fiscal situation so much 

worse.  However, as President Plosser was just emphasizing, lower potential growth is not a 

problem that monetary policy can fix.  I will have one side remark on the GDP report.  Anecdotal 

reports from around this table from the first half of 2011 did not seem to indicate an economy at 

stall speed.  I would not be surprised if further revisions again changed the picture of the first 

half of 2011. 

Current monetary policy remains extremely accommodative and has ratcheted up 

inflation expectations over the past year.  With the policy rate at zero, higher inflation 

expectations translate into lower real interest rates, the very definition of easier monetary policy.  

The real five-year rate, calculated from the TIPS market, is negative 67 basis points as of 

Friday—that’s a five-year rate—substantially lower, by approximately 100 basis points, than last 

summer.  So this Committee has done a lot, and I think further balance sheet policy is the most 

potent tool that we have.  It also carries with it substantial inflation risk, as has been repeatedly 

emphasized around the table. 

Our goal today, in my view, is to effectively acknowledge the slower economy and the 

difficult situation in financial markets and to remain prepared for action in the event that the 

August 9, 2011 56 of 162



 
 

 
 

anticipated strengthening in the second half does not materialize.  I counsel against taking direct 

policy actions today for two reasons.  Any action today with respect to further asset purchases, 

number one, would be viewed as helping the Congress with fiscal problems that weren’t solved 

and, number two, would solidify the notion that there is a so-called Greenspan–Bernanke put in 

the equity markets.  Still, despite not taking action today, it’s completely reasonable to plan for 

further action if necessary, given the very volatile markets of the past few days.  Any policy 

action we take going forward should be appropriately tied to specific outcomes in the 

macroeconomy and not to the calendar.  We have been burned twice by tying the end dates of 

key policy moves to the calendar, only to have the data contradict our decisions.  This occurred 

in March 2010; we had to reconsider our policy in August 2010.  It now happened again in June 

2011, and we are back here contemplating further action today.  We should adopt an approach 

closer to our interest rate policy, in which we make adjustments meeting by meeting in response 

to incoming data. 

Other policy approaches, besides balance sheet policy, do not sound like they will be 

effective to me.  The new Twist policy, in my view, would have questionable effects that would 

complicate our exit strategy.  Also, rates are puzzlingly low already out on the yield curve, so 

I’m not sure how much impact it would have there.  Also, the effects of that are not on expected 

inflation, which I think is the key variable from our perspective.  I think that an explicit promise 

into 2013 has many problems.  It’s not state contingent, which I have just emphasized.  I don’t 

think it’s credible to make promises that far out into the future, and I think there’s a substantial 

probability that a promise like that could backfire.  As I’ve emphasized before here, instead of 

generating higher inflation expectations by promising to keep rates at zero, we may get deflation.  

Markets might take the promise of low rates as a signal that potential growth is actually very 

August 9, 2011 57 of 162



 
 

 
 

low.  They’d come to expect zero policy rates for a very long time, which is only consistent with 

a mild deflation in the long run.  In addition, following that kind of path, as inflation expectations 

fall, policy actually gets tighter, not easier.  So I think there are a lot of problems with the 

explicit promise into 2013.  On targeting rates, we can talk about that more during the policy 

round, but I think the main issue there is the possibility that we would lose control of the balance 

sheet if we tried to target rates.  Those are my comments for now, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Over the past six months, there’s 

been a decline in optimism among our business contacts in the Ninth District, at least among 

those who are not in resource-related businesses and who do not live in the Dakotas.  [Laughter]  

More specifically, I am now hearing a renewal of the 2010 wait-and-see attitudes on both cap-ex 

and hiring.  The fading optimism in the Ninth District is reflective of national economic 

conditions.  As we are all aware, the economy grew slowly in the first half of 2011. 

I think we can look to housing as being a potential source of this slow growth.  In my 

view, the roots of this recession and of the slow recovery lie in the loss of housing value and the 

concomitant shrinkage of wealth and borrowing capacity.  And this process continues.  For 

example, the flow of funds data tell us that the value of real estate owned by households fell 

another 7 percent from the second quarter of 2010 through the first quarter of 2011.  We often 

focus on the impact of this loss of net worth on demand.  However, it also affects the supply side 

of the economy.  As Governor Duke emphasized in a speech last spring, entrepreneurs rely 

heavily on their personal assets and savings to initiate new businesses.  Hence, declines in 

household net worth disrupt the process of business formation and so disrupt the process of 

innovation and job creation that fuels the expansion of potential output.  And here, I think, the 

August 9, 2011 58 of 162



 
 

 
 

Census Bureau’s data on job creation from 2006 and 2007 are suggestive.  Housing values began 

to fall in 2006, and financial conditions generally worsened in 2007.  But growth remained 

positive until the first quarter of 2008.  If you looked at overall job creation, it remained higher in 

2007 than in 2006.  But the number of jobs created by newborn firms fell from 2006 to 2007 by 

12 percent, and of course, it’s gone on to fall sharply further since then. 

I’ve stressed one channel that links financial frictions and the supply side of the 

economy.  There are other channels that one could point to.  What was initially a demand shock 

can actually turn into a supply shock.  And I offer some evidence that actually countervails the 

thesis that President Lacker was describing.  There’s a host of empirical papers that document 

how spells of non-employment are associated with significant wage losses.  And the question is, 

is this due to screening or signaling effects, or is it due to actual deterioration of skills?  There’s a 

paper by Edin and Gustavsson from 2008 that uses a Swedish longitudinal data set that links 

measures of general literacy and numeracy to measures of employment, and they estimate that a 

year of non-employment is associated with an individual moving down 5 percentile points in the 

distribution of these general skills in the population.  This kind of erosion of skills is another 

effect of the fall of net worth generating unemployment and then translating into a corrosive 

effect on the supply side of the economy. 

What’s my point?  My point is, these joint effects on demand and supply make it hard for 

us to establish with any certainty to what extent the low growth of the economy translates into 

disinflationary pressures, whether the surprising low growth in real GDP reflects slow growth in 

potential output or a worsening output gap.  And the revisions in the Tealbook arising from the 

recent revisions in the NIPA are consistent with this abstract statement.  Thus, the August 

Tealbook says that the potential GDP grew at only 1.1 percent in 2009 and only 1.7 percent in 

August 9, 2011 59 of 162



 
 

 
 

2010, while in April the Tealbook said the potential GDP grew at 2 percent per year in both 

years.  These uncertainties about potential output imply that we need to use additional sources of 

information as we seek to measure changes in resource slack in the economy.  For example, 

despite the recent modest employment reports, the Tealbook predicts that unemployment will fall 

0.4 percentage point over the course of 2011, and we generally would view this kind of decline 

in unemployment as a sign of diminishing resource slack.  Now, I talked about it at earlier 

meetings—at length, I would say.  Unemployment itself is only an imperfect signal about the 

amount of slack in the economy.  I think it’s useful to turn to inflation itself as a complementary 

source of information. 

And here I think Governor Tarullo is absolutely right, and I’ll put myself in the group 

that was surprised on the downside by events in the first half of the year in terms of economic 

growth.  I think I’ll be surprised on the downside relative to my January forecast by what 

happens in the second half of the year.  But it’s also true that most of our forecasts were low for 

PCE core inflation for 2011.  I was probably on the high side relative to most of the people 

around the table, and I was forecasting 1½ percent PCE core inflation for 2011.  Now I agree 

with the Tealbook that we’re likely to come in at something closer to 1.8, and possibly even 

higher, for the entire year.  This is something we have to take into account as we think about the 

degree of slack and the effectiveness of monetary policy in the economy.  So from 2009 to 2010, 

core inflation was falling from 1.7 percent to 1 percent.  From 2010 to 2011, as I just talked 

about, it’s going to be rising from 1 percent to something like 1.8 percent.  At a minimum, you 

would normally think about this increase in the rate of change of inflation—this is the third 

derivative of the price level, for those of you who are keeping track of these kinds of things.  

President Williams appreciates that.  [Laughter]  It would seem to indicate that resource slack is 

August 9, 2011 60 of 162



 
 

 
 

lower in 2011 than in 2010.  GDP growth in 2011 has been slow, but as the Tealbook emphasizes 

on its very first page, we don’t exactly know why it’s been slow.  The falling rate of 

unemployment and the rising rate of inflation suggest that, despite the slow growth, resource 

slack is diminishing.  In the next go-round, I will talk about how these considerations should 

impact our thinking about policy.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of things.  In our region, things are 

about as they were—modest economic growth.  We still have an energy boom.  Whether that 

stays, given recent events, we can all guess at.  It depends on whether it’s temporary or longer 

term.  Agriculture’s still doing well.  We’re still seeing very significant increases in the value of 

properties as people deploy their liquidity into any kind of a hedge they think they can find.  One 

thing we have found, in talking with some of the major railroads in our part of the world, is that 

traffic is up in the past month—pretty importantly up, using their words.  So we have this modest 

economic growth.  It’s at risk given all the world events that we see today, and who knows for 

sure? 

I realize, in terms of the comments that I’m making, that we’re all well intentioned, and I 

take the original comment that we have to be open minded about this, but we are products of 

experience.  As you mentioned, I’ve been through three recessions here, but it is actually more 

than that, since I was in the Fed before that.  The question I ask myself as we go through this 

stuff is, what’s wrong?  Is it that capital’s not available, that there’s no liquidity in the system, 

that we’re not able to deploy it because of the impediments that monetary policy might have 

contributed to?  Is the policy rate too high?  Is there a liquidity shortfall somehow?  Or, perhaps, 

are there other issues?  The consumer in America is highly leveraged and remains so.  The states 

August 9, 2011 61 of 162



 
 

 
 

are highly leveraged with their future promises, and they have to deal with that.  Do we have a 

U.S., but also a global, sovereign debt issue that people are thinking about—whether it’s real or 

not, they feel it’s real?  Is this affecting confidence, and is it inhibiting the deployment of capital 

around the world and especially in the United States?  And can we, as a policy body, increase 

confidence by actions we take?  Perhaps.  But I think we’re finding out that we tend to do it on a 

temporary basis as we revert to the real issues that are ours, our country’s, and others’ to deal 

with, and that is the highly, highly leveraged world economy today that needs to be worked 

through.  Our political systems—not just here, but also in Europe—are having difficulty coming 

to grips with that because it requires significant adjustments in how we use our resources.  And 

that’s really what we’re facing today. 

I suspect that we are going to struggle through this for some time to come, and I worry 

that what actions we take now, with our good intentions, will have longer-term consequences as 

they are deployed.  And I’m not just talking inflation.  I mean consequences for the allocation of 

resources—I think the misallocation of resources is a risk as much as anything.  President Evans, 

I understand what you’re saying in terms of, “Would we be reacting this way if inflation were 

5 percent?”  But I will tell you, history and experience tell me, that over time, we—because we 

do care so much—tend to favor trying to bring the unemployment down over our inflationary 

goals.  We did it in the ’70s.  Inflation systematically got up because we were constantly pushing 

to try to keep unemployment lower, until finally inflation was so high that we had to take a pill, a 

very bitter pill.  Yes, I think we could easily find ourselves, if unemployment were to stay high 

or come down more slowly than any of us want, biasing our outcomes toward 5 percent 

inflation—not today, maybe five or six or seven years from now.  But I remind people that in 

economics that’s not a long time, actually.  And this housing crisis started in the 2002–2003 

August 9, 2011 62 of 162



 
 

 
 

period and didn’t erupt until 2007–2008.  So my only point is to say that I agree.  I wish we 

could do more.  Don’t misunderstand me—I wish we could do more.  But I think flooding more 

liquidity into the market, while it may have a temporary impact, has intermediate-term 

consequences—not just longer-term consequences—that I think force us to be more careful right 

now.  And I think we would be wise if we are more careful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The economic news since our last meeting 

has been very discouraging, and it’s getting harder to argue that the weakness that we saw in the 

first half of the year was an aberration.  After the GDP revisions, the recovery now looks like a 

tough slog with occasional bright spots that have been increasingly rare.  So, like many of you, I 

revised down my forecast for GDP growth over the next year and a half.  While a variety of 

inflation measures have been surprising to the upside, I think the sources of those pressures will 

prove to be temporary. 

I’ll briefly elaborate on my assessment of the outlook.  For some time now, I’ve projected 

a pace of recovery that’s been on the lower end of the Committee’s range of forecasts, but the 

incoming data have been even weaker than I have anticipated.  While some estimates of 

recession probabilities have moved into the danger zone, I don’t think a decline in GDP is the 

most likely scenario.  Instead, I expect output growth to pick up, albeit to a still-disappointing 

rate, in the second half of the year.  In my judgment, the key source of restraint on the pace of 

GDP growth is consumption.  Household spending is likely to remain soft while income growth 

is limited and households continue to repair their balance sheets.  The recent revisions to the 

NIPAs have highlighted these forces by significantly marking down income and consumer 

spending over the past three years.  My business contacts have long stated that retail sales have 

August 9, 2011 63 of 162



 
 

 
 

been unusually bifurcated, with lower-income consumers still struggling and behaving as if the 

recession hasn’t ended.  Still, my business contacts are reporting some growth, although most are 

reporting only small gains.  That said, on a more positive note, households are making grudging 

progress on debt reduction, and in my view, this progress will support modest growth in the 

economy and not lead to further deterioration. 

Key auto plants in my District are swiftly returning to normal production levels, which 

are about 50 percent higher than production levels were as recently as June.  This pickup in 

production is occurring despite some risks of a slowdown in overall retail sales, because dealer 

inventories have been left exceptionally low by the disruption in production stemming from the 

earthquake in Japan.  As the Tealbook suggests, the planned acceleration of auto production 

should provide a pretty sizable increment to output growth.  The last dramatic recovery of auto 

production was in 2010, and it was an important factor in one of those rare bright spots in the 

recovery.  Nevertheless, like the Tealbook, I’m concerned by the risk that this bump-up in 

manufacturing activity is going to prove to be transitory. 

Turning to the inflation outlook, I had been expecting to see measures of both total and 

underlying inflation moderate in the second half of this year.  And overall inflation has 

moderated, but inflation excluding food and energy has not.  I still consider underlying measures 

of inflation to be useful predictors of future headline rates, and the Cleveland Fed’s median and 

sticky price measures both indicate a lower underlying rate of inflation than does the measure 

excluding food and energy.  In addition, my downward revisions to the pace of economic growth 

induce me to expect reduced price pressures as the months roll by.  It also appears that financial 

markets are less concerned about inflation amid the signs of a global slowdown.  Inflation 

expectations, as measured in the Cleveland model, fell significantly across most durations 

August 9, 2011 64 of 162



 
 

 
 

following the debt agreement and the S&P rating announcement.  For example, the three-year 

expectation two years forward, which I think is perhaps the most relevant policy horizon, has 

declined 23 basis points to just under 1½ percent since the July CPI release.  It looks like 

inflation expectations could again be shifting, and if inflation expectations dip much further, 

inflation itself may move away from our price stability mandate. 

Turning to the risks surrounding my outlook, with the momentum to economic growth 

already so weak, I would put the risk to output as largely to the downside.  In recent meetings, I 

have viewed the inflation risks as skewed to the upside, in light of both inflation rates and 

expectations coming in higher than anticipated.  But today, the shift to lower inflation 

expectations that I’ve observed in the data has caused me to return the risk to inflation to being 

balanced.  These recent changes in risks have added to the challenges for monetary policy, and I 

think they suggest carefully exploring a range of policy options.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The deterioration in the economic outlook 

has been dramatic and equally disturbing.  Early this year, the economy downshifted to a rate of 

expansion that fell well short of the growth rate of potential output, which we’d traditionally call 

a growth recession.  Some of this weakness reflected transitory factors, and economic growth 

should pick up modestly in the second half of the year.  But even with that improvement, the 

pace of recovery will be insufficient to make meaningful progress on unemployment until next 

year.  Moreover, I see significant downside risks to the forecast.  Anemic growth and high 

unemployment leave the economy especially vulnerable to further adverse shocks and a double 

dip.  The debt crisis in Europe provides one example of such a shock.  Concerns regarding the 

recovery’s vulnerability have been a major reason for the recent volatility in financial markets, 

August 9, 2011 65 of 162



 
 

 
 

and I’m especially worried about the fragile confidence of households and businesses, which 

likely took another big hit with the stock market downturn.  Perhaps more worrisome is that the 

self-correcting process, key to past recoveries, appears to be largely AWOL this time around.  

Despite our efforts to account for the effects of fallout from the financial crisis, we have 

consistently been too optimistic about the pace of improvement in the economy.  I have become 

increasingly concerned that we may not have managed to avoid a Reinhart–Rogoff pattern of 

weak and prolonged recoveries that have followed past financial crises.  Perhaps this time is not 

so different after all. 

The extent to which persistent headwinds are hindering the recovery can be quantified in 

terms of the medium-term equilibrium real interest rate.  In my comments, I will refer to a 

particular model that I developed with Thomas Laubach some years ago.  In this model, the 

equilibrium real interest rate equates supply and demand over the medium term of several years.  

It changes in response to highly persistent shifts in aggregate supply and demand.  A decline in 

the equilibrium real interest rate would imply a negative shock to demand relative to supply.  I 

think this measure gets at the issue of supply versus demand shocks or persistent ones.  Since the 

outset of the recession, the estimated medium-term equilibrium real funds rate has fallen from 

2.4 percent to nearly zero today.  And for comparison, before the current episode, the lowest 

reading that we had on our estimate was 1.8 percent during the headwinds period of the early 

1990s.  Other measures of the equilibrium real interest rate that we look at, as well as those that 

are reported in the Tealbook, Book B, have also declined considerably over the past few years. 

I am also increasingly concerned that the sluggish pace of growth may permanently scar 

the economy.  The magnitude and duration of this downturn will mean that the millions of long-

term unemployed are seeing their human capital deteriorate or actually be destroyed, along the 

August 9, 2011 66 of 162



 
 

 
 

lines of the comments of President Kocherlakota.  I found the alternative scenario “More-

Persistent Spending Weakness with Supply-Side Corrosion” to be a very real risk, although not 

quite yet my modal forecast.  

Turning to inflation, with oil and some other commodity prices having declined sharply 

from earlier peaks, headline inflation is moderating.  Core inflation also rose noticeably this year, 

albeit from a very uncomfortably low level.  Some of the rise in core inflation reflects temporary 

factors that, as mentioned in the Tealbook, should fade in coming quarters.  For example, our 

staff has looked at the issue of pass-through of import prices, and we find that pass-through of 

higher import prices likely contributed about 0.3 percentage point at an annual rate to core 

inflation in the first half of the year.  With non-oil import price inflation moderating, the impulse 

to higher core inflation should also diminish in coming quarters.  Indeed, my business contacts 

tell me that the pass-through of higher import prices to consumer prices either has already 

occurred or will be completed soon. 

In sum, I expect the recovery to continue, but at a frustratingly slow pace that leaves the 

unemployment rate elevated for many years.  I expect inflation in coming quarters to return to 

levels of around 1½ percent, below my preferred long-run goal of 2 percent.  Unfortunately, I 

don’t see light at the end of the tunnel.  The staff’s long-term projection sees us falling short on 

both of our mandates through the end of 2015, the final year reported in the table.  Apparently 

the long run is just not long enough to reach our goals, at least without additional monetary 

support.  But that’s a topic I’ll leave for my comments later.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  First, I’m going to talk about financial 

market developments, and then I’ll talk a little bit about the economic activity data we’ve seen. 

August 9, 2011 67 of 162



 
 

 
 

My view is very similar to Brian’s that the market reaction is really about the 

deterioration of the economic growth outlook.  If you look at the confluence of the market 

indicators—stocks down, credit spreads wider, flight into safe-haven currencies, drop in 

Treasury yields—all are consistent with anxiety about the growth outlook.  What’s dangerous 

about this, of course, is that there’s a risk that this becomes a self-fulfilling process—that 

markets weaken, which then causes people to revise down their economic growth forecast, which 

leads to further market weakness.  Letting this run unabated is not without considerable risk, and 

I think the risks are higher than normal because, one, the economy was very close to stall speed 

even before this, and, two, the market understands that there’s a lack of potent policy tools that 

can be used to arrest this. 

I think that the market developments that are most disturbing to me right now are what 

we saw yesterday with bank stocks falling very, very sharply and CDS spreads widening.  What 

was interesting was that the stocks that fell the most were those for the weaker institutions.  I 

guess that’s not really surprising because obviously they’d be hit most by a poor economic 

environment.  But we did hear something that was actually very interesting.  It was that the 

inability of some banks to buy back their shares may have been contributing to greater price 

weakness in their stocks.  This could be because people who were putting on short positions 

knew that these companies would not be able to resist as easily as other companies.  I think that 

the key issue in terms of this dynamic is that it’s not obvious what the banks can do to break it.  

It’s not as if the bank could say, “I’ll go out and raise more capital,” and that’s going to make 

everybody feel better, because that’s going to be taken as a signal that the bank may actually be 

weaker than what people thought.  The key questions on this note are likely, one, will this 

dynamic continue, and, two, will it lead to funding pressures?  And where I guess I would be 

August 9, 2011 68 of 162



 
 

 
 

particularly nervous is among the broker–dealers.  So far we haven’t really seen much evidence 

of this, but that would be a very, very dangerous channel.  And, three, will this lead to credit 

rating downgrades?  In other words, if this process goes on long enough, will the credit rating 

agencies feel some need to respond to the deterioration in the stock prices and the widening 

credit default swap spreads by cutting the credit ratings, which then could feed back through in 

terms of the funding, which would be pretty dangerous?  Now, S&P said yesterday that the 

government downgrade would not lead them to mechanically downgrade the ratings of the major 

financial institutions, but that’s now, and things could change as we go forward. 

In terms of Europe, I think that it is disturbing, first, that we’re seeing renewed bank 

funding pressures.  Money market mutual funds are shortening their tenors, and they’re 

shortening them now to financial institutions that were really pretty protected and not being 

swept up by this a few months ago, especially some of the major French institutions.  We’re 

seeing it in markets more broadly in terms of widening in the FX dollar swap basis and a bit of 

upward pressure in dollar LIBOR rates.  It’s hard to know if this is it or if we’re going to see a 

lot more of that, but it is certainly disturbing.  The second issue in Europe is that there really is 

no long-term plan.  The ECB’s intervention—the fact that they’re willing to buy Italian and 

Spanish bonds—buys you some time.  But in some ways, the ECB intervention is very 

inconsistent with the commitments that have been made in terms of the EFSF because there has 

been no commitment made to increase the size of the EFSF beyond €440 billion.  If you really 

bring Italy and Spain into the picture, the EFSF needs to be orders of magnitude larger than that, 

and so far at least, the German officials have said that they have no intention to expand the size 

of the EFSF.  Until that changes, I guess I’m going to be pretty nervous about how this is all 

going to play out. 

August 9, 2011 69 of 162



 
 

 
 

In terms of the economic news, as President Rosengren mentioned, we decided to 

circulate a memo just talking about the conditional probability of recession given how weak 

output growth has been.  I’m not sure I would take those probabilities literally.  Obviously every 

business cycle is different, but it does, I think, show you that we are at a very dangerous point in 

terms of how slow the economy is growing and what that typically foreshadows regarding future 

outcomes in terms of recession.  The second thing I just want to say is that I wouldn’t take much 

comfort at all from the payroll employment data.  As David said, it wasn’t quite as horrible as it 

could have been, but it was pretty bad.  Aggregate hours worked were up only 0.1 percent; that’s 

not very strong.  And I would emphasize that this is not very timely information; this is the 

survey for the week that includes July 12.  To the extent that there was a deterioration in 

confidence and business activity in the run-up to the debt limit fiasco, we haven’t seen that yet in 

the employment data.  It’s very possible that the next employment report could actually be quite 

a bit weaker than that one.  And the last thing I would say in terms of the employment report is 

that the household survey was much weaker, with, as David mentioned, the drop in the 

unemployment rate due solely to the decline in the labor force participation. 

From my perspective, the weakness of the economy was very well established even 

before the market retrenchment.  On top of that, we have the risk that these market dynamics will 

continue, and that suggests to me that we should do more on the monetary policy front.  Now, I 

agree with President Hoenig that the problem is one of deleveraging at the household sector and 

at the government sector, and monetary policy cannot solve the deleveraging problem.  That’s 

something that has to take place.  But I would argue that the rate at which this deleveraging 

process takes place does matter, and monetary policy can affect the rate of deleveraging.  And by 

affecting the rate of deleveraging, it can determine how many things actually break in the 

August 9, 2011 70 of 162



 
 

 
 

financial system, and I think that can be important.  So I still think there’s a role for monetary 

policy, even though I agree with you that this is really mostly about deleveraging.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thanks.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ve marked down my economic growth 

outlook substantially in light of the information received over recent weeks, and I’ve become 

increasingly concerned about the downside risks.  The latest data indicate that the U.S. economy 

has been running alarmingly close to stall speed over recent months, and I anticipate only a 

modest pickup in growth over coming quarters.  Indeed, as David Wilcox mentioned, the staff’s 

econometric analysis suggests a 1 in 4 probability that the economy has already slipped into 

recession.  In other words, given the recent evolution of GDP, gross domestic income, and the 

unemployment rate, the NBER might well conclude that another recession began sometime last 

quarter.  One particularly troubling sign of economic weakness is that real personal consumption 

expenditures have declined in each of the past three monthly readings.  It’s worth noting that a 

pattern of three consecutive monthly declines in real PCE has occurred only on a handful of 

occasions over the postwar period—namely, 1959, 1974, 1980–81, 1990–91, and, most recently, 

in late 2008 and early 2009.  In every single one of these previous occasions, the three-month 

sequence of real PCE declines was associated with an NBER-dated recession. 

Of course, there are some special and temporary factors depressing consumer spending.  

Supply chain disruptions had a dramatic impact on the auto sector last quarter.  So it seems 

reasonable to anticipate a significant pickup in motor vehicle production and sales over the 

course of this summer, providing a transitory stimulus to consumer spending and GDP growth.  

Nonetheless, we should keep in mind that those supply-side factors cannot fully account for the 

recent weakness in household spending.  The nondurables and services components of real PCE 

August 9, 2011 71 of 162



 
 

 
 

were both completely flat, on net, over the past three months.  Energy price increases also 

depressed spending in the first half of the year, but careful staff analysis suggests that the decline 

in real disposable income resulting from higher energy prices can explain only a portion of the 

negative consumption surprise. 

Consumers are more downbeat than can be explained by trends in income, wealth, 

inflation, and unemployment.  To gain greater insight into the American consumer’s psyche, 

over the past few weeks I’ve been quizzing various friends, relatives, taxi drivers, and even 

innocent bystanders in the supermarket checkout line concerning their perspectives on the 

economy.  I could report some interesting anecdotes, but I’m reluctant to draw definitive 

conclusions from these interactions with a fairly small and arguably nonrandom sample of 

contacts in Georgetown, Berkeley, and Lanai.  [Laughter]  To gain a more accurate read on the 

wider population of American households, I devoted a few hours last weekend to analyzing the 

plethora of consumer sentiment surveys, including several conducted on a daily basis that are 

now readily available on the Internet.  Most of the survey results are free, but to support 

aggregate demand and in the interest of monetary policy, I shelled out $19.99 for a premium 

subscription to one of them.  In evaluating surveys of consumer sentiment, it’s important to keep 

in mind that there are marked differences in methodology that might be innocuous during normal 

times but have crucial implications under present circumstances.  For example, the Conference 

Board survey has served as a long-standing benchmark on consumer sentiment.  I was surprised 

to discover that this survey is still conducted via the U.S. mail, just as it was a few decades ago.  

Thus, it’s easy to see how the Conference Board’s measure will be heavily weighted toward the 

sorts of consumers who don’t move very often and promptly notify the U.S. Postal Service 

whenever they do so.  By comparison, the Michigan survey contacts households by a phone-

August 9, 2011 72 of 162



 
 

 
 

based approach, developed about two decades ago, in which telephone numbers are randomly 

selected from the phone book.  One pitfall is that this approach may systematically underweight 

consumers who have a cell phone but no landline.  There are, however, polling organizations like 

Gallup and Rasmussen that conduct daily surveys using state-of-the-art methods and that use a 

whole raft of demographic data to help ensure that the results are representative of the 

population. 

The Conference Board survey indicates only a modest drop in consumer sentiment over 

recent months, but I no longer find that result very reassuring.  In contrast, the Michigan survey 

and the Gallup and Rasmussen polls all indicate that consumer sentiment started moving down 

during the spring and then plummeted last month to levels not seen since March 2009.  

According to the Gallup poll, about three-fourths of households view national economic 

conditions as getting worse, while the Michigan survey indicates that only 10 percent of 

households are expecting any increase in their own real income over the next year or two.  

Moreover, the latest daily readings of the Gallup and Rasmussen polls suggest that consumer 

sentiment has continued drifting downward over the past week in spite of the debt ceiling 

resolution and bits of good news from the latest employment report.  Yesterday the Rasmussen 

index showed that sentiment among the roughly half of Americans with at least $5,000 invested 

in stocks, bonds, or mutual funds fell to lows not reached since March 2009.  I would also 

mention that this morning, an NFIB small business survey was released for July; it shows a 

further fall to recessionary readings in business confidence this spring and indicates that this 

result is almost entirely driven by respondents’ concerns about their likely sales. 

Returning now to econometric evidence, staff analysis of Markov regime-switching 

models suggests that an elevated level of consumer pessimism is by no means unwarranted.  For 

August 9, 2011 73 of 162



 
 

 
 

example, the recession probabilities that David Wilcox presented in his briefing were derived 

from a Markov regime-switching model in which the economy periodically transitions between 

three possible states:  an expansion state, with normal GDP growth; a recession state, with 

negative GDP growth; and a stall-speed state, in which GDP growth is positive but well below 

normal.  The estimated parameters indicate that the stall-speed state is a harbinger of bad news 

because that state is almost invariably followed by a recession.  Unfortunately, this model 

currently implies that the probability is greater than 60 percent that the economy is either at stall 

speed or in recession.  Of course, this model-based approach could be overestimating the 

magnitude of downside risk to the economy.  The model doesn’t account for the extent to which 

economic growth during the first half of this year was damped by the supply chain disruptions 

and other transitory factors.  However, the model is blissfully unaware of other significant risks, 

such as the S&P rating downgrade, the weakness of the housing sector, and the serious 

challenges facing our European counterparts. 

In summary, incoming information since our last meeting points to a modal outlook of 

sluggish economic recovery over coming quarters, and I see very substantial downside risks 

attending this outlook.  In my view, these circumstances clearly call for additional monetary 

policy accommodation, a point to which I will return in the policy go-round. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I celebrated my third anniversary with the 

FOMC with markets once again fluctuating wildly.  [Laughter]  So I really had to fight growing 

posttraumatic stress disorder stemming from my early experiences here.  However, at the risk of 

seeming too Pollyanna-ish, there are a few factors that seem better today than they were in 2008 

or even last August.  The banking system is in much better shape, and indeed, our policies are 

August 9, 2011 74 of 162



 
 

 
 

focused on incenting them to take more risk rather than to de-risk.  Corporate balance sheets and 

earnings are strong, and banks report that incoming financial statements show notable 

strengthening in businesses of all sizes.  Consumer balance sheets are also in better shape due to 

voluntary and involuntary deleveraging, and the weight of debt has been reduced through 

refinancing at lower rates.  But their income picture is grim, and the value of their primary asset, 

their home, is still drifting downward.  And finally, while uncertainty is still shading every 

financial decision, a few things have become clearer or will become clear in the near term.  The 

debt ceiling has been increased.  We no longer have to wonder whether and how far S&P is 

likely to downgrade U.S. debt, and we will soon know what that downgrade means for markets. 

Turning to the banks, the same themes that I’ve been reporting continue.  Credit metrics 

continue to improve.  In particular, credit card metrics are approaching, and in some instances 

have moved through, expectations for norms going forward.  Loan demand is still quite weak, 

but the banks are seeing slow, steady improvement from very low levels.  Interest in mortgage 

refinance picked up recently as rates tipped lower.  Credit card response rates are a bit better, and 

the Treasury has begun announcing approvals for investment under the small business lending 

program.  However, many of the banks that applied are under enforcement orders requiring 

permission to pay dividends and are therefore not eligible, and it looks now like approval rates 

will be disappointing.  Further, I did talk to at least one bank that had been approved, but they’re 

now concerned that they won’t be able to find the loan growth that they had anticipated.  So 

they’re not sure they’re going to accept the funds.  Deposits are still growing, but with no place 

to invest the money, price is ratcheting down. 

The most discouraging part of my recent discussions is that while banks no longer seem 

to be fighting for survival, very few have a clear vision of how they can achieve long-term 

August 9, 2011 75 of 162



 
 

 
 

growth or robust profitability.  Bank earnings are somewhat like the economy—modestly 

positive, which is better than negative, but still vulnerable to shocks.  Problem assets are being 

worked out, but there’s no replacement demand to offset liquidating portfolios.  Interest margins 

are weak and falling as funds from liquidating loans and new deposits are invested at very low 

rates, and banks have less room to lower deposit rates as they find themselves facing the zero 

lower bound.  Noninterest income has taken hits from regulations on overdrafts and interchange 

fees, and increases in other fees will only partly mitigate these costs.  Compliance costs from 

Dodd–Frank are expected to be substantial, and elevated deposit insurance premiums seem likely 

to continue for the foreseeable future.  This was the first quarter since 2005 in which upgrades in 

supervisory ratings outpaced downgrades, but I would characterize this statistic as pointing to 

less weakness rather than more strength.  One other note of caution:  I believe there are a lot of 

banks carefully watching the BNY Mellon decision to charge for new deposits.  With weak 

profitability, nowhere to invest new deposits, and rising FDIC and regulatory costs, the 

temptation to charge at least for deposit insurance is high.  As asset rates get closer to zero, 

negative nominal interest rates on deposits could quickly become a reality.  While monetary 

economists might cheer this outcome, I’m not sure what kind of market or banking distortions 

would ultimately follow. 

Finally, as we think about what actions we might take to support growth, I think it’s 

important to look at how improvements in the various loan segments are evolving.  Knowing that 

many are loath to allocate credit, I would still argue that our tools are more limited now and that 

we should consider targeting our actions to the weakest credit segments to yield better results.  

Looking at the results of the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, I find the responses to 

questions about the level of tightness to be quite instructive.  Business credit seems pretty fully 

August 9, 2011 76 of 162



 
 

 
 

healed, with large fractions of respondents reporting credit standards about in the middle 

compared with levels that existed between 2005 and today.  Even with commercial real estate, 

nearly half report standards in the middle or easier.  With a combination of declining past-due 

rates, lower corporate leverage, building cash positions, and improving earnings, the corporate 

sector does not appear to be credit constrained or likely to respond to lower rates by borrowing 

or investing more.  In contrast, the charts for consumer credit are a sea of red, the color 

indicating tighter conditions.  Only auto lending shows some level of neutral and easier lending, 

and to be fair, the slightly tighter conditions in credit cards may be more of a reaction to the 

CARD Act than anything else.  Moreover, the improvement in delinquencies and a resumption of 

growth in non-real-estate-secured consumer credit provide some evidence that creditworthy 

customers are able to access credit, and those who do still have credit outstanding are not 

experiencing as much difficulty paying it.  But standards for first mortgages and home equity 

loans are extremely tight.  Outstandings are steadily declining, and delinquency rates remain 

stubbornly high, reflecting both high levels of stress among borrowers and a backlog of 

delinquency resolution.  So I believe we need to look at problems in the mortgage market as the 

area where policy is most likely to result in improvements in the economy.  We have a housing 

task force at work here at the Board, and we are reaching out to other parts of the government to 

try to advance some policies that we think might help.  But if, as seems likely, this Committee 

considers further monetary policy actions, for me one yardstick for judging potential 

effectiveness will be an estimation of the extent to which the action will affect refinancing or 

new mortgage lending.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

August 9, 2011 77 of 162



 
 

 
 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To me, the economy appears to be faltering, 

and the probability that this faltering exposes us to increased sensitivity and vulnerability has 

risen materially.  Labor market conditions are certainly weaker than in June.  Although the 

unemployment rate ticked down last month, I don’t see any good news in the labor market 

situation.  For one thing, I think discouraged workers are holding down the unemployment rate.  

Indeed, the household survey indicates that the share of the working-age population that is now 

employed stands at 58.1 percent, the lowest level since 1983.  In addition, more-forward-looking 

indicators of labor demand, like the number of temporary employees or the claims figures, are 

not at all encouraging.  According to the Labor Department, there are 4.6 unemployed workers 

for every job opening, and these job figures were added in the middle of July before the debt 

ceiling debate and before stocks began their steep descent.  The economy may not be falling 

back into recession, but neither does it appear to be growing at the 3 percent rate many had 

hoped to see in the second half of the year. 

One of the theories suggested in the Tealbook to explain the notable weakness is that the 

self-equilibrating tendency of the economy has been greatly weakened by the damage resulting 

from the financial crisis.  This theory is only partially plausible to me, and here is my evaluation 

of it.  Consumer and business confidence are not recovering the way they usually do following a 

downturn, and this lack of confidence could be, as it seems to be already, snowballing into a self-

reinforcing cycle of anxiety.  Businesses are hunkering down, weakening the job market further, 

and consumers, in turn, are launching their own programs of austerity, curbing the spending the 

economy needs to grow.  If you think through the usual determinants of consumption—

disposable income, employment, stockholder wealth effects, housing wealth effects, and 

August 9, 2011 78 of 162



 
 

 
 

confidence—they all are currently a drag on consumer spending growth, and it’s not obvious to 

me how they are going to get turned around. 

Most disturbingly, the interactions among these factors seem to be dragging down 

economic growth even more.  For example, I have a neighbor with an elite MBA but a job that 

doesn’t need one, and she is so embarrassed about the real possibility of losing her home that she 

used to call me repeatedly when I was the banking commissioner, pleading for secrecy but 

needing a sustainable modification.  On this past Saturday morning, when I went to retrieve my 

newspaper in the yard, she drove by in her car and stopped to chat.  I asked her how she was 

doing, and she said something like, “Thank goodness I squandered my savings fighting 

foreclosure so I don’t have investments to tank after the debt deal that won’t get us anything.”  

[Laughter]  That formulation kind of took my breath away, so we talked about the weather.  But 

her remark makes me wonder about the self-correcting part of the staff’s possible hypothesis.  If 

the components of consumption are weak and households don’t expect much improvement, what 

moves the economy back to its trend level of growth?  It may well be that the overhang of 

private debt needs to be reduced before we get a sustainable recovery.  After all, taking a long 

look back, personal debt had become a cornerstone of economic and capital market activity.  

While initially consumer debt existed at the fringes of the economy, the prevalence of 

installment loans, national mortgage markets, and credit cards permitted consumers to borrow 

against money they did not have.  As the future of middle-class incomes becomes much less 

stable, the logic of borrowing against such hypothetical future incomes begins to unravel.  In the 

run-up to the crisis, credit was closing the gap between the haves and the have-nots, but without 

rising real wages and with a burst credit bubble, vast amounts of debt remain.  If debt 

deleveraging takes about seven years, we’re smack in the middle of slower growth, with more to 

August 9, 2011 79 of 162



 
 

 
 

come, and the question becomes less about what the outlook for the economy is and more about 

how monetary policy can help with the pace of this debt deleveraging. 

There are two dynamics that I think will hold back growth for a while.  First, households 

and businesses don’t have confidence in the future and so they’re not willing to spend money and 

take risks right now.  Second, households need to deleverage and aren’t willing to borrow in 

order to spend ahead of their incomes.  If I’m right about these, the economy isn’t going to 

recover quickly on its own and is going to need considerable policy support.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Thank you, all.  Let me try a 

summary and then make a few comments. 

Participants were concerned about an apparent ebbing of economic growth momentum, 

notwithstanding the possibility that the reversal of temporary factors such as the supply chain 

disruptions and high energy prices could bump up activity in the near term.  Significant 

downward revisions to GDP data for both the first half and earlier years contributed to the 

weaker outlook, as have financial disruptions.  Many saw the risk to the recovery as now to the 

downside, and some worry that the economy might be near stall speed.  As one measure, the 

estimated real equilibrium federal funds rate has fallen sharply.  Others noted, however, that 

slower potential growth may account for some of the weaker performance.  Leverage and debt 

also are retarding growth over a longer period.  As to inflation, lower commodity prices will 

reduce headline inflation, and overall, people see approximately balanced risks to the forecast 

with respect to inflation.  Uncertainty about the forecast may be, really and truly in this case, 

higher than usual. 

Consumer spending has been slow or even declining, especially for low- and moderate-

income households, as households have continued to repair their balance sheets and as sentiment 

August 9, 2011 80 of 162



 
 

 
 

has been poor.  The declines in automobile purchases associated with the Japan disaster account 

for some but not all of this weakness, which has been widespread across sectors.  Conditions in 

the labor market remain weak, as unemployment has increased, participation rates have fallen, 

and the employment-to-population ratio is very low.  Some of these phenomena can be explained 

by heterogeneity among workers, including both skill loss ex post and ex ante differences, but 

long-term unemployment can leave permanent scars on the labor force.  Housing and 

nonresidential construction remain weak, even though the rental housing sector is stronger.  The 

weakness of the housing sector has broader macro consequences through wealth, credit, and 

business formation, for example. 

Business attitudes vary, with some seeing modest growth but a number of participants 

citing issues of confidence, both economically and politically related.  Large firms are doing 

reasonably well as smaller firms struggle.  For many firms, demand remains insufficient to 

motivate significant hiring and investment, and uncertainty, including uncertainty about the 

fiscal situation and the debt limit, has also limited expansion plans.  Auto firms have done a good 

job of overcoming supply chain disruptions and expect higher near-term production and profits.  

State and local governments continue to lay off workers, and federal spending will also be a 

drag. 

Financial conditions have been turbulent, reflecting the European situation, the U.S. debt 

limit uncertainties and fiscal policy, the S&P downgrade, and increasing concerns about U.S. 

economic growth, both short term and long term.  In Europe, rising borrowing rates for Italy and 

Spain threaten a significant widening of their sovereign debt crisis, with implications for global 

markets.  Questions remain as to whether European authorities can stabilize the situation.  

Reflecting this turmoil, bank funding conditions continue to tighten in Europe, and U.S. money 

August 9, 2011 81 of 162



 
 

 
 

market mutual funds have reduced their exposures.  There are also banking issues in the United 

States, as several institutions have seen sharp declines in stock values and rises in their CDS 

spreads.  Credit rating downgrades could exacerbate that situation.  However, the U.S. banking 

sector is generally stronger, with improved credit quality—for example, in credit cards—and 

lending conditions returning somewhat more to normal, especially for business borrowers.  

Negative deposit rates, however, are a striking development. 

Inflation has recently moderated somewhat as prices of oil and other commodities have 

receded, although reports of attempts to pass through cost increases persist.  Core inflation has 

been running high, but trimmed-mean and similar measures suggest that inflation remains 

controlled.  Nominal wages have remained subdued.  Survey and financial measures of inflation 

expectations have remained stable.  Substantial uncertainties surround inflation forecasts, 

including the difficulty of judging the degree of slack in the economy.  Measurements of the 

output and unemployment gaps are also important for assessing the ability of monetary policy to 

stimulate growth.  However, the combination of inflation and unemployment that we currently 

see could be interpreted as putting too high a weight on inflation in our collective objective 

function. 

I tried to make that organized.  I don’t always succeed.  Are there any comments or 

questions?  [No response]  Let me just make a few comments.  A lot of the main points have 

been taken. 

I do think that the data we received during the intermeeting period were exceptionally 

disappointing, and in particular, unusually, they came from three separate sources.  First, we had 

a two-year NIPA revision, which gave us a different perspective on the depth of the recession.  

Second, we had the downward revision to GDP in the first half of the year, particularly in the 

August 9, 2011 82 of 162



 
 

 
 

first quarter.  And then the intermeeting data on spending as well as the developments in the 

financial markets were, on the whole, pretty weak.  So it clearly is the case that, since the last 

meeting, it’s appropriate to downgrade our outlook for the economy. 

One area of particular concern, I think, in terms of looking at the economic growth 

potential, is consumption.  Even given the poor performance of income and wealth, consumer 

spending has been extremely restrained.  There are various explanations for this.  I think you 

could put together standard economic models to help understand it.  Of course, one standard 

model is the permanent income hypothesis, which says that people spend based on their 

expectations of future income, whether it’s cyclical or secularly induced.  I think it’s very 

notable that consumers may have been better forecasters than the FOMC in the past few years, 

because their pessimism has been quite striking.  I took note of a Michigan survey question that 

has been asked since 1978:  Over the next year or two, do you expect that your family income 

will rise more or less than prices will go up?  In other words, will your real income rise?  A 

strong majority of consumers now polled expect prices to rise faster—that is, they expect their 

real income to fall.  The degree of that is the all-time low.  It is in fact a little bit lower than in 

1979–80—when inflation, of course, was much higher than it is today—and even much lower 

than during the recent recession.  So people are very pessimistic about future income, whether 

correctly or not we don’t know yet.  Related to that and related to some of these leverage 

discussions, another popular model of consumer spending is the buffer-stock model, which says 

that people, generally speaking, do not have much wealth, and they try to maintain a moderate-

sized buffer to protect themselves against various emergencies like health problems.  As we 

know, through the crisis, we now have a great reduction in access to credit—for example, 

through home equity lines and through home equity in general.  Financial resources have been 

August 9, 2011 83 of 162



 
 

 
 

substantially reduced; income has become much more uncertain.  People have required payments 

like rent and interest, gas, and so on.  In that kind of world, people will also tend to be very 

conservative about spending given the uncertainty in the environment.  That consumption is as 

cautious as it is is not unexplainable, but it certainly is one of the main factors that have been 

affecting the outlook.  Now, there are some factors that might make things look a little better.  

Real disposable income may grow more quickly in the third and fourth quarters as energy prices 

decline.  And, auto spending, which we’ve talked a lot about, may come back to some extent in 

the third quarter.  All of that said, I think, as has been pointed out, that we’ve been repeatedly 

disappointed in economic growth overall.  Consumer spending has been a very important part of 

that, and interpreting that, I think, is a very important issue. 

Clearly, one of the factors affecting household spending and confidence is the labor 

market.  I only want to make two observations here, both of which have been alluded to already.  

One is that simply looking at the deeper recession that we had, based on the revisions, may 

reduce the sense that there is some pent-up demand for labor.  It could be that in some sense 

labor is about appropriate given the amount of demand and production going on.  I think that 

should make us a little bit more pessimistic about future hiring intentions.  The other thing that I 

found very striking, and David Wilcox mentioned this in his remarks, is that currently in the 

forecast the entire decline in the unemployment rate between now and the end of 2012 comes 

from the fact that unemployment insurance programs are being ended, leaving the unemployed to 

move from unemployment out of the labor force.  Our government’s anti-unemployment 

program seems to consist primarily of cutting off unemployment benefits so people won’t report 

themselves as unemployed, and that’s really not an exaggeration.  I think that labor market 

conditions are quite concerning.  Demand remains quite weak, and I think it remains the most 

August 9, 2011 84 of 162



 
 

 
 

important single factor affecting the willingness of firms to hire and invest, although uncertainty 

and other issues are also at work. 

I take note of the fiscal drag situation.  We’ve been seeing, for example, as a very 

concrete example, 20,000 to 30,000 jobs a month being lost in state and local governments, 

which is pulling back overall job creation.  We know there’s very significant fiscal drag on the 

horizon coming from the federal side.  We are hoping that there will be self-equilibrating factors 

in the private sector to offset that.  We don’t know that for sure, but we do know that fiscal drag 

is going to happen. 

In the past few weeks, financial developments have been, of course, very important.  I 

think the developments in Europe are having real effects, not just in Europe but also in the 

United States, by affecting optimism, risk-taking, and concerns about financial stability.  And we 

have seen our own issues, of course, related to the debt limit.  These financial developments 

since the last meeting are another major reason to cause us to downgrade our growth outlook. 

On the inflation side, as always, we want to be vigilant about inflation, but with oil down 

almost 30 percent since its peak in April, with commodity prices in general down 15 percent 

from their peaks in April, with automobile prices receding, and with inflation expectations 

apparently reasonably stable, it doesn’t seem that high inflation is a near-term concern.  Of 

course, again, we’ll always want to pay close attention to that. 

Let me turn from this discussion of the outlook to try to say a few words to set the table 

for our policy discussion.  As you know, things have been changing rapidly in the past few 

weeks.  A week ago or so, when we sent out the statements for FOMC consideration, the way I 

was thinking about it was as follows:  On the one hand, we had significantly downgraded the 

outlook for the economy while reducing our inflation concerns.  That in itself would suggest a 

August 9, 2011 85 of 162



 
 

 
 

serious consideration of additional monetary stimulus to try to achieve our dual mandate.  On the 

other hand, a week ago we had a lot of uncertainty about both output and inflation in the second 

half.  There was certainly some basis for waiting to see if we could learn more about how the 

economy was going to evolve.  In addition, we had a second dimension of uncertainty, which is 

that besides deciding whether or not to take action, it’s a question of what action to take.  In our 

current regime, we now have, of course, a range of possible actions.  It was my sense at that time 

that having further work done by the staff and having a full discussion in September about what, 

if any, action should be taken were probably the right ways to go.  In that respect, it was my view 

about a week ago that a statement that reflected the state of the economy and indicated our 

willingness to respond as necessary would probably be sufficient.  Over the past week, we’ve 

seen a number of developments, most prominently the very severe stresses in the financial 

system, including both the European stresses and those in our banking system—two banks, in 

particular, were mentioned earlier—as well as the response to the downgrade and so on. 

Now, should we respond to those financial developments?  As President Bullard 

mentioned, we don’t want to be engaging in giving out free puts.  I don’t think that’s what we’re 

talking about here.  I think instead that there are some important connections between what’s 

happening in the financial markets and what’s happening in the economy.  First of all, financial 

markets are giving us information.  They’re telling us that there has been a general darkening of 

mood and expectations about where the economy is going.  Second, financial conditions 

themselves have real effects on the economy.  Not just lower asset prices, but increased stress 

and reduced risk-taking will affect the ability of the economy to recover.  Moreover, I think at 

this point we’re going beyond just lower asset prices and an increased risk of financial crisis.  In 

August 9, 2011 86 of 162



 
 

 
 

addition, the decline in commodity prices, which is part of this financial adjustment, is reducing 

inflation risk. 

My view at this point, and I’m just going to put this on the table before the go-round so 

that everybody can comment and take the opportunity to respond, is that simply darkening our 

statement—putting that out there—and taking no action have one big and one small 

disadvantage.  The big disadvantage is that I think the markets and the economy would react 

very poorly to that.  It seems as though the Fed is saying that the situation has gotten 

significantly worse, but we’re not willing to do anything about it.  I think that would raise 

questions about what the Fed’s thinking is, what our objectives are, and what we plan to do in the 

future.  Perversely, also, if we don’t do anything but suggest that we may, I have a concern that 

QE3 speculation may rise very significantly, and I actually would like to control that.  I think all 

of us—potentially all of us—would think that it’s not time yet, and we would much prefer not to 

get into that particular policy direction. 

Is there something we can do today that would be meaningful, would show that we are 

engaged, that would indicate that we are taking a step to try to improve economic conditions and 

financial conditions, and that would give some clarity to our future plans but would still be 

something that would be a reasonable step in the current context?  What I would like to propose 

is to consider the idea of changing the “extended period” language to refer specifically to mid-

2013.  That basically involves taking the “extended period” language from alternative A and 

putting it in alternative B, and the language would just say that the Committee now expects that 

the conditions that we’ve described, including low resource utilization and subdued inflation 

expectations, are likely to warrant very low policy rates at least through mid-2013.  I think that 

doing that would be encouraging.  As a response, it would be a reasonable response, a measured 

August 9, 2011 87 of 162



 
 

 
 

response.  Let me anticipate a few concerns about it.  First, is this tying us down in a way that’s 

dangerous or uncomfortable?  First of all, I would just note that it is, of course, quite consistent 

with where markets are today.  It’s also consistent with the Tealbook.  It’s consistent with the 

Taylor rule, at least the ’99 version of the Taylor rule.  It’s consistent with the Taylor rule 

applied to our projections.  It’s consistent with our optimal control analyses as well.  So clearly, 

it’s not an outlandish proposal.  At the same time, I think it would have some benefit because it 

would cut off, or at least reduce, the probability of a near-term tightening, and again, it would 

convey the sense that the Fed is willing to try to support recovery. 

President Bullard appropriately raised the question of contingency.  Is this sufficiently 

contingent?  Of course, the language is contingent.  What it is saying is that we expect that these 

specific conditions will lead to a situation in which low rates are warranted.  What I would 

suggest, and I think we’ll have more discussion of this, is that going forward—perhaps at 

Jackson Hole and perhaps in September—we can spell out even more concretely how those 

contingencies tie into our policy so that it becomes explicitly a rule-based or reaction function 

type of behavior.  In doing this, again, I think one of the benefits is that it will put a very high bar 

on QE3 as we focus on this action and on other actions that we might take, but I think that would 

be useful from a communication perspective.  Will it do anything?  Again, I think at this point, 

confidence and psychology are very important.  I worry about us just leaving the situation 

completely unaddressed, and, as I mentioned, I think it would have some effect on rates via the 

expectation mechanism.  I would note that there has been, for example, a lot of discussion about 

leverage.  Keeping inflation from being too low and keeping interest rates low actually help 

reduce leverage, and so I think that it actually might have some direct benefit. 

August 9, 2011 88 of 162



 
 

 
 

This is a suggestion.  I want to put it on the table initially.  I think we could do more.  I 

think we could consider a commitment with respect to the balance sheet reinvestment policy as 

well, and I’m certainly prepared to discuss that, but my own view is that this is the minimum we 

should do if we want to avoid conveying essentially insouciance in the face of what is clearly a 

deteriorating situation.  With those initial observations, let me ask Bill to make his initial 

comments, and then questions to Bill or to me will be fine, and then we’ll do our go-round on 

policy.  Bill. 

MR. ENGLISH.3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I’ll be referring to the handout 
labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives,” which was 
distributed earlier.  That packet contains the revised draft statements that we 
distributed yesterday as well as the associated draft directives. 

Yesterday’s revisions to the draft statements were intended to accomplish five 
objectives.  First, a new sentence in paragraphs A.1 and B.1 recognizes the 
deterioration in financial conditions over the intermeeting period and especially in 
recent days.  Second, additional words in paragraphs A.2 and B.2 clarify that the pace 
of the recovery is expected to be slower than was anticipated at the time of the June 
meeting, not slower than during the first half of the year.  Third, the change at the end 
of the final paragraphs of alternatives A and B suggests that the main risk to the 
Committee’s dual objectives is the weak recovery.  Fourth, writing “although only in 
part” in the sentence about temporary factors in paragraph B.1 is intended to discount 
somewhat the importance of such factors in explaining the slow pace of growth this 
year.  Finally, some small changes were made to paragraph 1 in all three alternatives 
in response to recent information about the labor market and energy prices. 

Turning first to alternative B, on page 4, the Committee may view the information 
received over the intermeeting period as pointing to a notably weaker economic 
outlook than was expected at the time of the June meeting, but also to less moderation 
in inflation.  Members may see temporary factors as accounting for part of the 
disappointing economic growth and higher inflation during the first half of this year, 
and so continue to expect that economic activity will gradually strengthen while 
inflation returns to a subdued pace.  Although the Committee might now see the 
recovery as likely to be more gradual than anticipated at the time of the June meeting, 
members may judge the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook to be 
unusually high—and so choose to leave the stance of policy unchanged at this 
meeting, as in alternative B. 

                                                 
3 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 

August 9, 2011 89 of 162



 
 

 
 

Even if they see the incoming data on output and employment as disappointing 
and increased downside risks resulting from the recent financial developments, 
members may believe that maintaining the current stance of policy is appropriate 
given the costs and risks associated with additional policy action.  For example, they 
could be concerned that more-aggressive use of forward guidance or adjustments to 
the balance sheet could undermine public confidence in the Committee’s ability or 
will to tighten policy sufficiently if needed, thereby boosting expected and actual 
inflation.  Thus, policymakers may believe that it is prudent to wait for additional 
information bearing on the medium-term outlook before deciding on the appropriate 
course for policy. 

As for the statement language, the first paragraph for alternative B would be 
updated to acknowledge that economic growth has been slower this year than the 
Committee had expected at the time of the June meeting, that overall conditions in the 
labor market have remained weak, and that financial conditions have become more 
restrictive.  The statement would indicate that the slow pace of recovery and the rise 
in inflation this year appear to reflect, although only in part, temporary factors, and it 
would note that inflation has moderated recently as prices of energy and some 
commodities have declined from their earlier peaks.  The second paragraph would be 
revised to note that the Committee now expects a somewhat slower recovery and only 
a gradual decline in the unemployment rate.  The third paragraph would indicate that 
the Committee will keep the target for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent.  This 
paragraph also retains the “extended period” language; as the Chairman noted, you 
might choose to substitute the firmer “extended period” language from alternative A 
here.  The statement also reiterates that the Committee will maintain its existing 
reinvestment policy, and it would end by stating that “the Committee will carefully 
assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information” and that it will either 
“act as needed” or “employ its policy tools as appropriate” to “promote a stronger 
pace of economic recovery in a context of price stability.”  An explicit reference to 
using “policy tools” would likely be read by investors as signaling a greater 
willingness to implement additional policy accommodation if economic growth does 
not pick up. 

A statement along the lines of alternative B would be about in line with the 
expectations captured by the Desk’s survey of primary dealers last week.  However, 
as Brian noted in his briefing, investors have become more concerned about the 
economic outlook in recent days and reportedly have marked up the odds associated 
with policy action at this meeting.  Thus, the release of a statement like alternative B, 
with a relatively downbeat assessment of the economy and no policy action, could 
disappoint some market participants.  Bond yields could increase and the foreign 
exchange value of the dollar rise.  Equity prices could decline somewhat. 

Alternative A, page 2, would be appropriate if policymakers view the weak 
economic growth as likely to persist and see inflation falling back to levels consistent 
with the dual mandate.  The sequence of downward revisions to the outlook since the 
start of the year, coupled with the sluggish first half reported in the revised NIPA 
data, might lead the Committee to conclude that the reasons for the sharp slowdown 

August 9, 2011 90 of 162



 
 

 
 

in economic growth in the first half extended well beyond identifiable factors that are 
likely to prove transitory, and will restrain the pace of recovery going forward.  As 
David noted in his remarks, even with the somewhat better-than-expected 
employment report on Friday, the labor market remains very weak.  And while 
inflation may not have slowed as rapidly as some of you anticipated, with substantial 
economic slack and modest increases in labor costs, you may see inflation as likely to 
remain subdued over coming quarters.  At the June meeting, many participants felt 
that the outlook was unusually uncertain and that additional information was required 
before deciding on the next policy step.  With the incoming data over the 
intermeeting period suggesting an even weaker outlook for economic activity, some 
participants may feel that it is now appropriate to provide additional accommodation, 
as in alternative A.  Moreover, you might feel that the downside risks to the 
outlook—including a further deterioration in the housing sector, an unexpectedly 
large near-term fiscal tightening, the substantial strains in domestic financial markets, 
or a wider and deeper crisis in Europe—have become more palpable over the 
intermeeting period and now call for some policy response. 

Compared with the statement under alternative B, the statement for alternative A 
would indicate somewhat more concern about the strength of the recovery and a bit 
less confidence that temporary factors account for a significant portion of the 
slowdown in economic growth this year.  Paragraph 2 would be similar to its 
counterpart under alternative B but would note heightened downside risks to the 
outlook for economic growth.  Regarding monetary policy, alternative A would 
include two steps to provide additional accommodation.  First, paragraph 3 would 
provide more-explicit forward guidance about the expected path for the federal funds 
rate by specifying that exceptionally low levels were likely “at least through mid-
2013.”  Second, paragraph 4 would announce that the Committee will provide 
additional support for economic recovery by selling $400 billion of shorter-maturity 
Treasury securities and simultaneously purchasing a similar amount of long-term 
securities.  This action would put additional downward pressure on longer-term 
interest rates by removing duration from the market and so would help foster 
financial conditions that would be more supportive of growth.  The statement for 
alternative A would end by suggesting that the Committee was willing to take 
additional action to support the recovery. 

Although expectations may have moved in recent days, market participants would 
probably still be surprised by the adoption of alternative A.  Interest rates and the 
foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely fall, and stock prices would 
probably increase. 

Alternative C, page 6, might be appropriate if the Committee viewed the 
disappointing progress of the recovery so far this year as largely attributable to 
temporary factors or to a lower level of potential output.  The statement under 
alternative C would note that economic growth has been modest of late, but would 
attribute more of the slowdown in growth this year to factors that are proving to be 
temporary.  The statement would also express more concern about inflation, noting 
that firms have faced cost pressures from higher prices for commodities and imported 

August 9, 2011 91 of 162



 
 

 
 

goods, and that the risks to the inflation outlook are tilted to the upside.  Paragraph 3 
would state that the target for the federal funds rate will remain 0 to ¼ percent and 
reiterate the “extended period” language.  But it would also indicate that the 
Committee was maintaining its existing reinvestment policy only “for the time 
being,” and so suggest that redemptions could begin relatively soon. 

The adoption of alternative C would greatly surprise market participants and 
would likely have substantial effects in financial markets. 

Draft directives for the three alternatives are presented on pages 7 through 9 of 
your handout.  Thank you.  That completes my prepared remarks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Are there any questions?  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  The sentence that appeared yesterday, “Financial conditions have 

become more restrictive”—I can understand the equity markets’ behavior contributing to that 

characterization, but how do you think it’ll be interpreted against things like mortgage rates and 

other rates that have not risen and, if anything, have fallen?  Treasury rates, of course, more 

broadly have fallen precipitously. 

MR. ENGLISH.  That’s right, though as you say, equity prices are down a lot, risk 

spreads are wider, and I think that on net, we view them as more restrictive in terms of their 

implications for economic growth. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, two hands. 

MR. LOCKHART.  I had the same question as President Lacker because if you think 

about the debt markets—the 10-year Treasury, the number of things that are priced off the 

10-year Treasury—it’s hard to say that this has created financially more-restrictive conditions 

across the board.  I think it’s the equity markets themselves and potentially the wealth effect 

down the road.  But I had the same question, and I’m glad President Lacker brought it up. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there others with this concern?  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Yes.  Why not say “financial conditions have become more volatile”?  I 

don’t believe, particularly after Governor Duke’s intervention and the point that Dennis just 

August 9, 2011 92 of 162



 
 

 
 

made with regard to Treasuries, that you could argue, other than the downturn in the equity 

markets and a slight widening in spreads, that financial conditions have become “more 

restrictive.”  Volatile?  Yes.  Restrictive?  I’d question that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Shall we just delete the sentence?  Any 

objection?  President Kocherlakota, you were supporting that view, right? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I was supporting President Fisher’s view. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we just delete the sentence then?  

MR. ENGLISH.  You could say financial conditions have been volatile as a way of 

acknowledging recent developments. 

MR. FISHER.  Everybody knows that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Why don’t we just delete it? 

MR. FISHER.  Delete it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions for Bill?  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I have one question.  In the same first paragraph, I was puzzled a little 

bit by where we said the pace of recovery appears to reflect “in part,” and we added “although 

only.”  What does “although only” add to this discussion—what was the purpose of adding that?  

Because “in part” is “in part.” 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think the intention was to downplay to some degree the importance of 

the temporary factors. 

MR. TARULLO.  Bill, wasn’t that intended in part to change the language from this last 

statement and to suggest that there’s been some shift since the last statement? 

MR. ENGLISH.  I agree.  The last statement certainly used “in part,” and so “although 

only in part” would suggest a downshift in that knob. 

August 9, 2011 93 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  [No response]  Are we ready for the 

go-round?  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I consider the case for policy action 

compelling.  Even though transitory factors played a role in depressing growth during the first 

half of the year, the data we have received since June revealed broad-based weakness that is very 

likely to persist.  How can a forecast in which resource utilization and inflation both linger at 

levels below the Committee’s targets possibly be consistent with an optimal monetary policy?  

At the very minimum, we should ease policy until our medium-term inflation forecast is centered 

on 2 percent.  The argument for policy easing becomes yet stronger when we consider the 

balance of risks to economic activity and inflation.  The downside risk to growth is particularly 

serious now because the potential for fiscal policy to respond in the event of a downturn is 

limited, if not nonexistent.  Should those downside growth risks materialize, we would likely be 

facing significant disinflationary risks, too.  Our arsenal is not empty, and we should avoid any 

inclination to save our ammunition until a later date. 

I strongly support your proposal to substitute the language related to “extended period” 

proposed in paragraph 3 of alternative A for that in alternative B.  As you mentioned, such 

forward guidance would be broadly in line with the implications of the staff’s estimated 

outcome-based policy rule and with FRB/US model simulations of the Taylor 1999 rule.  Both of 

those rules prescribe a funds rate trajectory that remains at the zero lower bound until the second 

half of 2013, at which point the unemployment rate would be in the vicinity of 7½ percent and 

inflation would be around 1½ percent.  I would also note that the optimal control rule calls for 

significantly later action to raise the funds rate off its lower bound at a significantly lower 

unemployment rate. 

August 9, 2011 94 of 162



 
 

 
 

To further enhance the clarity of our forward guidance, I believe it would be helpful to 

provide more-specific quantitative information about the economic conditions that are likely to 

warrant the continuation of exceptionally low levels of the funds rate.  For example, I would 

propose language along the following lines:  “The Committee anticipates that exceptionally low 

levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted as long as the unemployment rate 

exceeds 7½ percent and the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.  The 

Committee currently expects those economic conditions to prevail at least through mid-2013.”  

Such a formulation seems roughly consistent with the implications of our June economic 

projections, which had a central tendency of 7 to 7½ percent for the unemployment rate in 

2013:Q4 and a central tendency of 1½ to 2 percent for overall PCE inflation in 2013.  Providing 

a quantitative threshold for the unemployment rate would also underscore the conditionality of 

our forward guidance and hence might help ensure that the public interprets the reference to a 

calendar date—namely, mid-2013—as a forecast, not an unconditional promise.  Indeed, this 

approach would help the markets and the public understand how a shift in the economic outlook 

would be likely to affect the anticipated timing of policy firming.  For example, if there were a 

further downward revision of the economic outlook, investors would recognize that the 

7½ percent unemployment threshold would not be reached until a later date, and hence they 

would push back the anticipated time of policy liftoff. 

I’d also like to suggest one further change—to paragraph 4 in alternative B to make it a 

bit more forward leaning.  I would propose changing the word “will” to “is prepared to.”  In 

other words, I propose, “The Committee will carefully assess the economic outlook in light of 

incoming information and is prepared to employ its policy tools as appropriate to promote a 

stronger pace of recovery in a context of price stability.” 

August 9, 2011 95 of 162



 
 

 
 

Looking toward September, without a clear improvement in the outlook, there are a 

number of reasonable options for policy action that we should consider.  For example, I think 

that extending the duration of our Treasury holdings along the lines suggested in alternative A 

has some merit.  Such a program is attractive because it might push down longer-term yields, 

including mortgage rates, and might offer greater support to the housing market.  Another 

promising approach would be to establish some sort of peg or cap on shorter-term interest rates.  

Because capping rates at the short end involves buying at the short end, whereas lengthening the 

duration of our portfolio involves selling at the short end, we would need to analyze which 

alternative approach is preferable.  I’m somewhat less inclined to make further cuts in IOER, but 

I would certainly be willing to entertain such an approach.  At any rate, given the plethora of 

policy tools and the potential urgency of taking some further action in September, I hope we can 

plan on having a two-day FOMC meeting to ensure that we have enough time to consider the 

various options and to make specific decisions as appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman.  Excuse me. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Can I ask Governor Yellen to read her revised sentence—just to make 

sure I got it? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly. 

MS. YELLEN.  “The Committee anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal 

funds rate are likely to be warranted as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 7.5 percent and 

the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.  The Committee currently expects those 

economic conditions to prevail at least through mid-2013.” 

August 9, 2011 96 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. PLOSSER.  Can I ask a question?  You attached a specific number to the 

unemployment rate, but inflation “remains subdued”? 

MS. YELLEN.  Correct.  The “medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.” 

MR. PLOSSER.  Why—okay.  Thank you. 

MR. FISHER.  You wouldn’t be willing to put a number on that—2 percent, or a 

number? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We could talk about that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Certainly we can talk about it, or that’s a step we could take 

next time—either way.  Michelle, did anyone get this?  Is it possible to circulate that sentence?   

MS. SMITH.  I can get you copies.4 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Any other questions?  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Although it might be standard to say that 

another meeting’s worth of data might resolve uncertainty, the most recent NIPA revisions have 

answered enough of these questions for me.  Without substantial clarification of our policy 

intentions in line with our dual mandate responsibilities, I think there’s a distinctly high 

probability that we will continually revisit these periods of anemic growth without ever escaping 

the current malaise.  Consequently, I favor a strong indication today of additional 

accommodation.  I think alternative A is certainly a plausible demonstration of that.  

Alternative B doesn’t do that.  I am quite attracted to the suggestion that you’re making today 

and to Governor Yellen’s proposal.  So let me talk about a few things in that regard. 

Governor Yellen says that she would entertain this accommodative monetary policy to 

better center our inflation forecast at 2 percent, which is our objective.  I would do more.  I 

believe clarifying our policy framework in order to better achieve our dual mandate 
                                                 
4 The material distributed by Ms. Smith is appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 

August 9, 2011 97 of 162



 
 

 
 

responsibilities would help provide further policy accommodation, at least along the lines 

suggested in Eggertsson and Woodford, and this helps by defining that as extending through 

mid-2013.  What is clarity?  Conducting monetary policy in accordance with our dual mandate 

should mean that as long as high unemployment is generating an extraordinary policy loss, the 

FOMC is willing to provide very large amounts of accommodation and tolerate medium-term 

inflation substantially above 2 percent.  I want to thank President Hoenig for listening to me 

earlier, and I certainly take your point. 

MR. HOENIG.  I’m listening. 

MR. EVANS.  As I mentioned earlier, a 9 percent unemployment rate against a very 

conservative natural rate of 6 percent generates a policy loss that is as large as if inflation were 

running at 5 percent against a 2 percent objective.  But my stronger point is this:  We talk and act 

as if 2 percent is an almost unacceptable inflation rate and a ceiling that limits further policy 

accommodation.  A couple of examples:  First, the common view seems to be that we will 

consider further LSAPs and more only if the risk of deflation is significant.  I’m glad there’s a 

floor, but the ceiling is too low.  Second, in an interview the other day, Don Kohn—for whom I 

have the highest regard—spoke in the following way.  He said that additional quantitative easing 

might be appropriate if inflation keeps coming down.  His option for QE3 was handcuffed by an 

inflation ceiling that’s too low in my opinion.  Today’s medium-term inflation pressures are 

overstated.  I do not see how this ceiling-like framework is consistent with our dual mandate 

responsibilities, at least not if the ceiling is 2 percent.  Our objective can be 2 percent.  We 

should average that, but it shouldn’t be our ceiling. 

In favoring alternative A, I’m attracted to the additional commitment—defining 

“extended period” to be at least mid-2013.  I certainly support that.  I suspect that we would have 

August 9, 2011 98 of 162



 
 

 
 

ended up there anyway.  So we should reap the benefit of reducing the uncertainty.  I’m also 

quite attracted to the additional language that Governor Yellen used in terms of stating that this 

could be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate is above 7½ percent.  But again—and I 

don’t have the exact language—regarding “as long as medium-term inflation is subdued,” I 

would agree with that if we understood better that “subdued” could include 2½ percent in the 

current environment or even 3 percent.  But I do like that type of language. 

I think we need to avoid signaling that we’re AWOL, and so I agree with your 

suggestion, Mr. Chairman.  One thing that does seem missing in the current formulation of 

alternative B, as I understand it, is that it doesn’t include the characterization that the downside 

risks have increased, and I wonder how that would be interpreted.  I really think that should be 

included.  Alternative A has language like that as well as, frankly, I think, a better description of 

the temporary factors.  I would have been happy to take paragraphs 1 and 2 from alternative A, 

but I’m quite happy to support your suggestion, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, I came into the meeting supporting 

alternative B, at least as of Sunday afternoon, and I am prepared to support your 

recommendation, Mr. Chairman, about transferring from alternative A to alternative B the 

language that basically employs the idea of it being explicit about the time frame of “extended 

period.”  I see that as a modest, almost minimalist, but probably meaningful recognition of 

what’s happening at the moment, and it certainly overrides the wait-and-see approach that, short 

of yesterday’s events, I might have recommended.  I think this is a well-calibrated action.  It’s 

responsive, concrete, but not overreacting.  In some respects, I think it buys some time for more-

deliberate planning.  I very much support Governor Yellen’s suggestion.  Others have made the 

August 9, 2011 99 of 162



 
 

 
 

same suggestion of having a two-day meeting in September to have enough time to do that.  And 

I don’t mean to sound cavalier, but I also don’t think an explicit time frame on “extended period” 

is irreversible.  I think most observers understand the conditionality of our policies and 

statements.  I think that if we were surprised to the upside in terms of economic growth and the 

circumstances of the economy, we could certainly reconsider it. 

I have to be a little cautious.  I’d like really to hear more discussion regarding Governor 

Yellen’s suggestion of an explicit quantification of an unemployment trigger.  It just seems to me 

that being explicit on that while being more general and not explicit regarding the inflation 

situation may create some misinterpretation.  There may be a whole lot of questions about how 

we chose that particular number.  So at this particular juncture, I guess I just feel it’s better to be 

non-explicit than explicit on that.  I would like to hear more about what other people have to say. 

A small thing regarding wording in the statement.  I supported the idea of moving from 

“will act as needed” to “will employ its policy tools as appropriate.”  I understood that the 

drafters thought that was stronger language, and I supported it from the point of view of it being 

stronger language.  I think we need a very strong statement combined with a modest action at the 

moment.  And I do support the suggestion that Governor Yellen made—that is, to change the 

very last paragraph to “is prepared to.”  I think, again, the economy and the market are hoping to 

hear that we stand ready to act.  We will show that with the Chairman’s recommendation, but I 

think standing ready to act further is appropriate.  That relatively small change of verb conveys 

that.  Those are my thoughts, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  There is a two-hander. 

August 9, 2011 100 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman.  Could I just intervene here?  I wonder whether, in 

order to crystallize points of agreement or disagreement, it might be useful—I don’t want to put 

the onus on either Charlie or Janet—for one or both of them to briefly describe what is, in effect, 

the transmission mechanism that they would expect.  That is, if we adopted your language, Janet, 

how would you see that affecting the economy?  And thus, why do you think it’s an efficacious 

step to take right now?  Because I think some of the points of disagreement arise because people 

are skeptical that a step will have an effect, and if we could specify that and maybe talk about 

that as well as language, it might be helpful in reaching some consensus. 

MS. YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me be clear that I would support the language in A.3 and 

think that the language I’ve proposed is consistent with what’s there.  And the reason for its 

being useful even though it coincides with market expectations is that it does show concern, and 

it does indicate that some transitory pickup in economic growth in the next quarter or something 

is not going to cause us to move off “exceptionally” or “extended period.”  It takes some upside 

risk off the potential that we would be raising the funds rate.  I guess the reason that I like the 

quantitative threshold pertaining to unemployment is that it gives a clearer rationale for how we 

came up with this particular date and, by making our reaction function clearer, shows that we 

want to see a sufficient improvement in the economy before we would consider lifting the funds 

rate—as long as, I wrote, “the medium-term outlook for inflation remains subdued.”  I’m not 

sure if that’s the best language.  One could say “as long as the medium-term outlook for inflation 

is consistent with the dual mandate.”  That might be more general, and President Evans might 

like that better.  The idea is that there’s an escape clause having to do with inflation, but we’re 

giving a sense of concreteness.  What do we expect to see before we would contemplate raising 

it?  And given that the outlook can weaken or it can strengthen, we’re bringing into play a 

August 9, 2011 101 of 162



 
 

 
 

helpful and stabilizing market mechanism.  Bad data?  Markets automatically say, “Wow, 7½ 

percent—that’s not going to occur until 2019.  The Fed’s going to be on hold for years and years.  

It’s a lot longer than 2013.”  Or vice versa in the event that we get strong data.  That’s what I’m 

seeing is the advantage. 

MR. TARULLO.  That’s helpful.  Thanks. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The staff studies on additional 

monetary policy options were quite helpful.  I would find it both timely and helpful to explore 

these options in detail, as, to date we have spent far more time managing risks associated with 

the exit strategy than managing the risks associated with the need for additional stimulus.  

Unfortunately, we do not have time in a one-day meeting to fully discuss the memos.  I strongly 

support the September meeting being two days to more fully map out action should the economy 

continue along this path.  In particular, it would be useful to try to roughly calibrate the effects of 

the various policy options.  If we are looking to have an impact equivalent to at least a 25 basis 

point cut in the federal funds rate, which combination of staff suggestions meets this hurdle?  

That way, the Committee could more clearly evaluate the options based on the impacts on the 

economy and the difficulties in unwinding the policy when that became appropriate.  This would 

allow a better assessment of the costs and benefits of further accommodation options.  I’m 

increasingly worried that what we viewed as a tail occurrence is becoming the most likely 

outcome, and we have not yet fully prepared for the policy options should that result. 

If we were not at the zero bound, I have little doubt that we would today be considering 

at least a 25 basis point easing.  Most of the reaction functions discussed in the Tealbook B, 

imply that we should be easier than we were in June.  I am not certain that alternative A provides 

August 9, 2011 102 of 162



 
 

 
 

the best way to achieve further easing.  I fear that the change in language we have discussed does 

little to signal further easing.  It says that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate are 

likely to be maintained at least through mid-2013, but this matches the path of the federal funds 

rate that the market already expects, as described on page 53 of Tealbook A.  A statement that 

matches current market expectations is not likely to have much of an effect on market rates. 

My own sequencing of accommodation would be as follows:  Step 1, I would announce a 

fixed ceiling on Treasury securities through 2012 and a fixed floor on the balance sheet through 

2012, with an escape clause if the unemployment rate falls unexpectedly below 7½ percent or the 

core inflation rate unexpectedly rises above 2½ percent.  I would couple this with lowering the 

interest on reserves 25 basis points.  Foreign branches hold many of the reserves, and reserves 

pay 25 basis points while three-month Treasury bills have paid close to zero.  This amounts to a 

subsidy for foreign branches.  I see no reason to subsidize foreign branches with our interest on 

reserves, and coupled with the new language, I would expect this would amount to the equivalent 

of a 25 basis point easing.  Should further easing be necessary, I would extend the period of the 

ceiling on Treasury securities and the floor on our balance sheet with communication that the 

floor and ceiling would continue unless the unemployment or inflation triggers were reached.  

We could continue to extend out the period of ceilings and floors until we had greater confidence 

of achieving desirable monetary policy goals.  If the floor and ceiling were extended to three 

years and more accommodation was still needed, I would begin by first extending the maturity of 

the SOMA holdings by exchanging short-term securities for long-term securities.  If that proved 

insufficient, I would then expand our balance sheet with purchases of longer-maturity securities. 

In an unconstrained world, I would take step 1 today.  Given the limited time to fully 

discuss alternative options, I would prefer to take all of the language in alternative A but exclude 

August 9, 2011 103 of 162



 
 

 
 

paragraph 4.  I would include Governor Yellen’s language, and I would actually use core 

inflation of 2½ percent as the second trigger.  I view Governor Yellen’s proposal as changing 

something that is highly conditional to something that’s unconditional unless the triggers are hit, 

and so I think it is a much stronger statement to use Governor Yellen’s language.  Now, we’ve 

somewhat boxed ourselves in by using inflation at the medium term because we’re talking about 

a short period of time, and we’re talking about inflation.  We’re in effect trying to forecast oil 

prices.  So I would use core inflation at 2½ percent to take care of President Evans’s concern.  

And I would use core inflation, but since I doubt I will get consensus on that, I would be 

comfortable with Governor Yellen’s language.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative B for today.  As I said 

earlier, our goal is to acknowledge the reality of slower-than-expected economic growth and the 

difficult situation in financial markets and to remain prepared for a policy move in the event that 

the expected rebound in the second half does not materialize.  More aggressive action than that 

today, in my view, could be counterproductive.  Number one, it will be viewed as trying to 

compensate for a failure of the Congress to effectively address medium- and longer-term fiscal 

uncertainties.  Number two, stronger action today will definitely emphasize the idea, already 

popular in financial markets, that there is a Greenspan–Bernanke put on the equity markets.  

Both of these will be damaging to our credibility, in my view, and credibility is our most 

valuable asset.  Markets are not expecting much action at this meeting.  So I think we’ll be 

consistent with those market expectations if that’s the way we play this.  This does not prohibit 

us from having meetings during the intermeeting period if we think that the situation is 

deteriorating further or that we’re simply going to have to take action. 

August 9, 2011 104 of 162



 
 

 
 

Now, on the extended period through 2013, as I said earlier, I do not think we would be 

wise to tie policy action to the calendar.  We’ve already been burned by this twice, and if we do 

it today, we’ll be headed down for a third time.  The data have a way of contradicting what you 

expect.  If you track the macroeconomy for a long time, you know that there are wide bands of 

uncertainty, and the economy could be in a completely different place from what you expect two 

years out.  The 90 percent confidence intervals are so wide as to be laughable.  So I do not think 

you should tie it to a calendar date.  It will look very political to delay any rate hikes until after 

the election.  I think that will also damage our credibility.  I also doubt that we can credibly 

promise what this Committee may or may not do two years from now.  So I don’t think it’s all 

that meaningful.  I think that going with the 2013 language will put us in a box that we may not 

want to be in going forward.  Further, as I emphasized earlier, this move could backfire badly.  

This would keep policy rates at zero for at least four and a half years, unless we decide to renege, 

which will cost us some credibility chips if we want to do that.  Japan has been at zero for a 

decade and a half, and that policy has definitely not produced price stability.  Instead, they got 

mild deflation.  There are good theoretical reasons for why they would get that and why that has 

occurred.  I think we have to be more cognizant of this than we are around this table.  Worse, if 

we do get on that kind of a track and inflation expectations start to drift down because of this 

policy, monetary policy will actually be getting tighter, not easier, exactly at the point where 

we’re trying to provide stimulus.  I also agree with President Rosengren that to be effective, a 

move of this type has to go beyond what markets already expect, and I think that we’ve 

established at this meeting that the markets are expecting the policy rate, given the recent data, to 

be at zero through 2013.  So this would only ratify market expectations.  It wouldn’t have any 

August 9, 2011 105 of 162



 
 

 
 

stimulative impact of the types emphasized by authors like Gauti Eggertsson and Mike 

Woodford. 

I also disagree with the Chairman on the QE3.  I do not think we will be able to avoid a 

discussion of QE3 going forward, as much as many of us may like to.  This is our most potent 

weapon, and it’s more promising as having effects on the economy—and we can debate what 

those effects are—than any of the other tools in our toolbox.  This is because the QE program 

influences inflation expectations and therefore has potential to drive real interest rates lower if 

that is what the Committee desires.  The most important aspect of a further QE program would 

be to purchase or sell securities in response to economic conditions instead of according to 

calendar dates.  If we had this program in place as of today, we could simply announce a certain 

amount of purchases today, and that would be a much simpler way to react to events than what 

we’re forced to contemplate, which are alternative policy actions.  We could behave much more 

as we would in an interest rate environment where we would lower the policy rate in reaction to 

worse-than-expected economic data. 

The new language suggested by Governor Yellen to tie the fed funds rate move to a 

7.5 percent unemployment rate sounds super risky to me.  I might remind the Committee that 

Europe has not seen 7½ percent unemployment, except on rare occasions, over the past two 

decades.  We really have no idea where the unemployment rate may or may not be going as we 

go forward in time because we have that little of an understanding of what causes and 

perpetuates high unemployment.  The European example is one that should give us pause about 

tying anything to a specific number.  To me, that would be a very large move with very little 

thought behind it at this juncture.  I would certainly like to see a lot more study on that before we 

would tie it to a specific number.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

August 9, 2011 106 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  May I defer two or three slots until I have listened to others, Mr. 

Chairman?  I’d like to hear some more arguments. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sure.  President Hoenig. 

MR. HOENIG.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You know, I keep coming back to the fact 

that the fundamental problem is, we have issues outside of monetary policy that we’re not 

willing to address, and this country has a problem—an economy that has systematically 

consumed more than it produces.  And that means leverage has to continue to increase, and we 

have to move that forward.  If we’re going to take care of our employment problem, we have to 

increase production.  And I keep asking the question as I look at the projections—that’s why I 

was asking Dave about the investment outlook.  It’s going down, not up, even though we have 

dumped tons of money into this economy of ours, and here we are.  How is further quantitative 

easing or further guarantees of zero rates going to take care of the fundamental problems that 

we’re not willing to step up to as a nation?  I think that the central bank should be pushing other 

elements of this government to address long-term problems when it’s not.  The same thing is 

going on in Europe where you’ve got the central bank in Europe now doing a bridge loan so they 

can have time to get their bailout, which the markets are already saying isn’t going to be enough.  

And we have a problem in this country where we need to be boosting investment, and it is 

languishing. 

I think that monetary policy that goes and says things about 2013 is going to have a 

temporary effect for today, which will die off very quickly, and we’re going to be back here 

again.  We are going to be talking about QE3 until we take care of these long-run problems.  And 

I think we’re in a box, and we need to be pushing other sectors of this economy toward longer-

August 9, 2011 107 of 162



 
 

 
 

run solutions, and we’re not willing to do it.  So I’ll leave it at that.  My parting words, Richard.  

[Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I recommend taking no action today, as 

proposed in alternative B.  I’d prefer the language to be a little bit different, and we’ve already 

made one change.  I think our goal should be to be careful not to feed a panic by an excessively 

negative characterization of the economy, but also not to appear that we have our heads in the 

sand and don’t know what’s going on.  That’s clearly a delicate balancing act.  We need to be 

prepared to act in certain circumstances in the future, but we also want to avoid knee-jerk 

reactions. 

My argument for standing pat today is based on five related factors.  First of all, I think 

it’s too soon to tell the extent to which the disappointing economic data are telling us that the 

current weakness is temporary and will soon abate, or alternatively, that the economy has entered 

a more persistent regime of slower growth, driven by some combination of headwinds, supply-

side disruptions, and lower potential GDP growth.  That scenario of lower GDP growth plays 

into what President Bullard said.  Europe is in a world where they haven’t seen unemployment 

rates below 7.5 percent for most of the decade.  We may be headed for that world as well, and 

monetary policy is not the solution to that problem.  I don’t think we have enough data in hand at 

this point to firmly establish between these alternatives, but clearly the nature of the shock that 

we face here should govern, and will guide, the type of response we have.  We will always be 

uncertain, of course, but we must guard against reacting too quickly when we don’t know.  That 

leads to my second point, markets have no doubt been volatile, but I’m very dubious of changing 

the course of monetary policy at a time when the change could be interpreted as a direct reaction 

August 9, 2011 108 of 162



 
 

 
 

to the turbulence in the stock market, the S&P downgrades, or the policy actions in Europe.  It’s 

important that financial markets recognize that a systematic approach to achieving our dual 

mandate helps policy avoid exacerbating the effects of asset price swings on the economy.  Our 

credibility would surely suffer if markets perceived us as directly responding to stock market 

prices.  And whether we say we are or not, I worry that the perception will be there, and the next 

time the stock market moves overly aggressively one way or the other, we will be called to 

action.  Third, I’m very dubious that even more accommodative monetary policy is likely to be a 

potent tool that can speed up the renormalization of the economy.  As much as I might like it to 

be, the evidence seems to be dubious on that front.  I think that the portfolio balance effects on 

the yield curve that we would be counting on in alternative A policy, or Operation Twist, are 

likely to be miniscule.  They are easily overwhelmed by actions of investors in flight-to-quality 

moves or by shifts in the Treasury supply of securities at various maturities.  Fourth, in addition 

to being ineffective, further action might actually be bad news.  Our near-term zero interest rate 

policy is creating distortions in the market and real challenges for banks and money market 

mutual funds, not to mention the repo market.  As Governor Duke said, banks are turning away 

very large deposits because the cost of taking these deposits exceeds any return the bank can 

expect to earn on them.  At least one money market center bank is charging depositors to keep 

larger than their typical amount of funds in the bank.  This is an unprecedented action, and we 

don’t really know how this will play out.  We’ve had a zero interest rate policy now for a long 

time, yet economic activity has moved both up and down, and it isn’t clear that further action 

will change that pattern.  Fifth, monetary policy cannot and should not substitute for fiscal 

policy.  Fiscal policy in this realm may be more effective than monetary policy in dealing with 

some of our concerns.  If we overreach and promise more than we can deliver, we will 

August 9, 2011 109 of 162



 
 

 
 

undermine our ability to achieve both our mandates by losing credibility.  At the risk of being 

somewhat flippant, I will say it anyway.  I’m reminded of the old story that, given the path of the 

economy, insanity is characterized by repeating the same action over and over and over again, 

hoping you will get a different result.  So based on these five factors, I prefer to stand pat and 

carefully monitor the incoming financial data. 

You might ask, what might motivate me to reenter in terms of policy?  Well, I think they 

both have been alluded to.  I certainly think that developments in Europe pose the risk of 

significant financial disruptions to the economy.  We cannot solve their problems for them, but 

we have to act if financial disruptions and dysfunctions in the financial markets spin off from 

events in Europe.  We need to be prepared to support financial stability and the payment systems, 

and we need to do so explicitly for those reasons, not saying that that it will speed up the 

necessary structural adjustments in the real economy that we need to work through.  To the 

extent there are financial strains in dollar funding in Europe, we already have the swap lines in 

place.  But should that spill over and create dysfunction, I’d be prepared to move and act 

aggressively on financial stability.  I think we should continue to act if the accumulated data 

suggest that the economy is in a protracted period of slow growth and is vulnerable to negative 

shocks.  And more important, if significantly declining inflation expectations—not just 

deflation—were to happen, we might want to act further. 

Turning to language, I generally supported alternative B.  I have some preferences.  I 

think we removed one sentence that I agree with President Lacker on—“financial conditions.”  I 

think that the “although only in part” phrase was unnecessary, but I don’t want to hang on that.  I 

think the tone of the statement could be read as a signal that we have already decided that further 

accommodation is needed and will be forthcoming.  I think it’s very important we be careful 

August 9, 2011 110 of 162



 
 

 
 

about setting those expectations.  I think it’s premature.  We can meet in intermeeting periods if 

we need to, as President Bullard suggested.  I don’t think we want to convey a sense of panic to 

the stock market.  That would not help them.  A voice of stability and reason, I think, is still a 

role that we can play. 

In terms of the change, Mr. Chairman—in terms of “extended period”—I am torn there.  I 

don’t think it will do much good.  Since it matches where the market already expects us to be, I 

don’t know that providing that date will help.  I’m generally, like President Bullard, not in favor 

of time-dependent policies—I prefer contingent.  In that sense, I think Governor Yellen’s 

recommendation is an interesting one, but that would be a huge step.  And we run the risk of 

confusing the markets and, in fact, even this Committee without making our contingent policies 

more explicit and thinking about exactly what those numbers ought to be.  I have some sympathy 

for moving toward systematic policies like that where we can articulate them, but I think doing it 

at this juncture would be risky.  But I’m willing to entertain further discussions about that.  In 

fact, I think that the statement as it is, as I think President Hoenig suggested, will not—I wish, 

but I don’t think it will—quell demands, requests, and speculation about QE3.  That will be 

rampant in the marketplace.  I don’t think we will be successful in calming that by this action, 

and indeed, we may even be fostering more discussion about it going forward.   One more 

statement about language.  In paragraph 4 of alternative B, where we changed the language to 

“promote a stronger pace of economic recovery in a context of price stability,” I don’t like that 

language.  I would prefer that we just stick to what we’ve said, which is that we will “act as 

needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability.”  I don’t see a particular need to 

change that.  Again, it will raise speculation in the marketplace about, what do we mean by that?  

August 9, 2011 111 of 162



 
 

 
 

Are we preparing to do something different?  And I would prefer to stick with the original 

language on that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  On your point about communications, I do face a speech in 

a few weeks.  And I’d be more than interested, either now or in some other context, in taking 

instruction from this Committee about how you want me to phrase it.  And in particular, one 

thing I could do—I know there’s not unanimous agreement on this—is downplay that particular 

option in favor of continuing to look at options, et cetera.  But that’s something we could discuss. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Charlie, could you just give us an idea of what kind of action you 

might consider in the event that you became convinced that economic growth was substantially 

slowing and that inflationary expectations were declining? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Well, I think I would respond by saying there would be two pieces to 

that.  One is why we think the growth is slowing.  If I thought that basically we were facing 

lower potential growth rates on into the future, I’m not sure monetary policy can do much about 

that—the right policy responses are probably different.  However, if I thought inflation was 

beginning to fall to unacceptably low levels—and President Evans and I could talk about when 

that trigger might be met, but certainly deflation would fall into that category—we would talk 

about policies where we would want to raise inflationary expectations to prevent that from 

happening, which would also help on the side of lowering ex ante real interest rates.  So those 

would be the ways I would think about.  But it would depend on the real side, what we thought 

the source of the shock was.  How temporary do we believe this is?  If we are moving into a 

world, as President Bullard suggests, of a European steady state of low economic growth and a 

very high unemployment rate, that’s going to call for a different set of policies. 

August 9, 2011 112 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  If I could just ask a question, because I know that President Bullard 

mentioned that an unemployment trigger of 7½ percent could be super risky, and I thought you 

mentioned it this way earlier, President Plosser.  Governor Yellen’s proposal has jointly with the 

unemployment rate trigger the admonition that inflationary pressures ought to be—and we can 

disagree over what it is—subdued or some number.  In pointing to unemployment, do you have 

in mind some risk beyond the inflationary risk? 

MR. PLOSSER.  I didn’t say the word “risky.”  I just said I think we need more 

discussion about what that number ought to be.  If we want to talk about it in the September 

meeting, I’m willing to have that conversation.  But I think there’s more uncertainty, it seems to 

me, about what we think the path of the unemployment rate’s going to be and what’s appropriate.  

I think that’s a subject for debate. 

MR. EVANS.  As long as you’ve got the inflation safeguard—I mean, I could say 

6 percent unemployment.  And as soon as inflation got up to like 2¼ percent, that would come 

out of that conditionality.  So I’m not quite sure that’s such an issue. 

MR. BULLARD.  I called it risky, so let me clarify what I meant.  I think there’s a large 

literature that says, as I interpret it, that we don’t understand why unemployment is very high in 

some countries and states—there’s hysteresis in unemployment, and there are all these papers 

about comparing U.S. with European unemployment.  That tells me that unemployment is a 

difficult variable to understand, and I wouldn’t want to tie policy numerically to it.  Of course, 

we’re all very concerned about unemployment.  And I’m very concerned as well, but I wouldn’t 

want to tie policy numerically to unemployment for that reason, because I think it’s one of the 

least-well-understood variables of all the variables that we look at. 

August 9, 2011 113 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. TARULLO.  But what’s the risk, Jim? 

MS. YELLEN.  Because, if you’re right, you have an inflation escape clause there. 

MR. BULLARD.  Sure.  Having said what I said about the literature, I’ll also say that I 

agree with President Plosser that making it state contingent in that way is something we could 

study and look at, and I’d be willing to look at it further. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m going to call on President Williams and then 

President Fisher, if he’s ready, after that.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support alternative A.  And given 

the significant downgrade to the outlook for output and unemployment, and the heightened risks 

to the recovery, I think an additional accommodation is needed for the very reasons that you said.  

In this regard, I, too, very much appreciate the very helpful staff memos on possible policy 

actions for providing additional monetary accommodation.  In following Governor Tarullo, I 

have been changing my comments very much in real time, so let’s see if I’ve kept up with 

everything.  I support incorporating the more explicit forward-looking policy guidance as you 

suggested.  This step is a small one.  It may help markets better understand our policy framework 

and our intentions, and it may reduce uncertainty.  But as Brian pointed out earlier, if you look in 

the modal forecast, markets don’t expect us to raise rates until sometime in 2014, I think.  And of 

course, this is a conditional commitment, as the proposed language makes clear.  But I don’t 

think that’s actually enough.  Based on what’s going on in the economy and the forecast for 

inflation, I think we do need to go further, and I support extending the maturity of our Treasury 

holdings as described in paragraph 4 of alternative A.  Research by my colleague Eric Swanson 

on Operation Twist shows that that policy indeed did reduce longer-term interest rates.  His 

findings are completely consistent with the research that was done on the effects of the first stage 

August 9, 2011 114 of 162



 
 

 
 

of the LSAP program in the current episode.  So I think that it’s a small step.  I know it’s not a 

panacea, but I do think it’s a step that would help, and it would have relatively small downside 

risks.  I also think we should be thinking about all the other options, and I agree with the idea of 

a two-day meeting in September.  I think one option that I am also in favor of is lowering the 

target fed funds rate and IOER to zero, but I know that’s an issue that’s more complex.  We’ll 

have a good discussion of that at the next meeting.  I also prefer, by the way, when I said 

alternative A, the language regarding the downside that I think President Evans also 

mentioned—“Moreover, downside risks to the economic outlook have increased”—which was in 

paragraph 2.  I think that’s actually an important piece of the language that’s missing in 

alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, I’m sympathetic to your concern.  We’re expressing, as 

you said, a general darkening of mood and expectations.  The issue is, what action do we take?  

And there is a proposal on the table by Governor Yellen, which I’m not willing to support.  I’m 

not willing to support it because it’s asymmetric—that is, it talks about maintaining rates low as 

long as unemployment exceeds 7½ percent and a medium-term outlook for inflation remains 

subdued, undefined.  We have a lot of work to do to define our comfort level here.  I’m 

sympathetic to President Evans, but I think the asymmetry of it will create problems further 

down the path. 

I worry about paragraph 1 because there’s a lot that’s unspoken in here.  I would like to 

actually add a sentence—which I don’t think I’ll get, but I’m going to state it anyway.  That is, 

after we talk about how housing has flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still 

weak, and the housing sector remains depressed, which is true, I would like to add the following 

August 9, 2011 115 of 162



 
 

 
 

language:  “Uncertainty regarding non-monetary-policy initiatives appears to have added to the 

hesitancy of businesses’ willingness to expand payrolls, utilize existing capital, and add physical 

capacity, although business investment in productivity-enhancing equipment and software 

continues to expand.”  I would further insert that “uncertainty has been compounded by financial 

developments in Europe.”  For some reason, we’re not mentioning this.  I think these are 

significant factors. 

I think there are risks to us going further than we’ve already gone.  I understand the 

desire to act, but I think we have to think through those actions, and presently I don’t think we 

have a consensus at the table that we should do more.  I am not willing to vote in favor of doing 

more.  I think the proposal that Governor Yellen has put forward, which I’m somewhat 

sympathetic to, is too asymmetric.  I take President Bullard’s point seriously—that is, that 

pushing things out to 2013 looks too politically convenient—and I just think we don’t have 

enough information at this juncture.  I would endorse alternative B with the enhancement or 

complication that I’ve added, and I’m not willing to support much more than that.  I think we 

have to be extremely careful here.  We need to conduct monetary policy in the most deliberate 

way, not a reactionary way.  We have had a significant market selloff, which we talked about 

earlier with Brian.  In terms of valuation levels, we could have a great deal further to go.  I think 

the tool kit that we have in place has limited potential because we’ve exhausted much of what we 

have still in our pocket.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Of necessity more than 

preference, I am going to have to follow Governor Tarullo’s admonition to be nimble in my 

remarks, and I’ll do my best to do that at the cost of being even less articulate than usual.  I am 

August 9, 2011 116 of 162



 
 

 
 

willing to support alternative B as written and circulated.  I do not see myself being able to 

support any of the emendations except the one that President Plosser offered for paragraph 4.  

Let me talk about my thinking in that regard.  That thinking is framed by the following issue, and 

I’m often asked this:  What’s the most difficult thing for you in terms of formulating policy 

relative to being an academic and thinking about policy?  I think the difference is, for an 

academic, it’s a relatively sterile exercise where you write down models and you formulate what 

you’re supposed to do, and you come up with some long-term framework that you’re supposed 

to use.  And I think as a policymaker, quite rightly you’re keeping track of short-run movements 

in data and responding to that because there are movements that take place that are outside the 

realm of your models, and you have to be moving your thinking accordingly.  I think it’s very 

challenging to keep hold of your longer-term framework while you’re confronting the short-term 

data, and I’m a little concerned about the idea of changing our long-term framework in response 

to one week’s worth of information.  That’s what I find troubling. 

Let me talk about our longer-term framework, and I’ll say some things that are going to 

be unabashedly hawkish, and I’m going to say some things that I think are fairly dovish.  Let me 

talk about both of those.  My thinking about our longer-term framework is that it’s not just what 

we talk about among ourselves and how we understand the dual mandate or exactly what 

objective function gets used in the staff simulations.  It’s about what we communicate to the 

public and to our overseers, the Congress of the United States.  My understanding of what that 

communication is, and we reiterated this last November, is that our commitment is to follow 

policies that will keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under, and my thinking about further 

accommodation is shaped by that commitment. 

August 9, 2011 117 of 162



 
 

 
 

What we’re doing right now is using two forms of accommodation—low target interest 

rates and large-scale asset holdings.  And the way the monetary policy rules work is—and the 

rules are designed to target a particular inflation rate, in this case 2 percent—that you tailor the 

level of accommodation to the level of underlying inflation and to the level of the output gap.  

We adopted our current level of accommodation in November 2010, when inflation was very 

low, 1 percent and decelerating, and unemployment was 9.8 percent.  What’s the situation now?  

Unemployment is lower than it was at that point.  Core PCE inflation ran over 2 percent over the 

past six months.  Other measures of medium-term inflationary pressures—for example, the 

median CPI and the trimmed-mean CPI calculated by the Cleveland Fed—have also run near 

2 percent over that period.  None of these changes in the economic position since November—

the fall in unemployment and the rise in available measures of underlying inflation—argue in 

favor of easing given, as I said, that our longer-term framework that we effectively 

communicated was that we’re trying to keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under, with the idea 

that when pressures that are pushing up unemployment are coming along, they’re also pushing 

down inflation, and as we act to move inflation back up to 2 percent, we’re also acting to keep 

unemployment low.  In fact, as I argued last time, I think the changes in the economic picture 

relative to November could well argue for reducing accommodation, but I think that that would 

really be ignoring the data.  I think the data do lead one to think we could be facing a 

substantially wider output gap than even what’s in the Tealbook.  The way we would see that is, 

we should start to see downward pressures on inflation.  I think this is the scenario, for example, 

of the New York Fed forecast.  The New York Fed is forecasting 1.1 percent core inflation next 

year.  I think one way to resolve this is to see more information about incoming data on core 

inflation and inflationary expectations.  So I just don’t see adopting more accommodation at this 

August 9, 2011 118 of 162



 
 

 
 

stage as being consistent with our public commitment to keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit 

under. 

The other way to put this is, if we want to follow policies consistent with our public 

commitments, we should be prepared to change what our communication of our longer-run 

framework is.  I think this gets to some of the statements about lack of self-equilibration in the 

economy that Governor Raskin talked about and the staff talked about.  So what’s going on—or 

one story of what’s going on—is that we’ve got deleveraging that’s pushing down on 

consumption, and that means there aren’t enough jobs.  But if there was equilibrium, what should 

happen in the marketplace is that real interest rates should decline enough to generate enough 

consumption demand.  Even though people don’t want to eat as much now because of all the 

shocks that have hit them, if real interest rates fall enough, they’re not going to want to save, and 

that will make them spend, and that will generate jobs, and that will generate employment.  So 

what’s interfering with this possibility?  Well, one argument for what’s interfering with this 

possibility is the zero lower bound—and that if you’re at the zero lower bound, and you have a 

commitment, as we have, to keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under, that means you’ve put a 

lower bound on the real interest rate.  It can’t go below negative 2 percent, which sounds really, 

really low, but maybe it needs to be lower.  Making a public commitment to a higher target 

inflation rate—at least temporarily, as perhaps President Evans is advocating, or possibly 

permanently—would expand the range of possible outcomes you could attain.  In particular, you 

could generate policies that would lead the real interest rate to fall below negative 2 percent.  

This is not something I would argue we should adopt today.  It is something we should be 

thinking about and considering in response to what has been a long-term issue—that the 

economy is not recovering anywhere near as rapidly as we think it should, given conditions.  We 

August 9, 2011 119 of 162



 
 

 
 

should be thinking about whether or not that’s because of the fact that we’re not able to generate 

the real interest rates we need to get equilibrium. 

One thing that I certainly agree with Governor Yellen on is that I think it would be great 

to have a two-day meeting in September, and one of the things I think we should be talking about 

at that point is the possibility of adopting a hard target inflation rate.  I also don’t rule out the 

possibility of changing our framework and our way of thinking given the data we have seen 

coming in.  I think we should do that.  What I object to is the notion that we should be doing that 

on the fly in response to a relatively short flow of information.  I think it would be useful to have 

staff analysis of the costs and benefits of taking such a step.  But failing that, given that we have 

a particular framework in place that we have communicated to the public, which is that we are 

interested in keeping inflation at 2 percent or a bit under, I don’t see ourselves being able to 

adopt further accommodation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I need to interject here.  I guess it won’t help to 

argue for my position any further.  We have two dissents, is that right?  

MR. FISHER.  At this juncture. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser, do you intend to dissent? 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m inclined to, unless I hear something different. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  That’s a very difficult position for me, obviously.  

Just to get a sense of the Committee’s preferences so that I understand them, if we were to go 

back to alternative B as written with the forward-leaning language of the last paragraph, without 

the “financial conditions”, how many dissents would I have?  Any dissents?  [Simultaneous 

speakers]  I’m asking the question, just so I understand Committee preference. 

MR. EVANS.  No reference to mid-2013? 

August 9, 2011 120 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s right.  Alternative B as written, except we take out 

the “financial conditions” language and we use the more forward-leaning paragraph 4. 

MR. TARULLO.  So no action at all? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No action at all. 

MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I’m trying to get preferences. 

MR. EVANS.  I could not.  I mean, it just seems clear that we would simply be 

postponing that very discussion until September, when we would have the very same outcome.  

And so I could not support that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  We have to get this done by 1:30.  Yes? 

MS. YELLEN.  You might have other negative votes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I’m going to stick with what I have.  Let me just 

make a comment, and I understand your concerns, but I just need to say a couple of things.  

Number one, I’m perfectly willing to accept the argument that monetary policy is not the main 

tool, that this is not the main thing wrong with the economy, but it’s our duty to do what we can, 

to be palliative, to help where we can, even if we can’t solve fiscal, structural, and other 

problems.  Number two, we have a mandate that says we should look at employment and 

inflation.  We’ve had a very marked reduction in the outlook since the last meeting.  Not 

responding in any way not only raises a question of whether we’re following our mandate, but it 

also makes the markets uncertain because they don’t know what we’re doing.  They can’t follow 

our logic.  Again, to put out a much darker statement and not to do anything strike me as being 

inconsistent.  I believe this step is the most modest possible step we could take.  It’s completely 

conditional; it could be offset by any change in conditions.  It could be offset by asset sales, if 

August 9, 2011 121 of 162



 
 

 
 

necessary.  We will elaborate going forward exactly what the conditionality is, and I will look 

forward to our discussions around the table.  We will have a two-day meeting.  I think I can 

accede to that point, at least, for September.  [Laughter]  And we will discuss all of this, and 

we’ll continue with the subcommittee’s discussions about the appropriate use of an inflation 

objective, which I do not believe is in any way inconsistent with this perspective, because what 

we’re saying is, we believe that conditions will warrant, and “conditions warranting” means that 

we meet our objectives.  I don’t see any inconsistency of this with the inflation objective or that 

framework.  Again, I feel that not signaling to the market and to the public that we are at least 

engaged in understanding that there is an issue here and that we’re trying, at least in a palliative 

way, to respond to it, risks a real disconnect in terms of our communication, which I’m 

unfortunately not willing to accept.  It would be very unpleasant to have three dissents, but I 

guess if that’s where we end up, that’s where we end up. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman, I have a question. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Your proposal for my question about paragraph 4, the language—what 

was your— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, when I was talking about going back to the old 

version, I was going to take the most aggressive language.  But if you will not dissent, I will 

certainly listen to your suggestions. 

MR. PLOSSER.  I need to think about that a little bit. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Let’s go to President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support your recommendation of 

alternative B with the firmer “extended period” language from alternative A.  As I noted during 

August 9, 2011 122 of 162



 
 

 
 

our economic go-round, I revised down my outlook for economic growth, and I see further 

downside risks since our last meeting.  In addition, I have greater confidence than I did at our last 

meeting that inflationary pressures are gradually subsiding.  If we had a fed funds rate well 

above zero, given my outlook, I would be supporting a rate reduction.  But instead, we have to 

contemplate using tools that are less well understood and are more difficult to explain to the 

public.  Clearly, as many have said, and as you have just repeated, monetary policy can’t solve 

all of our problems.  But we should do what we can on the margin.  So I am open to providing 

further accommodation using nontraditional tools.  As others have said, I look forward to our 

meeting in September, where we can carefully weigh the costs and benefits of the options that 

were laid out in the staff memo.  In my view, Mr. Chairman, you have clearly laid out the 

reasons for taking some actions today.  I also agree with your comments regarding your desire to 

control the QE3 speculations. 

As others have noted, I have a strong preference for our policy responses to be contingent 

on evolving economic conditions rather than a date specific; however, I think it’s going to be 

difficult in the short time we have left today to come up with that language and those measures, 

although I like the language that Governor Yellen has suggested.  In fact, if the FOMC was 

currently publishing the fed funds rate path that underlies our current economic projections, then 

the public would already know that we don’t expect to raise the fed funds rate until about mid-

2013, that we expect at that time the unemployment rate is going to be at 7½ percent, and that we 

anticipate having subdued inflation until mid-2013.  I would encourage you, Mr. Chairman, to 

use the Jackson Hole speech to elaborate on some of these economic conditions, and I also think 

it would be helpful for you to articulate how the firmer “extended period” language, and perhaps 

August 9, 2011 123 of 162



 
 

 
 

some of the other policy options, would be expected to affect our economic outlook.  Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think we find ourselves in uncharted 

waters, and that’s a phrase we’ve been using for four years now.  But we’ve again veered farther 

away from the charts we have.  I welcomed Governor Tarullo’s opening of this round, which I 

interpret as an appeal for humility and openness to question how we know what we think we 

know about things.  My question, as you know, is whether monetary policy can have a big effect 

on economic growth right now.  I think the key question for us is, why is growth so low?  And 

I’d just remind you that our traditional approach to this—loss functions like the one President 

Evans referenced—rests on a dichotomy between the determinants of longer-run trend growth 

and fluctuations around that, where technologies and preferences and population growth are 

viewed to influence the former, but policy is the tool that moves around things in the meantime.  

And I don’t think we really know that that can never change.  The 20th-century trend growth in 

the United States is remarkably constant, but it’s also a fact that many other advanced countries 

with access to the same technology as us, and presumably the same types of human preferences 

involved, have converged to growth paths that are markedly lower than that in the second half of 

the 20th century.  And it’s not obvious to me that we’re not capable of shifting from the path we 

were on in the 20th century to one more like Europe’s, and it’s not obvious they can’t shift up.  

Given that, I think we should be circumspect about taking measures of the output gap, measures 

of the unemployment gap, as measures of how much further policy has to go.  My sense of things 

is that further monetary stimulus at this point is unlikely to change real outcomes very much at 

all.  If you look back at QE2, we didn’t have much of an effect on economic growth.  The effect 

August 9, 2011 124 of 162



 
 

 
 

we had was temporary, and we got a more sustained increase in inflation.  This is the classic 

prediction of what happens after a monetary policy impulse.  I think that in hindsight August is 

likely to be a Romer date.  You look at the impulse response after that, and it looks like the 

classic thing:  temporary effect on real activity, sustained effect on inflation. 

So I think we should be sitting pat.  I think we should avoid encouraging people to look 

to us, to look to monetary policy, to fix economic growth problems.  And so I favor 

alternative B.  And I guess a lot of options have been put on the table.  I strongly oppose putting 

in numbers for unemployment.  I share President Bullard’s discomfort with putting in a calendar 

date as well, just for the reasons he said.  I don’t think we can be sure that we’re not in the 

situation in which Europe found itself in the ’80s, and that we’re not going to see unemployment 

well above 8 percent for a decade or more.  And it’s through no fault of monetary policy.  So I 

don’t want to hang our hat on unemployment.  I don’t think we should.  That concludes my 

remarks.  Oh, and about the two-day meeting, can I get back to you when I see my BlackBerry?  

[Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Our position is incredibly uncomfortable.  

Many around the table have pointed out that the factors contributing to the disappointing results 

are not monetary in nature, and that it’s not clear that monetary policy can cure the ills.  Well, it 

might not be our fault, and it might not be our job, and we might not be in the best position to 

act, but I still see our responsibility as taking whatever action we can that we believe will result 

in the best outcome, regardless of how it fits with our own preferences or comfort level.  But we 

have to weigh carefully the costs and benefits of our options.  I don’t see the change in our 

guidance as high risk.  It communicates our best estimate of the future outcomes.  And even 

August 9, 2011 125 of 162



 
 

 
 

though the statement might not be different from market expectations today, it could keep 

markets from prematurely anticipating our exit if this uneven recovery results in a spurt of good 

data as a result of those same temporary factors.  And I do see the rewards of this action as not 

raising expectations for QE3.  As to the clarification proposed by Governor Yellen, I could 

support it but would prefer to take more time to think about it.  I do support a two-day meeting 

and perhaps an intermeeting conference to give us time to assess the relative costs and benefits of 

all of our options.  As I said in the economic go-round, I believe our remaining ammunition is 

limited and therefore must be carefully aimed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  President Bullard was first, I think. 

MR. BULLARD.  I just wanted to make a small suggestion in an effort to try to round up 

some consensus.  Instead of “2013,” could we change “an extended period” to “a period 

substantially longer than previously envisioned”?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I don’t know that that helps, really.  Tell me if it does. 

President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes, I’m not sure that helps, unfortunately.  I was just going 

to point out that while it is true that using “extended period until 2013” accords pretty much with 

our estimates of what our mean would be—or actually, I think, it’s even to the left of that—the 

reason it’s useful policy from one perspective—why it’s accommodative—is that you’re 

shearing off the possibility of raising rates or reversing accommodation before that.  We can’t 

both argue that it’s not going to have any effect and view it as increasing accommodation.  

That’s my only point. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that’s not true because, first of all, it is conditional.  It’s 

absolutely conditional.  But even if it’s not an ironclad commitment, it’s communicating an 

August 9, 2011 126 of 162



 
 

 
 

expectation and to the extent that there’s a misunderstanding or a disagreement it can be 

effective.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  I’m sorry, because we do have two more to go, and then we should 

probably have a discussion, but I’d be extremely cautious on “2013,” Mr. Chairman.  It just 

looks so politically convenient.  I really think that through your good efforts of communication, 

through the actions taken by this Committee, we’ve in essence, removed ourselves from the heat 

of the political debate.  I think we’re less suspect in the eyes of our critics than we have been.  

And I think the attention is rightly focused on getting this fiscal situation under control.  I might 

have different prescriptions than what has been suggested, but the focus is back on the Congress, 

with the assistance of the executive.  The “2013” just looks too politically convenient, and I 

don’t want to fall back into people being suspicious about the way we conduct our business.  So I 

just want to plead on that front.  I think it’s a mistake.  I think it would then allow those who are 

trying to squirm out of their duties of actually getting their act together on fiscal policy—

whatever that act is—to put the finger back on us.  And it’s unfortunately after an election, and 

it’s a declaration before we know what the outcome is of what’s likely to happen on the fiscal 

side, which is critical here.  So I wanted to plead that we do not adopt that specific date, given 

that it is ultra-inconvenient and given that we have worked very hard—and you have taken 

special personal risk in terms of your communications—to lower the temper and suspicion about 

monetary policy.  I think this would raise the suspicion and make us look like we’re way too 

politically acquiescent, whatever our personal politics may be. 

MR. TARULLO.  President Fisher, would you be happier with “2014”? 

MR. FISHER.  No. 

PARTICIPANT.  “End of 2012,” then. 

August 9, 2011 127 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. FISHER.  It depends on the conditions.  But look, again, we have restored our 

integrity to a great degree, and I don’t want to put a dent in it. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Some may interpret it that way, I suppose.  But that’s the 

appropriate date given our information. 

MR. FISHER.  Right now you have “extended period.”  “Extended period” is indefinite. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It’s two or three meetings according to some.  

[Simultaneous speakers] 

MR. EVANS.  We really should let everybody else have an opportunity. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We have a couple more people who’d like to speak. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Could I turn to Governor Tarullo, please? 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to begin, again, by invoking the 

legal authority under which we act every time we gather around this table.  And that legal 

authority gives us a dual mandate.  One, it doesn’t say we are supposed to promote price stability 

and maximum employment so long as the rest of the government does what we’d like them to be 

doing.  And it does say that we have to promote both price stability and maximum employment, 

and you cannot read one of those phrases out.  How one balances those has obviously been a 

centerpiece of U.S. monetary policy at least since the late ’70s and probably before, but it is our 

responsibility.  Point two, if what I said earlier about this being a possible inflection point is 

correct, I’m actually a bit concerned that simply changing the understanding of “extended 

period” to what was already anticipated is not going to do much.  And Mr. Chairman, I do agree 

with Charlie Plosser that we’re not going to dispense with speculation about QE3 by either 

making or not making that change in the language. 

August 9, 2011 128 of 162



 
 

 
 

I’ve been listening to everybody and trying to figure out how we could maximize the 

support for a particular statement here, and I’m not at all sure that I’ve got the way to do it.  But 

rather than state further my views on where the economy is and what monetary policy would do, 

let me see if I can at least offer two suggestions that might help.  First, I wonder whether there is 

a way to add a qualifying or descriptive phrase that reinforces the sense that this date already 

accords with our expectations for when we’d be converging on an appropriate moment to either 

begin to remove or no longer grant accommodation, and thereby make it more obviously 

contingent and more obviously predictive.  I suggest this, Richard, mindful more of Jim’s points 

about setting a date out there arbitrarily, no matter what it is, because I’m not as concerned about 

the political implications of saying “2013.”  Second, in trying to respond to, I think, some of 

Charlie Plosser’s concerns and some that I heard from other people, I wonder whether inserting 

an additional sentence in paragraph 4 might help give the public a more accurate sense of what 

we did today, and thus tamp down a little bit of unwarranted speculation.  We might think about 

adding as a first sentence that “the Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to”—

whether it’s “promote a stronger pace of economic recovery in a context of price stability” or 

“best foster maximum employment and price stability”—and then say, “It will continue to assess 

the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as 

appropriate.”  The purpose for inserting that first sentence is to make clear (a) that a lot of things 

other than QE3 were discussed and (b) that precisely because there’s a range of things under 

discussion, action may be forthcoming, but there is by no means a commitment to do so.  I think 

the purpose is also to just accurately reflect to the world before the minutes come out, which is in 

three weeks, that a lot of what we did today was to talk about what we might do and why we 

might do it.  I would hope that that could address the concerns of people who don’t want us to 

August 9, 2011 129 of 162



 
 

 
 

seem too passive, while not going over the line with the concerns of people who think that we’re 

not ready or that we don’t know enough to take some more tangible step right now.  Having said 

that, I’m going to withhold a judgment on anything because I’m not sure what’s on the table 

right now.  But I trust, Mr. Chairman, you’re going to try to come back, distill everything, and 

give us a concrete proposal on which you can again solicit people’s opinions. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, I’m still with the “2013,” unless I have a suggestion 

that will accommodate— 

MR. FISHER.  That’s an interesting suggestion.   

MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  I’m not sure what the right language is to try that. 

MS. DUKE.  What if it said, “The Committee currently projects,” rather than 

“anticipates”? 

MR. TARULLO.  “Projects”? 

MS. DUKE.  Yes. 

MR. TARULLO.  Ask the guys at the end of the table. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think people are very much overstating the degree of 

commitment in that language.  It says “currently anticipates that these conditions are likely to 

warrant.”  It’s qualified all over the place.  I don’t understand why people view this as some 

binding commitment.  It’s not a binding commitment.  There are all sorts of escape clauses.  I 

don’t understand why people view this language as so binding that they’d be willing to dissent.  

This is the Committee.  The Committee has a forecast.  Now, people may disagree with the 

forecast, but is it unreasonable for the Committee to have a view, that the Committee, in its 

totality, today anticipates that this is what is likely?  That’s not binding. 

August 9, 2011 130 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. TARULLO.  Bill, maybe that’s the point.  I think this is what Betsy was trying to 

get at.  If the sense of the forecast, and the forecast-dependent nature of this statement, were a bit 

more explicit, that might give a little bit of comfort to those who worry that a date is being 

placed out there absolutely. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “The Committee currently projects that economic 

conditions”?  Would that help anybody? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  If the projections change, then the date could change. 

MR. EVANS.  Were we working on Governor Yellen’s language? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  [Simultaneous speakers] 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it’s off the table for now. 

MR. BULLARD.  First of all, I agree very much with what Governor Tarullo said about 

saying that we had discussed a lot of options.  That’s very helpful, I think.  The other thing is to 

get rid of the “2013,” how about something very simple?  Instead of “for an extended period”—

“for a very substantial period”? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, that doesn’t change anything. 

MR. BULLARD.  I think if you move off the “extended period” language and switch it to 

something else, you’ll get a lot of market attention, and they will see that as a further 

commitment. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Does that help anybody? 

MS. DUKE.  No 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No. 

MR. FISHER.  I’m confused as to where we are right now, Mr. Chairman.  Maybe I’ll let 

Governor Raskin finish, but I think Governor Tarullo’s suggestion is worth thinking about. 

August 9, 2011 131 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I only heard one suggestion—the thing about the range of 

tools—which is useful but doesn’t address the controversy here. 

MR. TARULLO.  No, Betsy and I together, I think, are trying to address that by changing 

the words to make it clearer that we’ve picked the date because of our current projections.  

Maybe that’s what I’m suggesting. 

MS. DUKE.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How about this:  “Based on current projections, the 

Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .”?  Is that all right? 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  

MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry, I don’t know what we’re talking about.  This is critical to me. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We’re going to the sentence now—about the “2013.” 

MR. EVANS.  I’m sorry, we’re on alternative B? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 3 of alternative A, which says now, “The 

Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions . . .”, and would say “Based on current 

projections, the Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .”   

MR. EVANS.  But still “through mid-2013”?  It’s the date that matters.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Will that help?  At all? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I’ll have to think about it more.  

MR. FISHER.  Me, too. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right, you have five minutes.  [Laughter]  All right.  

Governor Raskin, please. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now, before we take alternative B off the 

table with the statement on forward guidance, I want to say a couple of things in support of it.  

August 9, 2011 132 of 162



 
 

 
 

First of all, I think it’s appropriately forceful but accurate in its characterization of the incoming 

data.  It now slightly de-emphasizes the role of temporary factors in the first-half slowdown.  I 

think the slow economic growth in the first half of this year extends beyond the factors that 

we’ve labeled as transitory.  Weaker growth in disposable personal income, to me, signals a 

protracted slowdown in consumer spending, particularly given the persistently low level of 

consumer confidence.  Nonetheless, I think that the pickup in inflation over the first half of this 

year is a transitory phenomenon, and I think that inflation will be subdued over the medium term.  

In fact, it appears to me as if a moderation in inflation is already under way, especially given that 

energy prices have decreased significantly from their peaks during the spring.  And as we’ve 

heard today, both survey- and market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have 

changed little, on balance, over the course of the year.  There’s going to continue to be 

considerable slack in labor markets over coming quarters, which will continue to exert 

significant restraint on wages and prices. 

Now, the statement of forward guidance.  Like you, Mr. Chairman, I think that 

alternative B without the statement of forward guidance runs the risk of communicating that the 

Committee is unable or unwilling to merely clarify its anticipation of responding to this 

protracted slowdown.  Because I think that an important source of the weakness in the economy 

is that households and businesses don’t have confidence that things will get better, I have 

reservations about a statement that leaves the impression that we cannot or will not clarify our 

anticipation.  If we choose not to clarify our anticipation, as in alternative B without any 

additional language, I think we need to explain why more clearly.  Otherwise, we run the risk of 

creating confusion. 

August 9, 2011 133 of 162



 
 

 
 

I recognize that one problem is that not everybody on this Committee agrees on the 

diagnosis or the treatment plan for the ailing economy, but we can’t let our lack of consensus 

cause us to confuse the public.  At this point, we run the risk of giving the impression either that 

we can’t do anything or that we won’t do anything, and that we will not clarify our anticipation, 

which I fear would exacerbate the lack of confidence in the economy.  So I think we should 

consider sending a stronger signal with our language about how long we are prepared to keep 

rates low.  I’d be very supportive of clarifying our forward guidance and believe that this would 

be a significant step, not in terms of monetary accommodation, but in terms of providing greater 

transparency about our overall strategy and about the policy path that we see as most appropriate 

for fostering our dual mandate.  So I think it would be helpful to include something.  And here, 

again, this language that was circulated—to me, all that it does is really describe with more 

specificity the economic conditions that are likely to warrant the continuation of an exceptionally 

low funds rate.  It also provides some loose indication of the time horizon over which we expect 

those conditions to prevail.  In sum, even if I thought that not clarifying our anticipation would 

most likely end with us successfully fulfilling the dual mandate in the future, I find it prudent to 

clarify now, not because the language is going to have a big impact, but because the fragile state 

of the economy at the moment makes it very vulnerable to any new negative shocks or the 

worsening of ongoing shocks, and clarifying our anticipation may help on the margin. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  Well, let me get a proposal—sorry.  

Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thirty seconds.  First, we have to do what we can do.  I 

completely agree with Governor Tarullo.  This notion that “It’s someone else’s fault, so that 

means we get to abdicate our responsibility”—that’s just ridiculous in my opinion.  Second, I 

August 9, 2011 134 of 162



 
 

 
 

think that what you proposed is the absolute minimum of what we need to do today.  I’d be 

prepared to do more, but that’s the absolute minimum.  And third, I think people are dramatically 

overstating the degree of commitment in saying that “we anticipate that something is likely based 

on our current projections.”  It just doesn’t bind us in any meaningful way.  All it does is provide 

more clarity to the market and replace something that today is completely empty.  The “extended 

period” language today is absolutely empty. 

MR. EVANS.  Come on, you can’t say empty. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it’s empty in the sense that it means that we’re 

going two or three meetings out, that’s it.  So the “extended period” language today doesn’t 

really add very much.  This actually provides a lot more than that, so I completely support you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  All right.  Let me—Michelle tells us we need 

to get this done as soon as possible. 

MR. FISHER.  Let’s get it right. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Could I clarify one thing, Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, of course. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  I would not be able to support the alternative, even as 

rewritten with Governor Duke’s proposed change of language. 

MR FISHER.  Which is? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Based on current projections”?  Can you conceive of any 

language that would help you? 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Not at this time, no. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  So what I’m proposing is alternative B.  In the 

first paragraph, we’ve struck the sentence— 

August 9, 2011 135 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. EVANS.  Mr. Chairman, can I just say that a number of people have preferred 

alternative A?  I mean, if you’re going to take three dissents— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, alternative A involves the lengthening of the portfolio, 

and I’m not going to introduce that discussion at this time.  I’m sorry, but I promise we’ll do that 

at the two-day meeting, which everyone has agreed to. 

So in alternative B, we’re scratching the “financial conditions” sentence from the first 

paragraph.  The second paragraph is unchanged.  The third paragraph—let me ask President 

Plosser now.  Is there anything we can do for you in the last paragraph? 

MR. PLOSSER.  I prefer the old language for paragraph 4, but I’m not sure doing that is 

sufficient offset to the “2013” language. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  What about the language in paragraph 3, where it says now, 

“The Committee continues to anticipate,” we’d say, “Based on its current projections, the 

Committee anticipates that economic conditions . . .”  Does that help? 

MR. PLOSSER.  I’m sorry to be slow here, but this very difficult.  Putting that, along 

with the change in paragraph 4, would be an improvement. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  A sufficient improvement? 

MR. PLOSSER.  That’s what I’m struggling with.  I’m not sure it would be, Mr. 

Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, could you read the full sentence for me, please?  I’m sorry. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  With the proposed change? 

MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 

August 9, 2011 136 of 162



 
 

 
 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It would be, “Based on its current projections, the 

Committee anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and 

a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low 

levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.”  “At least two years.”  How about 

“for at least two years”? 

MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, again, I think we have labored mightily to make clear that 

we are as politically independent as possible. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It’s not political. 

MR. FISHER.  But sir, it may well be interpreted as that by our critics.  We have 

mitigated our critics substantially.  Why don’t we just say “for a substantial period”?  I mean, 

we’re putting a date on here. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  “Extended,” “substantial”— 

MR. FISHER.  The date happens to be right after the election—I cannot support that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Fine.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  If you’re going to take three dissents, then I think we should go to 

the language of alternative A and take out paragraph 4, because I think there was enough support 

for that.  So if they’re going to dissent anyway, I think we should have much stronger language, 

because I think that was the consensus of everybody else other than the people who are 

dissenting.  If they really feel so strongly about that, I think we should go to alternative A, take 

out paragraph 4, and that would characterize how everybody else is viewing the economy. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Are there any objections? 

MR. ENGLISH.  Sorry, that’s alternative A, paragraphs 1 and 2? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Alternative A— 

August 9, 2011 137 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. ROSENGREN.  But take out the— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Take out “financial conditions” in the first paragraph. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But take alternative A, paragraphs 1 and 2? 

MR. ROSENGREN.  1, 2, and 3. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And 3, which is identical now.  Get rid of 4 completely. 

MR. ENGLISH.  You can’t take paragraph 3 of alternative A because there has to be the 

reinvestment. 

MR. LUECKE.  That’s two sentences of paragraph 3 in alternative B. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of A—but just add the 

sentence “The Committee also will maintain . . .”—and then paragraph 4 of A. 

MS. YELLEN.  So we’re putting in the reinvestment—“maintain its existing policy of 

reinvesting principal”? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  So it’s alternative A as written, eliminate the 

“financial conditions” sentence, and insert at the end of paragraph 3 the material on 

reinvestment. 

MS. DUKE.  Do you have Dan’s change to paragraph 4? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 4 is as in alternative A, which is exactly what we 

had.  What did you want to say, Governor? 

MR. TARULLO.  I think somebody’s got it.  [Simultaneous speakers] 

MS. YELLEN.  This is Dan’s proposal for 4. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The beginning of the last paragraph is, “The Committee 

discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a 

August 9, 2011 138 of 162



 
 

 
 

context of price stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming 

information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.” 

MR. WILCOX.  Do you want the last sentence from paragraph 3 in B—about the 

Committee being ready to “regularly review the size and composition”? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, exactly what’s in B.  The last two sentences in B.  

Dan, I don’t know.  Is it worth the effort at this juncture? 

MR. TARULLO.  Unless there’s an objection— 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think that first sentence really does help us a little bit with that “range 

of policy tools.” 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  Let’s go through it now.  So paragraphs 1 and 2 

from alternative A—and 3 from A. 

MR. ENGLISH.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial” sentence. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial” sentence; then 

paragraphs 2 and 3 from A and add to paragraph 3 the last two sentences—“The Committee also 

will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings.  

The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is 

prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.”  And then add the new 4:  “The Committee 

discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a 

context of price stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming 

information and is prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.”  [Simultaneous speakers] 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I’m a little concerned about whether the market will 

jump to the view that we’re going to do QE3 because you have this language:  “The Committee 

August 9, 2011 139 of 162



 
 

 
 

will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings.”  I just think you might 

want to be aware of that potential. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right.  We’ll use communication to downplay the QE3.  

All right.  Any further comments?  Would you please read the current statement?  And I 

apologize, everyone, for the rush. 

MR. LUECKE.  Paragraph 1 in A less the “financial;” paragraph 2 from A, explicitly as 

is; paragraph.3 from A plus the last two sentences of paragraph 3 in B; and paragraph 5 from A, 

with the new language, which I don’t have written down in full. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let’s get the new language read, if we could.  

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Michelle, are you taking this down? 

MS. SMITH.  Yes.  It would help if you would read me the last paragraph of A. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Here it is:  “The Committee”—capital C—“discussed the 

range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price 

stability.  It will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming information and is 

prepared to employ these tools as appropriate.”  Have you got it? 

MS. SMITH.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. SACK.  The last sentence of 3 seems very repetitive, doesn’t it? 

MR. TARULLO.  This is Bill’s concern again? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The last sentence— 

August 9, 2011 140 of 162



 
 

 
 

MR. SACK.  “The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its 

securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.”  Isn’t that one of the 

tools that’s covered now in paragraph 4? 

MR. FISHER.  It would be nice to see the whole thing so that we know what we’re 

voting on. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No, let’s just leave it. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That’s been standard.  That was in there last time. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That’s standard.  Let’s leave it.  Okay.  Any further 

questions or uncertainties?  Are you okay?  Let’s call the roll. 

MR. LUECKE.  Okay.  This vote will be on the language that was just described, in 

addition to the directive that is on page 8 of the packet that was handed out. 

Chairman Bernanke Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley Yes 
Governor Duke  Yes 
President Evans  Yes 
President Fisher  No 
President Kocherlakota No 
President Plosser  No 
Governor Raskin  Yes 
Governor Tarullo  Yes 
Governor Yellen  Yes 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you.  Lunch is available.  Let’s take 

20 minutes to get lunch, and then Linda Robertson will give a report to those who are still here.  

Our next meeting is September 20.  Thank you. 

END OF MEETING 

August 9, 2011 141 of 162




