FRB: Press Release--FOMC statement and Board discount rate action--December 14, 2004
Release Date: December 14, 2004
For immediate release
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for
the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 2-1/4 percent.
The Committee believes that, even after this action, the stance of monetary
policy remains accommodative and, coupled with robust underlying growth
in productivity, is providing ongoing support to economic activity. Output
appears to be growing at a moderate pace despite the earlier rise in energy
prices, and labor market conditions continue to improve gradually. Inflation
and longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained.
The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the attainment
of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few quarters
to be roughly equal. With underlying inflation expected to be relatively
low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at
a pace that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, the Committee will
respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation
to maintain price stability.
Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Alan Greenspan, Chairman;
Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Ben S. Bernanke; Susan S. Bies; Roger
W. Ferguson, Jr.; Edward M. Gramlich; Thomas M. Hoenig; Donald L. Kohn;
Cathy E. Minehan; Mark W. Olson; Sandra Pianalto; and William Poole.
In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25
basis point
increase in the discount rate to 3-1/4 percent. In taking this action,
the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland,
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas,
and San Francisco.
In addition, the Committee unanimously decided to expedite the release
of its minutes. Beginning with this meeting, the minutes of regularly
scheduled meetings will be released three weeks after the date of the
policy decision. The first set of expedited minutes will be released at
2 p.m. EST on January 4, 2005.
2004 Monetary policy
Home | News and
events
Accessibility
Last update: December 14, 2004