FRB: Press Release--FOMC statement--November 1, 2005
Release Date: November 1, 2005
For immediate release
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for
the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4 percent.
Elevated energy prices and hurricane-related disruptions in economic
activity have temporarily depressed output and employment. However, monetary
policy accommodation, coupled with robust underlying growth in productivity,
is providing ongoing support to economic activity that will likely be
augmented by planned rebuilding in the hurricane-affected areas. The cumulative
rise in energy and other costs has the potential to add to inflation
pressures; however, core inflation has been relatively low in recent months
and longer-term inflation expectations remain contained.
The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy action,
the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth
and price stability should be kept roughly equal. With underlying inflation
expected to be contained, the Committee believes that policy accommodation
can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill
its obligation to maintain price stability.
Voting for the FOMC monetary policy action were: Alan Greenspan, Chairman;
Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman; Susan S. Bies; Roger W. Ferguson,
Jr.; Richard W. Fisher; Donald L. Kohn; Michael H. Moskow; Mark W. Olson;
Anthony M. Santomero; and Gary H. Stern.
In a related action, the Board of Governors unanimously approved a 25-basis
point increase in the discount rate to 5 percent. In taking this action,
the Board approved the requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland,
Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas,
and San Francisco.
2005 Monetary policy
Home | News and
events
Accessibility
Last update: November 1, 2005