a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the 3-month bill rate has moved down into a 5.10 - 5.20 per cent range and the 6-month rate to around 5.25 per cent ; federal funds have traded at an average effective rate of slightly below 5 - 1/2 per cent ; net borrowed reserves of member banks have averaged $ 221 million during the two full statement weeks in the interval ; and borrowings have averaged $ 542 million .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . dealer loan rates in new york have usually been in a 6 - 6 - 1/2 per cent range , and financing has been generally available out of town at rates in a 5 - 1/4 - 5 - 3/4 per cent range .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . this configuration of money market elements represents a substantial easing from the rather tight conditions that had developed in the first half of november when the 3-month bill had risen to 5.45 per cent , federal funds were often trading at around 6 per cent , and member bank borrowings from the system were ranging between $ 600 and $ 700 million on average .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . but the day - to - day conditions at the time of the last committee meeting were already considerably easier-- when , to illustrate , the 3-month bill was about 5 - 1/4 per cent , and federal funds were trading near 5 - 1/2 per cent .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . longer - term money market rates , however , were still relatively high at that time -- the financial market relationships in perspective ( monthly averages and .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . where vailable . weekly avprappns f daily fnrp-- money market indicators bond yields flow of reserves , bank credit and money free
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . borrow- federal
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 3-month corporate munici- non-
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total bank time period reserves ings funds treas-
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . new pal borrowed re- credit upply deposits2
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( in millions rate ury gov't .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . issues ( aaa ) reserves serves proxy s y of dollars ) bill (
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( aaa ) i/ ( in mil ions ( in billions of dollars ) s-- of dollars ) i may -339
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 653 4.83 4.63 4.69 5.16 3.53 + 1 + 6 + 1.0 - 0.7 + 1.6 june -352 722 5.13 4.50 4.73 5.35 3.60 - 16
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . * + 3 * + 0.9 * + 0.9 + 1.5 july -359
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 739 5.18 4.78 4.84 5.48 3.77 +135
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . * - 1.5 + 1.9 sept .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -390 765 5.30 5.36 4.94 5.82 3.93 + 5 +129 - 0.1 + 0.9 +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 0.4 averages annual rates of increase 3/ year 1965 - 90 467 4.05 3.95 4.27 4.69 3.16 + 4.3 + 5.3 + 9.1 + 4.7 +16.0
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . first half 1966 -228 576 4.69 4.59 4.67 5.12 3.51 + 3.0 + 4.6 + 7.1
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . * + 4.7 +10.3 recent variations in growth may 11-july 6
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -365 719 5.05 4.56 4.72 5.32 3.61 + 8.8
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . * + 2.3 +12.8 from january 19yo to aate
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . , issues carry a 5-year call protection .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . time deposits adjusted at all commercial banks .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . base is average for month preceding specified period or in the case of weekly periods , the first week shown .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . changes have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . december 9 , 1966 .. preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . confidential ( fr
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ) -2- december 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 6 month bill rate was around 5 - 1/2 per cent -- and they have shown the most easing since then ( including a decline in yields on federal agency issues ) .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the somewhat easier money market conditions of recent weeks were accompanied by an expansion in certain monetary aggregates , though by a little less than was implicit in the projections in the last blue book .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the money supply has been growing since mid - november , with growth apparently in part accounted for by a reduction in u.s .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government deposits ( after rough allowance for shifting seasonal patterns in tax receipts ) .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . commercial banks have also had a less unfavorable experience with respect to cd 's as the decline in bill rates made cd 's more competitive .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . even with these recent developments , however , the bank credit proxy ( total member bank deposits ) decreased at a 5.4 per cent annual rate for the month of november as a whole .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . money supply also declined about 2 per cent on average in november , as compared with a slight increase expected by the staff at the time of the last fomc meeting .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . there was an increase in nonborrowed reserves in november , but total and required reserves declined further as member banks reduced outstanding borrowings at the federal reserve by about $ 160 million on average between october and november .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . after rising sharply in early november , bank borrowings in the euro - dollar market were reduced as the month progressed , but again rose markedly in early december .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the average november level
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . confidential ( fr ) -3- december 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . of such borrowings was substantially above october , and after allowance for them , the bank credit proxy in november would have shown a smaller decline -- about 3 per cent .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the behavior of the various reserve and monetary aggregates considered in conjunction with the easing of money market conditions in recent weeks is consistent with the hypothesis that demands for bank credit have been less strong , whether deterred by reported tight lending standards or by less confident business prospects .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . business loan increases at banks were relatively moderate in early fall , and slowed further in november ( although a part of the recent slowing may have reflected the speed - up into earlier months of corporate payments to the treasury of withheld income taxes ) .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . with loan increases smaller , and given current administrative restrictions at the discount window , banks have been willing to use some fraction of available funds to strengthen their liquidity positions by reducing their borrowings from the system .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . there have also been some reports of renewed bank interest in acquiring municipal securities .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . still , the easing of money market conditions that has taken place has not yet had much impact on reserve and bank credit growth .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . prospective developments assuming money market rates continuing about unchanged from those prevailing currently ( see first paragraph on page one ) , the outlook for december suggests that bank credit is not likely to show much , if any , expansion on average .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the annual rate of change confidential ( fr ) -4- december 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . in the bank credit proxy is likely to be within two percentage points of zero , plus or minus , with aggregate reserves projected as correspondingly weak .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the money supply is likely to increase , but projections of the amount are clouded by the intermixture of usual mid - december and year - end money market churning with rather special treasury financing patterns and general economic and federal budgetary uncertainties .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . a reasonable guess at present would put money expansion at a 5 - 10 per cent annual rate in december , reflecting a further shift out of u.s .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government deposits .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . this range allows for a bulge in borrowing from banks by businesses , finance companies , and government security dealers related in part to december tax period pressures and for some further run - offs in cd 's .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . individual banks ' expectations as to december cd experience are diverse , with estimates for attrition at individual large money market banks ranging up to about one - third of maturities .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the staff has assumed a run - off in a $ 700 million - $ 1 billion range during the month , given the record volume maturities in the month ( $ 5.5 billion ) , present rate relationships , and the usual sluggish reflow of private funds into money market instruments after the tax date .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total time and savings deposits at all commercial banks are likely to rise at a 2 - 3 per cent annual rate in december , reflecting projected continued growth of other time deposits .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . confidential ( fr ) with respect to the impact of rate relationships on cd 's , it should be pointed out that investors have recently exhibited an increased preference for extending maturities , as indicated in the bill market by the relatively narrow spread that has emerged between 3- and 6-month bills .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . as a result , bank cd experience may be relatively more influenced in the period ahead by rates on longer- term bills , especially those maturing around the march , april and june tax dates .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . at the moment , the investment yield on a 6-month bill is just under 5 - 1/2 per cent , while a 3-month bill yields about 25 basis points less .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . upward bill rate pressures could develop between now and year - end . for one thing , system outright buying of bills in the market has been reduced by the provision of reserves through reduction in the treasury balance at the federal reserve , through sales of special certificates to the treasury , and through foreign drawings on system swaps to supply funds to the euro - dollar market .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . this , in conjunction with aggressive dealer bidding in recent treasury bill financings , has contributed to unusually large dealer bill inventories , especially of longer - term bills .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . these bills may weigh heavily on the market going into the dividend and tax period unless financing continues to be readily available .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . yet another factor tending to add to market pressures in the period ahead may be increased bank demand for federal funds to replace any euro - dollars lost as a result of foreign year - end window dressing operations .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . in view of prospective year - end december 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . confidential ( fr ) -6- december 9 , 1966 money market churning ,
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . the level of net borrowed reserves consistent with steady money market conditions may fluctuate widely in the weeks ahead , and sometimes may have to be close to zero if current money market rates are to be maintained in the face of peak seasonal pressures .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . if the committee wished to encourage somewhat easier market conditions , however , this would appear to require net reserves over the next four weeks consistently ranging around zero .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . such a net reserve position might be consistent with a 3-month bill rate moving close to , and possibly below , 5 per cent and with a federal funds rate also moving down toward 5 per cent .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . such a rate structure might not fully emerge until early next year when normal seasonal pressures abate .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . even if bill and other money market rates are thus reduced by system action in the period ahead , this is not likely to generate any prompt and substantial bank credit expansion because banks are likely to be inclined to reduce their short - term borrowings further .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . a modest rate of bank credit expansion , however , might be expected as time passes since banks may be able to terminate net cd run - offs and subsequently begin to add to outstandings .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . an easing of bank liquidity positions would increase their willingness to add to security portfolios and to accommodate loan demands .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . this , in turn , would contribute to a better market for municipal and federal confidential
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( fr ) -7- december 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government security issues ( including participation certificates ) and probably to some renewed expansion of the money stock .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . on the other hand , if loan demands do not hold up and business activity is weaker than expected , banks might begin to lower cd rates in line with reductions in bill rates , and transaction demand for money may fall off .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . in such a situation , the rate levels specified above would not be low enough to stimulate much of a bank credit and money expansion .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . chart la member bank reserves seasonally adjusted monthly averages of daily figures billions of dollars required against   total private deposits lo- 0
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . * ---- --- required against private demand deposits chart
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . lb member bank reserves monthly averages of daily figures billions of dollars , seasonally adjusted 23.5 -required reserves 23.0
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . _ _ - net borrowed reserves -- 22.5 -nonborrowed reserves billions of dollars member bank borrowings excess reserves
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . i chart 2 money supply and bank deposits seasonally adjusted weekly averages of daily figures billions of dollars billions of dollars
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total member bank deposits -- 245 ( credit proxy )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . money supply time deposits adjusted ( all commercial banks ) negotiable cd 's --- - ( unadjusted ) change in series
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . i chart 3 demand deposits and currency
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . seasonally adjusted weekly averages of daily figures is of dollars money supply components : currency outside banks
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ~~*1- billion demand deposits u.s
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . demand deposits ( member banks ) table a-1 marginal reserve measures ( dollar amounts in millions , based on period averages of daily figures ) period monthly ( reserves weeks ending in ) : 1965
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . --november 1966
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . --january november
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p weekly : sept .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 7 excess member banks reserves borrowings as r evised to free reserves date as first published each week expected conclusion of each week 's open market opeations p - preliminary table a-2 aggregate reserves and related measures retrospective changes , seasonally adjusted ( in per cent , annual rates based on monthly averages of daily figures ) res e r v e
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . e gates omonetar v variables required reserves
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total member time money supply total nd against a e deposits private reserves o e total demand deposit(comm .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total demand reserves deposits ( credit ) 1/ banks )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . _ deposits annually :
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . monthly : 1965 - -july + 3.7 + 4.1 + 4.8 - 2.0 + 7.4 +15.0 + 5.2 + 4.7 august + 0.4 + 1.5 - 1.8 - 4.0 + 6.8 +18.3 + 4.4 + 2.8 september - 1.2 - 3.9 - 2.2 - 6.8 + 3.6 +13.7 + 8.1 + 9.4 october + 3.7 + 7.3 + 9.7 + 5.1 +12.5 +17.8 + 8.0 + 7.5 november + 0.6 + 5.0 - 2.0 - 3.9 + 5.1 +15.0 + 2.9 + 1.9 december +13.8 +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 9.8 +13.7- + 8.2 + 9.7
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +11.5 +11.6 +13.0
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1966 - -january +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 6.7 + 9.5 + 6.9 +11.3 + 8.1 + 7.4 + 5.7 + 4.6 february + 4.0 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 5.7 + 1.4 -- march + 2.9 - 4.6 + 2.7 + 4.0 + 5.5 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 8.2 april
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +13.2 +10.9 +11.9 +11.7 +15.5
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +15.3 +11.3 +12.7 may + 0.3 + 0.1 +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 2.1 - 4.8 + 4.9 +12.7 - 4.9 - 7.2 june 2/ + 0.2 - 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 4.4 +11.8 + 6.3 + 7.2 august - -20.2 -15.8 -14.8 -16.9 - 3.4 +10.7 -- - 0.9 september2/ + 6.6 - 0.3 - 0.2 - 3.0 -- + 3.0 + 6.4 + 7.3 october 2/ -10.0 - 7.1 - 1.1 - 2.1 - 3.4 - 2.3 - 6.3 - 8.1 november 2 /p - 2.2 + 5.4 - 7.7 - 8.3 - 5.4 + 0.8 - 2.8 - 4.6 1/ includes all deposits subject to reserve requirements .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . movements in this aggregate correspond closely with movements in total member bank credit .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 2/ changes in reserves , total deposits , and time deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . changes in reserves have been adjusted for increases in reserve requirements in july and september .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . laoie b - i major sources and uses of reserves retrospective and prospective ( dollar amounts in millions , based on weekly averages of daily figures )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . factors affecting supply of reserves change = bank use of reserves period federal reserve gold currency technical in required excessperiod gold excess credit ( excl .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . tk outside factors total reserves reserves stock reserves float )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1/ banks net 2/ reserves 3/ actual fear : year - to - date : ( 12/30/64 - 12/8/65 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +4,129 -1,579 -2,017
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -190 +344 +451 -107 ( 12/29/65 - 12/7/66 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +2,843 -628 -1,791 -299
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -259 weekly : 9 + 509 + 1 - 677 +141
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 99 16 p + 5 + 1 - 87
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - 2 -173 +171
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 775 - 27 - 17 -439
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 20 +271 projected 4/ 21 - 420 --
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +485 15 - 230 -- +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 95 - 40 -175 -175 -- for retrospective details , see table b-4 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . for factors included , see table b-3 . for required reserves by type of deposits , see table b-2 . see reserve side for explanation of projections .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p - preilminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . table b-2 changes in required reserve components retrospective and prospective seasonal and nonseasonal changes ( dollar amounts in millions , based on weekly averages of daily figures ) total supporting supporting private deposits u.
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . other thanperiod required demand total seasonal changes seasonal han demand
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total seasonal changes reserves deposits
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . _ demand time demand time actual year : 1964 ( 1/1/64 - 12/30/64 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 13 +753 -222 - 12
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +476 1965 ( 12/30/64 - 12/29/65 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +1,188 - 89
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +115 - 4 +499 +667 year - to - date :
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( 12/30/64 - 12/8/65 ) +444 -249
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +347 +652(12/29/65 - 12/7/66 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +751 -444 + 5 + 51
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +1,139 1/ weekly : projected 21 +485 +
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 85 +400 +310 - 15 +115 - 1028
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - 10 +240 -250 -175 + 5 - 80
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 15 + 10 + 518 -245
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -145 -100 -115 + 15 - 5 + 525
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +100 -245 -230
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 10 - 30 + 5 1/ reflects reserve requirement changes in p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . july and september .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . table b-3 technical factors affecting reserves retrospective and prospective changes ( dollar amounts in millions , based on weekly averages of daily figures ) technical foreign other priod facts treasury deposits nonmember d fcto operations and gold deposits and loans f. r.
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . accounts actual ( sign indicates effect on reserves ) year : 1964 ( 1/1/64 - 12/30/64 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - 37 +196 1965 ( 12/30/64 - 12/29/65 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +294 -171 + 77 +598 year - to - date : ( 12/30/64 - 12/8/65 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -1,024 + 71
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( 12/29/65 - 12/7/66 ) -299
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +531 -699 - 36 - 95 weekly :
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 9 +141 + 78 +120
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - 7 - 50 projected 28
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -370 -500 +130 --
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . -- 18 + 50 -- + 50 - table b-4 source of federal reserve credit retrospective changes ( dollar amounts in millions of dollars , based on weekly averages of daily figures ) total federal u. s.
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government securities federal period reserve credit total repurchase agency bankers ' member banks ( excl .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . float ) holdings bills iother areements securities acceptances borrowings year : , 964 ( 1/1/64 - 12/30/64 ) 1965 ( 12/30/64 - 12/29/65 ) year - to - date : ( 12/30/64 - 12/8/65 )
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . ( 12/29/65 - 12/7/66 ) weekly : 1966 - -sept . 7
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +3,281 +3,916 +4,078 +2,931 + 380 + 506 + 273 + 225 + 455 + 550
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +3,425 +2,242 + 380 + 496 + 194 + 243 + 323 + 212 + 141
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . + 41 + 10 - 10-i + 79
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +338 +115 + 9 + 9 + 77 + 77 + 42 + 58 +139
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +100 + 76 + 52 + 65
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . +197 1 i .1 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - - chart reference table c-1
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . total , nonborrowed and required reserves seasonally adjusted ( dollar amounts in millions , based on monthly averages of daily figures ) 1964
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . --january 1965 - -january 1966
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . --january june 1/ july
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1/ august 1/ september 1/ october 1/ november
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p 1/ p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1/ reserves have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . table c-2 deposits supported by required reserves at all member banks seasonally adjusted ( dollar amounts in billions , based on monthly averages of daily figures ) total member private u.s .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . monthly bank deposits e demand demand ( credit ) /
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . deposits deposits 2/ deposits i/ includes all deposits subject to reserve requirements--.e . , the total of time , private demand , and u.s .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government demand deposits .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . movements in this aggregate correspond closely with movements in total member bank credit .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 2/ private demand deposits include demand deposits of individuals , partner- ships and corporations and net interbank balances .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 3/ deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . c-2a deposits supported by required reserves at all member banks seasonally adjusted ( dollar amounts in millions , based on weekly averages of daily figures ) total member time private u.
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . week ending : bank deposits deposits demand demand ( credit ) / deposits 2/ deposits 1966 - -july 6 sept .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 7 p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1/ includes all deposits subject to reserve requirements -- i.e . , the total of time , private demand , and u.s .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . government demand deposits .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . move- ments in this aggregate correspond closely with movements in total member bank credit .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . / private demand deposits include demand deposits on individuals , partner- ships and corporations and net interbank balances .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . table c-3 money supply and time deposits at all commercial banks seasonally adjusted ( dollar amounts in billions , based on monthly averages of daily figures ) private monthly money supply currency / demand time deposits s1 deposits 2/ adjusted 1964 - -october 1965
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . --january 1966 - -january june 3/ july 3/ august 3/ september3/ october 3/ november 7/p
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 1/ includes currency outside the treasury , the federal reserve , and the vaults of all commercial banks .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 2/ includes ( 1 ) demand deposits at all commercial banks , other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the u.s . government , less cash items in process of collection and federal reserve float ; and ( 2 ) foreign demand balances at federal reserve banks .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 3/ deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . table c-3a money supply
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . a. time deposits at all commercial fanks seasonally adjusted ( dollar amounts in billions , based on monthly averages of daily figures ) private time deposits week ending money supply currency 1/ demand adjusted i deposits 2/ adjusted 1966 - -july 6 sept .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 7 1/ includes currency outside the treasury , the federal reserve , and the vaults of all commercial banks .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . 2/ includes ( 1 ) demand deposits at all commercial banks , other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the u.s . government , less cash items in process of collection and federal reserve float ; and ( 2 ) foreign demand balances of federal reserve banks .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . - deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective june 9 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . p - preliminary .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . december 13 , 1966 .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . confidential ( fr ) to : federal open market committee subject : supplement to from : the staff blue book .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . since the current issue of the blue book , " money market and reserve relationships " was prepared on friday afternoon , aggressive professional and investor buying interest in the government securities market has carried both bond and bill
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . yields appreciably lower .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . as a result , the first paragraph of the blue book text , which is given as a reference for purposes of interpreting the staff 's suggested alternative a of the current directive , is out of date .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . to be fully current , the second sentence of that paragraph should describe the 3-month bill rate as moving down into a 5.00 - 5.15 per cent range rather than a 5.10- 5.20 per cent range ; and the 6-month bill should be described as being in a 5.10 - 5.20 per cent range rather than around 5.25 per cent .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . such bill rates , being thus at least temporarily lower relative to other money market rates , probably also serve to raise slightly the rate of bank credit expansion that can be expected to ensue from a maintenance of " current money market conditions " ; but their influence is not believed to be strong enough to produce a december bank credit expansion much above the range already specified in the blue book .
a PAR since the last meeting of the committee on november 22 , there has been a modest easing of day - to - day money market conditions and a more marked decline in longer - term bill rates . committee members may wish to have these market changes in mind in making any references to the blue book in this morning 's discussion .



