a PAR 10 in this situation , the committee may wish to consider three alternative policy courses for the interval until its next meeting on july 21 , at which time " even keel " considerations are likely to become a factor constraining operations .
a PAR 10 first , it may wish to continue the current directive for another interval , emphasizing the objective of moderating financial market pressures , with secondary attention to the monetary aggregates .
a PAR 10 second , it may wish to reestablish as its primary objective the achievement of moderate growth in the monetary aggregates , along the lines visualized at the may 5 and earlier meetings , with a proviso addressed to countering any excessive pressures that may develop .
a PAR 10 or the committee , in recognition of the somewhat weaker economic news and the prospect that economic recovery over the next year may be more sluggish than was antici- pated earlier , may wish to move policy toward the achievement of a moderately faster rate of growth in money and bank credit than has prevailed in the year to date , with a proviso similar to that of the preceding alternative .
a PAR 10 specificationsfor these three alternatives are discussed below .
a PAR 18 for the money supply to grow at the targeted 4 per cent annual rate in the third quarter , money market conditions would have to be somewhat firmer than those currently prevailing as described in paragraph ( 12   above .
a PAR 18 these firmer conditions might include a federal funds rate generally in a 7 - 3/4 - -8 - 1/4 per cent range , net borrowed reserves averaging around $ 900 million , and member bank borrowings averaging around $ 1 billion .
a PAR 18 in these circumstances , the 3-month treasury bill rate could also be expected to range somewhat higher than under alternative a , perhaps between 6.60 and 7.10 per cent .
a PAR 18 months septemb 
a SENT -- the table also shows the projected weekly path associated with alternative a . weekly path for monetary aggregates ( daily average levels , seasonally adjusted in billions of dollars ) adjusted credit proxy money supply tctal reserves l/ 2/ week ending alt .

b PAR 16 time deposits -- not shown in the table -- are projected to grow at about a 9 - 1/2 per cent rate on average over the third quarter .
b PAR 16 with investment yields on treasury bills and other short - term market instruments continuing at levels that make large negotiable cd 's non- competitive , no net growth in these instruments is projected , although it is expected that enough new cd 's can be issued outside new york city to offset continuing run - offs at the major banks .
b PAR 16 growth in consumer- type time and savings deposits is likely to slow appreciably in july , during the mid - year reinvestment period .
b PAR 16 thereafter , growth of such accounts should pick up appreciably as in other recent quarters , returning total time deposit expansion to about a 10 - 1/2 per cent annual rate in september .
b PAR 16 the pattern of growth in the credit proxy is strongly influenced by the projected path of time deposit expansion and assumes a steady growth in nondeposit sources of funds at $ 100 million a week . if commercial paper issuers should move back into banks in volume , growth in the proxy , of course , could be larger , with bank financing presumably coming from non - deposit sources ( or perhaps from increased borrowing at the discount window ) .


