a PAR 3 the following table shows recent developments in the money supply and the adjusted credit proxy .
a PAR 3 recent paths of key monetary aggregates ( seasonally adjusted , billions of dollars ) money supply adjusted credit proxy indicated at .
a PAR 3 last meeting- month week ending november 11 december 2 actual results indicated at .
a PAR 3 last meetin - 7 annual rates of change third quarter ( sept . over june ) october over sept .
a PAR 3 november over % annual rates of change actual results
a PAR 3 1/ alternative a path of previous blue book , levels and rates of growth for the money supply have been converted to a revised basis .
a PAR 3 2/ 5.2 per cent annual rate for third quarter average over second quarter average .
a PAR 11 in the case of alternative a , the federal funds range is wide enough to allow for some tightening from recent levels .
a PAR 11 this may be required to limit money growth in the first quarter to 5 per cent should the greenbook projection of a 10 - 1/2 per cent annual rate of growth in nominal gnp in the first quarter be realized .
a PAR 11 since the last meeting of the committee , the demand for money has proven to be somewhat stronger , at given federal funds rates , than the staff antici- pated .
a PAR 11 this greater demand may have been temporary , however , resulting from a sudden surge in financial market transactions , as noted earlier .
a PAR 11 because of uncertainties as to the source of recent money demand and as to transactions needs associated with such a large bulge in prospective gnp growth , a fairly wide federal funds rate range is also shown for alternatives b and
a PAR 11 c. if demand for money at given federal funds rates continues to be greater than anticipated -- as a result of financial transactions or the need to finance a temporary large post - strike bulge in gnp -- the committee may be faced with the possibility of either per- mitting the federal funds rate to rise above the ranges shown in paragraph ( 10 ) for any particular alternative chosen , or permitting , at least temporarily , a higher money growth rate than contemplated .
a PAR 15 this alternative is proposed for possible use if the committee decides upon a 5 per cent target growth rate for the money supply in the first quarter : to implement this policy , the committee seeks to promote [ del : some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead with allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike .
a PAR 15 ] system open market opera- tions until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market con- ditions consistent with those objectives .
a PAR 15 deletion of the phrase " some easing of conditions in credit markets " is proposed in light of the analysis in paragraphs ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) above suggesting that some rise in the federal funds rate might be required as the quarter progresses to keep the money supply growth rate from exceed- ing 5 per cent .
a PAR 15 while some rise in the federal funds rate would not necessarily be inconsistent with continued declines in long - term rates , particularly if over - all credit demands slacken , it is assumed that the committee would not want to indicate that it was seeking " to promote " some easing of credit market conditions under a policy course that contemplates the possibility of some firming of money market conditions .


c SENT -- under alternative c , declining market interest rates would very likely encourage some further shift away from euro - dollar borrow- ings absent additional board action .


