a PAR 15 under alternative a , with a funds rate around 4 - 1/4 per cent ,
a PAR 15 m1 is expected to continue growing relatively rapidly through the third quarter , although slowing somewhat on balance from the very rapid pace of recent months .
a PAR 15 the growth rate in m2 is expected to moderate further to a 9 per cent annual rate by the third quarter .
a PAR 15 on the other hand , following a sluggish performance in the spring , the adjusted credit proxy may grow more rapidly on balance in june and the third quarter as nondeposit sources of funds stop running off and as modest cd growth is resumed .
a PAR 15 for the second quarter , growth in the proxy may be at only a 4 - 1/2 per cent rate , followed by about an 8 per cent growth rate in the third quarter .
a PAR 16 between now and the next meeting of the committee , the 3-month bill rate under alternative a may be in a 3 - 3/4 - -4 - 1/4 per cent range .
a PAR 16 the rate could temporarily come under downward pressure over the very near - term in view of the relatively small market supply of short bills in a period when customer demands for bills may be sizable ,
a PAR 16 includ- ing demands from investors who chose to redeem the mid - may treasury maturities and from some foreign official accounts who do not place dollars in special treasury issues .
a PAR 16 however , in late may the treasury will be raising a substantial amount of new cash probably in the bill area , with the amount depending on how long foreign funds remain invested in special issues and on whether the treasury offers another euro - dollar certificate abroad .
a PAR 16 with the federal funds rate returning to around 4 - 1/4 per cent , bond market pressures are likely to moderate , assuming a reasonable resolution of current exchange market uncertainties .
a PAR 16 the current treasury refunding will be settled on may 17 ; dealer positions in the new issues are very light , as the treasury has undertaken sizable buying of when - issued securities .
a SENT -- growth in m2 may be affected somewhat sooner by the higher funds rate , and over time the growth rate may diminish by about a percentage point relative to alternative a . only a minor slow- ing in the credit proxy is projected , as cd growth may be sustained , if not enhanced , as tighter money market conditions lead to anticipatory
a PAR 22 alternative
a PAR 22 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions , subject to a proviso clause .
a PAR 22 " to implement this policy , [ del : while taking account of the treasury financing the terms of which are to be announced late in the month , ] system open market opera- tions until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to [ del : attaining temporarily some minor firming in ] maintaining prevailing money market conditions , while continuing to meet some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in long - term credit markets ; provided that somewhat firmer money market conditions shall be sought [ del : modified ] if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are [ del : deviating ] significantly exceeding [ del : from ] the growth paths expected [ del : desired ] , taking account of the current treasury financing and uncertainties in foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 22 if the committee adopts this alternative , it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative a in paragraph ( 14 ) as a description of " prevailing " conditions , and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec- tion with alternative a as the " expected " paths .
a PAR 22 use of the word " expected " rather than " desired " is suggested in connection with these growth paths since the rates shown for m1 are well above those the committee has previously indicated that it desired .
a PAR 22 also , a one - way proviso clause ( guarding against significant excesses but not shortfalls ) is suggested , on the assumption that the committee would not want market conditions to be eased on the coming period if the aggregates should fall short of the indicated paths .
a PAR 22 a directive with this general structure-- putting primary emphasis on money market conditions rather than the aggregates -- can , of course , be used in connection with specifications other than those shown for alternative a , with suitable language changes .

b PAR 18 the 3- onth bill rate would be likely to rise under alternative b , perhaps to around 4 - 1/2 per cent , or somewhat higher if expectations of an upward adjustment in the discount rate should develop .
b PAR 18 should expectations of a discount rate move become pervasive , it may also tend to keep bond yields under upward pressure .
b PAR 18 apart from the effects of such expectations , the recent run - up in bond yields has anticipated a good part of the firming in day - to - day money rates of the magnitude contemplated in this alternative .
b PAR 23 alternative
b PAR 23 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides ( a ) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates for the monetary and credit aggregates ( subject to the constraints that might be imposed by the treasury financing and foreign exchange market uncertainties ) , and ( b ) to adopt as targets the growth rates ( including an 8 - 1/2 per cent second - quarter rise in m1 ) discussed earlier in connection with alternative b . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead ,
b PAR 23 [ del : while ] taking account of the current treasury financing [ del : the terms of which are to be announced late in the month , ] and uncertainties in foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 23 system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to [ del : attaining temporarily some minor firming in ] maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with those objectives , while continuing to meet some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in long - term credit markets ; [ del : provided that money market conditions shall be modified if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from the growth paths desired]. " the phrase " to moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead " is suggested as a summary description of the objectives for the aggregates because the paths anticipated for both m1 and m2 involve some gradual slowing on average in coming months .

c PAR 9 although recent foreign exchange market developments heighten all the usual uncertainties in assessing the future , the relationships among money market conditions and monetary aggregates that have evolved since the last meeting of the committee strongly suggest that the fomc 's desires expressed at the last committee meeting with respect to aggregates for the second quarter will not be achieved under prevailing money market conditions .
c PAR 9 given such money market conditions , the table on the next page compares the committee 's desires for the aggregates with current expectations .
c PAR 9 ( the paths shown as " desired " take the june levels for the aggregates indicated in the previous blue book under alternative c as targets .
c PAR 9 the annual rates of change for april and the second quarter differ in many cases from those shown in the previous blue book because the march levels for the aggregates have been revised since the last committee meeting .
c PAR 9 for example the march level of m1 was revised up by $ 400 million to $ 219.4 billion .
c PAR 9 thus the level of $ 222.4 billion for m 1 in june represented a 6 per cent annual rate of growth over the second quarter at the time of the last committee meeting , but it now represents a 5 - 1/2 per cent rate of growth . )
c PAR 19 a wide and high range of 6 to 8 per cent for the funds rate is presented , partly to allow for the sharp increase in interest rates that might be required to dampen money demand over a short period of time .
c PAR 19 for instance in may and june , growth in m1 would have to be reduced to a 2 - 1/2 per cent annual rate under this alternative .
c PAR 19 the higher interest rates likely to be associated with this m1 behavior would have a considerable dampening effect on growth in time deposits other than large cd 's , and growth in m2 would be further constrained , with about a 7 - 1/2 per cent rate expected for the second quarter .
c PAR 19 growth in the credit proxy would likely be quite small .
c PAR 19 even though banks are assumed to bid more aggressively for large cd 's and perhaps non - deposit funds as growth in demand deposits and consumer - type time deposits diminish , bank credit would be expected to rise by only a 2 - 1/2 per cent annual rate over the second quarter under this alternative .


