a PAR 13 growth in time and savings deposits other than large cd 's is expected to slow in late november and december from the recent rapid pace .
a PAR 13 on balance , under alternative a / b , we would anticipate a growth rate in consumer - type time deposits of around 11 per cent in the fourth quarter , but slowing to about 7 per cent in the first quarter as consumer spending continues to rise .
a PAR 13 such a development would lead to growth rates for m2 of 5 - 1/2 and 6 - 1/2 per cent in the fourth and first quarters , respectively .
a PAR 13 growth rates would be somewhat more rapid under alterna-
a PAR 13 tive c as lower market interest rates enhanced the relative attractiveness of bank deposits .
a PAR 17 alternative
a PAR 17 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to place more emphasis on money market conditions than on the aggregates and wishes to call for maintenance of the conditions " that have evolved since the discount rate reduction " , subject to a proviso clause .
a PAR 17 " to implement this policy , [ del : the committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over te months ahead . ]
a PAR 17 system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to [ del : achieving bank reserve and ] maintaining the money market conditions [ del : consistent with that objective , taking account of the forthcoming treasury financings . ]
a PAR 17 that have evolved since the discount rate reduction ; provided that somewhat easier conditions shall be sought if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are falling significantly below the growth paths expected .
a PAR 17 if the committee adopts this alternative , it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative a in paragraph ( 9 ) as a description of the conditions to be maintained , and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alternative a as the " expected " paths .
a PAR 17 the proviso clause has been formulated in one - way terms , guarding against significant shortfalls but not excesses , on the assumption that the committee would not want money market conditions to be tightened in the coming period if the aggregates should appear to be expanding on paths above those projected , which involve no growth over the fourth quarter for m1 and relatively low growth rates for m2 and the bank credit proxy .
a SENT -- as in alternative a , the committee may wish to indicate a greater willingness to countenance overshoots in the aggregates than shortfalls .

b SENT -- the language for alternative b , " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead .
b SENT -- this language differs from that of alternative b in indicating that the committee seeks " to promote substantial growth " rather than " to achieve moderate growth " in the aggregates over the months ahead .

c PAR 8 two alternative sets of specifications for committee consideration are summarized in the text table below .
c PAR 8 the two sets of specifications correspond to three directive alternatives , with the first set associated with both directive a and b and the second set with directive c. as noted in the final section of this blue book , the choice between directives a and b depends on the degree of emphasis the committee wishes to place on monetary aggregates as compared with money market conditions .
c PAR 8 alternative
c PAR 8 a / b alternative c federal funds rate 4 - 1/2 - -4 - 7/8 3 - 7/8 - -4 - 1/2 member bank borrowings 150 - 300 50 - 150 growth in m ( saar ) december 1 - 1/2 3 4th q. 1971 0 1/2 
c PAR 9 money market conditions consistent with alternative
c PAR 9 a / b might encompass a federal funds rate in a 4 - 1/2 - -4 - 7/8 per cent range ; member bank borrowings in a $ 150-$300 million range ; and , taking account of recent wide swings in excess reserves , a net reserve position for member banks in a plus $ 250 million to minus $ 150 million area .
c PAR 9 these conditions are somewhat easier than prevailed at the time of the last committee meeting , and reflect a response over the past few weeks to the weakness of the monetary aggregates and , in recent days , to the reduction in the discount rate .
c PAR 14 although the outstanding amount of large cd 's and non- deposit sources has shown little net change in recent weeks , these sources of funds , particularly large cd 's , are expected to resume expansion in the period ahead .
c PAR 14 the expansion is likely to be moderate , however , under either alternative .
c PAR 14 over the balance of this year , business loan demands are expected to be modest in view of the continued comparatively large volume of capital market financing and the relatively small rate of business inventory accumulation anticipated .
c PAR 14 under alternative c there could be a pick - up in business borrowing from banks as lending terms ease further , but the increased inflow of demand and consumer - type deposits associated with that alternative would probably generate enough resources so that banks would not need to be more aggressive in that cd market .
c SENT -- it is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to pursue the more aggressive course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for alternative c . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to promote sub- stantial [ del : achieve moderate ] growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead .

