a PAR 11 under all of the alternatives growth in money supply -- whether m1 or m2 - -would be expected to slow over coming months from the unusually rapid february rates of increase .
a PAR 11 however , as indicated in the preceding paragraph , under alternative a , m1 would be expected to grow more rapidly in the second quarter than in the first .
a PAR 11 with short - term interest rates persisting around current levels , the willingness of the public to hold cash seems likely to alternative monthly and quarterly paths of key monetary aggregates ( seasonally adjusted , billions of dollars ) m1 m2 alt .
a PAR 11 c per cent annual rates of growth
a PAR 11 q. 1971 adjusted credit proxy alt .
a PAR 11 c total reserves alt .
a PAR 11 c per cent annual rates of growth
a PAR 11 q. 1971 increase , given transactions needs associated with staff gnp projections , an opportunity cost of holding money lower on average in the second quarter than in the first , and the probablity that expectations of rising interest rates ( and falling capital values ) would become more pervasive in an expanding economic situation .
a PAR 11 growth in m2 would be expected to moderate from the first quarter pace , even under alternative a , however , as the initial asset ad- justment by the public to the sharp drop of late 1970 and early 1971 in market rates relative to time deposit offering rates runs it course .
a PAR 13 an effort to move onto growth paths for aggregates in the second quarter slower than shown for alternative a -- given staff assumptions as to the strength of economic recovery and attendent credit demands -- seems likely to require a rise in the federal funds rate from current levels during the next four weeks .
a PAR 13 the money market conditions now estimated to be con- sistent with alternative a through c are shown in the table below , using the second quarter annual rate of growth in m1 as a convenient index of the col- lection of monetary aggregates .
a PAR 13 difference in money market conditions of these dimensions would be expected to have only relatively minor effects on growth rates for the aggregates in march .
a PAR 13 federal funds member bank net m1 rate borrowings reserves 
a PAR 21 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to retain the structure of the present directive -- involving a primary instruction concerned with money market conditions and long - term rates , and a proviso clause relating to the aggregates .
a PAR 21 to implement this policy , system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining prevailing money market conditions while accommodating any [ del : additional ] downward movements in long- term rates ; provided that money market conditions shall [ del : promptly ] be modified [ del : eased somewhat further ] if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from [ del : falling short of ] the growth paths [ del : desired ] expected .
a PAR 21 " as will be noted , the primary instruction in alternative a is identical to that of the present directive , except that it is proposed -- in view of the recent increases in long - term rates -- to call for accommodating " any " rather than " additional " downward movements in such rates .
a PAR 21 certain changes are proposed in the proviso clause .
a PAR 21 these include : ( a ) making it a two - way clause , on the assumption that , in light of the recent stronger performance of the aggregates , the committee would wish the desk to react to sizable deviations in either direction ; and ( b ) referring to " credit " as well as " monetary " aggregates , in order to explicitly include the bank credit proxy among the aggregates to be considered by the manager .
a PAR 21 if the committee adopts this alternative , it may wish to consider the money market conditions set forth in the first line of the table in paragraph ( 13 ) above as a description of " prevailing " conditions , and for purposes of the proviso clause , to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alternative a as the " expected " paths .

b PAR 17 if short - term rates do not rise over the next few weeks , the staff would expect long - term market yields to work down , given the present wide spread of long over short rates , once headway is made in absorbing the exceptionally large volume of corporate bonds in the immediate offing .
b PAR 17 in the corporate and municipal bond market the recent rise in yields has probably reflected some discounting of potential future rate increases .
b PAR 17 thus , a rise in short - rates of about the magnitude indicated for alternative b might not be accompanied by any appreciable rise in long rates over the second quarter as a whole , although an initial market reaction would be likely ; money market tightening of the degree contemplated under alternative
b PAR 17 c might well bring a more lasting long - term rate advance .
b PAR 22 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides ( a ) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates for the aggregates , and ( b ) to adopt as targets the growth rates ( including a 7 per cent second - quarter rise in m1 ) dis- cussed earlier in connection with alternative b . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to promote sustained growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead .
b PAR 22 system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining [ del : prevailing ] bank reserves and money market condi- tions consistent with that objective [ del : while accommodating additional downward movements in long - term rates , provided that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling short of the growth path desired]. " the phrase " sustained growth " is suggested as a description of the committee 's objective for the aggregates because the second - quarter growth rate for m1 shown for this alternative is the same as the rate now expected for the first quarter .


d PAR 18 it is recognized that the committee could regard the second quarter projections of the aggregatesasproblematical at this juncture and could be more concerned over the policy implications of the recent firming that has taken place in bond markets .
d PAR 18 if in these circumstances the committee would wish to promote somewhat easier over - all credit conditions , including near- term declines in long - term rates , it could consider a policy alternative-- such as alternative d -- that would call for some further easing of money market conditions .
d PAR 18 a federal funds rate consistently around 3 - -3 - 1/4 per cent would encourage lower dealer loan rates and would lead to a further drop in short - term market rates and perhaps the prime rate .
d PAR 18 the 3-month bill rate might fluctuate around 3 per cent .
d PAR 18 such developments would tend in time to bring long - term rates down , as a widened spread of long- over short - term rates provided greater encouragement to private borrowers to take advantage of the lower short - term financing rates .
d PAR 18 indications of a continuing easing trend in monetary policy would also make dealers more willing holders of , and under- writers more aggressive bidders for , long - term debt .
d PAR 19 as nearly as can be judged , the expected effect on monetary aggregates of a policy consistent with the money market specif- ications of alternative d would be as shown in the table below .
d PAR 19 paths of key monetary aggregates-- monthly and quarterly ( alternative d ) ( seasonally adjusted , billions of dollars ) concepts of money
d PAR 19 m1 m 2 adj .
d PAR 19 credit proxy per cent annual rates of growth
d PAR 19 q. 1971 paths of key monetary aggregates-- weekly ( alternative d ) february 2 4 p p -- preliminary .
d PAR 19 e -- estimated from partial data .
d PAR 19 total reserves possible directive language 

