a PAR 6 the money market conditions shown for the three paths vary from a range around those recently prevailing ( alt .
a PAR 6 a ) to considerably easier specifications .
a PAR 6 overall credit conditions -- as typified by behavior of short- and long - term interest rates -- might well ease somewhat between now and the next committee meeting even under alternative a . credit demands from businesses and state and local governments in long - term markets appear to be tapering off , and investors have shown a greater willingness to purchase longer - term securities .
a PAR 6 investors ' demands will be influenced , however , by their evaluation , as the details of phase ii become known , of the extent to which it seems to promise significant restraint on wage and price pressures .
a PAR 6 alternative monthly and quarterly paths of key monetary aggregates alt .
a PAR 6 b march 231.4 alt .
a PAR 6 c per cent annual rates of growth
a PAR 6 4th q. 1971
a PAR 6 q. 1972 adjusted credit proxy alt .
a PAR 6 c total reserve alt .
a PAR 6 c per cent annual rates of growth
a PAR 6 4th q. 1971
a SENT -- ( 10 ) our best present estimate is that under the money market conditions of alternative a , m1 will grow in the first quarter of next year at a 4 - 1/2 per cent annual rate following the 2 - 1/2 per cent rate indicated for the fourth quarter .
a PAR 11 the bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected to grow less rapidly than in the third quarter under any of the alternatives ; under alternative a , the growth rate is projected to drop below 5 per cent .
a PAR 11 the slowing in growth reflects mainly a turn - around in the availability of u.s .
a PAR 11 government deposits to finance credit expansion ; these deposits are expected to decline irregularly in the fourth quarter following a sub- stantial rise in the third .
a PAR 11 growth in time deposits other than large cd 's is expected to remain moderate in the fourth quarter , with growth rates somewhat larger under alternativesb and c as a result of the lower market interest rates likely to develop .
a PAR 14 alternative
a PAR 14 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions , subject to a proviso clause .
a PAR 14 " to implement this policy , [ del : the committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates , taking account of developments in capital markets .
a PAR 14 ] system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to [ del : achieving bank reserves and ] maintaining about the prevailing money market conditions ; [ del : consistent with that objective ] provided that somewhat easier conditions shall be sought , taking acount of the forthcoming treasury financing , if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are falling significantly below the growth paths expected .
a PAR 14 if the committee adopts this alternative , it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative a in paragraph ( 5 ) as a description of " prevailing conditions " , and for purposes of the pro- viso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alternative a as the " expected " paths .
a PAR 14 the proviso clause has been formulated in one - way terms , guarding against signif- icant shortfalls but not excesses , on the assumption that the committee would not want money market conditions to be tightened in the coming period if m1 and m2 should appear to be expanding on paths above those projected , which represent comparatively low growth rates for the fourth quarter .

b PAR 15 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to seek the growth rates for the aggregates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative b , including a fourth - quarter rate for m1 of 3 per cent and moving up to a 6 per cent path in the first quarter .
b PAR 15 to implement this policy , the committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates [ del : , taking account of developments in capital markets ] over the months ahead .
b PAR 15 system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective , taking account of the forthcoming treasury financing .
b SENT -- this language differs from that of alternative b in indicating that the committee seeks " actively to promote " rather than " to achieve " moderate growth in the aggregates over the months ahead .

c PAR 8 an easing of money market conditions that entailed a federal funds rate dropping appreciably below the 5 per cent discount rate for a sustained period could well lead to significant declines in other market rates , particularly if expectations of an accompanying discount rate cut should become pervasive .
c PAR 8 the lower the federal funds rate were to drop-- and particularly if it moved into the range of alternative c -- the greater would be the possibility of a large speculative build - up in bond positions , especially during this forthcoming treasury financing period .
c PAR 8 such a build - up would carry with it the potential for a sharp subsequent market reversal or for the need to expand money and credit rapidly to forestall such a reversal .
c SENT -- it is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to pursue the more aggressive course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for alternative c . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks actively to promote [ del : achieve ] moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates [ del : , taking account of developments in capital markets ] over the months ahead .


