a SENT -- under alternative a -- which contemplates a federal funds rate in a 5 - -5 - 5/8 per cent range -- the annual rate of growth in m1 is likely to be only about one or two per cent in september and around 3 - 1/2 per cent for the fourth quarter .
a SENT -- ( 12 ) growth in time and savings deposits other than large cd 's is expected to accelerate from recent low rates to about a 9 - 1/2 per cent annual rate in september , given experience in the first two weeks of the month , but , under alternative a , to drop back to a 7 - 1/2 per cent rate in the fourth quarter .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the adjusted bank credit proxy is expected to grow at an 8 per cent annual rate in september and 4 - 1/2 per cent in the fourth quarter .
a PAR 14 alternative
a PAR 14 this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to seek , or permit , the growth rates for the aggregates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative a , including rates for m 1 of 1 - 1/2 and 3 - 1/2 per cent in september and the fourth quarter , respectively .
a PAR 14 the money market and reserve conditions believed likely to be consistent with such growth rates are noted in paragraph ( 8) . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to achieve [ del : more ] moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead .
a PAR 14 system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective .
a PAR 14 this language differs from that of the directive adopted at the august 24 meeting only in the deletion of the word " more " from the phrase " to achieve more moderate growth . . .
a PAR 14 it is assumed that the committee would not want to continue to call for ' more moderate growth " in light of the august experience , when m 1 and m 2 grew at rates of about 3 and 5 per cent , respectively .
a SENT -- this modification is proposed for consideration if the committee does not wish to accept as aggregate targets the comparatively low growth rates of alternative a for a period longer than the weeks immediately ahead .
a SENT -- this language is proposed for possible use if the committee decides to seek somewhat more rapid growth rates in the aggregates than called for under alternative a . the money market and reserve conditions believed likely to prove consistent with those growth rates are noted in paragraph ( 8) . " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to promote [ del : achieve more ] moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead .


c SENT -- a somewhat more rapid growth in such deposits would be anticipated under alternative c , given the marked decline in market interest rates that would be expected .

