a SENT -- 8) of the three alternatives presented , alternative a involves money market conditions closest to those most recently prevailing .
a SENT -- under alternative a , we would expect the rate of growth in such deposits in the third quarter to drop to around 9 per cent , somewhat below the expected second quarter pace , and about half the first quarter rate .
a PAR 15 longer - term interest rates are not likely to be subject to upward interest rate pressures from the demand side over the next few months .
a PAR 15 the volume of corporate bonds coming to market appears to be abating somewhat further , and mortgage credit demands seem to be topping out .
a PAR 15 market expectations appear to have shifted to an assumption of relative rate stability over the next few months , but expectations could change abruptly if money market conditions firm .
a PAR 15 expectations might not change to any significant degree under alternative a but would shift more markedly if short - term market conditions move into the ranges associated with b and c. proposed directive 

b SENT -- ( 11 ) for alternative b , the mid - point of the federal funds rate range is just under 5 per cent .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the bill rate could move higher more quickly .
c SENT -- this would be particularly so under the money market conditions expected to be consistent with alternative c aggregates .
c PAR 14 banks are expected to be relatively aggressive in offer-
c PAR 14 ing large negotiable cd 's , strong loan expansion -- with business loans expected to continue rising at around the rate of the past few months-- in conjunction with diminishing net inflow of funds from consumer - type time deposits are likely to encourage bank demand for cd funds .
c PAR 14 if short - term rates rise into the alternative c range , we would expect that banks would have to rely particularly heavily on large cd 's as interest rate ceilings constrain consumer - type time deposit inflows .
c PAR 16 possible language for the operational paragraph of the directive is given below .
c PAR 16 the three alternative adjectives qualifying " growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead " might be taken to correspond with the similarly lettered patterns of aggregate growth rates described in the preceding section .
c PAR 16 to implement this policy , [ del : while taking account of capital market developments and the forthcoming treasury financing , ] the committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and ( a - moderate ) money market conditions that will support ( b - somewhat more moderate )
c PAR 16 ( c - more moderate ) growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead .
c PAR 16 " deletion of the reference to capital market developments is proposed in light of the recent and prospective moderation of credit demands in secur- ities markets .
c PAR 16 the committee may wish , however , to consider including the capital markets reference -- particularly under alternative c and possibly b -- in view of the possibility under these alternatives that strong upward rate pressures could develop in longer - term markets .
c PAR 16 appendix revised rpd data on may 18 , the rpd series was released to the public ; the series will now appear weekly in two board statistical releases and monthly in the bulletin .
c PAR 16 weekly and monthly data are available back through 1960 .
c PAR 16 the published seasonally adjusted series differs somewhat from the previously available internal figures as a result of technical adjustments undertaken in the course of a thorough methodological review .
c PAR 16 while , as before , seasonally adjusted rpd is based on seasonally adjusted deposit aggregates , two technical adjustments were made to the data .
c PAR 16 first , required reserve ratios were aggregated from micro data in order to adjust ratios for the distribution of deposits below and above $ 5 million at each bank , reflecting differences in reserve requirements .
c PAR 16 this changed the level of the rpd series by about $ 30 million on average .
c PAR 16 second , required reserves for private demand and total time and savings deposits were calculated directly .
c PAR 16 1/ in the old series , required reserves for net interbank and treasury deposits had been subtracted from total reserves to calculate rpd .
c PAR 16 this different method of calculation reduced the level of rpd by about $ 350 million on average .
c PAR 16 as indicated in the first three columns of the table on the next page , the level of the new series is lower than for the old series .
c PAR 16 1/ to this total are added required reserves for nondeposit funds and excess reserves to obtain rpd .
c PAR 16 2/ in the old series , average demand deposit reserve ratios were used , however , because of the distribution of interbank deposits by class of bank , the required reserve ratio applicable to interbank deposits is considerably different from the average reserve ratio .
c PAR 16 appendix reserves available to support private nonbank deposits ( seasonally adjusted ) old new old series series difference series se :
c PAR 16 d ( millions of dollars )
c PAR 16 ( percentage annu ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) 30,001 29,625 376 15.8 1 : ( 30,388 )
c PAR 16 ( 30,006 ) ( 382 )
c PAR 16 ( -march pril ay / -- : ojected .
c PAR 16 ( 7.5 ) new ries target al rate of change

