a SENT -- as noted below , the language of alternative a is quite similar to that adopted by the committee on december 14 .
a PAR 7 the language proposed for alternative a is as follows : " to implement this policy , the committee seeks to promote the degree of ease in bank reserve and money market conditions essential to greater growth in monetary aggregates [ del : over the months ahead , while taking account of international develop- ments]. " possible targets for monetary aggregates per cent annual rates of growth 1971 december 1972 january credit proxy total reserves 1971 december 1972 january per cent annual rates of growth 1971 december 1972 january this language differs from that adopted at the last meeting ( as amended on december 20 ) by omitting references to the " months ahead " and to international developments , and it would be associated with different money market specifications .
a PAR 7 omission of the reference to " months ahead " is suggested if the committee wishes to emphasize prompt attain- ment of a desired rate of growth for m1 the aggregate hitherto lagging .
a PAR 7 the reference to international developments is omitted because reflows of funds from abroad have not been showing signs of becoming a disturbing influence on monetary policy .
a PAR 7 to the extent that pressures from this source do in fact develop , it is thought that past committee discussion gives the manager sufficient flexibility to cope with them .
a PAR 8 if the committee were to adopt the language of alternative a , it may wish to consider instructing the manager to ease the federal funds rate from the prevailing 3 - 5/8 per cent to the neighborhood of 3 - 1/4 per cent in the first week following the meeting and to the neighborhood of 3 per cent in the second week , unless a sudden surge of m1 growth were to appear .
a PAR 8 the purpose of such an instruction would be to stimulate more growth in m1 than has been apparent in the data thus far available .
a PAR 8 if such an approach were successful in moving m1 onto the path specified by the committee as desired , the staff believes that the odds are that the funds rate would need to be raised in the ensuing weeks in order to keep growth in m1 around the target rate , particularly if a 6 per cent target path for m1 is adopted but also perhaps under an 8 per cent target .

b PAR 9 the proposed language for alternative b follows : " to implement this policy , [ del : the committee seeks to promote the degree of ease in bank reserve and money market conditions essential to ] system open market operations until the next meeting of the committee shall be conducted with a view to supplying the bank reserves needed to support greater growth in monetary aggregates ; [ del : over the months ahead , while taking account of international developments ] provided that money market conditions do not fluctuate over an unduly wide range .
b PAR 9 if the committee were to take this course in its operating instructions , the manager would be guided initially in his reserve supplying operations by a target path for reserves thought to be consistent with whatever aggre- gate targets the committee adopts .
b PAR 9 the estimates for total reserves , seasonally adjusted and rounded , consistent with the proposed targets i and ii are shown in the table ; and detailed weekly and monthly seasonally un- adjusted figures have been prepared for use if this alternative procedure is adopted .



