a SENT -- as shown in the chart on the following page , the 6 - 1/2 per cent growth rate of alternative a returns m1 by march of next year to a long - run 5 - 1/4 per cent growth path ( illustrated by the dashed line ) .

b PAR 12 although the interest rate declines anticipated under the easing alternatives might be fairly sharp
b PAR 12 , it is quite likely that rates will turn around , particularly under alternative b .
b PAR 12 this assumes that the economy expands as projected in the greenbook and therefore that the underlying transactions demand for money will be relatively well maintained and credit demands will be fairly strong .
b PAR 12 thus , under alternative b , bill rates might be back in the neighborhood of current levels , or perhaps above them , by around year - end .
b PAR 12 the degree of any reversal would be tempered , however , if it proves necessary to reduce the funds rate somewhat below the bottom of the alternative b range later this year in order to achieve the desired monetary growth path .

c SENT -- a sharper decline in the funds rate would be likely under a. under alternative c , money market conditions seem most likely to remain around those prevailing recently , given the more restrained growth in reserves and the aggregates posited .
c PAR 10 rpd growth for october - november of course becomes larger the easier are the policy alternatives .
c PAR 10 while the differences in rpd growth in the short - run are modest , the differences in growth of non- borrowed reserves are larger in order to compensate , under the easier alternatives , for the further drop in member bank borrowings that would be envisaged .
c PAR 10 the unchanged money market conditions of alternative c encompass a federal funds rate centered in a 9 - 1/2 - -10 - 1/2 per cent range and member bank borrowings that fluctuate around $ 1.5 billion .
c PAR 10 to attain the aggregates specified under b , the federal funds rate would be expected to decline toward the lower part of the 8 - 3/4 - -1-l/4 per cent range indicated , and average member bank borrowings may decline to around $ 1.3 billion .
c PAR 10 under a , the funds rate could drop considerably further to around 8 per cent and member bank borrowings to around $ 1 billion .
c PAR 10 however , it has become very difficult in recent weeks to anticipate shifts in member bank demands for borrowing as market conditions change , and these estimates of borrowing could even be a bit on the high side .
c PAR 10 ( 10 ) ( 11 ) notes !
c PAR 10 weekly ata for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averageq of daily data .
c PAR 10 columns 5 and 6 are one - day wednesday quotes .
c PAR 10 for columns 7 , 8 and 10 the weekly date is the mid - point of the calendar week over which data are averaged .
c PAR 10 column 9 is a one - day quote for thursday following the end of the statement week .
c PAR 10 column 11 gives finm suction data for the monday preceding the end of the statement week .
c PAR 10 the fnma auction yield is the average yield in the bi - weekly auction for short - term forward commitments for gcvernmet underwritten mortgages .
c PAR 10 appendix table reserves and monetary variables confidential ( fr ) october 12 , 1973
c PAR 10 m _ eny stock mensures bank credit measures
c PAR 10 other support pvt .
c PAR 10 n n credit loans and total other than institution nondepost gov't .
c PAR 10 total obfurrowed _ depnsits 1 2 3 proxy investments
c PAR 10 time cd 's i depoits ' c 's funds demand ( 1 ( ( 2 ) ( 3 ( 4 ) ( 5 ) -(6 ( ) t )
c SENT -- ( 11 ) under alternative c , unless the federal funds rate declines to the lower end of the indicated range , treasury bill rates are likely to move somewhat higher , as expectations of additional easing in monetary policy are disappointed .


