a SENT -- similarly , as a result of the recent overshoot , a committee decision to move onto a higher 6 - 1/2 per cent long - run target growth path ( alternative a ) or the money supply and longer run target paths ratio scale , billions of dollars 6%% growth alt .
a SENT -- " including current estimates for june , these are as follows : m1 , 5.5 per cent ; m2 , 7.5 per cent ; and the bank credit proxy , 13.5 per cent . alternative a to implement this policy ,

b PAR 11 in the weeks immediately ahead , a federal funds rate in the general neighborhood of the currently prevailing 8 - 1/2 per cent rate may be consistent with the specifications for the aggregates shown below for alternative b . under b , m1 in june - july is indicated to rise in a 6 - -8 per cent annual rate , range with growth at a 9 per cent rate in june , but slowing to about a 5 per cent rate in july .
b PAR 11 the slowing in july and the quite modest rate of growth indicated for the third quarter in part reflect the unwinding of the presumably temporary surge in privately held cash balances engendered by the heavy income tax refunds .
b PAR 11 more basically , the longer - run demand for m 1 is likely to be well below the second - quarter pace in lagged reaction to the sharp recent rise in short - term interest rates and in reflec- tion of the more moderate rate of growth in nominal gnp projected for the second half of 1973 .
b PAR 11 ( 11 ) monthly june 175 weekly june 6
b PAR 11 -1,107 - -- 1,955 848
b PAR 11 -140p - srpresents change in system 's portfolio from end - of - period to end - of - period ; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions .
b PAR 11 7/ represents change in daily average level from preceding period .
b PAR 11 / includes matched sale - purchase transactions as well as rp 's .
b PAR 11 4/ sum of changes in vault cash , currency in circulation , treasury operations , f.r .
b PAR 11 float , gold and foreign accounts , and other fr accounts .
b PAR 11 5/ reserves to support private nonbank deposits .
b PAR 11 target change for may and june reflects the target adopted at the may 15 , 1973 fom ( lmeting .
b PAR 11 target change for previous tnths reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month .
b PAR 11 strictly confidential ( fr ) june 15 , 1973 table 4 security dealer positions and bank positions millions of dollars
b PAR 11 security other security period dealer positions dealer positions meber ank reserves positions bills coupon issues corporate municipal excess borrowings at fib basic reserve jeficit bills ......
b PAR 11 bonds bonds reserves total seasonal 8 new york
b PAR 11 ( 11 ) ( 12 ) :
b PAR 11 : : : : : : : : : : : : : ..............
b PAR 11 : : : : : : : : : : : : . .
b PAR 11 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : ( 13 )
b PAR 12 the high degree of economic uncertainty now prevailing , including the administration 's recently announced price freeze , make pro- jections of money demand more than usually difficult .
b PAR 12 while prices will stablilize during the period of the freeze , the makeup of the phase iv program and its implications for longer - term price movements are total unknowns .
b PAR 12 the money supply paths presented in this blue book do not assume an appreciable longer - run reduction in demand for money as a result of the freeze and phase iv .
b PAR 12 nor have we made
b PAR 12 an explicit allowance in the short- run for any temporary downward shift in transactions demand for money , such as conceivably could result from a temporary stabilization of prices , or from shifts into market securities if expectations of declining interest rates become more prevalent .
b PAR 12 because of these various uncertainties , and their possible effects on the demand for money and hence on rpd , the federal funds rate ranges suggested are wider than in recent meetings ( for example , 7 - 1/2 - -9 - 1/2 per cent for alternative b ) .
b PAR 12 however , the committee may wish to allow for the possibility that the freeze itself may lead to a temporary lessening of money demand , by permitting growth rates below the ranges speci- fied or by lifting the lower end of the funds rate range .
b PAR 13 even with a continuation of current money market conditions , short- and long - term interest rates over the next few weeks may be under some further upward pressure .
b PAR 13 short rates do not appear to have adjusted fully to the higher day - to - day rates now prevailing , and the yield spread between short- and long - term markets is abnormally small and in some cases negative .
b PAR 13 interest rates would , of course , come under greater upward pressure if money market conditions should tighten , as they might under either alternative b or c. however , market expectations concerning the likely content and effectiveness of phase iv will be critical for interest rate behavior .
b SENT -- con- ditions consistent with moderate [ del : somewhat slower ] growth in monetary aggregates over the months immediately ahead [ del : than occurred on average in the past 6 months]. alternative b to implement this policy , while taking account of [ del : international and ] domestic financial market developments , the committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with somewhat slower growth in monetary aggregates over the months immediately ahead [ del : than occurred on average in the past 6 months ]

c SENT -- ( alternative c ) would imply growth from the indicated june level to december at rates somewhat slower than those path rates .
c SENT -- but cd growth will probably be slower than in the first few months of the year in reflection of the higher cost of cd 's . on balance , taking all deposit flows into account , growth in the bank credit proxy is expected to slow further in the second half of the year under all three alternatives , with the slowing greatest under alternative c . proposed directive ( 16 ) presented below

