a SENT -- consequently , in alternative a , a movement of the funds rate down through the range shown would be anticipated .

b PAR 12 growth in h1 in february - march is shown at a 7 - -9 per cent annual rate in alternative b and at close to those rates in the other alternatives .
b PAR 12 these growth rates are more rapid than the longer - run targets .
b PAR 12 given prevailing interest rates , money balances are expected to pick up temporarily in february and march partly because of larger than normal payments of tax refunds .
b PAR 12 with the bulge in ml growth in the period ahead , and taking account of the january weakness , expansion in the first quarter would be around 5 - -6 per cent .
b PAR 12 in the second quarter , as the refunds are phased out , continuation of an m1 growth rate in this range seems likely at around current money market conditions , given the restrictive effect on money demand still being exerted by relatively high interest rates , 

c SENT -- the range for alternative c is meant to indicate , however , that the staff would expect the funds rate to move up from prevailing levels to close to the top of the range shown between now and the next committee meeting , as reserve growth is constrained .
c PAR 15 a tightening of the money market , such as might accompany alternative c , would probably lead to substantial upward adjustments in both short- and long - term interest rates .
c PAR 15 under these circumstances the viability of the current discount rate and of cid efforts to defer increases in the prime loan rate would come more clearly into question .
c PAR 15 and there could be some acceleration of capital market borrowing , as corporations attempted to safeguard themselves against higher rates later or more stringent institutional borrowing conditions .
c PAR 15 mortgage market conditions would also tend to tighten as interest rates reached the zone where a significant diversion of savings flows from banks and other savings institutions became increasingly probable .

