a PAR 13 a somewhat more rapid longer - run rate of growth in m1 than adopted by the committee at its last meeting , such as envisioned under alternative a , appears necessary if money market conditions are not to tighten further .
a PAR 13 under alternative a , the staff would expect the federal funds rate to trade most frequently around 11 - 11¼ per cent .
a PAR 14 the funds rate has been subject to upward pressure , in part because of a shift of bank borrowing preferences from the window to the funds market .
a PAR 14 this pressure may moderate , however , if more normal borrowing preferences come to prevail .
a PAR 14 we have assumed that member banks will want to increase their borrowing ( apart from special borrowing ) to about $ 2 billion per week on average under alternative a , given the roughly 3 percentage point spread of the federal funds rate over the current 8 per cent discount rate .
a PAR 14 special borrowing by a problem bank may add another $ 1 billion or so to borrowing levels .
a PAR 17 growth in time and savings deposits at banks ( other than negotiable cd 's at the large weekly reporting banks   , and in deposits at thrift institutions has been sharply curtailed by the attraction of high market interest rates to savers .
a PAR 17 we would expect this tendency to continue even under alternative a , so that m2 growth over the second and third quarters would be expected to slow to around 6.5 per cent , and in m3 to about 5.0 per cent -- on the order of 4 percentage points below the average annual rate of expansion in the fourth and first quarters .
a PAR 20 under alternative a , banks are expected to continue borrowing fairly heavily through cd 's , and to obtain funds in the euro- dollar market .
a PAR 20 we have projected a slower growth in cd 's , though , in the expectation that tighter lending terms by banks will work to moderate loan growth .
a PAR 20 moreover , it appears that less - than - prime banks are be- ginning to encounter investor resistance to their cd 's .
a PAR 20 if , as seems quite possible , such resistance intensifies , cd growth could be substantially less than projected , bank credit expansion could be constrained , and strains in other financial markets ( including the euro - dollar market ) could be exacerbated .
a PAR 23 in the event that the committee wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions , the specifications of alternative a might be associated with language indicating that " . .
a PAR 23 committee seeks to maintain about the pre- vailing restrictive money market conditions , provided that the monetary aggregates appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance .
a PAR 23 " chart 1 strictly confidential ( fr )
a PAR 23 5/17/74 reserves available to support private nonbank deposits billions of dollars
a PAR 23 ii 11111111 11
a PAR 23 1974 sbreak in series actual level of rpd after changes in reserve requirements 11 % growth for apr chart 3 money market conditions and interest rates money market conditions per cent interest rates short - term percent -i 13 strictly confidential
a PAR 23 may 17 , 1974bank reserves ( actual and current projections ) ii aggregate reserves i required reserves reserves available for i------------ -------- ----------------- private nombank deposits ii
a PAR 23 seasonally adjusted ii---------------------------------------------------- ------- - ----
a PAR 23 -----------
a PAR 23 total nonborrowed i private other cd 's and gov't and perio
a PAR 23 adj i non seas
a PAR 23 adj ii reserves reserves i demand time dep
a PAR 23 non dep interbank


c SENT -- the 4¾ per cent annual rate of growth for m1 in alternative c has been set to compensate for this upward revision .
c PAR 19 to achieve the even greater restraint on monetary ex- pansion called for under alternative c , the federal funds rate would be expected to rise to around 13 per cent over the next few weeks .
c PAR 19 the time and savings deposits experience at banks and thrift institutions would be expected to deteriorate further -- with deposit flows at thrift institutions probably negative as the treasury bill rate adjusted sharply upward , perhaps to near 10 per cent .
c PAR 21 under alternative c and possibly also b , sharply higher interest rates would erode asset values and bring the adequacy of bank liquidity into question .
c PAR 21 banks outside major money centers might in some cases be excluded altogether from raising funds in national money markets .
c PAR 21 with the intensification of pressures on financial institutions and financial markets , many institutional lenders would likely severely restrict loan extensions .
c PAR 21 the mortgage market would come under great pressure and some nonfinancial businesses would encounter serious liquidity problems .
c SENT -- in alternative c , it is proposed to give special emphasis to that phase -- i.e . , " . .


