a SENT -- for all three alternatives , it is proposed to include a reference to treasury financing because the regular mid- november refunding will be announced on october 30 . alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of the forthcoming treasury financing and of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with substantial [ del : moderate ] growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead .

b PAR 7 of the three alternatives shown , alternative b includes the 5¾ per cent longer - run target path for m1 adopted at the last committee meeting .
b PAR 7 a further decline in the federal funds rate over the next few weeks is indicated for that alternative , at least to the mid - point of the 8¾-10¾ per cent range .
b PAR 7 the expected funds rate is lower than anticipated at the previous meeting for two reasons : ( a ) m 1 growth since the meeting -5a- alternative longer - run targets for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 7 b 1974 sept .
b PAR 7 b quarters : 1974 4th q. 1975 1st
b PAR 7 q. months : adjusted credit alt .
b PAR 7 b 1974 sept .
b PAR 7 proxy alt .
b PAR 7 c rates of growth total reserves alt .
b PAR 7 c rpd alt .
b PAR 7 b quarters : 1974 4th q. 1975 1st .
b PAR 7 q. months : rates of growth alt .
b PAR 7 c money supply and longer run target paths ratio scale , billions of dollars rate of growth i--
b PAR 7 | 53 4 % growth rate has fallen short of expectations , and thus a more active provision of reserves is required in future to move back to path ; and ( b ) demand for money is expected to be lower , particularly by the first quarter , in view of the slower growth now projected by the staff for nominal gnp .
b PAR 8 based on partial data for the early days of the month , m1 growth in october is expected to be quite slow .
b PAR 8 growth is , expected to pick up considerably later in the fall and early winter , partly in consequence of the lagged impact on money demand of recent and projected interest rate declines .
b PAR 8 over the october - november period , m1 growth is indicated to be in a 4¾-6¾ per cent annual rate range under alternative b . given the small rise in september , the 5¾ per cent growth rate from august to march implies a 6½ per cent rate from september to march -- i.e . over the fourth and first quarters .
b PAR 8 ( 8) ( 86.5 )
b PAR 8 e5.9 10.6 r5.8
b PAR 8 ~-~- - --- - -----
b PAR 8 -------------------- -
b PAR 8 - ----------- ------
b PAR 8 - --- strictly confidential ( fr ) october 11 , 1974 table 3 reserve effects of open market operations and other reserve factors ( millions of dollars , not seasonally adjusted ) open market operations l/ daily average reserve effects 2/ en in reserve categories &
b PAR 8 target bills coupon agency rp 's ' open market _ member
b PAR 8 other 4/ req .
b PAR 8 against available res , 5 _ available & accept .
b PAR 8 issues issues
b PAR 8 net 3/ total operations bank borrowing factors u.s.g . and interb .
b PAR 10 the additional declines in interest rates expected under alternative b may involve a further easing in the 3-month commercial paper rate to the 9 - 9½ per cent range , compared with around 9¾ per cent currently , the 3-month treasury bill should continue to fluctuate very widely -- say , in a 6 - 8 per cent range -- and may average a bit below 7 per cent , although very large additions to the supply of bills in the days immediately ahead would likely exert upward pressure on the rate .
b PAR 10 as short - term market rates ease off , some pick - up in net inflows of time deposits other than money market cd 's at banks are to be expected , and the position of thrift institu- tions may show some improvement .
b PAR 10 growth rates of 7½ and 6¼ per cent , respectively , are expected for m2 and m3 over the fourth and first quarters , up from the relatively low third quarter growth rates of 4 - 5 per cent .



