a PAR 14 under alternative a -- which encompasses a 6½ per cent growth rate for m1 over the next six months -- the staff would expect that the federal funds rate would not rise from current levels and might , over time , drop back somewhat .
a PAR 14 if the funds rate remains around 9¼--9½ per cent , there may be some further upward rate adjustments in markets , particularly as the forthcoming treasury financing is absorbed .
a PAR 14 a somewhat lower funds rate would moderate and , perhaps to some degree reverse , recent upward rate pressures .
a PAR 14 short - term rates , particularly bill rates , are likely to be influenced by the strength of business loan demands and by the way in which the recycling of oil money affects u.s .
a PAR 14 assuming business loan growth is moderate , banks , under this alternative , would probably not be a source of pressure on markets in view of the continued availability of demand deposits and strong growth in time and savings deposits other than large cd 's .
a PAR 14 under the circumstances , banks would have little interest in issuing additional cd 's or in borrowing from the euro - dollar market , unless rates in that market were to drop sharply with the receipt of arab oil money in volume .
a PAR 14 ( 14)l ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( ) ( 5 ) 6 )

b PAR 10 effectuation of committee policy in the weeks immediately ahead will be taking place at a time when short - term credit markets will have to absorb a large treasury financing -- one that will probably raise about $ 4 billion of new cash .
b PAR 10 it is likely that part of the funds will be raised through tax bills and the remainder through short - term coupon issues .
b PAR 10 this is a somewhat larger cash offering than the market is expecting , and will probably itself exert some upward pressure on interest rates .
b PAR 10 if the federal funds rate is rising at the same time , general upward rate pressures are likely to be intensified , ( 11 ) in returning to the m1 growth path by september , alternative b includes a growth rate for m1 over the second quarter of around 5¾ per cent and during the third quarter of 5 per cent , averaging close to 5¾ per cent for the six month period .
b PAR 10 achievement of such growth rates is expected by the staff to entail some further increase in interest rates as bank reserves are held back relative to demand .
b PAR 10 demands for money and for supporting bank reserves over the next several months are expected to be sustained by the transactions needs associated with growth in nominal gnp projected at 5.7 and 7.8 per cent for the second and third quarters , respectively .
b PAR 10 these growth rates do not include any upward impact from lifting the embargo , and thus could underestimate money demand to some extent , particularly by the third quarter .
b PAR 10 in early spring , there is also likely to be some increase in private cash balances due to higher than average income tax refunds .
b PAR 10 in moving gradually back to the 5¾ per cent long run path , the staff would expect that reserve provision in the weeks ahead would lead to a rise in the federal funds rate to around 10 per cent between now and mid - april and would be associated with m1 growth over the march - april period in a 6 ½-- 8 ½ per cent annual rate range .

c PAR 13 under alternative c , the expected rise of interest rates would be much sharper -- with the funds rate moving up into the 10¼--11 per cent area -- in order to bring the money supply back to the long run path by mid - year .
c PAR 13 if interest rates rose so sharply , though , a strong effect on money demand would be likely by the third quarter , with money growth in that quarter projected to fell below a 4 per cent annual rate ( unless reserves were provided at a rate that would permit money market conditions to ease sharply by around mid - year ) .
c PAR 13 a rise in the funds rate to as high as 11 per cent range would also threaten replication of the conditions of last summer at thrift institutions .
c PAR 13 the mortgage commitment policies of those institutions would again be under considerable restraint and the viability of the current time and savings deposit ceiling rate structure would probably come into question if high interest rate levels- with the 3-month bill rate moving over 9 per cent -- were sustained for some time .
c PAR 13 there could well be significant feedback effects on gnp of such developments by late summer , though more particularly by the fourth quarter .


