a PAR 14 under alternative a -- which contemplates m1 growth at a 7 per cent annual rate over the second half of the year -- the federal funds rate would be expected to decline to around 11 per cent between now and the next committee meeting , probably stimulating a fairly marked decline of interest rates over a broad maturity spectrum .
a PAR 14 interest rate declines would be intensified in the short run as market attitudes with respect to monetary policy shift and as government security dealers begin to cover short positions .
a PAR 14 however , given the size of prospective borrowing demands and the concern over inflation , rate declines would not be likely to cumulate .
a PAR 14 for example , recently postponed municipal and corporate offerings would probably be re - offered shortly under the circum- stances , and this would tend to moderate downward rate pressures .
a PAR 14 the position of banks and thrift institutions would ease under this alternative , though remaining on the tight side as compared with historical experience , since an 11 per cent federal funds rate implies a structure of market rates still quite attractive relative to present regulation q ceilings .
a SENT -- for all three alternatives , it is proposed to include a reference to treasury financing because the regular august refunding will be announced on july 31 . alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of the forthcoming treasury refunding and of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to [ del : maintain about the prevailing restrictive ] achieve bank reserve and money market conditions

b PAR 7 the table on the next page shows ( in percentage annual rates of change   selected monetary and financial flows over various recent time periods .
b PAR 7 appendix table iii compares money supply growth rates computed on a quarterly - average basis with those computed on a last - month- of - quarter basis .
b PAR 7 projected figures on the two bases are shown in appendix table iv for the three alternatives presented in the next section .
b PAR 7 average past past past of past three twelve six three past calendar years
b PAR 7 months months
b PAR 7 months month
b PAR 7 1971 june ' 74 june ' 74 june ' 74
b PAR 7 over over over over 1973 june ' 73 tde .
b PAR 7 _ ' 7 3 m vl ' 74 .may '
b PAR 7 7a reserves available to support concepts of money ml ( currency plus demand m2 ( m1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m3
b PAR 7 ( m2 plus deposits at bank credit total member banks deposits loans and investments of short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions ) nonbank commercial paper .2 .5
b PAR 7 -.2 -.1 1/ other than interbank and u.s . government .
b PAR 7 2/ based on month - end figures .
b PAR 7 includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
b PAR 7 note : all items are based on average of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institutions -- which are derived from either end - of - month or last wednesday- of - month figures .
b PAR 7 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed .
b PAR 7 prospective developments ( 8) specifications for alternative suggested policy stances are summarized below for committee consideration ( with more detailed figures shown in the table on p. 7a ) .
b PAR 7 c targets ( 3rd & 4th qtrs .
b PAR 7 combined ) associated ranges for july - august m1 4¾-6¾ 4 - 6 3¼-5¼ m2
b PAR 7 6½-8½ 5½-7½ 4¾-6¾
b PAR 7 rpd 10½-12½ 9¾-ll¾ 9 - 11 federal funds rate range ( inter - meeting period )
b PAR 7 10 - 12 11 - 13 12 - 14 ( 9 ) of the alternatives presented , alternative b represents continuation of the longer - run target path for m1 adopted at the last committee meeting .
b PAR 7 in that alternative , the annual growth rate for the second half of 1974 is 5½ per cent .
b PAR 7 this is slightly above the 5¼ per cent rate adopted at the last meeting simply because the june level for m1 turned out to be slightly lower than estimated at that time ; the level set for december is unchanged from the previous meeting .
b PAR 10 the specifications of alternative b would contemplate a federal funds rate in an 11 - 13 per cent range between now and the next committee meeting , and m1 growth for july - august in a 4 - 6 per cent annual money supply and longer run target path ratio scale , billions of dollars rate of growth june ' 73 to june ' 74 5.8 % .
b PAR 10 5/4 % -7a- alternative longer - run targets for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 10 b 1974 june set .
b PAR 10 1974 3rd q.
b PAR 10 4th q. months :
b PAR 10 288.8 ' alt .
b PAR 10 b rates of growth adjusted credit alt , a alt .
b PAR 10 b 1974 june sept .
b PAR 10 quarters ; 1974 3rd q.
b PAR 10 4th q. months .
b PAR 10 pro y alt .
b PAR 10 c total reserves alt , a alt .
b PAR 10 .. 7 rpd at a a!a .
b PAR 10 c rate range .
b PAR 10 the funds rate centers on 12 per cent , which would represent an easing from the money market conditions prevailing over the past two weeks .
b PAR 10 such a funds rate would probably lead to some relaxation in pressures on short- and long - term markets , partly because investors and borrowers would come to believe that monetary policy was a little less restrictive than had appeared to be the case in the most recent weeks .
b PAR 10 any drop in market rates is likely to be modest in size and short - lived , however , given the inflationary environment , continued strong credit demands , and the forthcoming treasury , federal financing bank , and agency financings ( both to raise cash and to refund maturing issues ) .
b PAR 10 large demands for u.s .
b PAR 10 securities by foreign official accounts , of course , could modify this rate outlook appreciably in particular market sectors .
b PAR 10 ( 10 ) starget available (
b PAR 10 l974 fomc meeting .
b PAR 10 uring the month .
b PAR 10 represents change in system 's portfolio from end - of - period to end - of - period ; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions .
b PAR 10 represents change in daily average level for preceding period .
b PAR 10 inclides matched sale - purchase transactions as well as rp 's .
b PAR 10 sum of changes in vault cash , currency in circulation , treasury operations , f.r .
b PAR 10 float , gold and foreign accounts , and other restrves to support private nonhank deposits .
b PAR 10 target change for june and july reflects the target adopted at the june 18 , target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted d - - l .i _ l irl r
b PAR 10 t strictly confidential ( fr ) july 12 , 1974 table 4 security dealer positions and bank positions millions of dollars
b PAR 10 security dealer positions dealer positions member , bank reserve positions corporate municipal excess
b PAR 10 * * borrowing at frb
b PAR 10 * * basic .
b PAR 10 reserve deficit period bills coupon issues bonds bonds reserves total seasonal 8 new york 38 others ( 1 ) ( 2 )
b PAR 12 the ability of banks to finance additional loan demands is expected to be relatively limited , though .
b PAR 12 with growth in demand deposits and consumer - type time deposits constrained , banks will be under pressure to issue new cd 's . however , except for the prime names , market receptivity to cd 's is in some question .
b PAR 12 in general , the recent concern with liquidity exposure , on the part of both banks and investors , will probably reduce the pace at which new cd 's will be offered . as a result , bank credit growth under alternative b is projected at around an 8½ per cent annual rate over the third quarter , substantially less than in the first half of the year .
b PAR 12 this rate of expansion would probably mean that banks will have to cut back sharply on acquisitions of securities , particularly municipal and federal agency issues .
b PAR 12 thus , interest rates in intermediate and longer - term markets would likely come under renewed upward pressure as time goes on .
b PAR 12 the bank prime loan rate would probably also rise somewhat further .
b SENT -- ( 13 ) under alternative b pressures on thrift institutions would be expected to be somewhat greater than during the second quarter .
b SENT -- under this alternative , interest rates would likely rise further in the weeks immediately ahead , and would rise by more than under alternative b over the longer run .
b SENT -- [ del : appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. alternative b to implement this policy , while taking account of the forthcoming treasury refunding and of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to [ del : maintain the prevailing restrictive ] achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [ del : provided that the ] that would moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead [ del : appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance].

c PAR 15 the possibility of a credit crunch in financial markets can not be ignored , especially under alternative c . such a development could be triggered by a series of failures of financial or industrial concerns , here or abroad .
c PAR 15 this could lead to sharply higher rates and a drying up of credit flows in markets where there is perceived to be heightened credit risk and to lower rates in safe markets , such as the treasury securities market .
c PAR 15 many borrowers would not be able to obtain credit , and some bank and other institutional lenders would not be able to tap their usual sources of funds .
c PAR 15 under the circumstances , remedial action by the system would be expected , either through the market or through the discount window .
c PAR 15 as a result , whatever specifications are adopted by the committee would very likely have to be superseded , at least temporarily , by other operating criteria .
c PAR 15 it should be recognized in any event that the various specifications presented are more uncertain than usual since the situation in financial markets and the economy is unprecedented in the postwar period .
c PAR 15 proposed directive language 
c PAR 17 in the event that the committee again wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of prevailing money market conditions , the specifications of alternative c might be associated with the language used in the directive adopted at the last meeting-- namely , that " . . .the committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing restrictive money market conditions , provided that the monetary aggregates appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance .
c PAR 17 " chart 1 strictly confidential ( fr )
c PAR 17 7/12/74 reserves available to support private nonbank deposits billions of dollars
c PAR 17 i sbreak in series actual level of rpd after changes in reserve requirements
c PAR 17 13%% growth
c PAR 17 strictly confidential ( fr )
c PAR 17 7/12/74 monetary aggregates narrow money supply m1 billions of dollars broader money supply m2 1973
c PAR 17 1974 m a m chart 2 chart 3 strictly confidential ( fr )
c PAR 17 monetary aggregates adjusted credit proxy billions total reserves
c PAR 17 i sbreak in series , actual level of total reserves after changes in reterve requirements
c PAR 17 a,^m k04 chart 4 money market conditions weekly averages federal funds
c PAR 17 discol rate money market conditions and interest rates interest rates percent short - term percent interest rates long - term percent weekly averages weekly s euro - dollars fha mortgages s1
c PAR 17 3 month fnma monday
c PAR 17 auction aaa utility new issue government bonds 10-year averages billions of dollars !
c PAR 17 d 3 treasury bills municipal bond buyer 3 month thursdays prime commercial paper 4 6 month 3owei strictly confidential bank reserves july 12 , 1974 ( actual and current projections )
c PAR 17 ii aggregate reserves i reouired reserves rfserves available for -----------------------------------------
c PAR 17 s private nonbank deposits i seasonally adjusted sii---------------------------------------- i---------------------
c PAR 17 ii total nonborrowed i private other cd 's and gov't and period seas
c PAR 17 adj i non seas
c PAR 17 ii reserves reserves i pfmand time dep
c PAR 17 ncn dep interbank

