a PAR 9 of the alternatives shown , alternative a encompasses the 6 per cent annual growth rate for m1 specified by the committee at its last meeting in its longer - run targets for the first half of ' 75 .
a PAR 9 this alternative also shows a 9¾ per cent growth rate for m2 , slightly higher than the rate specified by the committee last time .
a PAR 9 the projected relationship between m 1 and m2 is changed because a further decline in market interest rates is now assumed to be necessary if the indicated m1 growth rate is to be attained by mid - year , and that should result in larger inflows of consumer - type time and savings deposits .
a PAR 10 given the january shortfall in m1 and the sharply weaker economy now projected by the staff for the first and second quarters of this year , we would expect it to be necessary for the federal funds rate to decline to around the middle of a 4 - 5 per cent range between now and mid - march if the growth in the aggregates as shown under alternative a were to be attained .
a PAR 10 some further decline in the funds rate might be needed by early spring .
a PAR 10 ( 10 ) n.a .
a PAR 10 fnma auction yields ( 11 ) 8 , and 10
a PAR 10 the end of is the weekly data for colums 1 to 4 are statement week averages o daily data .
a PAR 10 columns 5 and 6 are one - day wednesday quotes .
a PAR 10 for columns 7 , the weekly date is the mid - point of the calendar week over which data are averaged .
a PAR 10 column 9 is a one - day quote for thursday following the statement week .
a PAR 10 column 11 gives fnma auction data for the monday preceeding the end of the statement week .
a PAR 10 the fnma auction yield average yield in bi - weekly auction for short - term forward commitments for government underwritten mortgages .
a PAR 10 ~1- _ - -i rhort - trm appendix table 1 reserves and monetary variables february 14 , 1975 money stock bank credit reserves othermeasures measures available total te tr period to adjusted loans tme thrift non-
a PAR 10 total non- support m 1   m2
a PAR 10 m 3   credit and total other inst- cd 's deposit gov't .
a PAR 10 borrowed private proxy invest- time than tution funds demand deposits ments cd 's deposits funs ( per cent annual rates of growth )
a PAR 10 ( dollar change in billions ) annually : semi - annually :
a PAR 10 2nd half 1974 6.2 20.3 4.9 3.1 5.8 5.5 5.4 1.4 11.0 8.1 5.1 9.0 --
a PAR 10 -3.4 quarterly : monthly : notes : reserve requirements on eurodollar borrowings are included beginning october 16 , 1969 , and beginning october 1 , 1970 .
a PAR 10 1/ growth rates are based on estimated monthly average levels derived by averaging end of p - preliminary .
a PAR 10 requirements on bank - related commercial paper are included current month and end of previous month reported data .
a PAR 10 712-s february 14 , 1975 appendix table 2 reserves and monetary variables seasonally adjusted , billions of dollars reserves money stock measures bank credit othermeasures period available total time thrift to m adj loans inon- u
a PAR 10 to 1 ad loans total other instn total rowed support p m 2   m 3   credit and time than tuti cd 's deposit gov't pvt total pvt proxy invest funds demand deposits
a PAR 10 dep ments cd 's d annually
a PAR 10 : monthly : weekly : notes .
a PAR 10 estimated monthly average levels derived by averaging end of current month and end of previous month rep rted data .
a PAR 10 reserve requirements on eurodollar borrowings are included beginning october 16 , 1969 , and requirements on bank - related commercial paper are included beginning october 1 , 1970 .
a PAR 10 adjusted credit proxy includes mainly total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements , bank - related commercial paper and eurodollar borrowings of u. s. banks .
a PAR 10 weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks .
a PAR 10 monthly data are daily fr 712 t averages except for nonbank commercial paper figures which are foi last day of month .
a PAR 10 weekly data are not available for m3 , total loans and investment and thrift institution deposits .
a PAR 10 p - preliminary .
a PAR 10 appendix table iii growth rate in money supply ( per cent change at an annual rate )
a PAR 10 m = annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the final months of the quarters .
a PAR 10 q = annual rate calculated from average levels in all three months of the quarters .
a PAR 10 i iii appendix table iv growth rates in money supply for alternatives alt .
a PAR 10 a m qm alt .
a PAR 10 d m = annual of the rates of growth calculated from average levels in last months quarters .
a PAR 10 q = annual rates calculated from average levels in all three months of the quarters .
a PAR 10 i iii appendix table
a PAR 10 v comparison of old and revised money stock growth rates ( per cent annual rates of change ) m1   m2
a PAR 10 old revised old revised old revised annual : half - year
a PAR 10 : quarterly : monthly :

b PAR 12 the specifications of alternative b involve attainment of a 6 per cent rate of growth in m1 by september , rather than by mid- year .
b PAR 12 with the target horizon stretched out , interest rates are likely to decline more moderately over the near - term , and the later upward movement is likely to be more delayed and probably less sharp .
b PAR 12 the annual growth rate for m1 over the first half of this year under this alternative would be around 4½ per cent , while m2 would expand at about a 7½ per cent rate .
b PAR 13 further significant declines in the funds rate in the spring may not prove necessary , assuming that gnp is no weaker than projected for the first half of this year and that the sharp expansion in economic activity projected for the third quarter develops .
b PAR 14 private short - term credit demands are expected to remain weak into early spring , but the treasury is likely to borrow an additional $ 15-$18 billion of new cash between now and mid - april .
b PAR 14 the provision of bank reserves and easing of money market conditions needed to sustain growth in the monetary aggregates , as specified in alternative b , should , at least over the near - term , permit the new treasury debt to be absorbed at declining interest rates , though the reductions may be modest .
b PAR 14 the 3-month bill rate could drop by about ½ percentage point to around 5 per cent between now and the next committee meeting .
b PAR 14 given the shift in borrowing demands from private sectors to the treasury , private short - term rates may decline more .
b PAR 14 longer - term rates may show rather modest further declines , however , since corporate and state and local government demands on bond markets are expected to remain sizable .

c PAR 16 under alternative c , the funds rate would be expected to decline to around 6 per cent -- the mid - point of the range shown in paragraph ( 7 --or a little below , between now and the next committee meeting .
c PAR 16 such a decline is probably not much more than the market has already discounted .
c PAR 16 as a result , interest rates may decline little further over the next few weeks under this alternative .
c PAR 16 moreover , the weight of treasury financings could place upward pressure on the rate structure rather soon .

d PAR 17 under alternative d , which involves money market conditions in the neighborhood of those prevailing on average in the period since the last meeting , m 1 would grow at a rate of about 4 per cent over the first nine months of the year .
d PAR 17 if the funds rate was around the 6½ per cent mid - point of the range shown for that alternative , market rates would probably rise -- possibly sharply in the treasury market -- in the weeks immediately ahead .
d PAR 17 net inflows of savings to thrift institutions would not be likely to strengthen from their recent pace , and might slacken somewhat -- which would tend to limit the extent of recovery in housing .
d PAR 17 in general , prospective market developments under this alternative may have implications for the projected pattern of economic recovery in the second half of the year .
d PAR 17 proposed directive 

