a PAR 11 given the high rates of growth in the monetary aggregates in november , such an easing in the money market would be contrary to current market expectations and might be accompanied by a sizable near - term decline in short - term rates .
a PAR 11 on the other hand , many market participants may take the view that such an easing is only temporary and , to that extent , declines in market rates would be limited .
a PAR 11 under this alternative , the staff expects that the funds rate would have to begin rising later in the winter in order to attain the fomc 's current longer - run monetary objectives and that the rate would be in the 7½-8 per cent area by summer .
a PAR 11 this alternative , therefore , would ultimately tend to exert considerable pressure on savings inflows at thrift institutions and banks .
a SENT -- alternative " money market " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking [ del : more than usual ] account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat easier bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates do not appear to be growing at rates above those currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months

b PAR 5 the table on the following page shows ( in percentage annual rates of change   selected monetary and financial flows over various time periods .
b PAR 5 past past calendar twelve six three past .
b PAR 5 year months months months month 1974 over over over over reserves available to support concepts of money m1 ( currency plus demand m2 ( m1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m3 ( plus deposits at bank credit total member bank deposits loans and investments of short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions )
b PAR 5 large cd 's 2.2 -.3 -.7 1.1 .1 nonbank commercial paper .4
b PAR 5 1/ other than interbank and u.s . government .
b PAR 5 2/ based on month - end figures .
b PAR 5 includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
b PAR 5 note : all items are based on averages of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institu- tions -- which are derived from either end - of - month or last wednesday - of - month figures .
b PAR 5 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed .
b PAR 5 prospective developments ( 6 ) summarized below for committee consideration are alternative operating specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate for the period between now and the next committee meeting .
b PAR 5 all of the alternatives can be viewed as being consistent with the fomc 's current longer - run objectives for the aggregates -- as indexed by a 5 - 7½ per cent rate of growth in m1 from qiii ' 75 to qiii ' 76 .
b PAR 5 they do , of course , imply differing patterns of growth in m 1 over the target period and differing levels and time paths of interest rates ( as shown in appendix table iv ) .
b PAR 5 c ranges of tolerance for december - january m1
b PAR 5 1/ 4½-6½ 4 - 6 3½-5½ m2
b PAR 5 7 - 9 6½-8½
b PAR 5 4½-6 4 - 6 3½-5½ federal funds rate
b PAR 5 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼ 1/
b PAR 5 the 2-month growth rates for m1 and m2 are based on preliminary new seasonal factors .
b PAR 5 appendix table v compares the new and previous factors for m1 and shows the effect of the change on monthly growth rates .
b PAR 5 for the december - january period , the new factors add about 2¼ percentage points to the growth rate for m1 .
b PAR 5 the revised money supply series incorporating new seasonal factors will not be published until late january .
b PAR 5 by that time benchmark and certain other statistical adjust- ments will have been completed for m1 , weekly seasonals consistent with the monthly seasonals will have been developed , and figures for reserves and bank credit will also have been revised .
b PAR 5 with the exception of the table in paragraph ( 6 ) , all tables show data based on the old seasonal factors .
b PAR 5 however , the figures in parentheses in the detailed table on p. 5a reflect the new seasonal factors .
b PAR 5 -5a- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates .
b PAR 5 m1 m2 alt .
b PAR 5 c 1975 november 1976 january 1975 qiii qiv 1976 qi oil qiii growth rates
b PAR 5 1975 december 1/ quarterly average : 1975 qiv 1976 qi qii
b PAR 5 qiii qiii '
b PAR 5 75-qi ' 76 qi
b PAR 5 ' 76-qiii ' 76 qiii ' 75-qiii ' 76 2.0(0.8 ) 4.4(9.9 ) , 2.0(0.8 )
b PAR 5 3.6(9.1 ) 2.0(0.8 )
b PAR 5 7.9(10.7 ) 6.5(5.9 )
b PAR 5 7.2(10.0 ) 6.5(5.9
b PAR 5 ) 6.5(9.3 )
b PAR 5 1/ figures in parentheses represent rates of growth based on the with 2-month growth rates shown in summary table in paragraph preliminary new seasonal factors and are ( 6 ) .
b PAR 5 consistent -5b- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m4   m5
b PAR 5 credit proxy alt , a alt .
b PAR 5 c growth rates monthly : quarterly averages : qiii ' 75-qi ' 76 8.4 8.1 7.9 9.8
b PAR 5 9.5 9.2 7.3 6,9 6.7 ( 7 ) under alternative b the federal funds rate range is centered around the 5¼ per cent level that has been prevailing for several weeks .
b PAR 5 the staff believes that in these circumstances m1 would grow in about a 4 - 6 per cent , annual rate , range and m2 in a 7 - 9 per cent range .
b PAR 5 growth of m 1 in the december - january period is expected to be constrained by continuing shifts of corporate funds from demand deposits to savings accounts .
b PAR 5 the expected range of m1 growth reflects our assumption that such shifts may reduce m growth by 1 to 1 percentage points .
b PAR 5 this assumption is based on an evaluation of early data on the increase in corporate savings accounts and our expectation that the pace at which funds are transferred out of demand accounts will slow .
b PAR 9 the basic outlook over the longer run for monetary aggregates and interest rates appears little changed from the previous blue book .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , the federal funds rate would be expected to begin rising by around mid - winter and may reach the 7 - 7½ per cent range by summer , which would be a shade less than projected last time .
b PAR 9 growth in time deposits other than large cd 's is expected to moderate progressively over the first half of next year .
b PAR 9 we have assumed that shifts of funds from demand deposits into corporate savings accounts will become negligible by late winter , but this assumption is subject to considerable uncertainty because of the novelty of the development .
b PAR 9 ( 9 ) monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures .
b PAR 9 government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis .
b PAR 9 trading positions , which exclude treasury bills financed by repurchase agreements maturing in 16 days or more , are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near - term .
b PAR 9 other security dealer positions issues still in syndicate , excluding trading positions .
b PAR 9 the basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at federal reserve less net federal funds purchases .
b PAR 9 weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks , except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are friday figures . - " - ~liiil l-
b PAR 9 i-- strictly confidential strictly confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc december 12 , 1975 table 6 selected interest rates ( per cent )
b PAR 9 s short - term long - term streasury bills 90 - 119 day cd 's new issue - nyc aaa utility
b PAR 9 municipal u.s .
b PAR 9 government fnma gnma federal commercial new recently bond ( 20-yr . constant auction guaranteed period funds
b PAR 9 90-day 1-year paper 60 - 89 day 190 - 119 day issue offered buyer maturity ) yield securities 1974-high low 1975 - -high low sept .
b SENT -- ahead]. alternative b to implement this policy , while taking [ del : more than usual ] account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to [ del : achieve ] maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months

c SENT -- ahead]. alternative c to implement this policy , while taking [ del : more than usual ] account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat firmer bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates do not appear to be growing at rates below those currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead]. ( 14 ) in all four of the alternatives , it is proposed to delete the words " more than usual " in the phrase , " while taking more than usual account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , " since action by the federal government has somewhat eased new york city 's near- term financial problems .


