a PAR 9 of the three alternatives presented , alternative a most closely approximates the longer - run growth rates that accompanied the specifications chosen by the committee at its last meeting .
a PAR 9 it includes growth in m1 at a 6 per cent annual rate over the first nine months of the year .
a PAR 9 this implies , as is shown , an 8 per cent annual rate of growth over the -6a- alternative longer - run growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
a PAR 9 q. growth rates alt .
a PAR 9 c credit proxy alt .
a PAR 9 q. growth rates forthcoming 7 month period from february to september .
a PAR 9 growth rates in the other monetary aggregates are somewhat larger than the earlier speci- fications because of shifting relationships among the various forms of liquid assets .
a PAR 10 under alternative a , a further decline in the federal funds rate to around 5 per cent -- the mid - point of the 4½-5½ per cent range shown -- would be anticipated over the next few weeks .
a PAR 10 this reflects staff expectations of continued near - term weakness in economic activity and in the transactions demand for money during the second quarter .
a PAR 10 after , without any further decline in the federal funds rate , the sharp rebound in economic activity projected for the third quarter is expected to lead to a rapid rate of growth in m1 during the summer -- large enough to bring growth for the first nine months of the year up to a 6 per cent annual rate .
a PAR 10 given the rapid summer growth needed to attain a 6 per cent rate over the nine month period , the funds rate and other interest rates would likely need to rise fairly sharply in the late summer and fall if the committee wishes to maintain m1 growth in the period after september at around the 6 per cent annual rate .
a PAR 11 consumer - type time and savings deposits at banks and thrift institutions would also be likely to expand somewhat more rapidly than in recent months under alternative a , given the further decline in market interest rates that is assumed .
a PAR 11 meanwhile , banks may continue to let large cd 's run - off , at least until around mid - year , reflecting the weakness in private credit demands , cautious bank management attitudes , and the increased availability of demand deposits as well as other time deposits .
a PAR 11 as a result , broader monetary aggregates excluding large cd 's ( m2 and m3 ) would be expected to show more rapid growth over the next few months than their counterparts including large cd 's ( m2 and m4 , respectively ) .
a PAR 11 ( 11 ) monthly weekly 1/ represents change in system 's portfolio from end - of - period to end - of - period ; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions .
a PAR 11 2/ represents change in daily average level for preceding period .
a PAR 11 3/ includes matched sale - purchase transactions as well as rp 's .
a PAR 11 4/ sum of changes in vault cash , currency in circulation , treasury operations , f.r .
a PAR 11 float , gold and foreign accounts , and other f.r . accounts .
a PAR 11 target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month .
a PAR 11 special certificate ( direct treasury borrowing from p.r . ) .
a PAR 11 * reflects special certificate purchase .
a PAR 11 table 4 security dealer positions and bank positions ( millions of dollars ) confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc march 14 , 1975 u.s . govt .
a PAR 11 security dealer positions dealer positions member bank reserve positions period
a PAR 11 corporate municipal excess
a PAR 11 * * borrowing at frb
a PAR 11 * * basic reserve deficit bills coupon issues bonds bonds reserves total seasonal 8 new york 38 others ( 1 ) ( 2 )
a PAR 12 alternative
a PAR 12 b shows the pattern of monetary aggregates that would be associated with little change in money market conditions from those recently prevailing .
a PAR 12 the federal funds rate range centers on 5¾ per cent .
a PAR 12 growth rates in key monetary aggregates would , of course , be slower than under alternative a -- as indexed by a 7 per cent annual growth rate in m1 over the seven month february - september period and a 5¼ per cent growth rate over the first nine months of the year .

b PAR 13 market interest rates probably would rise somewhat over the weeks ahead under alternative b . the treasury will continue to raise sizable amounts of new cash , including continued cash additions to weekly bill auctions , and dealer positions in treasury issues are relatively high .
b PAR 13 moreover , the calendar of new corporate and municipal issues remains exceptionally large .
b PAR 13 stabilization of the funds rate around 5 per cent would likely be taken by the market as evidence that the federal reserve was no longer seeking actively to ease credit markets .
b PAR 13 thus , unless the economy turned out to be considerably weaker than currently projected , the weight of treasury and corporate long - term credit demands would tend to exert upward pressure on market rates .

c PAR 15 upward rate pressures might be fairly severe for a time in corporate and municipal bond markets , in view of the large volume of new issues currently over- hanging the market and the possibility that investors would hold back pending clarification of federal reserve intentions .
c PAR 15 with market interest rates rising , the rate of growth in consumer - type time and savings deposits at banks and thrift institutions would begin to diminish .
c PAR 15 and with the change in prospects for savings inflows , mortgage market conditions would not be likely to ease much , if any , further .
c SENT -- we would expect that the acceleration in money growth would be relatively modest under alternative c , however , since rising interest rates would be working to restrain money demand .


