a PAR 5 the table on the following page shows ( in percentage annual rates of change   selected monetary and financing flows over various time periods .
a PAR 5 appendix table iii compares money supply growth rates computed on a quarterly - average basis with those computed on a last - month - of - quarter basis .
a PAR 5 past past calendar twelve six three past year months months months month
a PAR 5 july'75 july'75 1974 over over over over total reserves 8.5 -0.3
a PAR 5 4,2 reserves available to support private nonbank concepts of money m1 ( currency plus demand m2 ( m1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m3 ( m2 plus deposits at bank credit total member bank deposits loans and investments of short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions ) nonbank commercial paper .4 .1
a PAR 5 1/ other than interbank and u.s . government .
a PAR 5 2/ based on month - end figures .
a PAR 5 includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
a PAR 5 note : all items are based on averages of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institu- tions -- which are derived from either end - of - month or last wednesday - of - month figures .
a PAR 5 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed .
a PAR 5 prospective developments ( 6 ) summarized below for committee consideration are specifica- tions for three alternative short - run policy courses .
a PAR 5 more detailed figures -- including levels and quarterly growth rates of the monetary aggregates associated with the committee 's 5 - 7½ per cent long - run growth target for m1 - -are presented in the tables on pages 5a and 5b .
a PAR 5 alternative operating guides expressed in terms of nonborrowed reserves , as well as other related reserve measures , are shown in appendix table iv .
a PAR 5 c ranges of tolerance m1 5 to 7½ 4½ to 7 4 to 6½ m2   9 to 11½ 8¼ to 10¾ 7½ to 10 rpd -1 to -3½
a PAR 5 federal funds rate ( intermeeting range )
a PAR 5 5½ to 6¾ 6 to 7½ 6¼ to 8¼ ( 7 )
a PAR 5 since nominal gnp is now projected to expand at an average rate of 15 per cent through the second quarter of 1976 , it seems highly probable that longer - run growth in m1 can be contained within the committee 's 5 - 7½ per cent long - term target range only if money market rates rise further as the period progresses .
a PAR 5 for this reason none of the short - run policy options presented contemplates an easing of money market rates from recent levels .
a PAR 5 under alternative a , the average funds rate would remain close to recently prevailing levels for the time being , but -5a- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2
a PAR 5 c levels growth rates memo committee target ranges 5
a PAR 5 -7½ 8½-10½ 10 - 12 -5b- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) credit proxy alt .
a PAR 5 c levels 1975 july 1975 qii
a PAR 5 qiii qiv 1976 qii growth rates 1975
a PAR 5 august qiii
a PAR 5 ' 75-qiv ' 75 qiv ' 75-qii ' 7 6 alternatives b and
a PAR 5 c would both involve some immediate further tightening of money market conditions .
a SENT -- under the unchanged money market conditions contemplated for alternative a , m1 growth in september is thought likely to rise to around a 7 - 1/2 per cent annual rate -- resulting in an august - september average of about 6 - 1/4 per cent .
a PAR 12 although we anticipate that interest rates would need to rise substantially as the year progresses under any of the longer- run scenarios described above , the unchanged money market conditions of alternative a would probably encourage general interest rate stability for a time .
a PAR 12 in the absence of additional money market firming there might even be some little rally if there are no disquieting financial developments .
a PAR 12 private credit demands remain quite weak on balance , although there have been some fragmentary indications of the beginnings of a pickup in recent weeks .
a PAR 12 the market appears to have made its adjustment to the higher funds rate now prevailing , and the treasury announcement of its somewhat increased third quarter needs has already been taken into account by market participants .

b PAR 9 it conforms with the monetary assumptions underlying the greenbook economic projection and is thought likely to imply a federal funds rate approaching 9 per cent by early 1976 .
b PAR 9 as noted in the greenbook , a rate of money growth in the upper part of the committee 's long - run target range would help accommodate the special price effects resulting from decontrol of old oil and the worsening international outlook for food prices .
b PAR 9 ( 9 ) ( 10 ) n.a .
b SENT -- therefore , the staff believes that this strategy would imply somewhat higher money market rates early in 1976 than under alternative b . ( 11 ) during the immediate august - september period , growth in the monetary aggregates is expected to pick up from the depressed july pace .
b SENT -- ( 13 ) the 50 basis points rise in the federal funds rate contemplated under alternative b would probably trigger roughly commensurate advances in other short - term rates , and long - term markets would also come under renewed upward rate pressure .

c PAR 8 the short - run specifications for alternative c -- which contemplate a near - term rise in the federal funds rate to around 7 - 1/4 per cent ( the mid - point of the range presented --are thought to be consistent with a policy strategy geared to ultimate attainment of the 6 - 1/4 per cent mid - point of the committee 's 5 - -7 - 1/2 per cent long - run target range for m1 .
c PAR 8 if the staff projection of significantly more rapid growth in nominal gnp proves correct , we believe that efforts to hold m1 expansion to the 6 - 1/4 per cent long - run target will require further substantial increases in the federal funds rate during the fall and early winter -- perhaps to 10 per cent or more by early 1976 .
c PAR 8 ( 8) ( 9 ) monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures .
c PAR 8 government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis .
c PAR 8 trading positions , which exclude treasury bills financed by repurchase agreements maturing in 16 days or more , are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near - term .
c PAR 8 other security dealer positions issues still in syndicate , excluding trading positions .
c PAR 8 the basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at federal reserves less net federal funds purchases .
c PAR 8 weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks , except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are friday figures .
c PAR 8 --~-~---- " y ~ii ----~
c PAR 8 strictly confidential strictly confidential ( fr ) august 15 , 1975 table 6 selected interest rates ( per cent ) short - term lng - tan treasury bills 90 - 119 day cd 's new tsue - nyc aaa utility municipal u.s .
c PAR 8 government fnma federal commercial new recently bond ( 20-yr . constant auctions period funds
c PAR 8 90-day 1-year paper 60 - 89 day 90 - 119 day issue offered buyer maturity ) yields 1974 - -high low 1975 - -ligh
c PAR 8 low 1974 - -july sept .
c PAR 8 1975 - -june 4 july 2 aug 6 note : ( 1 ) ( 3 )
c SENT -- market repercussions from the rise in the federal funds rate of 100 basis points or more contemplated under alternative c , of course , would be more extreme .
c PAR 14 under any of the alternatives time deposit inflows would be expected to moderate from those of the recent past .
c PAR 14 some slowing is already evident in the recent data , mainly because the special treasury payments to individuals have terminated .
c PAR 14 increasingly , however , higher market interest rates will come to impinge on savings inflows to the intermediaries , and under alternative c this impact would probably be quite pronounced by the fourth quarter . because of the developing squeeze , we have assumed an increase in regulation
c PAR 14 q ceilings amounting to one - half a percentage point for longer - term certifi- cates ( to become effective by year - end ) under all alternatives presented .
c PAR 14 this assumption reduces , but does not eliminate , the marked slowing that would otherwise have been projected in the rate of expansion of consumer - type time deposits and the more broadly defined measures of money supply .
c PAR 15 in the august - september period , we would expect savings inflows to continue at the more moderate recent pace , but perhaps to be drifting lower , particularly under alternative c . the bank credit proxy is expected to remain quite weak , since banks are unlikely to become aggressive in seeking funds through issuance of cd 's and non - deposit liabilities until business loan demand strengthens materially .

