a PAR 7 the table on the following page shows ( in percentage annual rates of change   selected monetary and financing flows over various time periods .
a PAR 7 past past calendar twelve six three past year months months months month 1974 over over over over total reserves
a PAR 7 8.5 -1.2 -2.0 - -14.4 reserves available to support private nonbank concepts of money ( revised series ) m1 ( currency plus demand m2 ( m1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m3 ( m2 plus deposits at bank credit total member bank deposits loans and investments of commercial banks
a PAR 7 2/ 9.2 1.8 4.3 4,3 6.8 short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions ) nonbank commercial paper .4 .1
a PAR 7 1/ other than interbank and u.s . government .
a PAR 7 2/ based on month - end figures .
a PAR 7 includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
a PAR 7 note : all items are based on averages of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institu- tions -- which are derived from either end - of - month or last wednesday - of - month figures .
a PAR 7 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed .
a PAR 7 prospective developments ( 8) summarized below for committee consideration are specifi- cations for three alternative short - run policy courses .
a PAR 7 more detailed figures -- including longer - run growth rates -- are presented in the tables on pp .
a PAR 7 6a and 6b .
a PAR 7 c ranges of tolerance m1
a PAR 7 6½ -8½ 6 - 8 5½-7½ m2
a PAR 7 2½-4½ 2 - 4 1½-3½ federal funds rate ( 9 ) following relatively slow growth in the july - august period , in september and october m1 is expected to expand at rates more nearly consistent with the underlying strength of transactions demands .
a PAR 7 deposit expansion in the previous months had been dampened as the public brought deposit holdings into a more normal relationship with income and interest rates , following the sharp bulge in late spring resulting from special treasury payments .
a PAR 7 this process now appears to have been completed .
a PAR 7 under alternative a --which assumes the same federal funds rate range for the forthcoming intermeeting period as that adopted at the last meeting -- m1 is expected to rise at an annual rate in the 6½-3½ per cent area over this and the next month on average .
a PAR 7 m2 growth is also likely to accelerate , mainly reflecting the more rapid expansion on demand deposits .
a PAR 7 -6a- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
a PAR 7 c 1975 august 1975 qii oiii qiv 1976 qi qii growth rates
a PAR 7 1975 september qiii qiv 1976 qi q11 qii
a PAR 7 ' 75-qiv ' 75 qiv ' 75-qii ' 76 qii ' 75-q0i ' 76 memo committee target ranges 84 - 10~ levels - 6b - alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) credit proxy levels
a PAR 7 1975 august octnber
a PAR 7 1975 qii qiii qiv 1976 qi qii alt .
a PAR 7 c growth rates 1975 september qii qiv 1976 qi qii qii ' 75-qiv ' 75 qiv ' 75-qii ' 76 however , growth in consumer - type time and savings deposits also is expected to strengthen a little , at least temporarily , from its reduced august rate .
a PAR 12 given the large amount of treasury borrowing that is being compressed into the next month or so , as well as the still sensitive state of the municipal market , a significant rise in the federal funds rate -- for example , toward the upper end of the 5 - 3/4 - -7 per cent range of alternative a -- would likely lead to substantial further yield advances .
a PAR 12 interest rate increases would be accentuated if strengthening credit demands on banks from businesses and consumers were at the same time reducing bank willingness to add to treasury security holdings .
a PAR 13 while alternative a basically assumes little or no change in the federal funds rate between now and the next meeting , the staff believes the funds rate would have to rise later in the fall if the monetary aggregates are to remain on track with the committee 's longer- run objectives .
a PAR 13 a funds rate in the 7 - 7 per cent area would be expected by late fall , assuming a longer - run m1 objective characterized by 7 per cent growth from qii ' 75 to qii ' 76 ( the assumption of the green book gnp projection ) , with further funds rate increases anticipated in the first half of next year .
a PAR 13 attainment of a longer - run 6 per cent annual rate of growth in m1 would be likely to require more prompt and intensive pressure on the funds market .
a PAR 13 in view of the further interest rate increases expected given either of these two m1 growth rates , we have assumed , in working out all of the alternatives in this bluebook , a small upward adjustment in regulation
a PAR 13 q ceilings around year - end of ¼ to ½ percentage point on time certificates .
a PAR 13 with this assumption , longer - run m2 growth is projected toward the low end of the committee 's announced target range under alternative a . 
a SENT -- alternative " money market " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to [ del : achieve ] maintain about the prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months

b PAR 17 as in the other alternatives , additional tightening would appear to be necessary later this year and early next year .
b PAR 17 the staff has assumed that the federal funds rate under this alternative would probably rise to the 7 -8 per cent area by late fall .
b PAR 17 this particular funds rate pattern would be consistent with a one - year growth rate for m1 between qii ' 75 and qii ' 76 of 6 - 3/4 per cent .
b PAR 17 given the downward revision of $ 1.2 billion in the average level of m1 in the second quarter of 1975 , such a growth rate would result in the same average level of m1 in the second quarter of 1976 as was implied by the 6 per cent growth path presented in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 17 proposed directive 
b SENT -- ahead]. alternative b to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat firmer bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates do not appear to be growing at rates below those currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months

c PAR 14 with growth in nonborrowed reserves more constrained , member bank borrowing under this alternative would be likely to rise to $ 400 million or more , given the 6 per cent discount rate .
c PAR 14 nonetheless , growth of m1 in september - october would probably be reduced somewhat , to the 6 - 8 per cent area .
c PAR 14 interest rates generally would rise quite sharply during the next month under this alternative , particularly given the very large treasury financing demands described in paragraph ( 6 ) .
c PAR 14 a rise in the 3-month bill rate to [ 8 ] per cent or a little above would not be unlikely , and the yield on 2-year treasury notes could exceed 9 per cent .
c SENT -- ( 16 ) under alternative c mortgage market conditions may be expected to tighten rather promptly , with rates rising further over the next few weeks and with lenders becoming less willing to make loan commitments .
c SENT -- ahead]. alternative c to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve firmer bank reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates do not appear to be growing at rates below those currently expected [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead]. reserves available to support private nonbank deposits -sept


