a PAR 16 such an approach seems most consistent with an effort to raise longer - run growth rates from those cur- rently in place .
a PAR 16 the contemplated 1/2 point reduction in the federal funds rate in the near - term would lead to a significant decline in market rates-- and also probably in the prime loan and primary mortgage rates -- over the next few weeks .
a PAR 16 there would be some further increase in net inflows of interest - bearing deposits at banks and thrift institutions .
a PAR 16 as such inflows continued , and as market rates declined , it is likely that earn- ings experience would place these institutions under some pressure to reduce interest rates offered on deposits .
a PAR 16 however , no substantial reductions would be likely over the next few weeks .
a PAR 16 proposed directive 
a SENT -- alternative " monetary aggregates " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with [ del : moderate ] substantial growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead .

b PAR 12 the staff would still expect interest rates to rise over the longer run under alternative b , given the projected pace of economic activity .
b PAR 12 however , we would now anticipate a federal funds rate no higher than about 6 per cent by mid-'77 and perhaps rising to around 6 - 1/2 per cent later that year , as may be seen from appendix table ii .
b PAR 12 this represents both more delayed , and less , interest rate pressure than anticipated earlier .
b PAR 12 m2 and m3 would , as a result , probably show somewhat more strength over the longer run relative to m1 than previously expected-- although growth rates in the broader monetary aggregates would , of course , be expected to slacken over the next few quarters .
b PAR 13 over the next few weeks , interest rates would be likely to show little net change under alternative b . about $ 4 billion of pub- licly - held debt maturing on november 15 will need to be rolled over , and the treasury may also take the opportunity to raise about $ 2 - 1/2 billion of new cash .
b PAR 13 private credit demands in short - term markets , including demands at banks , are likely to remain quite moderate over the next few weeks .
b PAR 13 with banks expected to receive large inflows of funds from m2 deposits , they probably will permit cd 's to run off somewhat further over the next few weeks and may also be substantial investors in intermediate- and short - term issues offered in the treasury refunding .
b PAR 13 thus , interest rates in short- and intermediate - term market sectors are not likely to be under any pressure from market forces over the period immediately ahead .
b PAR 13 however , some upward pressure on private long - term rates may be generated if the treasury offers a substantial amount of the new issues in the 10- year and longer maturity area , given the existing relatively narrow spread between treasury and corporate issues and the sizable forward calendar of corporate and state and local government bonds .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the growth ranges for the broader monetary aggregates are about the same as those that now prevail , but the range for m1 is lower .
c PAR 15 further increases in interest rates can be expected over the longer - run under alternative c , assuming m1 growth over the qiii ' 76- qiii ' 77 period is constrained to around 4 - 3/4 per cent .
c PAR 15 as shown in the appendix table , a funds rate as high as 7 - 3/4 per cent might develop by the fall of 1977 .

