a SENT -- the alternative a rates may be viewed as compensating , in an arithmetic sense , for the shortfall in m1 growth relative to expecta- tions in the fourth quarter .
a SENT -- that is to say , under alternative a the level of m1 in the third quarter 1976(using mid - points of the ranges ) would be the same as that implied by a 6¼ per cent growth rate measured from the third quarter of 1975 .
a PAR 12 under such circumstances , m1 would be expected to expand and m2 in a 7½-11½ per cent range .
a PAR 12 the pick - up in m1 growth relative to recent behavior reflects mainly staff expectations that the projected continuing rise in nominal gnp will be accompanied by resumed expansion in money demand -- given the unusual , and probably unsustainable , rise in the velocity of money that has already occurred in the current cyclical expansion .
a PAR 14 the lower funds rate assumed under alternative a would be expected to persist until late spring or early summer .
a PAR 14 the funds rate would then be expected to begin rising , given continued expansion in gnp .
a PAR 14 the funds rate would be likely to be around 6 per cent by late 1976 , assuming money growth over the year is held to around 7¼ per cent under this alternative .
a SENT -- alternative " monetary aggregate " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to [ del : maintain prevailing ] achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with substantial growth in monetary aggregates over the [ del : period immediately ] months

b PAR 10 the m1 level for qiii ' 76 that is implied by the committee 's current longer - run growth range probably should be adjusted downward , however , on economic grounds to allow for recent shifts of business funds from demand deposits into savings accounts and for expected future growth of such accounts at the expense of demand deposits .
b PAR 10 the regulatory change permitting businesses to hold savings accounts up to $ 150,000 in size became effective in mid - november .
b PAR 10 by early january such accounts aggregated about $ 2 billion , of which the staff estimates that about $ 1½ billion would otherwise have gone into demand deposits .
b PAR 10 growth in business savings accounts has been slowing in recent weeks , and the staff expects it to slow further as time goes on ; by the third quarter of 1976 , additional growth in such accounts substituting for demand deposits might total $ 1 billion . in sum then , a $ 2½ billion downward adjustment in the target level of m1 for the third quarter might be a reasonable allowance for corporate savings accounts .
b PAR 10 this would imply m1 growth over the next three quarters at close to a 6¼ per cent annual rate , which is approximately the growth rate for that period under alternative b . for the one year qiii ' 75-qiii ' 76 period , the path contained in alternative b involves m1 growth of 5.3 per cent .
b PAR 15 a federal funds rate centered around 4¾ per cent is con- templated under alternative b , with m1 growth in a 4 - 8 per cent annual rate range in the january - february period .
b PAR 15 given such a funds rate , interest rates generally may show little net change over the next few weeks .
b PAR 15 if anything , short - term interest rates could drift up a little , as expectations by some market participants of a further decline in the funds rate , following the discount rate action announced today , are disappointed .
b PAR 15 longer - term market interest rates may remain around the recent reduced levels , given the more moderate corporate bond calendar and the availability of sizable funds for investment in longer - term markets from insurance companies , savings banks , and pension funds .
b PAR 15 with business loan demand slack , banks may show increased interest in intermediate - term treasury offerings to increase earnings , particularly in view of the steep slope of the yield curve .
b PAR 15 mortgage rates can be expected to decline somewhat further since savings inflows to thrift institutions are expected to be well maintained and since a more favorable yield spread of primary mortgage rates over corporate bond rates has recently developed .

c PAR 17 this approach is most consistent with a reduction in the longer - run growth ranges .
c PAR 17 if the fomc were to seek one - year growth in the aggregates as indexed by m1 expansion of about 5¼ per cent from qiv ' 75 to qiv ' 76 , the staff believes that the funds rate would have to rise further to around 7¼ per cent by summer .

