a PAR 8 alternative
a PAR 8 a involves an easing in money market conditions over the next few weeks -- with the funds rate moving down to the mid - point of a 4 - 5 per cent range .
a PAR 8 however , assuming the staff 's projection of the rate of expansion in nominal gnp over the next year is correct , interest rates would not be expected to decline for long and would probably soon have to begin rising if m1 growth over the qiii ' 76-qiii ' 77 period were to be kept to around 5½ per cent ( the mid - point of the committee 's longer - run range of 4½-6½ per cent ) .
a PAR 8 on balance , money market conditions would be somewhat easier and monetary growth rates somewhat more rapid over the next six months under alternative
a PAR 8 a than under alternatives b or c.
a PAR 8 on the other hand , alternative a would involve greater monetary restraint in the second six months of the qiii ' 76-qiii ' 77 period .
a SENT -- alternative " money market " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat easier bank reserve and money market conditions { del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates ] over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected .

b PAR 13 under any of the alternatives presented , we expect m1 growth over the november - december period to be modest .
b PAR 13 assuming unchanged money market conditions over the next few weeks , as under alternative b , m1 may expand in a 2½-6½ per cent annual rate range during the 2-month period .
b PAR 13 incoming data for early november suggest a sharp deceleration in growth during the current month from the unusually high october rate moreover , growth is unlikely to strengthen in december , given the sluggish expansion in economic activity now expected in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 13 if the mid - point of the 2½-6½ per cent november - december range is realized , growth in m1 from the third to the fourth quarter would be at almost a 7 per cent annual rate .

c PAR 10 with such an early effort to restrain growth in the aggregates , we would expect that little , if any , further tightening would be required later .
c SENT -- the tightening of money market conditions contemplated under alternative c may reduce the 2-month m2 growth rate to an 8½-12½ per cent range .

