a SENT -- alternative " money market " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of develop- ments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat easier bank reserve and money market condi- tions [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates ] over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected .

b PAR 9 the intermeeting range for the federal funds rate under alternative b is centered on 5¾ per cent , the rate recently prevailing .
b PAR 9 given the projected increase in nominal gnp at about an 11 per cent annual rate on average over the next few quarters , the staff still expects that interest rates will begin rising fairly soon if longer - run m1 growth is held to around a 5¾ per cent annual rate .
b PAR 9 by the second quarter of 1977 , we would expect the funds rate to average around 7¼ per cent .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , m1 is expected to expand in a 4 - 8 per cent , annual rate , range over the august - september period and m2 in a 7½-11½ per cent range .
b PAR 10 m1 is expected to increase somewhat more rapidly in september than in august , in part because of a sharp drop in treasury balances .
b PAR 10 these balances have built up substantially in august , reflecting the unexpectedly large amount of net new money raised in the recent treasury financing operation .

c PAR 14 while alternative c involves more near - term restraint than b , the early move toward tightening would work to limit interest rate increases needed over the longer run to maintain m1 growth over the qii ' 76-qii ' 77 period at around 5 - 3/4 per cent .
c PAR 14 the staff believes that the funds rate could peak out at around 6 - 3/4 per cent during the fall under an alternative c approach .
c PAR 14 at such a rate level , it appears that an upward adjustment in regulation q may not be needed to enable the com- mittee to attain its longer - run m2 and m3 objectives .


