a PAR 15 with economic expansion continu- ing , however , it would be expected that interest rates would have to begin rising in early fall , with the funds rate reaching 5 - 3/4 per cent by early 1977 and 6 - 1/2 per cent in the spring .
a PAR 15 under these conditions , inflows of interest - bearing deposits would probably accelerate for a time and m2 and m3 would remain quite strong into early winter -- before slowing as rates on market securities become more attractive .
a SENT -- under alternative a , inflows of other deposits should reduce the need for banks to rely on such sources of funds over the balance of the year .
a SENT -- alternative " monetary aggregates " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con- sistent with [ del : moderate ] substantial growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead .

b PAR 12 under alternative b , the annual rate of growth of m1 in the july - august period is expected to be in a 4½ to 8½ range .
b PAR 12 ( on average from the second to the third quarter , m 1 is expected to grow at only a 4¾ per cent annual rate for arithmetic reasons -- specifically , because the second quarter average is high relative to the june level . )
b PAR 12 given the projection for nominal gnp , if growth in m1 over the qii ' 76-qii ' 77 period is to be constrained to 5¾ per cent -- the mid - point of the alternative b longer - run growth range -- it is likely that short - term interest rates would have to begin moving up later in the summer .
b PAR 12 under this alternative , the funds rate is expected to reach 7 per cent in early 1977 and to rise marginally further in the spring .
b PAR 13 if the funds rate remains around 5¼ per cent over the next four weeks , short - term interest rates are unlikely to change significantly .
b PAR 13 inflows of time and savings deposits other than negotiable cd 's at banks can be expected to be higher than in june as a result of the declines in interest rates since mid - year .
b PAR 13 over the july - august period , m2 might expand at an annual rate in an 8 to 12 per cent range .
b PAR 13 as the year pro- gresses , however , rising market rates would probably slow net inflows of time and savings deposits somewhat .
b PAR 13 the alternative b projection assumes an upward adjustment in regulation q ceilings in early 1977 .

c PAR 14 subsequently , interest rates undoubtedly would have to rise appreciably further if m1 growth over the qii ' 76 to qii ' 77 period is to be constrained to the 4 - 3/4 per cent mid - point of the longer - run range .
c PAR 14 by the spring of 1977 , the funds rate might be around 8 - 1/4 per cent .
c PAR 14 under these circumstances , inflows of funds into small - denomination deposits at banks and thrift institutions in the first half of 1977 would be depressed by the greater relative attrac- tiveness of rates on market instruments , even though under this alternative regulation q ceilings are assumed to be relaxed in the fourth quarter of 1976 .


