a PAR 14 such an easing would encourage more rapid money growth in the third and fourth quarter than under alternatives b and c. however , if the fomc also wished to constrain longer - run m1 growth to 5¼ per cent , alternative a would entail a more pronounced slowing in the rate of expansion of m1 in early 1977 and a sharper rise in interest rates in late 1976 and early 1977 than would the other two alternatives .
a PAR 14 proposed directive 
a SENT -- alternative " money market " proposals alternative a to implement this policy , while taking account of develop- ments in domestic and international financial markets , the committee seeks to achieve somewhat easier bank reserve and money market condi- tions [ del : consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates ] over the period immediately ahead , provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected .

b PAR 7 three alternative sets of short - run specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate are summarized below for committee consideration .
b PAR 7 ( more detailed data , as well as longer - run growth rates , are shown in the tables on pp .
b PAR 7 6a and 6b , while reserve aggregates believed to be consistent with these specifications are presented in appendix table i. ) alt .
b PAR 7 c ranges for june - july m1 4½-8½ 4 - 8 3½-7½ m2   7
b PAR 7 -11 6½-10½ 5½-9½ federal funds rate 4½-5½ 5 - 6 5½-6½ ( intermeeting range ) (
b PAR 7 8) if the federal funds rate between now and the next meeting of the committee remains around the recently prevailing 5½ per cent -- the mid - point of the alternative b range -- the staff would expect that the annual rate of m1 growth may be in a 4 - 8 per cent range over the june - july period .
b PAR 7 in light of the data already reported for the early part of the month , growth in june is expected to be around a 5 per cent annual rate .
b PAR 7 such a growth rate may reflect , in part , continued adjustment by cash - holders to the april bulge in m1 growth .
b PAR 7 recently available deposit ownership survey figures suggest that much of the april increase was in balances of consumers , who may take a longer time than busineses and other holders to restore their balances to desired levels .
b PAR 7 the staff expects m1 growth in july to be at a somewhat higher rate , in view of the projected rise in nominal gnp .
b PAR 7 -6a- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2
b PAR 7 c growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual annual fomc longer - run range qi ' 76-qi ' 77 44 - 7 7t-10 9
b PAR 7 -6b- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m4 m5
b PAR 7 credit proxy alt .
b PAR 7 c growth rates eonthly : quarterly averages : semi - annual annual ( 9 ) given the prevailing federal funds rate , time deposits other than large money market cd 's are expected to grow over the next two months at an annual rate around 10 per cent .
b PAR 7 with short - term market rates generally above the 5 per cent passbook rate , interest - sensitive holders , including businesses and state and local governments , may continue to reduce holdings of savings deposits .
b PAR 7 however , this may be offset by further expansion of ceiling - free time certificates of deposit , including large- denomination certificates issued by non - money market banks .
b PAR 7 thus , for the june - july period , m2 growth may be in a 6½-10½ per cent annual rate range under alternative b . ( 10 ) in the near - term , if the money market remains stable , short- and long - term interest rates are likely to change little .
b PAR 7 longer- term market interest rates could edge down further once the market has absorbed the very large volume of new corporate and municipal bond offerings scheduled for june .
b PAR 7 the treasury has a very large third - quarter deficit to finance , but it is expected to end the current fiscal year with a large cash balance and will probably raise the bulk of the new cash it needs later this summer .
b PAR 11 over the longer run , the outlook is still for upward pressures on interest rates , particularly short - term rates .
b PAR 11 credit demands on banks and in short - term markets are expected to strengthen as the year progresses -- with consequent upward pressure on cd and commercial paper rates .
b PAR 11 and by early winter the treasury may have to finance itself increasingly outside the banking system , even if some upward adjustment in regulation q ceiling rates has been made by then , as we assume .
b PAR 11 as may be seen from appendix table ii , under alternative b the staff would expect a federal funds rate of around 8 per cent by early next year , given a growth rate in m1 from qi ' 76 to qi ' 77 of 5¾ per cent .



