a PAR 15 the near - term easing of the money market under alternative a would probably stimulate a substantial rally in debt markets , particularly in light of the sizable short position of u.s .
a PAR 15 government security dealers in coupon issues .
a PAR 15 the staff would not expect any decline in the funds rate to be sustainable , given the strong growth in nominal gnp that is projected .
a PAR 15 a subsequent rather sharp rise in the funds rate would seem to be required under the cir- cumstances to keep monetary growth rates within their longer - run ranges .
a PAR 15 directive language 

b PAR 6 the table on the following page shows ( in terms of percentage annual rates of change   related monetary and financial flows over various time periods .
b PAR 6 past past past twelve six three past months months months month 1976 over over over over concepts of money m 1 ( currency plus demand m2 ( m1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m3 ( 2 plus deposits at thrift bank credit total member bank deposits loans and investments of short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions )
b PAR 6 1/ other than interbank and u.s . government .
b PAR 6 2/ based on month - end figures .
b PAR 6 includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
b PAR 6 note : all items are based on averages of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institu- tions -- which are derived from either end - of - month or last wednesday - of - month figures .
b PAR 6 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series tien reserve requirements are changed .
b PAR 6 prospective developments ( 7 ) summarized below for committee consideration are alternative short - run operating specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate .
b PAR 6 ( detailed data are shown in the tables on pp .
b PAR 6 6 and 7 ) .
b PAR 6 c ranges for may - june m1 1½-5½ 1 - 5 ½-4½ m2   4 - 8 3½-7½ 2¾-6¾ federal funds rate
b PAR 6 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
b PAR 6 ( intermeeting period ) ( 8) under all alternatives , we expect m1 growth to slow markedly over the next several weeks from the april pace .
b PAR 6 the extremely large m1 expansion last month appears to have provided the public with sufficient cash to accommodate much of their increased transactions needs in the second quarter , when nominal gnp is pro- jected to expand at about a 14 per cent annual rate .
b PAR 6 a growth range of 1 to 5 per cent for the may - june period is projected under alternative b , assuming the federal funds rate remains around 5¼ per cent -- the mid- point of a 4¾-5¾ per cent range .
b PAR 6 for the second quarter as a whole , m1 growth would be around a 9¼ per cent annual rate , well above the 4.8 per cent rate of the first quarter .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , we would expect m2 to expand in a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range in the may - june period .
b PAR 9 the time and savings deposit component of m 2 is expected to expand somewhat alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2
b PAR 9 c growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual annual alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m4   m5
b PAR 9 credit proxy alt .
b PAR 9 c growth rates monthly : quarterly averages : semi - annual annual fomc longer - run range more rapidly over the weeks ahead than during the recent past .
b PAR 9 in the course of april , growth in consumer - type time and savings deposits appears to have been restrained by relatively large nonwith- held tax payments by individuals .
b PAR 9 still , growth in the weeks ahead is likely to be slower than the pace during the first quarter in view of the higher level of short- and intermediate - term market rates now prevailing .
b PAR 11 we would expect the funds rate and other interest rates , particularly short - term rates , to rise substantially after mid- year , as the demands for money and credit continue to be generally strong and the treasury once again becomes a sizable net borrower .
b PAR 11 by the first quarter of 1978 , the staff anticipates a funds rate of around 7 per cent under alternative b , if m1 growth is to be near the mid - point of the committee 's 4 -6 per cent range for the qi'77-qi'78 period .
b PAR 11 this is a somewhat higher funds rate than the funds rate projected for the first quarter of 1976 in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 11 this upward revision reflects the need for greater restraint in m growth over the last three quarters of the target period in view of the 9¼ per cent annual growth rate in m1 now expected for the second quarter .
b PAR 11 with the somewhat higher interest rates anticipated , inflows of interest - bearing deposits in m 2 and m3 would probably slow , and growth in these aggregates over the qi ' 77-qi ' 78 period may be around the lower ends of their longer run ranges .
b PAR 11 ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 )

c PAR 13 the increases in short - term rates under alternative c would probably also be accompanied by a fairly prompt return to ceiling rates on time deposits at those banks and thrift institutions that had lowered offering rates previously .
c PAR 13 banks may also begin to press cd offerings more consistently on the market , partly to lock in funds at current interest costs .
c PAR 13 depository institutions are likely to raise their lending rates on business loans and mortgages .
c PAR 13 moreover -- with outstanding mortgage commitments at record levels-- thrifts are likely to become considerably more cautious in making new commitments .
c PAR 13 in bond markets , rates may show some increase , but these increases may be limited by the continued large volume of institutional funds seeking long - term outlets and by any effect that a tightening of the money market may have in dampening inflationary expectations .
c PAR 14 an immediate tightening of the money market , such as is called for under alternative c , would probably reduce somewhat the level to which the funds rate would have to rise ultimately to restrain monetary growth to within the fomc 's longer - run ranges .
c PAR 14 we would expect the funds rate to peak at around 6¾ per cent in the winter of this year .

