a PAR 18 interest rates may tend to decline rather substantially as the funds rate begins to drop , particularly in the intermediate - term treasury area where dealers have a net short position .
a PAR 18 but assuming that incoming economic news does not cast doubt on the fundamental strength of the economy , interest rate declines may be limited over the next month or so as corporations and state and local governments increase market borrowing in anticipation of higher interest rates later on and as the market focuses on the treasury 's large fall cash need .
a SENT -- ( 19 ) we would expect the funds rate to begin rising in the fall under alternative a if growth in the aggregates is to remain around the midpoints of the longer - run ranges for this alternative .

b SENT -- ( 9 )  under alternative b , the one year growth ranges for m-1 and m-2 are the same as those adopted by the committee in april .
b PAR 11 under alternative b , the proposed federal funds rate range is the same as that adopted by the committee at its previous meeting .
b PAR 11 if the funds rate remains near the recently prevailing 5 - 3/8 per cent level , the staff would expect m-1 growth for the july - august period to be at about a 6 per cent annual rate .
b PAR 11 with the public 's adjustment to the april bulge in m-1 now completed , the transactions demand for money is expected to rise more in line with the continued growth in nominal gnp .
b PAR 11 growth in m-2 is expected to be in a 7 - 11 per cent annual rate range during the july - august period , as the time and savings deposit component of that aggregate continues to expand at near its recent pace .
b PAR 13 further increases in interest rates are likely to develop late this year and in the first half of next year if the midpoints of the longer - run growth ranges contemplated under alternative b are to be achieved .
b PAR 13 the funds rate might need to rise to about 6 per cent by year- end and to about 6¼ per cent by the second quarter of 1978 .
b PAR 13 this would be an appreciably smaller rise in interest rates than the staff thought likely last month .
b PAR 13 it allows for the higher average level of the money stock over the next year that results from applying an unchanged growth rate to a new base period in which there has been a substantial overshoot .
b PAR 13 ( the federal funds rate projections four quarters ahead are shown in appendix ii ) .
b SENT -- given the degree of near - term ease assumed , the funds rate by spring may have to be at or slightly above the level assumed at that time under alternative b in order to constrain monetary growth in the first half of next year to the indicated rate .
b SENT -- meanwhile , however , for most of the one - year period ahead , short- term rates would have been lower than under alternative b , with consequent relatively easier credit and liquidity conditions at banks and other institutions .

c PAR 15 with the funds rate rising over the next few weeks as specified above , we would expect m-1 in the july - august period to expand in a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range and m-2 in a 6½-10½ per cent range .
c PAR 15 net inflows of shorter - term small denomination time deposits to banks and thrift institutions may slow at the higher interest levels , and there may also be a further outflow of interest - sensitive savings deposits of individuals , businesses , and state and local governments .
c PAR 15 banks may be expected to adapt to such developments by more aggressively offering large denomination time deposits ; except for negotiable deposits offered by large banks , these deposits are included in m-2 .
c PAR 15 even under the short - run specifications of alternative c , there would appear to be sufficient leeway between ceiling rates in time certificates maturing in four years or more and yields on market instruments to enable banks to retain the funds involved in maturing " wild card " certificates .
c PAR 15 they could , however , lose some funds to thrift institutions , which can offer somewhat higher rates .
c PAR 16 the rise in market rates of interest over the next few weeks accompanying short - run alternative c ( or d   would probably carry the 3-month treasury bill rate above the 5¼ per cent ceiling rate on thrift institution savings deposits .
c PAR 16 this may trigger an increased diversion of these deposits to market instruments .
c PAR 16 under alternative c we would expect that thrifts would become less willing to commit funds to the mortgage market at near the recent pace .
c PAR 16 in addition , given the substantial mortgage takedowns in train , these institutions would have to draw down their liquid assets and borrow more heavily from the fhl banks ; the need for secondary mortgage market support by fnma would also increase .
c PAR 16 but the rise in mortgage rates may be limited if insurance companies , for example , become more active in the mortgage market as a result of the continuing favorable spread of mortgage rates over corporate bond yields .
c PAR 16 in any event , upward pressures on corporate and tax exempt bond yields are likely to be relatively modest , given the substantial supply of investible funds at insurance companies and other institutional investors .


