a PAR 15 an easing of the federal funds rate over the near term to the mid - point of a 4½ to 5¼ per cent range -- as called for under alternative a -- and the associated decline in short - term rates might well be accompanied , at least temporarily , by significant declines in 1/ from july to october 1973 interest ceilings were removed on time deposits with minimum denominations of $ 1,000 and maturities of at least four years .
a PAR 15 commercial banks accumulated about $ 9 billion , and thrift institutions $ 18 billion , in such " wild card " accounts .
a PAR 15 about one - third of these deposits at commercial banks are estimated to have been issued at rates above now - prevailing ceilings on four- year accounts .
a PAR 15 although information concerning thrifts is much less complete , it is estimated that about the same proportion of their " wild card " certificates were issued at rates above current ceilings on four - year accounts .
a PAR 15 long - term rates .
a PAR 15 at present dealer positions in treasury coupon issues are relatively low and forward calendars for long - term treasury and corporate debt are quite light .
a PAR 15 in order to achieve growth rates in m-1 at the mid - point of the committee 's one - year range , however , the federal funds rate would have to begin to rise relatively soon and to reach a level above those envisioned under alternatives b and c. thus , under alternative a , the federal funds rate would be expected to average around 7¼ per cent in the first quarter of 1978 .
a PAR 15 directive language 

b PAR 6 summarized below for committee consideration are alternative short - run operating specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate .
b PAR 6 ( detailed data are shown in the tables on pp .
b PAR 6 6 and 7 . )
b PAR 6 c ranges for june - july m-1 3½ to 7½ 3 to 7 2½ to 6½ m-2 6½ to 10½ 6 to 10 5½ to 9½ federal funds rate 4½ to 5¼ 5 to 5¾ 5½ to 6¼ ( intermeeting period ) ( 7 ) assuming the federal funds rate remains around the 5 - 3/8 per cent mid - point of the alternative b range
b PAR 6 , the staff expects m-1 growth in the june - july period to strengthen to an annual rate in the range of 3 to 7 per cent .
b PAR 6 available weekly data suggest that m-1 growth will remain relatively slow in june .
b PAR 6 by july , however , most of the adjustment to the april bulge should have already occurred , and m-1 is expected to grow more rapidly in response to the projected expansion in gnp and the associated increases in transactions demands for money .
b PAR 6 the july expansion in m-1 is likely to be buoyed further by an earlier- alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2
b PAR 6 c growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual annual fomc longer - run range qi ' 77-qi ' 78 4 - 64 7 - 94 84 - 11 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m4   m5 credit proxy alt .
b PAR 6 c growth rates monthly : quarterly averages : semi - annual annual than - usual distribution of social security checks , leading to more than normal amounts of funds held in demand deposit accounts over the long holiday weekend.1/
b PAR 8 under alternative b growth in m-2 over june - july would be expected to pick up somewhat , due mainly to the anticipated strengthening in m-1 .
b PAR 8 however , growth in the time and savings deposit component of m-2 also should recover somewhat from the reduced pace of recent months .
b PAR 8 the stimulative effects on time and savings deposit inflows of a continued rise in personal income and advances in offering rates at some banks are expected to be about counterbalanced by the delayed impact of earlier increases in short - term market rates .
b PAR 8 ( 8) ( 9 ) ( 10 )
b PAR 12 the staff projections suggest that under alternative b the federal funds rate would have to advance to an average of about 6 per cent in the first quarter of next year if m-1 growth in the qi '
b PAR 12 77- qi ' 78 period is to be held near the mid - point of the committee 's 4 -6 per cent range .
b PAR 12 this funds rate level is somewhat lower than that shown in the last blue book , reflecting both the slower second - quarter growth of the aggregates than projected then and the slightly slower growth of nominal gnp now expected in late 1977 and early 1978 .
b PAR 12 inflows of interest - bearing deposits are still expected to slow sufficiently to keep growth in m-2 and m-3 in the lower part of their respective one - year ranges .

c PAR 13 the alternative c specifications involve an increase of the funds rate over the next few weeks to the mid - point of a 5½-6½ per cent range .
c PAR 13 this may be accompanied by growth in m-1 in the june - july period at an annual rate in a range of 2½ to 6½ per cent .
c PAR 13 money market firming of the degree contemplated under this alternative probably would produce a prompt , appreciable rise in short - term interest rates and some increase in bond yields .
c PAR 13 the rise in short - term market rates probably would induce more depository institutions to raise offering rates on savings and time deposits to ceiling levels .
c PAR 13 short - term rates might rise far enough to trigger sizable outflows of savings funds to market instruments and to induce banks to bid aggressively for negotiable cd 's and for the types of large - denomination time deposits included in m-2 .
c PAR 13 if ceiling rates are unattractive relative to market rates , beginning in july some institutions may experience substantial withdrawals in connection with heavy maturities of " wild card " accounts.1/ 
c SENT -- ( 14 )  the immediate tightening of the money market under alternative c would tend to lessen the degree of restraint that would be needed later to achieve growth in m-1 over the qi ' 77-qi ' 78 period near the mid - point of the committee 's one - year range .
c SENT -- although growth in m-2 and m-3 would consequently be stronger in late 1977 and early 1978 than under the other alternatives , even under alternative c the growth rates projected for m-2 and m-3 over the year ending qi ' 78 are in the lower part of their respective ranges .

