a PAR 17 the easing in the money market envisioned under alternative a may stimulate rather substantial downward adjustments over the short - run in intermediate- and longer - term interest rates , particularly in the treasury securities market where dealers may be expected to make efforts to cover short positions .
a PAR 17 the staff would not expect that downward rate movements could be sustained , however .
a PAR 17 given the projected strength in nominal gnp and money demand between now and mid-1978 , interest rates would probably once again begin rising by early fall -- with the funds rate under this alternative peaking at around 7¼ per cent in the second quarter of directive language 

b PAR 9 a marked slowing in growth of m-1 is anticipated for the august - september period , as the extremely rapid expansion in m-1 in july probably provided the public with enough cash to accommodate the bulk of third - quarter transactions needs .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , m-1 is expected to expand in a 2 - 6 per cent , annual rate , range .
b PAR 9 such an expansion would produce an 8¾ per cent annual rate of growth from the second to the third quarter , as compared with a 12 per cent annual rate of growth in nominal gnp projected for that period .
b PAR 10 growth in m-2 over the august - september period under alternative b is expected to be in a 4 -8 per cent annual rate range .
b PAR 10 the time and savings deposit component of m-2 is likely to expand at about an 8¼ per cent annual rate over the period , well below the june- july average .
b PAR 10 the higher level of interest rates on short- and alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2 alt .
b PAR 10 c growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual : annual : fomc range : 7 - 94 - 6k alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m 3   bank credit alt .
b PAR 10 c growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual : annual : fomc range : 7 - 108½-11 intermediate - term market instruments that has recently emerged is expected to divert funds away from savings and shorter - maturity time deposits .



