a SENT -- a decline in the funds rate to the midpoint of the 3 to 4 per cent alternative a range could be accompanied by relatively modest reductions in other interest rates , if market participants were to view such a decline as temporary in light of the recent indications of strengthening economic activity .
a SENT -- ( 12 ) the decline in the funds rate under alternative a would probably have to be reversed shortly if the committee is to attain growth rates in the aggregates within its longer - run ranges .

b PAR 7 assuming the federal funds rate remains around 4 - 5/8 per cent -- the midpoint of the alternative b range
b PAR 7 --we expect m1 growth in the march - april period to accelerate and be at an annual rate in a 5 to 9 per cent range .
b PAR 7 this pick - up in monetary growth is expected in view of the strengthening in economic activity that appears to be in process .
b PAR 7 tax rebates are not likely to be disbursed until may , and thus will not directly influence monetary growth rates in march and april .
b PAR 7 the rebates will have a substantial effect on growth in money in the following months ; alternative projections of their impact on m1 and m2 over the spring and summer will be shown in next month 's blue book .
b PAR 7 at the moment the staff is tentatively estimating that the rebates will raise the second - quarter growth rate in m1 ( relative to what it otherwise would be ) by about 2 percentage points , and lower the third - quarter rate by about the same amount .
b PAR 7 ( such estimated impacts are included in the tables on pages 5 and 6 . )
b SENT -- the easing of the money market would generate more rapid growth in the aggregates over the next few months than under alternative b , and higher interest rates would be required later in the year to restrain growth .

c SENT -- a rise in the funds rate , as under alternative c , could be accompanied by fairly substantial upward adjustments in short - term rates -- of about 50 basis points or so .

