a PAR 6 the table on the next page shows percentage annual rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various time periods .
a PAR 6 past past past twelve six three past months months months month 1977 over over over over concepts of money m-1 ( currency plus demand m-2 ( m-1 plus time deposits at commercial banks m-3 ( m-2 plus deposits at bank credit loans and investments of all commercial banks 2/ short - term market paper ( monthly average change in billions )
a PAR 6 1/ other than interbank and u.s .
a PAR 6 government .
a PAR 6 2/ includes loans sold to affiliates and branches .
a PAR 6 note : all items are based on averages of daily figures , except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks , commercial paper , and thrift institutions
a PAR 6 --which are derived from either end - of - month or wednesday statement date figures .
a PAR 6 growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve require- ments are changed .
a PAR 6 prospective developments ( 7 ) the table below presents for committee consideration
a PAR 6 two alternative sets of specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate for the forthcoming intermeeting period .
a PAR 6 ( more detailed and longer - term data for the aggregates are shown in the tables on pp .
a PAR 6 6 and 7 . )
a PAR 6 b ranges for may - june m-1 4½ to 8½ 4 to 8 m-2 5 to 9 4½ to 8½ federal funds rate 7 to 7¾ 7½ to 8¼ ( intermeeting period ) ( 8) growth in m-1 is expected to slow considerably over the two - month may - june period from the extraordinary april rate , partly because the temporary impact of tax - related factors should be unwinding .
a PAR 6 under alternative a -- which encompasses a range for the federal funds rate centered on its recently prevailing level of around 7 - 3/8 per cent -- m-1 is expected to expand in a 4 to 8 per cent annual rate range over the may - june period .
a PAR 6 given this projection , the level of m-1 in each month of the second quarter would be above levels implied by the fomc 's longer - run range , as shown in chart 1 on the following page .
a PAR 6 growth in m-1 in the second quarter would be at a 9¼ per cent annual rate , reflecting for the most part the sharp rebound in economic activity this quarter , when nominal gnp is now anticipated to expand at a 17½ per cent annual rate .
a PAR 6 chart 1 recently established m-1 growth ranges and actual m-1 - projection q1 ' 78 - 01 ' 79 ' q4 '
a PAR 6 77- .cc- q3 '
a PAR 6 77-q3 ' 78 illions of dollars s   - 360 ' - 4 % -q4 '
a PAR 6 78 s350 q2 '
a PAR 6 77- q2 ' 78 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m-1 m-2 alt .
a PAR 6 b growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual : annual : alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates ( cont'd ) m-3 bank credit alt .
a PAR 6 b growth rates monthly : quarterly average : semi - annual : annual : ( 9 ) growth in m-2 over the may - june period is also likely to be in a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate range under alternative a . unlike levels of m - l , the implied levels of m-2 would be generally within the longer - run ranges adopted by the committee for this aggregate , as shown in chart 2 on the following page.1/ ( 10 )
a PAR 6 the recent and expected near - term increases in market rates of interest will probably be associated with continued slow growth in savings deposits .
a PAR 6 banks are expected to benefit only modestly from the june
a PAR 6 1 introduction of the new 6-month and 8-year certificates , because these instruments are likely to be particularly attractive to the most interest - sensitive depositors who will probably take advantage of the higher rates offered by thrift institutions.2/ however , with loan demands expected to remain large , and demand deposits decelerating from their rapid growth in april , banks are projected to step up significantly their issuance of large - denomination time deposits .
a PAR 6 since a major portion of such instruments are included in m-2 , the interest - bearing component of this aggregate is expected to pick up somewhat from its reduced march - april pace .
a PAR 6 ( 6 ) , and ( 1 ) , respectively , on table 1-monetary aggregates .
a PAR 6 figures in columns ( 11 , ( 2 ) , and ( 61 reflect daily data reported by member banks , with estimates for nonmember banks derived from data reported by small member banks , benchmarked to nonmember call report figures .
a PAR 6 savings deposits of business and governmental units - columns ( 4 ) and ( 5 - -- and large denomination time deposits -- colun
a PAR 12 long - term rates are expected to show relatively little change under the conditions of alternative a . public offerings of corporate bonds are projected to remain moderate over the coming weeks , and state and local bond issuance should drop off markedly in late may after the effective date of the new irs ruling with regard to sinking fund provisions of tax - exempt bond offerings .
a PAR 12 on the other hand , the treasury -- after retiring about $ 2 billion of coupon securities in the latest refunding -- will probably raise about $ 2 to $ 2 billion of new cash when it sells the regular four - year cycle note in early june .
a PAR 12 in addition , the fhlb system will announce terms for its mid - quarter refunding early next week , and is expected to raise about $ 1 billion in this operation .
a PAR 12 receptions for these offerings could be quite good , however , since dealers have distri- buted the bulk of their awards of the treasury refunding issues and have reestablished a short position in coupon issues .
a PAR 15 the federal funds rate level that the staff believes will be needed to induce such velocity increases are shown in appendix i. under alternative a the federal funds rate might need to rise by fall into a range of 9 to 10 per cent -- about one percentage point higher than projected last month.1/ these projections assume some further downward shift in the demand for money -- as a result , for example , of more intensive marketing of previously introduced innovations and cash management services as interest rates rise.- it should be noted , though , that the relationship between money demand , income , and interest rates in the board 's econometric model has not generated any evidence of a further downward shift over the past five quarters .

b PAR 13 m-1 growth would likely be in a 4 to 8 per cent annual rate range over may and june and m-2 growth in a 4 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 per cent range .
b PAR 13 under this alternative , short - term rates generally might rise 1/2 percentage point or a little more .
b PAR 13 with loan demands expected to remain sizable , relatively prompt upward adjustments in the prime loan rate may be anticipated .
b PAR 13 moreover , a rise in member bank borrowings would also increase pressure for another discount rate adjustment .
b PAR 13 bond yields too could be expected to rise , though increases may be limited since current market yields have probably anticipated some further monetary tightness .
b PAR 13 the widening spread between interest rates in the united states and the rest of the world would tend to provide support for the exchange value of the dollar .


