a PAR 20 such an action would surprise market participants , in view of the increased rate of inflation and the probability that the data to be published in coming weeks will be indicating more rapid m-1 growth .
a PAR 20 downward pressure on short - term rates would tend to be moderate since participants would expect a reversal in the funds rate over the near term .
a PAR 20 thus , the 3-month bill rate might still remain somewhat above 6 per cent , and private short - term rates would decline only marginally .
a PAR 20 long - term rates probably also would be little affected .
a PAR 20 on the other hand , the dollar would almost certainly decline in foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 21 however , given expected nominal gnp growth over the policy period , the near - term decline in the funds rate would soon have to be reversed to restrain growth in m-1 to the mid - point of its longer run range .
a PAR 21 by late spring , the funds rate would have to begin rising again , reaching 8 per cent by late in the year .
a PAR 21 directive language 

b PAR 9 all of the alternatives imply relatively rapid increases in the income velocity of m-1 , and also a rise in the income velocity of m-2 , as shown in appendix ii . assuming m-1 growth at the 5¼ per cent mid - point of the alternative b range , v-1 would be projected to rise by about 7 per cent over the coming four quarters , more than twice the average rate of the past two years .
b PAR 9 the projected rise in interest rates would tend to increase the public 's willingness to economize on cash balances and thus would contribute to an accelera- tion in velocity growth .
b PAR 9 however , the staff has assumed that there also will be a further downward shift in the demand for money over the period ahead , partly because higher market interest rates may once again lead to new financial innovations that substitute for demand deposits , and to more intensive marketing of earlier innovations and cash management services , as financial institutions attempt to retain funds . whether such a further downward shift in demand for m-1 will actually occur is quite uncertain , however . if it does not , efforts to constrain growth in m-1 to the mid - point of the ranges presented are likely to involve interest rate levels higher than those projected , and consequent growth in real gnp below the projected rate .
b SENT -- for example , as shown in the table below , m-1 growth at around the 5¼ per cent mid - point of the alternative b range for the qi '
b PAR 13 growth in m-2 over the april - may period is likely to be in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range under alternative b . savings deposits at commercial banks are expected to show very small growth at best , though larger - than - seasonal tax refunds to individuals may temporarily strengthen flows into these deposits in coming weeks .
b PAR 13 with market yields remaining above ceiling rates , small - denomination time deposits at commercial banks are also likely to grow only moderately .
b PAR 13 however , in view of continued strong loan demands , banks probably will maintain their reliance on large - denomination time deposits .
b PAR 13 since a major portion of these deposits is included in m-2 ,
b PAR 13 the interest - bear- ing component of this aggregate is expected to continue at near its recent pace .
b PAR 14 under alternative b , inflows to savings and loan associa- tions and mutual savings banks over the april - may period can be expected to remain at near the 6 to 7 per cent average monthly rate prevailing since year end .
b PAR 14 consequently , thrifts are likely to continue to reduce their portfolio liquidity and to increase their borrowing from the federal home loan banks and others .
b PAR 14 at the same time , the commitment and other mortgage lending policies of thrift institutions are likely to be tightened further .

c PAR 18 under alternative c the federal funds rate would rise over the intermeeting period to the mid - point of a 7 to 7½ per cent range .
c PAR 18 m-1 growth would likely be in a 5½ to 9½ per cent annual rate range over april and may and m-2 growth in a 6 to 10 per cent range .
c PAR 18 under these circumstances , private short - term rates would probably rise about percentage point , while treasury bill rates may increase somewhat less because of sizable bill paydowns .
c PAR 18 the prime rate would also be likely to increase , particularly since loan demands are expected to remain strong , and bond yields should continue to move up somewhat .
c PAR 18 with the rise in market rates , member bank borrowing from federal reserve banks would expand sharply from recently reduced levels , increasing pressures for a discount rate advance .
c PAR 18 the rise in short - term rates under alternative c may provide some support for the dollar in international exchange markets .
c PAR 19 the near - term increase in interest rates under alternative c would be a step toward reducing the longer - run rate of growth of the monetary aggregates , but further upward adjustments in interest rates over the coming year would be required to limit m-1 growth to the mid - point of its 4 to 6 per cent longer - run range .
c PAR 19 the funds rate would probably have to rise to 9 per cent by late this year .

