a SENT -- 9¾ to 10½ ( 10 ) alternative a presumes a federal funds rate between now and the january meeting centered in the prevailing 9¾ to 10 per cent range .
a PAR 13 under alternative a , m-2 is projected to expand in a 6 to 10 per cent annual rate range in december - january , a somewhat more rapid pace than in recent weeks .
a PAR 13 this acceleration reflects mainly the expected strengthening of m-1 and the anticipated end of the recent decline in outstanding savings deposits .
a PAR 13 growth in the interest - bearing component of m-2 is expected to be at about a 9 to 10 per cent annual rate , with growth almost wholly attributable to expansion in large time deposits that are not subject to interest rate ceilings .
a PAR 16 if the federal funds rate remains within the 9¾ to 10 per cent range over the intermeeting period , as envisioned under alternative a , interest rates on short - term market instruments will likely fluctuate within a narrow range .
a PAR 16 private short - term rates appear to have fully adjusted to the current funds rate level , and no significant change in private short - term credit demands appears in prospect for the weeks immediately ahead .
a PAR 16 the relative movement of treasury bill rates will , of course , be influenced by the level of foreign exchange market intervention and the portfolio policies of foreign official institutions .
a PAR 16 1/ the fhlbb has indicated that advances will not be liberally available to institutions that do not make reasonable efforts to roll over maturing 6-month certificates .
a SENT -- , the midpoint of alternative a would call for no further rise in the funds rate over the longer - run policy period .
a SENT -- this additional restraint on monetary expansion would imply that the funds rate could be lower than the alternative a path by next summer , while still achieving the same growth in the aggregates over the qiii ' 78 to qiii ' 79 period .

b PAR 18 under alternative b , the federal funds rate would rise by mid - january to the midpoint of a 9¾ to 10½ per cent range .
b PAR 18 m-1 growth would likely be in a 2 to 7 per cent annual rate range over december - january , and m-1 + and m-2 , respectively , in a ½ to 4½ and 5½ to 9½ per cent range .
b PAR 18 the resulting increase in short - term market rates of interest would further slow the growth of deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings , induce more aggressive offerings of mmc 's and large denomination time deposits , and a tightening of bank lending terms -- with the prime loan rate moving up to 11¾ or 12 per cent .
b PAR 18 1/ the treasury is also expected to issue swiss franc denominated notes , amounting to about $ 1.2 billion equivalent , in the first part of january .
b PAR 18 long - term yields would also probably move up , but the light financing calendar and further evidence of the system 's determination to con- strain monetary growth would tend to limit such movement .



