a SENT -- by contrast , alternative a would imply a reduction in the funds rate , reaching year - end levels about ¾ of a percentage point below the current level .
a SENT -- i calls for a reduction in the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point from the current level ; such a decline over the intermeeting period would be most consistent with the alternative a longer - run range .

b SENT -- growth for m-1 would have to be about 3 percentage points lower to reach the low end of the alternative b range of growth , and 3 points higher to reach the upper end .
b PAR 18 under alternative b , m-2 is expected to expand at a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate range in february - march ,
b PAR 18 considerably 1/ this , of course , represents the end - point of the long - run policy period .
b PAR 18 2/ adjusted for the retarding effects of ats on m-1 , the velocity increase would be 8 per cent annual rate .
b PAR 18 more rapidly than in the previous three months , but growth at the 7 per cent midpoint would be a little less than needed to bring m-2 up to the low end of the range specified under alternative b . the acceleration of this aggregate reflects the expected strengthening of both m-1 and the interest - bearing component of m-2 , with much of the strength in the latter likely to result from a slowing of re- cent unusually rapid savings account withdrawals .
b PAR 20 if federal funds continue to trade at a rate of 10 per cent or slightly higher over the intermeeting period , as con- templated under alternative b , other short - term rates are also likely to remain about unchanged , as recent market rate declines appear to reflect full adjustment to the weak growth of the aggregates .
b PAR 20 business short - term credit demands may strengthen a bit in coming weeks , and the treasury is expected to offer a sizable block of cash management bills in early march .
b PAR 20 but these short - term demands are likely to be accommodated without significant upward pressure on rates unless a resurgence in growth of the monetary aggregates causes adjustments in market expectations about the future course of monetary policy .
b PAR 21 yields on longer - term securities would also be expected to remain at about current levels over the intermeeting period under alternative b .
b PAR 21 security offerings by corporations , state and local governments , and the u.s . treasury are expected to be moderate .
b PAR 21 in its mid - february refunding , the treasury has announced that it intends to auction $ 2¼ billion and $ 2 billion of 8 and 29¾ year securities , respectively , in order to rollover maturing debt and raise about $ 1.25 billion of new money .
b PAR 21 following this operation , the treasury can raise the additional $ 10 billion of new cash needed by the end of the quarter through sale of cash management bills and routine offerings of short- and intermediate - term notes .
b PAR 22 the foreign exchange value of the dollar over coming weeks may be sustained , under money market conditions implied by alternative b , as banks obtain more funds from abroad to meet relatively strong credit demands in a period of modest growth in domestic deposits .
b PAR 22 the relatively high interest rates in the u.s . and recent evidence of strength in the dollar may also encourage investment in the dollar - denominated assets by private market participants .
b PAR 22 of course , the behavior of the dollar on exchange markets will also depend on a number of other factors , including future developments in the middle east .

c PAR 23 under alternative c , the federal funds rate would be expected to rise to the midpoint of a 10 to 11 per cent range .
c PAR 23 growth in m-1 would likely be in a 4 to 9 per cent and m-2 in 4 to 8 per cent annual rate range , respectively .
c PAR 23 a tightening action at this time is likely to come as a surprise to the market in light of the recent weakness in the aggregates .
c PAR 23 as a result , market participants might conclude that a further tightening could follow and thus a comparatively sharp increase in short - term interest rates could occur .
c PAR 23 the higher level of money market rates would further encourage out- flows of deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings , induce even more aggressive offerings of mmc 's and large denomination time deposits , and foster a firming of bank lending terms -- with the prime rate moving up to record levels of over 12 per cent .
c PAR 23 the dollar would tend to move higher in foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 23 in bond markets , interest rates would rise , but both the moderate volume of new security offerings and strengthened market expectations that inflation will be curbed would tend to limit such movements .
c PAR 23 in the mortgage market , however , rates would likely move significantly higher in response to reduced deposit inflows at thrifts and the further rise in the cost of their mmc 's .

