a SENT -- under alternative a , however , we would expect interest rates to rise later in the year to offset the stimulative effect on the aggregates of the easing in market conditions assumed for the weeks ahead if m-1 growth over the year is to be near the middle of the 1½ to 4½ per cent range .

b PAR 13 under alternative b , with the funds rate remaining un- changed from the currently prevailing level of 10 per cent or a little higher , given the staff 's gnp projection , we expect m-1 to increase over the march - april period in a range centered on a 4 to 9 per cent annual rate range .
b PAR 13 with growth at the midpoint of this range , the level of m - l in april would be below the low end of the path implied by the committee 's current longer - run range .
b PAR 13 growth at the 9 per cent upper end of the alternative b short - run range , would bring m-1 to a level in april just above the low end of the committee 's longer - run range , as shown in the chart on the next page .
b PAR 14 under alternative b , m-2 is expected to expand in a 3 to 7 per cent annual rate range in march - april , considerably above its recent rate of growth .
b PAR 14 most of the acceleration reflects the projected strengthening of m-1 , but the interest - bearing component of m-2 is expected to rise a little faster than it has , on average , over the past few months .
b PAR 14 commercial banks can be expected to benefit to some extent from the elimination of the rate ceiling differential on mmcs , effective mid - march , and the unusually rapid outflow of savings deposits of recent months is expected to diminish .
b PAR 14 however , as shown in the chart on the following page , even growth in m-2 at the upper end of the alternative b range would leave the level of this aggregate in april below the lower end of the path implied by the committee 's longer - run range .
b PAR 16 if , as projected , the monetary aggregates strengthen in march - april , market expectations of a near - term tightening of monetary policy may themselves lead to some upward pressures on short - term interest rates .
b PAR 16 in addition , the treasury market may have to absorb further bill sales by foreign accounts , and the treasury may have to offer a sizable amount of cash management bills to cover cash drains prior to the mid- april tax date .
b PAR 16 rate pressures could be intensified if banks increase the pace of their cd offerings , which they might well do if bank credit demands remain strong , availability of corporate rp money declines as the april tax date approaches , or the return flow of funds from their branches abroad diminishes .
b PAR 16 any tendency for short - term rates to rise , however , would be blunted by stability of the funds rate at near current levels , as contemplated under alternative b . the dollar may well continue to trade around current levels in the exchange markets over the next few weeks , accompanied by continuation of some central bank net sales of dollars .
b PAR 17 under alternative b , bond yields can be expected to fluctuate in a fairly narrow range .
b PAR 17 the volume of oncoming supplies in the municipal market is likely to rise from the recent pace , but the corporate new issue calendar remains quite modest .
b PAR 17 moreover , the treasury is entering a period of seasonally light coupon financing activity .
b PAR 17 it is expected to raise about $ 2 billion of new money in early april through sale of a 15-year bond ( or perhaps a 5-year note ) , but thereafter it is expected to borrow only about $ 1 billion of additional new money in the coupon market until june .
b PAR 17 while there appears to be little reason to expect any significant rise in bond market rates under alternative b , the projected slowing of deposit flows at thrift institutions suggests that primary mortgage yields may edge higher in coming weeks .

c PAR 18 under alternative c , the federal funds rate would rise to the midpoint of a 10 - 1/4 to 11 per cent range .
c PAR 18 growth in m-1 and m-2 would likely be in annual rate ranges of 3 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 per cent and 3 to 7 per cent , respectively .
c PAR 18 a tightening action at this time , while widely discussed by financial market participants in recent weeks , does not appear to have been fully discounted , and thus market interest rates would be expected to move up rather significantly in both long- and short - term markets , with the increases greatest in the short - term area .

