a PAR 15 growth in m-1 and m-2 would likely be in annual rate ranges of 3 to 7 and 5 to 9 per cent , respectively .
a PAR 15 an easing action might tend to reinforce views that a considerable weakening in economic activity is in prospect .
a PAR 15 as a result , short - term interest rates could decline sharply .
a PAR 15 bond yields would be expected to decline in the short - run , as investors might feel that interest rates had peaked .
a PAR 15 however , such strength could be short - lived because many market participants would question the system 's resolve to restrain inflationary pressures . reflecting this latter concern , the dollar probably would lose strength in exchange markets .
a SENT -- under alternative a , however , 1/ on the basis of recent evidence , the staff has lowered somewhat its assumption regarding the impact of ats shifts on m-1 growth , and now believes that such shifts will reduce m-1 by about 2½ percentage points over the qiv ' 78 to qi ' 79 period .

b SENT -- growth rates from march required to achieve levels implied by fomc longer - run ranges for m-1 and m-2 low end midpoint high end of range of range of range achieve level by : m-1 qiv ' 79 ( end - point of m-2 qiv ' 79 ( end - point of ( 10 ) as shown in the table above and in the chart on page 9 m-1 and m-2 under alternative b , would be unlikely by may to reach levels implied by the lower ends of their longer - run ranges .
b PAR 11 under alternative b , m-2 is expected to accelerate into expected strengthening of m-1 , as well as continuation of the recent pick - up in growth of the interest - bearing component of m-2 .
b PAR 11 the decline in outstanding savings deposits appears to be abating .
b PAR 11 and banks are expected to continue to be more active in the mmc market , as seems to be the case since the mid - march elimination of the rate ceiling differential on these deposits .
b PAR 11 thrift institutions ' deposit inflows , on the other hand , are expected to moderate in the months ahead , largely reflecting the mid - march regulatory actions.1/ thus , their commitment activity is likely to remain limited over the near term , and in order to finance mortgage takedowns thrifts will likely reduce their liquidity and continue to borrow .
b PAR 11 primary mortgage rates may continue to edge upward as deposit inflows to thrift institutions diminish .
b PAR 11 ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 15 )
b PAR 12 financial markets in the weeks ahead may be subject to some of the same conflicting pressures as in recent weeks -- continued high 1/ our projections have not taken into account any offsetting boost to deposit flows that might result from changes in deposit rate ceilings that have been proposed for public comment .
b PAR 12 inflation , a strengthened dollar , and increased uncertainty about the future course of economic activity .
b PAR 12 in such an environment , even stability in the funds rate , as contemplated under alternative b , could be associated with relatively wide fluctuations in interest rates arising from changing expectations .
b PAR 12 apart from expectational factors , underlying demand - supply forces appear in reasonable balance .
b PAR 12 a large paydown of treasury cash management bills in the latter part of april may exert downward pressures on very short - term interest rates , but this could be offset by continued sales of bills by foreign official institutions should the dollar continue strong .

c PAR 14 growth in m-1 and m-2 would likely be in an annual rate range of 2 to 6 and 4 to 8 per cent , respectively .
c PAR 14 short - term interest rates probably would increase in line with the rise in the funds rate .
c PAR 14 it is less clear what might happen to long - term rates .
c PAR 14 they may rise some in sympathy with the increase in short rates .
c PAR 14 but it is equally likely that they may show little net change , or perhaps even decline some , if the market comes to believe that interest rates may peak sooner than otherwise .


