a PAR 20 reserve supplying operations to achieve this target would call for growth in both total and nonborrowed reserves at about a 10¼ percent annual rate in the next three months .
a PAR 20 it is anticipated that money market rates would decline under this alternative over the next few weeks , with the federal funds rate moving towards the 7 percent lower end of its proposed range and the 3-month bill rate moving back into the 6 to 7 percent range .
a PAR 20 such a decline in rates would bring increased pressure on banks and thrift institutions to cut their lending rates and would very likely cause a further erosion in the exchange value of the dollar unless accompanied by drops in interest rates abroad .
a PAR 20 a significant decline in short rates is likely to lead to some sympathetic response in capital markets as well .
a PAR 20 however , the substantial volume of oncoming issues from both the private and public sectors , as well as investor concerns about inflation , would tend to limit declines in bond yields .
a PAR 20 staff projections suggest that short - term rates would have to rise sharply by late summer or early fall to lower growth in the aggregates if the midpoints of the longer - run targets for the year are to be achieved .

b SENT -- 8 - 1/2 7 - 1/2 7 - 3/4 5 - 1/2 8 - 3/4 6 - 3/4 7 - 1/2 annual rates of growth in bank credit for the year and for the expected under alternative b ; year 1980 , 4 - 3/4 ; qi , 9 - 1/2 ; qii , i ; qiv , 7 - 1/2 .
b PAR 17 of the three short - run alternatives , alternative b would probably have the least effect on market rates of interest over the forth- coming intermeeting period .
b PAR 17 even under this alternative , however , there might be some further upward pressure on interest rates if the market comes to feel that monetary policy will have to begin restraining money growth or that fiscal policy will be turning more expansionary .
b PAR 17 in any event , treasury borrowing needs appear rather substantial over the months ahead .
b PAR 17 mortgage rates are likely to decline only a bit further , particu- larly if short rates stabilize or back up some and thrift institutions become concerned about the cost and magnitude of future deposit inflows .
b PAR 17 looking toward the fall of the year , it appears more likely that interest rates would be under some upward pressure , as nominal gnp growth - and accompanying money and credit demands - accelerates .
b PAR 17 if , however , the public 's transactions demand for money remains on the low side relative to gnp , upward interest rate pressures could be quite minimal .
b PAR 18 the specifications of alternative b call for a considerable slowing in m-2 from its may - june pace .
b PAR 18 mmmf growth , while remaining large , is expected to slacken from its recent exceptionally rapid rate as previous market yield declines are reflected in returns posted by the funds .
b PAR 18 not all of this slowdown is expected to be reflected in gains for the depository institutions , although the 30-month small saver certificate is projected to grow strongly .
b PAR 18 with domestic bank loan demands remaining weak , cd and eurodollar borrowing will continue to decline , and there will probably be further advances from u.s .
b PAR 18 banks to their foreign branches in response to relatively strong credit demands in eurodollar markets .
b PAR 19 to achieve the growth in the aggregates specified under alternative b , total reserves would have to expand at about an 8¼ percent annual rate from june to september .
b PAR 19 assuming a level of member bank borrowings ( excluding special borrowings ) of about $ 50 to $ 100 million , nonborrowed reserves would expand at about an 8 percent.annual rate .
b PAR 22 given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the directive consistent with the form of recent directives , except for the at a pace consistent with the desired rates of monetary growth over the third quarter of 1980 , provided that the federal funds rate on a weekly average basis remains within a specified range .
b PAR 22 the range for the federal funds rate adopted at the may meeting is shown in strike - through form .
b PAR 22 in the short run , the committee seeks expansion of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of m-1a[del : , ] and m-1b
b PAR 22 [ del : , and m-2 at rates high enough to promote achievement of the committee 's objectives for monetary growth over the year ] over the third quarter of 1980 at annual rates of   percent and   percent respectively , provided that in the period before the next regular meeting the weekly average federal funds rate remains within a range of [ del : 8½ to 14 ]   to   percent .
b PAR 22 tee committee believes that , consistent with this short - run policy , m-2 should grow at an annual rate of about   percent over the third quarter .
b PAR 22 if it appears during the period before the next meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the objective for the expansion of reserves , the manager for domestic operations is promptly to notify the chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the committee .
b PAR 22 appendix i estimated impact of nationwide now accounts on the monetary aggregates in 1981
b PAR 22 the depository institutions deregulation and monetary control act of 1980 extends now account authority nationwide to all depository institu- tions except credit unions as of december 31 , 1 9 8 0 .
b PAR 22 1 / in addition , it makes permanent the authority of insured commercial banks and mutual savings banks to offer ats accounts and of federally insured credit unions to offer share drafts.2- as the public adjusts to these new circumstances , growth in m-1a will be slowed by shifts from household demand deposits to other check- able deposits ( ocds ) , while growth in m-1b will be enlarged by shifts of funds from savings deposits and other liquid assets to ocds .
b PAR 22 no significant impact is expected on m-2 because it includes virtually all of the funds likely to shift to now or ats accounts .
b PAR 22 table i-1 shows the estimated distribution of household trans- action deposits between demand deposits and ocds .
b PAR 22 in the bottom line it may be seen that roughly 30 percent of the estimated $ 19 billion of household 1/ nows have been authorized for all depository institutions except credit unions in massachusetts and new hampshire since january 1 , 1974 , in the other four new england states since february 27 , 1976 , in new york since november 10 , 1978 , and in new jersey since december 28 , 1979 .
b PAR 22 nows may be held only by individuals and nonprofit organizations .
b PAR 22 2/ ats were authorized nationwide at banks and thrifts on november 1 , 1978 and share drafts first became available at federal credit unions on october 1 , 1974 .
b PAR 22 ats may be held only by individuals , and share drafts only by credit union members .
b PAR 22 3/ because ceiling interest rates on nows are likely to be below those on other savings deposits , it may seem implausible that a substantial amount of savings - type balances would shift to nows .
b PAR 22 however , in new england- where the ceiling rates on savings deposits exceed those on nows ( at com- mercial banks these two ceiling rates were equal until july 1979)-more than one - fifth of existing nows have no draft activity , suggesting that the funds in such accounts were diverted from savings or other liquid assets .
b PAR 22 shifts are also likely to occur to meet the generally higher minimum balances re- quirements associated with nows compared to demand deposits .
b PAR 22 overall , staff estimates indicate that roughly one - third of now balances were diverted from other than demand deposit accounts .
b PAR 22 table i-1 estmated distribution of household transaction balances first quarter 1980 ( quarterly averages , billions of dollars except as noted ) 8 states 42 states household with now
b PAR 22 without now deposit items authority authority all states ( 3 )
b PAR 22 estimated amount shifted ( 4 ) estimated amount shifted 11 nows , ats , share drafts and demand deposits at mutual savings banks .
b PAR 22 2/ an estimated two - thirds of now , ats , and cusds were converted from demand deposits and one - third were diverted from other liquid assets .
b PAR 22 transaction balances in the 8 northeastern states where now accounts already exists have shifted to ocds , while about 6 - 1/2 percent of the $ 92 billion of household transaction accounts in the rest of the nation have so shifted .
b PAR 22 it is the $ 86 billion of personal transaction deposits still held in demand deposits in the 42 states not currently having nows that are likely to be most affected by the new legislation .
b PAR 22 some inferences about the amount of demand deposits in the 42 states likely to be converted to nows may be drawn from the earlier experience with now and ats accounts .
b PAR 22 ( table i-2 . )
b PAR 22 in massachusetts and new hampshire , less than 10 percent of household demand deposits are esti- mated to have shifted to nows by the end of the first year during which all institutions in those states could offer these instruments ; about half of such shifts had occurred during the previous 1 - 1/2 years when only state - chartered msbs could offer nows .
b PAR 22 the slow transition in these states reflected the novelty of the now concept as well as the un- certainty about their future status .
b PAR 22 in 1976 , when nows were first authorized in the four other new england states , the growing awareness and acceptance of nows resulted in much faster adjustment , and about 20 percent of house- hold demand deposits shifted in the first year .
b PAR 22 similarly , in new york , about 20 percent of household demand deposits shifted to nows during the first year .
b PAR 22 finally , the ats experience in the rest of the nation indicates a rather slow transition , reminiscent of the experience in the original two now states .
b PAR 22 after the first year , only about 5 percent of consumer demand deposits had shifted to ats accounts .
b PAR 22 as in the original two now states , the slow response to ats likely reflected in part table i-2 estimated percent of household demand deposits shifted to now - ats one year after authorization states where authorized type of account authorized date of authorization percent of demand deposits shifted to new accounts after 1 year massachusetts and new hampshire connecticut , maine rhode island , and vermont new york nows nows nows and ats rest of nation 1 ats january
b PAR 22 1974 march 1976 november 1978 november 1978
b PAR 22 i/ includes new jersey .
b PAR 22 9 - 1/2 5 - 1/4 uncertainty about the future status of the new accounts.1/ in addition , the sluggish growth of ats may reflect the absence so far of strong inter- institutional competition for interest - bearing transaction accounts , since s&ls have generally not been authorized to offer ats accounts .
b PAR 22 the varied now and ats experience suggests a fairly wide range for the possible proportion of demand deposits shifting to nows in 1981 .
b PAR 22 projections of consumer demand deposits indicate that , in the absence of nationwide nows , household demand deposits in the 42 states would have grown to an estimated $ 93 - 1/2 billion by the end of 1981.2/ if the adjust- ment is relatively fast , a diversion to nows of 20 percent , or $ 18 - 3/4 billion , of these household demand deposits may occur during 1981 .
b PAR 22 on the other hand , if it is relatively slow the shifts may be only about 5 percent , or $ 4½ billion .
b PAR 22 these figures translate into reduction of m - a growth of from 1 to 5 percentage points in 1981 ( see table i-3 ) .
b PAR 22 roughly one - third of existing now deposits are estimated to have been diverted from assets other than demand deposits .
b PAR 22 thus , adding a $ 2 - 1/4 billion shift from savings and other liquid assets to the low estimate of $ 4 - 1/2 billion from demand deposits produces a $ 6 - 3/4 total growth in nows during 1981 .
b PAR 22 similarly , adding $ 9 - 1/2 billion to the high estimate of $ 18 - 3/4 billion from demand deposits yields $ 28 - 1/4 billion in total now growth .
b PAR 22 these figures imply an estimated boost to m-1b growth ranging from 1/2 to 2 - 1/2 percentage points during 1981 .
b PAR 22 1/ ats accounts at commercial banks grew to over $ 6 billion during the first half year they were offered .
b PAR 22 then , in april 1979 a court ruling set aside regulations authorizing ats accounts , and placed their ultimate status in doubt until the monetary control act was passed ; during the 10 month interim , ats grew by only around $ 2 billion .
b PAR 22 this figure assumes 6 percent growth in consumer transaction deposits in 1980 and 1981 and is consistent with the growth in ocds implied by alternative b and strategy 1 in this bluebook , i.e. , a 6 percent growth in consumer trans- actions deposits is consistent with a 4 - 1/2 percent growth in m-1a .
b PAR 22 table i-3 estimated impact of the authorization of nationwide nows on growth of m-1a and m-1b in ( in percent ) reduction in m-1a low estimate high estimate boost in m-1b 1/2 2 - 1/2 midpoint estimate memo : growth in nows outside the northeast during 1981 $ 6 - 3/4 billion $ 28 - 1/4 billion
b PAR 22 $ 17 - 1/2 billion3 1 - 1/2
b PAR 22 the width of these ranges reflects the high degree of un- certainty regarding the speed of adjustment to nationwide nows in light of the diversity of experience with now and ats accounts .
b PAR 22 several factors argue for expecting a rate of growth in the vicinity of the lower bound : ( 1 ) at year end 1979 , one - third of commercial banks , holding an estimat- ed 70 percent of household demand deposits , already offered now or ats accounts .
b PAR 22 since now and ats accounts are close sub- stitutes from the viewpoints of both offering institutions and depositors , the nationwide now authority does not seem to be the sort of innovation that should cause massive shifts of funds .

c SENT -- under alternative c , m-1a growth would be 6 percent from june to september , and growth would need to continue at that rate in the fourth quarter .
c PAR 21 total reserves would have to expand at a 6¼ percent rate . assuming member bank adjustment borrowings of about $ 200 million during the forthcoming intermeeting period - given the current discount rate -- nonborrowed reserves would increase at a 5¼ percent rate .
c PAR 21 these reserve specifications suggest that the funds rate would increase to around the midpoint of the 9 to 14 percent range suggested for this alternative .
c PAR 21 and an even higher funds rate would be likely to emerge by the fourth quarter .
c PAR 21 the policy stance of alternative c would intensify the recent weakness in money and capital markets , and interest rates would be expected to rise throughout the maturity spectrum .
c PAR 21 these interest rate developments would probably lead to a strengthening of the dollar in foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 21 directive language 


