a PAR 16 compared to the other alternatives , alternative a involves a greater increase in money over the four months ending in june , with m-1a targeted to expand at a 3¾ percent rate over that period .
a PAR 16 the monetary base and total reserves might expand at annual rates of 8 and 6 percent , respectively .
a PAR 16 as shown in the charts , the more rapid rates of growth of aggregates anticipated under alternative a would carry them to levels in june above their midpoint paths .
a PAR 16 the somewhat greater reserve supply would tend to be associated with some downward pressure on money market rates .
a PAR 16 the federal funds rate possibly would decline to about the 15 to 15 per- cent area over the next few weeks , with an associated member bank borrowing of around $ 1¾ billion .
a PAR 16 nonborrowed reserves would expand at about a 6½ percent annual rate in the february to june period .
a PAR 16 ( 16 ) ( 4 ) note : weekly data for columns 1 , 2 , 3 , and 5 through 10 are statement week averages of daily data .
a PAR 16 weekly data in column 4 are average rates set in the auctions of 6-month bills that will be issued on the thursday following the end of the statement week .
a PAR 16 for column 11 , the weekly date is the mid - point of the calendar week over wuichl data are averaged .
a PAR 16 columns 12 and 13 are 1-day quotes for friday and thursday , respectively , following the end of the statement week .
a PAR 16 column 14 is an average of contract interest rates on commitments for conventional first mortgages with 80 percent loan - to - value ratios made by a sample of insured savings and loan associations on the friday following the end of the statement week .
a PAR 16 column 15 gives fnma auction data for monday preceding the end of the statement week .
a PAR 16 column 16 is a 1-day quote for monday preceding the end of the statement week .. the fnma auction yield is the average yield in a bi - weekly auction for short - term forward commitments for government underwritten mortgages .
a PAR 16 gnma yields are average net yields to investors on mortgage - backed securities for immediate delivery , assuming prepayment in 12 years on pools of 30-year fia / va mortgages carrying the coupon rate 50 basis points below the current fiia / va ceiling .
a PAR 16 90 - 119 day maturity prior to november 1979 .
a PAR 17 the immediate decline in money market rates that could develop under alternative a might be viewed by the markets as inconsistent with the new anti - inflation program .
a PAR 17 under that interpretation , the dollar might weaken on foreign exchange markets ; in addition , any tendency of the bond markets to rally would be limited by continued inflationary expectations .
a PAR 17 the short - term rate decline under this alternative over the next few weeks is not likely to be large enough to make any significant difference for thrift deposit flows , and mortgage markets would continue taut .
a PAR 17 directive language 

b SENT -- c growth rates monthly quarterly average annual note : the following annual rates of growth in bank credit for the year and for the quarters are expected under alternative b : year 1980 , 7 % , qi ,
b SENT -- for the december to june period , bank credit growth under alternative b would be 9k percent .
b PAR 8 such growth , as shown on chart 1 on the next page , would also achieve levels of m-1a and m-1b by june that are on the midpoint paths of the committee 's longer - run qiv ' 79 to qiv ' 80 target ranges for these aggregates .
b PAR 8 of course , given the surge in growth in the aggregates in february , m-1a and m-1b growth would have to slow considerably in the february - june period -- to 3 and 3¾ percent average annual rates , respectively .
b PAR 8 with a significant weakening in these aggregates recently , and with nominal gnp growth projected by the staff to decelerate in the spring quarter , such average rates of growth might be consistent with a federal funds rate over the next few weeks not far from the 16 to 17 percent level that has prevailed recently.1/ restraints on use of credit cards and check overdraft facilities in the new anti - inflation program could tend to increase the demand for money ( or more particularly currency ) , but probably by no more than a minor amount , if at all , since a certain amount of spending might be curtailed and some spenders may simply write more checks on existing demand deposit holdings .
b PAR 9 the staff expects that under alternative b m-2 for the december - june period would grow around 7¾ percent and by 7 percent from february to june .
b PAR 9 this is faster than would be implied by a simple extension of the 6 percent rate targeted for the december to march period .
b PAR 9 however , 1/ there is as yet
b PAR 9 no evidence that larger than normal tax refunds -- which began in late february -- have measurably affected money growth .
b PAR 9 as noted in the last bluebook , growth rate of m-1a in march and april could be increased by 1 to 3 percentage points by such refunds , with offsetting effects in the ensuing three months .
b PAR 9 given the continued uncertain influence of tax refunds on the aggregates , and the lack of evidence of any positive impact in the limited data thus far , the staff has still made no special adjustment in the targets presented to the committee .
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m-1a and m-1b m-1a - longer - run range .
b PAR 9 short - run alternauv - march projection billions of dollars
b PAR 9 s6 % 3%% m-1b slonger - un rang .
b PAR 9 hort - run a rmtiv smarch projection aaons ot daws 0 1 0
b PAR 9 i chart 2 actual and targeted m-2 and m-3
b PAR 9 longer - aun range shr - flrun altenmaves march projection s '
b PAR 9 , - confio0etai .
b PAR 9 oeus - fomc shnons of dcamu o
b PAR 9 me damownusn on tmew acs m-2 the specified growth for february - june represents a significant slowing from the february pace , and as shown in chart 2 , such growth would place m-2 in june at the midpoint of its longer - run range .
b PAR 11 the specifications of alternative b imply an annual rate of growth from february to june of the monetary base and of total reserves of about 7¾ percent and 5¾ percent , at annual rates , respectively .
b PAR 11 member bank borrowings might average around the $ 2½ billion over the next few weeks ; assuming that they then edge down toward about $ 1¾ billion by mid- year , nonborrowed reserves would increase at about a 4¾ percent annual rate over the february - june period .
b PAR 11 the level of borrowing and growth of nonborrowed reserves would , of course , be affected by any changes in bank attitudes toward the discount window .
b PAR 11 it is not clear whether the newly instituted 3 point surcharge over the basic discount rate will tend to encourage more willing use of the window , at least up to the point where the surcharge goes into effect , or will encourage banks to be more conservative for fear that unexpected events may force them to borrow at the higher rate .

c SENT -- the tightening of money markets that appears needed under alternative c might be construed by the market as reinforcing the new anti - inflation program , and this could lead to some easing of bond market pressures even as short rates rise .
c SENT -- ( 14 ) as shown in the charts , the aggregate specifications of alternative c imply that m-1a and m-1b would be below their midpoint paths by june .


