a SENT -- the following annual rates of growth in bank credit for the year and for the quarters are expected under alternative a : year 1980 , 5 ' ; qi ,
a PAR 12 under alternative a , given the demand for transactions balances implied by the staff 's stronger economic projection for the current quarter , money market interest rates are likely to remain at the higher levels attained recently .
a PAR 12 aggregate credit demands may pick up , especially in the household sector .
a PAR 12 the runoff in consumer installment debt likely will slow , while the demand for home mortgages probably will strengthen somewhat .
a PAR 12 borrowing by the treasury and state and local governments will remain quite large .
a PAR 12 in the business sector , although total borrowing probably will rise in coming weeks , a significant portion of the increase will reflect a rebuilding of liquidity positions .
a PAR 13 to achieve the growth in the aggregates specified under alternative a , total reserves would have to expand at about a 5 percent annual rate from july to september .
a PAR 13 assuming a level of member bank borrowing ( excluding special borrowings ) of about $ 100 million , nonborrowed reserves would expand at about a 6 - 1/4 percent annual rate .
a PAR 13 with member bank borrowings at such minimal levels , the federal funds rate would be expected to fluctuate around the current 10 percent discount rate .
a SENT -- ( 15 ) a simple extrapolation of the june to september target for m-1a under alternative a would yield a 4 percent growth of this aggregate for the qiv ' 79 to qiv ' 80 period .

b SENT -- only minor variations in growth rates would be expected under alternative b . chart
b PAR 14 to achieve the alternative b targets , growth in total reserves at about a 5 percent annual rate would be required .
b PAR 14 with adjustment borrowings assumed to be about $ 200 million , nonborrowed reserves would expand at a 4 - 1/4 percent annual rate .
b PAR 14 at the current discount rate , these specifications suggest that the federal funds rate would move toward the 11 percent area in the intermeeting period .
b PAR 14 interest rates would be expected to rise throughout the maturity spectrum .
b PAR 14 the bank prime rate almost certainly would be increased , and home mortgate rates , already under upward pressure from recent increases in other interest rates , pro-
b PAR 14 bably also would rise significantly - especially in light of the greater concerns about deposit flows that would develop among lenders .
b PAR 14 the recent strength of the dollar in foreign exchange markets probably would continue , moderated by u.s .
b PAR 14 official purchases of foreign currencies to repay swap debt .


