a SENT -- b growth from june to september implied growth from july to federal funds rate range 15 to 21 16 to 22 ( 8) alternative a retains the committee 's 7 percent june - to- september target for m1-b adopted at the last meeting , a target that would require an 8½ percent annual rate of growth over the two - month july - to- september period .
a SENT -- i ank credit - actual level billions of alternative a to be on the order of 10½ percent .
a PAR 10 to achieve the alternative a specifications , total reserves probably would have to expand at about a 13 percent annual rate in august and september , considerably more than in july .
a PAR 10 even such a rapid expansion in reserves , and the associated faster money growth , would likely be con- sistent with short - term interest rates holding near current levels .
a PAR 10 nominal gnp is expected by the staff to expand at a 7 percent annual rate in the third quarter , suggesting strong transactions demands for money over the balance of the quarter .
a PAR 10 even with the alternative a target specifi- cations , income velocity of m - b would rise at a relatively rapid annual rate of about 5 percent this quarter .
a PAR 10 it seems reasonable to expect that under alternative a the federal funds rate over the next few weeks might be in the area of 18 percent .
a PAR 10 with the current level of discount and surcharge rates , borrowing at the discount window could be in a $ 1 to $ 1 billion range .
a SENT -- pressure on thrift institution earnings would be more intense under this alternative than under alternative a , and mortgage rates would probably rise further .

b SENT -- the alternative b specifications imply growth of total reserves from july to september at an 11 percent annual rate .
b SENT -- under alternative b , market interest rates , especially short - term rates , are likely to rise , perhaps appreciably .
b SENT -- thus , if this directive included the july to september growth rate for m1-b in alternative b , the language of the directive would permit the higher growth in m1-b needed to meet the 7 percent quarterly target should m2 remain at or fall below the upper bound of its longer - run range .


