a PAR 16 under alternative a , m1-b growth is targeted to rise at about a 12 percent annual rate from september to december in order to bring this aggregate back to the lower bound of its long - run range by the end of the year .
a PAR 16 we would expect a substantial drop in short - term rates-- with the funds rate dropping into a 10 to 12 percent range on average and 3-month rates moving toward single digit levels -- as reserves are expanded to reach this objective .
a PAR 16 total reserves would have to rise at a 9 percent annual rate over the quarter , and nonborrowed reserves at about an 18 percent annual rate .
a PAR 16 a reserve operating path that appears to entail market rates well below the present 14 percent discount rate calls into question the sustainability of that rate , for technical reasons if for no other.1/ 1/ a discount rate well above the expected funds rate runs the risk of leading to highly volatile money market conditions .
a PAR 16 with adjustment borrowing negligible , the level of nonborrowed reserves in the operating path would be effectively equal to the total reserves path .
a PAR 16 if there were a shortfall in money and in required reserves , maintenance of nonborrowed reserves at path levels would entail adding to banks ' excess reserves , with consequent downward , and possibly sharp downward , pressure on the funds rate .
a PAR 16 in the short - run the funds rate could be driven toward minimal levels .
a PAR 16 rates could subsequently rebound sharply as money demand strengthened , perhaps excessively , in response to the very low money market rates .
a PAR 16 this type of rate volatility would probably be a little more marked under lagged than under contemporaneous reserve accounting , since under the former excess reserves created by federal reserve operations in any given week can not be absorbed by changes in required reserves that week .
a PAR 16 with a discount rate low relative to money market rates , the nonborrowed reserves path could be set below the total reserve path .
a PAR 16 as a result , a change in borrowing could absorb shortfalls in required reserves ; and , with borrowing less interest inelastic than excess reserves , short - term market rates would vary less for a given nonborrowed reserve path .
a PAR 17 m2 under this alternative would probably grow at a 12 percent annual rate over the next three months .
a PAR 17 net inflows of funds to thrift institutions may pick up somewhat , but more importantly , pressures on their earnings would be greatly alleviated .
a PAR 17 both mortgage market rates and bond yields are likely to show a substantial drop , calling forth stronger demands for longer - term financing .
a PAR 17 in exchange markets , the dollar would probably weaken considerably .
a PAR 17 however , the declines in long - term rates and exchange rates would tend to be moderated in the degree that market participants came to believe that a substantial rebound of short - term rates was in prospect over a reasonably near term .
a PAR 17 such a rebound would be expected by the staff early next year in the process of restraining money growth to fomc 's 1982 targets .
a PAR 17 such upward interest rate pressures would be intensified as the sharp easing of credit conditions between now and year - end contemplated by alternative a leads to more of a strengthening in economic activity in the first part of next year than is in the current staff projection .
a PAR 17 directive language 

b PAR 13 the specifications of alternative b call for a more rapid growth in m1-b at around a 9 percent annual rate from september to december , sustained by 6 percent annual rate of growth in total reserves .
b PAR 13 the federal funds rate under these conditions is likely to decline to around the current 14 percent basic discount rate or just below .
b PAR 13 ment borrowing at the discount window would move down to minimal levels in the area of $ 200 to 300 million or so .
b PAR 13 nonborrowed reserve growth would be at a 14 percent annual rate over the next three months .

c PAR 10 under the specifications of alternative c we would expect growth in m1-b at a 6 percent annual rate over the september to december period to be consistent with maintaining m2 relatively near to the upper limit of its longer - run target range .
c PAR 10 the staff does not expect this alternative to involve further downward pressures on short - term interest rates , given the 7 percent increase in nominal gnp projected for the fourth quarter and assuming less rapid downward shift in demand for m1-b ( relative to income and interest rates ) than occurred earlier this year.2/ 
c PAR 12 total reserves would need to expand at a 3 percent annual rate over the last three months of the year if the monetary specifications of alternative c are to be achieved .
c PAR 12 adjustment borrowing at the discount window would probably vary between $ 900 million and $ 1.2 billion , given the current structure of discount rates and a federal funds rate in the area of 15 to 16 percent .
c PAR 12 nonborrowed reserves would be targeted to expand at a 4 percent annual rate over the last three months of the year .

