a PAR 20 this alternative would entail growth in total reserves at a 4 percent annual rate over the first three months of the year .
a PAR 20 assuming a level of adjustment borrowing of around $ 250 million , nonborrowed reserves would grow at a 6 percent rate .
a PAR 20 such a pace of reserve provision would likely be associated with a federal funds rate near or a little below the current 12 percent discount rate .
a PAR 20 that probably would be accompanied by a decline in short - term rates from recent levels , with the 3-month bill perhaps around 10 to 10 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 20 bond yields are likely to decline some , but declines might be limited by a sizable pickup in bond offerings as the market viewed the decline as opening another " window " . with an indication of lower borrowing costs , thrift institutions would be somewhat more willing to cut mortgage rates further and increase commitment activity .
a PAR 21 the contemplated modest decline in short - term interest rates under alternative a might be accompanied by a tendency for the dollar to decline on exchange markets .
a PAR 21 however , any decline could be short - lived , or limited , as foreign central banks take advantage of any strengthening in their currencies to lower their own interest rates further in light of continued weak performance of their economies .
a SENT -- selection of alternative a might involve a larger rise in rates later in the year to compensate for the greater near- term monetary stimulus associated with this approach if the committee desires to slow money growth later in an effort to achieve midpoint growth for the year .

b PAR 16 growth of m1 from the estimated december level to march would be at a slower 2¼ percent rate since the level of december is high relative to the fourth quarter average .
b PAR 16 growth of m2 over that period would also be relatively moderate - at a 7 - 1/2 percent annual rate -- for the same reason .
b PAR 18 the alternative b specifications would require expansion in total reserves at a 2 percent pace from december to march.1 / assuming adjustment borrowing in the $ 450 million area , nonborrowed reserves would increase at a 1 - 1/2 percent rate and , at the present discount rate , the 1/ abstracting from any impact on required reserves from shifts from reservable deposits to nonreservable ibf liabilities .
b PAR 18 federal funds rate in the intermeeting period would likely fluctuate up in a 12 to 13 percent range .
b PAR 18 the 3-month treasury bill could be expected to trade in the 11 to 11 - 1/2 percent area , as sizable first quarter treasury financing demands make themselves felt in an environment in which the money market shows no sign of easing .
b SENT -- the table below shows interest rate forecasts for the year , assuming alternative b for the first quarter and midpoint growth of m1 thereafter .

c PAR 22 essentially no growth in total reserves would be involved , and assuming adjustment borrowing of $ 650 million , nonborrowed reserves would decline at about a 2 - 1/2 percent rate in the first quarter .
c PAR 22 a federal funds rate of perhaps 13 to 14 percent in the inter- meeting period would be implied .
c PAR 22 such a move in the funds rate would surprise market participants , and a fairly substantial rise in other market interest rates , at least temporarily , would tend to develop .
c PAR 22 the 3-month bill rate would probably move to near 12 - 1/2 percent , the corporate bond rate might approach 16 percent , and new issue volume would probably drop significantly as firms return to short - term credit markets .
c PAR 22 residential mortgage rates would retrace part of their recent decline .
c PAR 22 the higher than expected level of interest rates would tend to strengthen the dollar further in foreign exchange markets and limit reductions in foreign interest rates .

