a SENT -- ( more detailed and longer - run data for the alternatives are contained in the table and charts on the following pages , and the quarterly interest rate pattern underlying the staff 's gnp projection for 1982 is contained in appendix ii . ) alternative a , calling for a 4½ percent rate of growth of m1 in the march - to - june interval , would , as shown in chart 1 , maintain the level of narrow money above the upper end of the committee 's 2½-to-5½ percent longer - run range throughout the second quarter ; however , that rate , if sustained over the second half , would bring m1 down to the upper end of range by year - end .
a PAR 11 a federal funds rate of 13 percent or so would be implied , given the present discount rate .
a SENT -- if the m1 specification of alternative a is adopted for the second quarter , this would imply a further deceleration of m1 growth over the last six months of the year to a 2¾ percent annual rate to be consistent with growth for the year ( qiv to qiv basis ) at 4¾ percent rate , the middle of the upper half of the fomc 's m1 range for the year ( see the top line of the " 4¾ " column in the table below . )
a SENT -- the last column of the table shows that growth at about a 4 percent annual rate over the last six months of the year would be consistent with hitting the upper limit of the longer - run range under alternative a -- which would provide more scope for financing expected economic recovery .

b SENT -- the 3 percent m1 rate of growth from march to june of alternative b is designed to bring the level of that aggregate to about the upper limit of the committee 's longer - run range by around mid - year .
b PAR 13 the alternative b specifications , which call for m1 growth at a 3 percent rate from march to june , imply an increase in total reserves at a 7 percent rate .
b PAR 13 assuming adjustment borrowing of $ 1¼ billion , nonborrowed reserves would also increase at around a 7 percent rate , and the federal funds rate would likely fluctuate around 14 percent or a bit higher .
b PAR 13 other interest rates would probably continue to fluctuate within the range of the past several weeks , absent any substantial change in the fiscal outlook .
b PAR 13 in addition , to the extent that the market has discounted a considerable bulge in money growth in april , market rates could decline somewhat if such a bulge does not develop .

c SENT -- the alternative c specification of 1½ percent m1 growth would place that aggregate at about the middle of the upper half of the range by mid - year .
c PAR 14 this alternative would appear to be consistent with adjustment borrowing of near $ 1¾ billion , implying essentially no growth in nonborrowed reserves .
c PAR 14 under this approach , the federal funds rate would likely rise into the 15 to 16 percent range over the inter- meeting period .
c PAR 14 such a rebound in the funds rate would probably lead to a substantial rise in other short - term rates and renewed upward pressure on long rates .
c PAR 14 these rate pressures might be moderated to the extent that market expectations about the vigor of economic recovery and future credit demands are dampened .
c PAR 14 the dollar would come under substantial upward pressure in exchange markets .


