a SENT -- since alternative a would probably be associated with a drop in short - term rates over the near - term -- typified by federal funds falling to around 7 - 1/2 percent and a 3-month treasury bill to around 6 - 3/4 - -it is possible that a fairly substantial reversal of interest rates as the year 1983 progresses may be required under this alternative to restrain m2 growth to its longer - term range ( assuming that economic activity improved in the course of the year ) .
a PAR 16 total reserves might increase at a 9 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the first three months of the year under alternative a and nonborrowed reserves at a 12 - 1/2 percent annual rate , assuming adjustment borrowing of around $ 100 million or so .
a PAR 16 the discount rate would come under further downward pressure .
a PAR 16 the further easing in short - term markets con- templated by this alternative may be associated with additional declines in longer - term rates , particularly if signs of economic recovery remained weak or scattered and if a revival of upward price and wage pressures was not apparent .
a PAR 16 on the other hand , signs of an easing in reserve availability , particularly against a backdrop of continued relatively rapid money growth , might intensify inflationary concerns , exerting upward pressure on bond yields .

b PAR 11 while the specifications of alternative b call for an observed 11 percent assumed rate of growth in m2 over the next three months , such growth , given our preliminary estimate of shifts from market instruments , alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 11 _ ml- ' alt .
b PAR 11 c growth rates monthly growth rates quarterly average 1/ for purposes of constructing this tablewe have assumed that growth of m1 will be boosted by 3 per- centage points at an annual rate in the december to march period as a result of shifts related to the new money market accounts .
b PAR 11 as discussed in appendix iii , the staff believes that the actual shifts could have an effect on m1 growth of from -4 to +10 percentage points at an annual rate over this period .
b PAR 11 confidential ( fr ) class ii
b PAR 11 -fomcactual and targeted m2 m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives december
b PAR 11 1982 level is prlcte .
b PAR 11 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 confidential ( fr ) class -fomc
b PAR 11 m3 billions of dollars - actual level ..
b PAR 11 " short - run alternatives 9
b PAR 11 i december 1982 level s proected
b PAR 11 " " " chart 3 actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc billions of dollars - actual level 2 ' /o
b PAR 11 dcember 1982 level
b PAR 11 i popoctee would represent a substantial slowing from 1982 's pace in underlying m2 expansion ( abstracting from the impact of shifts associated with the new accounts ) . such a slowing would appear to be consistent with little change in short - term interest rates from current levels despite an expected acceleration in the rate of growth of nominal gnp .
b PAR 11 m2 balances grew unusually rapidly relative to gnp in 1982 , and we would anticipate an abate- ment of such liquidity demands in the course of 1983 as economic activity begins to rise and consumer and business confidence is restored .
b PAR 12 it would appear that alternative b would be consistent with a federal funds rate around the current 8 - 1/2 percent discount rate , or edging down further , and other market interest rates generally little changed .
b PAR 12 the 3-month treasury bill rate may continue in a 7 - 1/2 to 8 per- cent range , with private rates running about 1/2 to 3/4 of a percentage point higher ; however , a failure of the economy to show generalized signs of a revival in aggregate demand -- as the market might infer from weak retail sales and similar incoming data for december , should that develop-- could well lead to anticipatory rate declines .
b PAR 12 the prime loan rate could drop somewhat from its current 11 - 1/2 percent level , given its spread over prevailing open market rates .
b PAR 12 mortgage rates might come under some further downward pressure if inflows into the new accounts at thrifts induce these institutions to step up their new commitment activity .
b PAR 14 total reserve growth at about a 6 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the december ' 82 to march ' 83 period would probably be consistent with the m2 and m3 specifications of alternative b .
b PAR 14 the relation of reserves to m2 is more uncertain than usual , however , because of the wide range of possible shifts of funds into or out of deposit accounts included in m1 , which bear sizable reserve requirements .
b PAR 14 if more funds than expected move into super - now accounts , a larger growth in total reserves would be con- sistent with any given growth of m2-and vice versa if more funds than anticipated move out of m1 into mmdas .
b PAR 14 for purposes of an initial estimate of total reserves , we have assumed m1 growth from december to march at about an 8 percent rate on the assumption , noted earlier , that shifts into super - nows dominate shifts from ml into mmdas .
b PAR 14 we would anticipate non- borrowed reserve growth under alternative b at about 8 percent over the next three months , assuming borrowing from the discount window in the neighborhood of $ 250 million .


