a SENT -- ( 13 ) an increase in the committee 's fourth - quarter m2 target to a 10 percent annual rate , as in alternative a , might be required for some further easing of money market conditions in an environment of continued strong liquidity demands on the part of the public .
a PAR 14 under alternative a , we would expect the federal funds rate to decline from its present level to the area of 8½ percent , with total reserves rising at about an 8 percent annual rate in november and december .
a PAR 14 assuming such a decline in the funds rate , adjustment borrowing would be at minimal levels ( $ 150 million or less ) , given the present or a somewhat lower discount rate .
a PAR 14 nonborrowed reserves would rise at about an 11½ percent annual rate over the balance of the year .
a PAR 15 the further easing in bank reserve positions contemplated by alternative a might involve a drop in the 3-month bill rate to around 7½ percent , or perhaps somewhat lower depending on expectations of further policy adjustments .
a PAR 15 as markets ease , and confidence in markets and the economy improves , some little further narrowing in quality spreads might develop .
a PAR 15 the bank prime rate would probably decline to around 11 percent .
a PAR 15 bond rates would also likely share in these downward adjustments , as investors hastened to lock up still relatively high longer - term yields .
a PAR 15 and the lower cost of thrift institution deposits would bring additional downward pressure on mortgage rates .
a PAR 15 the further decline in u.s .
a PAR 15 interest rates would tend at least to blunt the strength of the dollar on foreign exchange markets , and may well bring some depreciation .

b PAR 10 given continued strong liquidity demands , such an m2 target might involve a federal funds rate over the intermeeting period fluctuating around the present 9½ percent discount rate and borrowing at the discount window ranging around $ 350 million .
b PAR 10 nonborrowed reserves would expand in parallel with total reserves over the last two months of the year .



