a PAR 13 the 3-month bill rate under alternative a would probably drop below the current discount rate , and range around 11 percent .
a PAR 13 a substantial bond market rally might well ensue , especially if it appeared that congress was in process of significantly reducing federal budget deficits .
a PAR 13 a considerable depreciation of the dollar on exchange markets might also take place , although this trend would be limited if foreign monetary authorities took the opportunity to permit their interest rates to decline further .
a PAR 13 reduced deposit costs would diminish earnings pressures over time on thrifts , work toward making them more willing mortgage lenders , and contribute to further declines in mortgage rates .

b PAR 9 under alternative b , we would expect some further downward drift in short - term rates between now and mid - year .
b PAR 9 the transactions demand for money is expected to be more moderate than anticipated at the time of the last meeting , with projected growth in nominal gnp in the second quarter revised down to only a 6½ percent annual rate .
b PAR 9 in addi- tion , we would anticipate the relatively strong precautionary demands of early this year and late 1981 to begin to moderate as economic prospects improve .
b PAR 10 the small decline in m1 over may and june called for by alternative b would appear to be consistent with a 6 percent growth in total reserves over the two months .
b PAR 10 with short - term interest rates expected to decline -- indexed by the federal funds rate drifting down to the 13½ percent area -- depository institutions might be expected to borrow about $ 800 million at the current 12 percent discount rate .
b PAR 10 on that assumption , nonborrowed reserves would expand by 14 percent at an annual rate over the two months .
b SENT -- growth in m2 could be expected to be somewhat higher than under alternative b , largely reflecting the stronger growth in m1 and possibly greater interest in mmcs and mmmfs , both of whose yields lag declines in market rates .
b SENT -- under alternative b , for example , growth in m1 in the second half of the year of 3 to 4¾ percent , as shown in the table below , would be consistent with growth for the year at the upper limit or just below .
b PAR 16 the committee could simply reaffirm the directive adopted at the previous meeting , since the behavior of the aggregates has not been far off track and since many of the same problems of interpretation of aggregate behavior remain .
b PAR 16 that directive is shown below .
b PAR 16 the language would be most consistent with alternative b , although it also could be adapted to alternatives a
b PAR 16 if the committee adopted alternative b , it might wish to note that it has reaffirmed objectives adopted at the last meeting ( with possible language shown in brackets ) .
b PAR 16 in the short run [ , reaffirming its decision at the previous meeting , ] the committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates con- sistent with growth of m1 and m2 from march to june at annual rates of about [ del : 3 ]   percent and [ del : 8 ]   percent respectively .
b PAR 16 the committee also noted that deviations from these targets should be evaluated in light of the probability that m2 would be less affected over the period than m1 by deposit shifts related to the tax date and by changes in the relative importance of now accounts as a savings vehicle .
b PAR 16 some shortfall in growth of m1 , consistent with progress toward the upper part of the range for the year as a whole , would be acceptable in the context of appreciably reduced pressures in the money market and relative strength of other aggregates .
b PAR 16 the chairman may call for committee consultation if it appears to the manager for domestic operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [ del : 12 to 16 ]   to   percent .
b PAR 16 appendix i reserve targets and related measures intermeeting period ( millions of dollars ; not seasonally adjusted )
b PAR 16 i implied reserve ii adjustment borrowing stargets for inter-
b PAR 16 i for smeeting sub - period projection of remaining
b PAR 16 ( average for reserves demanded ( statement sub - period )
b PAR 16 i ( average for sub - period )
b PAR 16 i average of inter- reserves path|
b PAR 16 total borrowed
b PAR 16 i excess i for meeting constructed i reserves i reserves i reserves r reserves i reserves isub - periodi period[/

c PAR 14 assuming adjustment borrowing at around $ 1.1 billion , nonborrowed reserves would increase at only a 7½ percent rate over the last two months of the quarter .
c PAR 14 the federal funds rate would probably be around the 14 to 14½ percent area , below its range of recent weeks .
c PAR 14 long - term rates would likely show little net change , since some easing in money market conditions has probably been anticipated , and on balance the exchange rate would also change little .

