a SENT -- ( 14 )  under alternative a , m1 over the next three months would grow at a rate matching that of the upper bound of the committee 's current longer - run range .
a SENT -- because such a trajectory would mean that there would be no narrowing of the existing absolute gap relative to the top of the range , alternative a might be viewed as especially consistent with a deci- sion to raise the 1982 range or to tolerate a small overshoot .

b PAR 16 the growth of m1 at a 4 percent pace specified in alternative b for the whole june - september period is not expected to be accompanied by upward interest rate pressures despite the anticipated strengthening in nominal gnp .
b PAR 16 it seems likely that transaction demands for cash in the third quarter will be satisfied in part by liquidity built up earlier this year .
b PAR 16 the federal funds rate might be at or somewhat below the 14¼ percent level of recent statement weeks , trading generally in a 13 - 14¼ percent range .
b PAR 16 at the current 12 percent discount rate , adjustment borrowing from the discount window likely would be in the $ 800 million to $ 1 billion area .
b PAR 16 with expansion in total reserves at a 5 percent annual rate over the quarter , a nonborrowed reserve path calling for growth at a slightly faster rate would be implied .

c PAR 20 it seems likely that the more restrained reserve provision consistent with such growth would place further pressure on the money markets , with the federal funds rate moving to 15 percent or a bit higher over the inter- meeting periods . borrowing at the discount window would rise to the vicinity of $ 1½ billion , and nonborrowed reserves would drop at a 1½ percent annual rate over the quarter .
c PAR 21 the firming in the funds market expected under alternative c should be accompanied by moderately higher market rates generally but with the likelihood that commercial paper and cd rates may rise more rapidly than treasury bill rates as concerns about spreading financial problems are exacerbated .
c PAR 21 the 3-month bill rate may be in a 13 to 13½ percent range , and 3-month cd rates could move above 16 percent .
c PAR 21 financial pressures would inhibit the upturn in aggregate demand .
c PAR 21 the bank prime rate likely would rise , as would primary mortgage rates .
c PAR 21 the dollar probably would come under further substantial upward pressure in exchange markets .
c PAR 21 directive language 


