a SENT -- ( 12 ) continuation of the short - run policy toward m1 adopted at the last meeting is shown as alternative a in the table below .
a SENT -- this option would bring m1 into the upper half of the 2½ to 5½ percent longer- run range by march , assuming this long - run range is based , as has been the case in the past , on the actual average level of m1 in the fourth quarter of the previous year.1/ the risk of sharp interest rate fluctua- tions that might be associated with alternative a , accompanied by potentially adverse implications for economic activity and financial markets , might be reduced by extending beyond the first quarter the horizon over which the committee targets the return of m1 to within the tentative 2½ to 5½ percent longer - run range -- as is contemplated by the three other alternatives in the table .
a SENT -- this approach , like alternative a , would be consistent with growth for 1982 at around the midpoint of the longer - run range .

b PAR 16 the staff believes that such a slowing in narrow money growth is consistent with only rather modest further upward pressure on interest rates , if any .
b PAR 16 given the staff 's projection of nominal gnp growth during the current quarter at only about a 2½ percent annual rate , the rapid increase in money that has already occurred would appear quite sufficient to finance transactions needs over the quarter , even assuming that a substantial part of the increase represented precautionary balances .
b PAR 16 indeed , even with virtually no money growth over the balance of the quarter , the velocity of m1 would decline in the quarter at a postwar record annual rate of about 9 percent .
b PAR 17 the alternative b specifications would entail little change in total reserves over the period from january to march . assuming adjustment borrowing of around $ 1 billion , nonborrowed reserves would decline at a 3 percent rate and , at the present discount rate , the federal funds rate in the intermeeting period would likely fluctuate in a 13½ to 14½ percent range.1/ demands for short - term credit are likely to remain quite strong over the balance of the quarter , with businesses continuing to avoid the bond market at the relatively high rate levels likely to prevail over the near - term under this alternative .

c PAR 19 appendix iii shows the quarterly pattern of interest rates over 1982 and 1983 associated with the greenbook projection .
c PAR 19 annual rate .
c PAR 19 assuming a decline in adjustment borrowing from recent levels to about $ 1 billion , nonborrowed reserves would rise at 2 percent rate .
c PAR 19 a federal funds rate of about 13 percent would be implied .
c PAR 19 the 3-month bill rate would likely decline from present levels to around 12 percent or a bit lower as expectations of further monetary ease tend to develop .
c PAR 19 bond yields may edge down from current levels , inducing a pick - up in bond issuance from recent depressed levels .

d PAR 20 given the staff 's expectations for weak money demand , such reserve growth would probably be associated with a decline in borrowing to about $ 500 million , given the current discount rate , and with growth in nonborrowed reserves at a 15 percent annual rate over the balance of the quarter .
d PAR 20 the federal funds rate may drop to near 12 percent , and the 3-month bill rate decline into the 10½ to 11 percent area .
d PAR 20 a sizable rally in bond markets would also tend to develop , but marketing of the large overhang of corporate bonds would tend to moderate the extent of rate decline .
d PAR 20 cost pressure on thrift institutions would be eased , which would probably be reflected in a downward adjustment in mortgage rates and in a greater willingness on the part of instititions to make mortgage commitments .
d PAR 20 m2 growth is likely to be strengthened under this alternative , particularly in the near - term , as yields on mmmfs lag the drop in open market rates .
d PAR 20 directive language 

