a PAR 8 against that background , two alternatives are shown below for the monetary and credit aggregates in 1983 .
a PAR 8 alternative
a PAR 8 ii differs only by including an m1 range that has greater odds of being consistent with the broader aggregates .
a PAR 8 upward adjustments in growth ranges are not suggested for the broader aggregates , even though recent experience suggests the possibility that expansion of m2 and particularly m3 over the year is more likely to be in the upper half of their ranges rather than near their midpoints as earlier anticipated .
a PAR 8 it is not expected that the recent decision by didc to eliminate ceiling rates on time deposits ( but not on regular now and savings accounts ) by october 1 will have any very significant impact on growth of m2 and m3 , since time deposit expansion has for some time already been in forms either without ceiling or with ceilings indexed to market rates .
a PAR 8 ii ml 4 to 8 7 to 11 m2 1/ 7 to 10 7 to 10 m3
a PAR 8 6½ to 9½ total credit 8½ to 11½ 8½ to 11½ 
a SENT -- thus , one option ( alternative a in the table below ) for the committee -- in addition to simply retaining the present ranges -- would be to retain the ranges but indicate that actual growth for 1984 was expected to be lower in the ranges than it had been in 1983 .
a PAR 18 the specifications of alternative a contemplate no further tightening of money market conditions over the next few months .
a PAR 18 a federal funds rate range of 6 to 10 percent is shown for this alternative , the same as in the directive adopted at the last meeting .
a PAR 18 however , a federal funds rate in the upper half of that range -- around 9 percent or a little higher -- would be contemplated .
a PAR 18 recent experience with borrowing at the discount window would suggest that borrowing would tend to be in the $ 450 to 600 million range .
a PAR 18 from june to september , nonborrowed and total reserves would be expected to expand at annual rates of about 5½ and 4 percent , respectively .
a PAR 20 under alternative a , m1 growth is anticipated to slow much more substantially than growth in the other aggregates .
a PAR 20 in large part , this is because m1 demand is no longer expected to be buttressed by the lagged impact of last year 's sharp declines in interest rates .
a PAR 20 indeed , the recent rise in short - term rates should begin to have a restraining effect on m1 .
a PAR 20 the assumed m1 growth in this alternative would be consistent , given our gnp projection , with about no change in its income velocity in the third quarter,1/ in contrast to the declines in velocity that have generally characterized the past several quarters .
a PAR 20 such a turn - around in velocity would not be unexpected during the course of a cyclical expan- sion .
a PAR 20 however , as noted earlier , large uncertainties surround estimates of m1 demand , given the change in its composition as now accounts have become an increasingly important component of the aggregates .
a PAR 20 should the public continue to place a substantial amount of savings in components of m1 , and over the next few weeks some of the tax cut may well be lodged in such deposits , the velocity of m1 could continue to fall -- with m1 1 on a quarterly average basis m1 growth in the third quarter under alternative a would be around 10¾ percent at an annual rate .
a PAR 20 growth faster -- at current levels of interest rates .
a PAR 20 on the other hand , the large build - up in m1 balances of the past several quarters could well support a rapid expansion in gnp without much further increase in m1 should confidence generated by continuing favorable economic news entail a substantial reduction in demand for liquidity .
a PAR 21 given recent market rate adjustments , it would seem most likely that interest rates would generally remain near current levels under alternative a or decline some .
a PAR 21 in large degree , market rate increases in recent days seem to have been in anticipation of a further tightening of monetary policy .
a PAR 21 the 3-month treasury bill rate might be in an 8¾ to 9¼ percent range over the next several weeks .
a PAR 21 markets will remain ex- ceptionally sensitive , however , given the unexpected strength of the economy , and the level of rates will be strongly influenced by assessment of the meaning for monetary policy over the next few months of incoming economic news and the federal reserve 's decisions about longer - run targets .
a PAR 21 if and as short - term interest rates tend to stabilize , long - term rates may tend to decline from current levels .
a SENT -- while thrift deposit flows might be about the same as under alternative a , higher deposit costs would once again begin to eliminate the earnings of a large number of s&ls and msbs , exerting upward pressure on mortgage rates .

b PAR 9 the implications of these targets for annual growth rates of the aggregates over the second half of 1983 are shown in the last two columns of the table below .
b PAR 9 it should be noted that a considerable slowing in m1 growth over the balance of the year is needed if even the upper end of the alternative b m1 range is to be achieved .
b PAR 9 growth in the broader monetary and credit aggregates would not need to be as different in the second half of this year relative to the first half for growth to fall within their present longer - run ranges .
b PAR 9 the table below shows second half growth rates consistent with expansion of m2 and m3 for the year in the upper half of their ranges and expansion of total credit at its midpoint .
b PAR 9 growth needed in 2nd
b PAR 9 half ' 83 to attain actual growth assumed growth for the year assumed growth qiv ' 82 - - qii ' 83 - - june ' 83 - - m3 9 9.3 9.2 8,9 i/ for m2 , the base period for growth rates is always february / march ' 83 instead of qiv ' 82 .
b PAR 9 2/ total credit growth rates are calculated using the last month of each period .
b SENT -- yet another option ( alternative b ) would be to lower all of the longer - run ranges for the broader aggregates by ½ percentage point .
b PAR 12 but the 4 to 8 percent range would represent a con- siderable reduction from likely growth this year , or from this year 's range if the committee chose to raise it .
b PAR 12 m1 demand this year was augmented by the upward adjustment of cash balances induced by the lower level of market rates that developed as inflation ebbed ; such a lagged effect is not anticipated next year , and the velocity of m1 may develop along lines more consistent with earlier post - war cyclical and secular patterns .
b PAR 12 of course , there are still large unknowns .
b PAR 12 super now accounts bearing market rates may come increasingly to affect the behavior of m1 , and we remain uncertain about how the public 's attitudes toward these accounts as well as regular now accounts are being influenced by transactions needs , interest rates , and broad considerations of wealth and liquidity .
b PAR 12 it should also be noted that if a sizable further decline in short - term interest rates happens to occur , a large further rise in m1 could develop , involving growth rates higher than in the alternatives presented , as market rates come near to the regulatory ceiling on regular now accounts.1/ 
b PAR 23 this alternative would involve borrowing from the discount window in the $ 850 million to $ 1 billion range ( given the present discount rate ) , and the federal funds rate might be expected to move well into the 9½ to 10 percent area .
b PAR 23 total reserves are likely to expand at about 2¼ percent annual rate over the june to september period .
b PAR 23 nonborrowed reserves would be about flat if the level of borrowing rose to the range specified .
b PAR 26 alternative
b PAR 26 c involves an approach that would exert relatively strong restraint on the aggregates and credit markets over the near - term .
b PAR 26 m1 growth might be lower than 10 percent for the year and growth of m2 over the year would probably be somewhat below the midpoint of its longer - run range .
b PAR 26 under this approach , federal funds would be expected to rise to 10½ percent or so over the near - term .
b PAR 26 with the level of borrowing at the discount window expanding to about $ 1¼ billion and market interest rates rising , the current level of the discount rate would be called into question , as indeed it also would under alternative b . total reserves would change little from june to september , and nonborrowed reserves would drop by about 5 percent at an annual rate if borrowing rose as specified .

c SENT -- a variant on this option ( alternative c ) would be to lower only the upper limits of the ranges by ½ point ( or possibly 1 point ) , on the thought that reductions in the lower limits would tend to bring them to " unrealistic " rates in relation to the economic outlook .

