a PAR 16 growth of nonborrowed reserves would likely average around 5 percent at an annual rate over november and december .
a PAR 18 the extent of easing in money market conditions contem- plated under alternative a would probably result in a sizable decline in other short - term interest rates , with the 3-month treasury bill falling into the 8 to 8 - 1/2 percent area , and a decline in the dollar on foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 18 the reaction of bond yields may be more muted , espe-
a PAR 18 cially if incoming data indicated not only continued strength in economic activity but also a very substantial pickup in money stock growth .

b PAR 10 the specifications of alternative b are expected to be consistent with little change in bank reserve positions and money market conditions from those recently prevailing .
b PAR 10 borrowing at the discount window would be anticipated to be around $ 650 million and the funds rate between 9 - 1/4 and 9 - 1/2 percent , perhaps closer to the latter rate .
b PAR 10 spite a pickup in growth of transactions deposits , nonborrowed reserves would probably change little under this alternative over the two - month november - december period , owing primarily to the impact of lagged reserve accounting and changes in the deposit mix .
b PAR 11 m2 growth is expected to slow a little in november and december under alternative b from its rate in october , when its nontrans- actions component was probably boosted slightly by the october 1 deregula- tion .
b PAR 11 although growth of 8 - 1/2 percent over the final three months of the year would represent a considerable pickup from the pace of the previous three months , on a quarterly average basis the expansion of m2 would fall well short of projected nominal gnp growth for the second consecutive quarter ; nonetheless , the resulting increase in m2 velocity of 3 to 4 percent would not be atypical for this stage of an economic recovery .
b PAR 11 m3 growth is expected to be sustained at , or a little above , its october pace .
b PAR 11 should the decline in the treasury cash balance be exaggerated because of debt ceiling problems , growth in m2 and m3 may be somewhat stronger as banks seek additional deposit funds to support credit expansion in the absence of their usual treasury balances .
b PAR 14 market interest rates might tend to rise a bit under alternative b , although the likelihood or extent of any such upward pressure would depend in part on whether reserve paths led to federal funds trading more consistently near 9 - 1/2 percent than has been the case recently .
b PAR 14 in any event , credit markets will have to absorb a large volume of new treasury issues in a short period at a time when private credit demands may be picking up .
b PAR 14 on balance , a 3-month treasury bill rate in an 8 - 3/4 to 9 - 1/4 percent range might be anticipated , with bond yields unchanged or rising slightly .

c PAR 19 somewhat tighter reserve conditions are contemplated under alternative c , with discount window borrowing in the neighborhood of $ 800 to $ 900 million and the federal funds rate rising to around 10 percent .
c PAR 19 under these conditions , growth in m1 and m2 for 1983 would be expected to move down further in the lower halves of their respective longer - term ranges , while m3 would come in closer to the midpoint of its range .
c PAR 19 market interest rates would rise sharply from current levels under this alternative .
c PAR 19 such a tightening over the period immediately ahead does not appear to be widely anticipated in the market despite the recent strength of the economy , given growth of the monetary aggregates well within their ranges and concerns generated by international debt problems .
c PAR 19 the 3-month treasury bill rate would probably move up in a 9 - 1/4 to 9 - 3/4 percent range , and bond yields would probably adjust similarly , at least initially .
c PAR 19 the recent decline on yields in fixed - rate mortgages would probably be reversed , and the dollar would appreciate further in foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 19 directive language 

