a PAR 16 adjustment borrowing of around $ 150 to $ 200 million would be consistent with such a funds rate range if the discount rate were cut to 8 percent . or such a funds rate might emerge , or be approached , if borrowing were dropped to the $ 50 - 100 million range at the current discount rate .
a PAR 17 short - term interest rates may decline considerably under alternative a , as market fears of any near - term tightening are allayed and current dealer financing costs drop along with the funds rate .
a PAR 17 the 3-month bill rates might trade around 7½ percent , and the generally lower short - term rates would lead to a further decline in the bank prime rate .
a PAR 17 longer - term rates may also decline , but the declines may be limited by a resultant step - up in corporate bond offerings .

b PAR 14 total and nonborrowed reserves can be expected to rise from march to june at annual rates of 6 and 7 - 1/2 percent , respectively , after declining on balance over the previous three - month period largely because of deposit mix changes related to introduction of mmdas .
b PAR 14 the monetary base is expected to grow about as rapidly as in the first quarter .

c PAR 11 partly because lagged effects of earlier market rate declines have dissipated , we expect broad money growth to slow over the months ahead ( even abstracting from mmda shifts   .
c PAR 11 nonetheless , judging from recent behavior , we would expect demand to be sufficiently strong so that an effort to bring m2 growth down to the pace of alternative c might be associated with rising interest rates .
c PAR 11 however , a deceleration to the pace of b or a might be accomplished with stable or declining rates .
c PAR 11 1/ specifically , the staff is expecting that weekly total mmda inflows will slow from the about $ 10 billion average pace of recent weeks to about $ 5 billion early in the second quarter and less than $ 2 billion by late in the quarter .
c PAR 11 by the end of june , we anticipate a level of mmdas of around $ 375 billion .
c PAR 11 for the march to june interval staff assume that only 10 to 15 percent of mmda growth will reflect shifts from non - m2 assets .
c PAR 18 short - term interest rates would rise somewhat further , since the market would not appear to have fully discounted such a tightening .
c PAR 18 the 3-month bill rate could rise to around 9 percent and large cds would probably be offered at 9½ percent or higher , exerting upward pressure on the prime rate .
c PAR 18 longer - term rates would also rise , and the spread of the mortgage rate over the bond rate may also widen , as lenders contemplated the cost impacts of rising deposit rates , especially with such a large proportion of their deposits in the form of mmdas and mmcs .
c PAR 18 interest rates would probably lead to further upward pressure on dollar exchange rates .
c PAR 18 directive language 

