a PAR 18 the alternative envisions a drop in borrowing to near minimal levels -- perhaps $ 100 million , which would bring the federal funds rate down to around 8 percent .
a PAR 18 a similar easing of money market conditions could be attained with a drop in the discount rate to 8 percent , and borrowing to about $ 200 million .
a PAR 19 the approach of alternative a , particularly if it also involved a cut in the discount rate , could lead to fairly sizable declines in short - term interest rates , partly because it would tend to confirm that the committee was discounting the recent behavior of m1 .
a PAR 19 a 3-month bill rate around 7½-7¾ percent might be anticipated , and the prime loan rate should come down another notch .
a PAR 19 a moderate decline in long - term rates is also probable .
a PAR 19 there is a possibility , though , of some adverse effect on long - run inflation expectations , given the recent strong economic and monetary data -- which would have a negative impact on bond markets .
a PAR 19 in foreign exchange markets , a drop in short rates here would help reverse the rise in the dollar of recent days , but it is doubtful that the dollar would drop very substantially , given the continuing attractiveness of dollar assets and the probability of some easing action by foreign central banks .
a PAR 20 over the longer run , looking toward the year as a whole , alternative a would , with greater probability , involve m1 growth above the fomc 's longer - run range , unless interest rates moved up again in the second half of the year .
a PAR 20 m2 growth would be raised for the year , but the direct effect of lower market rates on demand for m2 may be quite modest given the relatively low interest - elasticity of that aggregate . whether m2 growth would be strongly affected , with some risk of overshooting the present long - run range , would depend mainly on the degree of upward impact on gnp growth ( relative to our current forecast of 8 percent at an annual rate over the second half ) of some easing in interest rates now .
a PAR 20 since the contemplated interest rate declines are small , a substantial impact on spending would seem to be contingent on whether the easing engendered a significant improvement in business and consumer confidence .

b PAR 14 while estimates of the relationship between the aggregates and bank reserve positions are subject to considerable uncertainty , the money supply specifications of alternative b are expected to be consistent with little change in the current degree of restraint on bank reserve positions -- that is , with borrowing at the discount window fluctuating around $ 250 million , associated with a federal funds rate generally just above the current 8½ percent discount rate .
b PAR 14 nonborrowed reserves in june would be expected to expand at about a 9 percent annual rate , and total reserves by about 6 percent .
b PAR 15 under alternative b , there is little reason to believe that interest rates in general would change much from current levels , given the recent back - up in interest rates .
b PAR 15 the 3-month treasury bill rate would probably trade in the vicinity of 8¼ percent .
b PAR 15 the bond market is likely to remain able to absorb a large supply of corporate , tax exempt , and treasury offerings at around present rate levels , although those rates could come under upward pressure should signs of more vigorous economic recovery emerge , particularly if doubts intensified about prospects for fiscal restraint .
b PAR 15 after edging down recently mortgage rates may tend to stabilize .
b PAR 15 the total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to increase at about a 9 to 9½ percent annual rate over the second quarter-- little different from the first -- as federal government credit demands remain large and private credit demands stay moderate .
b PAR 16 the staff does not expect the bulge in m1 growth in may to presage continued rapid growth in double digits in june or the months beyond .
b PAR 16 both our ( refurbished ) quarterly and monthly money demand models would project expansion in a 6 to 7 percent annual rate area at around current interest rates , given projected gnp .
b PAR 16 m1 growth in june seems likely to be in that area , or perhaps lower considering the unwinding of special influences that may be inflating growth in may -- such as seasonal adjustment problems and possible effects from an unusually sharp decline june growth expected under alternative b , m1 on a quarterly average basis would expand at about an 11 percent annual rate , which would imply a 2 percent decline in its income velocity -- a much smaller decline than in the first quarter but still in sharp contrast to the increases that have usually been registered in the early stages of business cycle upturns .
b PAR 17 m2 growth under alternative b is anticipated to be around a 9 percent annual rate over may and june on average .
b PAR 17 growth in the non- transactions component of that aggregate is expected to pick up , after having been depressed in april by ira - keogh transfers .
b PAR 17 growth in m3 is likely to be held down by cd run - offs at banks , as loan demand -- particu- larly from businesses -- remains soft , and by declines in the assets of institution - only money market funds , though at a slower pace than in recent months .

c PAR 21 with an increasing amount of reserve demands met at the discount window , non- borrowed reserves over the next month would decline at an annual rate of around 2 percent .
c PAR 21 the 3-month bill rate would probably rise into the 8½ to 9 percent area , and the prime rate would come under upward pressure .
c PAR 21 bond rates , too , would rise , perhaps sharply initially , but subsequent investor willingness to acquire long - term assets in light of improved inflationary expectations would tend to blunt such increases .

