a PAR 14 the specifications of alternative a contemplate more rapid growth of the aggregates , with m1 coming closer to the upper limit of its longer - run range by june and m2 moving above its midpoint .
a PAR 14 m3 would probably tend to remain around the upper limit of its long - run range .
a PAR 14 the near - term growth rates of this alternative-8 and 8 - 3/4 per- cent for m1 and m2 respectively over the march - to - june period -- would probably involve a little less pressure on reserve positions over the intermeeting period than has been evident most recently .
a PAR 15 borrowing at the discount window under alternative a would be around $ 550 to $ 650 million , and nonborrowed reserves would increase at about a 10 percent annual rate .
a PAR 15 the federal funds rate would probably drop to around 9 - 3/4 percent .
a PAR 15 other interest rates also would be expected to decline from current levels , at least to the degree that some of the recent rate increases may have anticipated firmer monetary conditions than contemplated under this alternative .
a PAR 15 the extent of any such rally could be quite limited , however , in the absence of substantive progress in reducing the budget deficit and evidence of a slowing in the pace of economic activity .
a PAR 15 moreover , a tendency for growth in the monetary aggregates to be relatively strong , as is anticipated in this alternative , particularly for m1 and m3 , would probably lead to market expectations that any moderation in the degree of pressure on bank reserve positions was not sustainable .
a PAR 16 the approach of alternative a would probably lead to more rapid gnp growth over the spring and summer than in the staff 's current forecast .
a PAR 16 in such a case , this alternative increases the odds that a substantial rise of interest rates later this year and into 1985 may be needed to keep money growth rates within their long - run target bands and/or to forestall greater upward pressures than currently projected on the average price level .

b PAR 9 the specifications of alternative b , which are those considered most consistent with the staff 's gnp outlook , call for some slowing of m1 growth from the pace of the december - to - march period , although this aggregate would remain above the midpoint of its longer- run range in june .
b PAR 9 growth of m2 would be expected to accelerate , how- ever , placing this aggregate near the middle of its range by mid - year , while m3 growth would continue near the upper end of its range .
b PAR 9 given the continuing strength of money and credit demands implicit in the 10 - 1/4 percent growth of nominal gnp forecast for the second quarter , these specifications may involve some further firming of interest rates over the intermeeting period and a relatively strong rise in velocity .
b PAR 9 m1 velocity in the second quarter would probably expand at about a alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m1 m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 9 c growth rates monthly growth rates quarterly average chart 1 actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc bilions of dollars " actual levels short run alternatives
b PAR 9 i - chart 2 actual and targeted m2 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars
b PAR 9 ~d'1f 9 % -- actual levels short run alternatives " , , i chart 3 actual and targeted m3 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars
b PAR 9 -actual levels short run alternatives 9 % _ , wuni
b PAR 9 i 3 - 1/2 percent annual rate , slower than in the first quarter and close to what is typical in the second year of a recovery .
b PAR 9 while m1 would still be well in the upper part of its range by june , its expansion would be expected to moderate further toward the middle of the range over the second half of the year partly in lagged response to further interest rate increases and also reflecting a slowdown in gnp growth .
b PAR 10 the expansion of m2 is expected to accelerate from its unusually slow pace of recent months under alternative b -- and the other alternatives as well -- after the extraordinary 5 - 1/2 percent rise in its velocity in the first quarter .
b PAR 10 even with the pickup in m2 growth and slowing in the rate of increase in gnp , v2 would be expected to rise at around a 2 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter , a little less than its average increase over the past four quarters .
b PAR 10 there had been a marked drop in m2 velocity during the recession , and also in early 1983 when mmdas were introduced ; thus , the rise over recent quarters may reflect some unwinding of balances that had been moved into m2 for precautionary reasons or because of the initial attractiveness of mmdas .
b PAR 10 m3 under this alternative is not expected to slow much , if at all , from its recent pace , with this aggregate remaining around the top of its long - term range .
b PAR 10 while cd issuance at banks and thrifts may moderate somewhat as growth of core deposits picks up , the need for the managed liabilities in m3 should remain sizable given projected strength in demands on these institutions for credit by households and businesses ( including additional financing that may be associated with merger activity ) .
b PAR 11 borrowing at the discount window of around $ 1 billion , or perhaps a bit more , probably would be associated with the monetary aggregate specifications of alternative b , and nonborrowed and total re-
b PAR 11 serves could be expected to increase at annual rates of 3 and 6 percent , respectively .
b PAR 11 given the current discount rate , the federal funds rate would probably be in the neighborhood of 10 - 1/2 percent , although it could be even higher in the next several days around the quarter - ending statement date and also around the mid - april tax date .
b PAR 11 while immediate transitional adjustments to crr seem to be behind us , it should be noted in this context that there are still uncertainties about the lasting impact of crr and the lengthening of the reserve period on bank reserve management policies .
b PAR 12 the market has probably not entirely discounted the degree of reserve restraint implied by alternative b , and interest rates generally would be expected to increase somewhat further , with the trea- sury bill rate possibly moving up about 1/4 percentage point to around 10 percent or a little higher , partly in anticipation of a rise in the discount rate .
b PAR 12 longer - term market rates should also rise a little fur- ther , particularly as the market absorbs the recently announced $ 15 bil- lion package of treasury coupon issues ( to be auctioned in the week of the fomc meeting ) .
b PAR 12 the prime rate would again come under pressure as the spread over 3-month cds narrowed to less than one percentage point after allowance for reserve requirements .
b PAR 12 with thrift institution earnings deteriorating as rates rose , the spread of mortgage rates over bond rates might begin to widen .
b PAR 12 the dollar may continue to hold its recent gains , and perhaps even rise somewhat further , for a time , as investors react not only to the higher returns on dollar assets but also to the signal of determination to combat inflation .
b PAR 12 however , over time the dollar is expected to resume declining in light of the large and growing current account deficit .


