a SENT -- ( 12 ) the specifications of alternative a would be consistent with a policy that exerts somewhat more restraint on demands for goods and services so as to provide greater assurance that inflationary pressures will be kept in check over time .
a SENT -- a sym- metrical argument might be made if demands for goods and services proved to be substantially stronger than now anticipated -- leading to the possibility of reduced m1 growth well below the top of its alternative a range in face of a marked rise in interest rates , although this effect could be muted by shifts of funds into super - now accounts from fixed - ceiling now accounts and demand deposits .

b SENT -- the set of ranges announced by the committee last july as its tentative choices for 1984 are shown below as alternative b .
b PAR 8 alternative
b PAR 8 ii includes growth ranges for the broad aggre- gates and credit that are 1/2 point lower than last year 's ranges , and a range for m1 that is one point lower than the range adopted for the second half of last year .
b PAR 8 the 1/2 point reduction in the range for m2 may not represent an " effective " reduction , since last year 's range had allowed for some residual shifting into mmdas from assets outside m2 - -on the order of 1/2 to 1 percentage point at an annual rate , which is close to what actually developed , as nearly as can be estimated .
b PAR 8 on that reasoning , the committee could consider whether to reduce the m2 range for 1984 by one percentage point from 1983 ( rather than 1/2 point ) so as to be more consist- ent with the effective reduction embodied in the other ranges shown in alternative b .
b PAR 8 that would make the m2 range under alternative b 6 to 9 percent , the same as for m3 .
b PAR 9 the staff 's gnp projection for 1984 assumes growth in the money and credit aggregates generally in the upper half of the alternative b ranges ( though in the case of m2 right around the midpoint of a 6 - 1/2 to 9 - 1/2 percent range   .
b PAR 9 such outcomes would represent a deceleration of - actual growth rates of the monetary aggregates in 1984 from their rates for 1983 as a whole , though the slowing , if any , would be much less marked for m1 and m2 when comparisons are made with growth in 1983 from their target base periods .
b PAR 9 credit growth in 1984 is expected to be close to the 10 - 1/2 percent pace of 1983 .
b SENT -- as growth in m2 and m1 is restrained to rates around the midpoints of the proposed 5 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 and 4 to 7 percent ranges , respectively , interest rates would probably be subject to more upward pressure this year than under alternative b .
b SENT -- should such demands prove to be substan- tially weaker , growth of m1 might tend to be substantially stronger than indicated -- given m2 growth around , say , the middle of the alternative b range -- as falling market interest rates increase the demand for transactions accounts , especially fixed ceiling rate now accounts .
b PAR 16 the specifications of alternative b , which are expected to involve little change in money market conditions over the intermeeting period , would bring m2 growth to the middle of its alternative b range by alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 16 b 1983 - -october 1984
b PAR 16 --january growth rates monthly 1983-october 1984 - -january
b PAR 16 growth rates quarterly average alt .
b PAR 16 c chart 1 actual and targeted m2 confidential fr class
b PAR 16 ii fomc bilhons of dolln , :
b PAR 16 - 23d0 actual level sshort - run alternatives 218c chart 2 actual and targeted m3 confidential fr , class
b PAR 16 ii fomc - actual level shor ' run alternatives billion o '
b PAR 16 6'200 - 265
b PAR 16 : 255c 240c chart 3 actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars
b PAR 16 5~~~ 5 c sactual level sshort - run alternatives march , with m1 in the upper part of its range .
b PAR 16 m1 growth would be expected to moderate in february and march from the relatively rapid average pace of december and january , to about a 5 percent annual rate .
b PAR 16 on a quarterly average basis , m1 expansion in the first quarter would be around 7 - 1/4 per- cent , implying growth in velocity of around 2 - 1/2 percent , given projected first - quarter nominal gnp growth .
b PAR 16 such a velocity rise would be somewhat less than in the fourth quarter -- which was about 3 - 1/2 percent -- and roughly in line with predictions of the money demand equations in the board 's quarterly and monthly models .
b PAR 16 while m1 growth may slow over the next two months , growth in the nontransactions component of m2 is expected to pick up from its depressed january pace and be more in line with growth in income , thereby sustaining m2 growth at around an 8 percent annual rate .
b PAR 17 borrowing at the discount window under alternative b would be expected to range around $ 650 million , and federal funds to remain in the 9 - 1/4 to 9 - 1/2 percent area .
b PAR 17 however , with contemporaneous reserve requirements being instituted on february 2 , reserve paths will have to take account of transitional and more permanent adaptations by banks in their reserve management strategies that could affect , among other things , patterns of borrowing and excess reserves .
b PAR 17 reserve paths in the initial stage of crr implementation would probably need to allow for higher than average excess reserves .
b PAR 17 by march , however , excess reserves may be closer to " normal , " and on that assumption growth in total reserves over the next two months is likely to be around 5 percent under
b PAR 18 interest rates under alternative b would be expected to fluctuate in a narrow range around current levels over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 18 the recent drop in short and long - term rates is not likely to carry further , given the continued growth expected in the monetary aggregates and expansion in credit demands at slightly more than the fourth - quarter pace .
b PAR 18 treasury credit demands are likely to be larger this quarter than in the fourth , offsetting some tendency for private borrowing to slow .
b PAR 18 state and local government bond issuance is expected to be at a relatively reduced pace , given the legislative uncertainty about the status of some types of revenue bonds .
b PAR 18 the increase in household mortgage and consumer installment debt also is likely to moderate along with the slower growth of consumer durables purchases and the relatively flat pattern of housing starts and expenditures .
b PAR 18 corporate borrowing , on the other hand , may be greater than in the fourth quarter as internal fund generation levels off while spending for capital and inventories continues to rise .

c SENT -- i contemplates somewhat less rapid growth in money and credit , while alternative c -- which continues the ranges set for 1983 into 1984 - -would
c PAR 13 the more rapid growth of the aggregates contemplated by alternative c may not involve any rise of short - term interest rates over the course of next year , but at the risk of being more accommodative to upward price pressures .
c PAR 13 in that process , the trade - off between output and price changes , for any given money growth , would begin to deteriorate if inflationary expectations worsened .
c PAR 13 such expectational effects might tend to push longer - term rates up as the year progressed , and involve higher short - term rates in 1985 in the process of restraining inflation over time .


