a PAR 14 a considerable near - term rally would probably develop in financial markets in response to the easing of money market conditions .
a PAR 14 the treasury bill rate would be likely to drop into the 9 - 1/4 to 9 - 1/2 percent area , and bond yields would also move downward .
a PAR 14 the size of the decline in long rates might well be limited by larger corporate bond offerings and by expectations that the lower level of money market rates could not be sustained with economic activity still expanding rapidly and credit growth strong relative to the federal reserve 's range .
a PAR 14 m1 would be in the middle of the upper half of its range by june under this alternative , but demand for this , and other , aggregates would be boosted in the third quarter by the lower level of short - term interest rates that developed as well as by a perhaps somewhat more robust expansion of economic activity than now implied in the staff forecasts .
a PAR 14 thus , alternative a increases the odds that renewed tightening of money market conditions might be necessary later in the year if the committee wishes to hold m1 and m2 close to the midpoints of their ranges and m3 and credit to near the upper ends of their ranges .

b PAR 8 the specifications of alternative b , which are expected to be consistent with little , if any ,
b PAR 8 change from the current degree of pressure on bank reserve positions , call for growth in m1 and m2 at rates chosen by the committee in march .
b PAR 8 with regard to m1 , this implies a substantial rebound in growth during may and june , partly as seasonal chart 1 actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc billions of dollars -actual levels short run alternatives chart 2 actual and targeted m2 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars - actual levels
b PAR 8 short run alternatives 9 % - z.%vu chart
b PAR 8 3 actual and targeted m3 confidential ( fr ) class
b PAR 8 ii fomc -actual levels short run alternatives
b PAR 8 ' 6 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 8 c growth rates monthly february 6.6 6.6 6.6 8.4 8.4 8.4 10.4 10.4 10.4 , larch 5.0 5.0 5.0
b PAR 8 3.7 3.7 3.7 9.0 9.0 9.0 j growth rates quarterly average ' 83 q4 to june ' 84 6.9 6.7 6.5 7.3 7.2 7.1 9.8 9.6
b PAR 8 9.5 - -- --- factor " errors " average out , but more basically reflecting underlying demands for cash balances over the quarter as a whole from growth of income and spending .
b PAR 8 m2 appears to be in process of expanding in somewhat closer alignment to growth of income , following the unusual increases in velocity in the second half of the last year and in the first quarter .
b PAR 8 m2 velocity would still be expected to increase during the second quarter , but at about a 2 percent annual rate , a slower pace than it averaged over the previous three quarters .
b PAR 8 on the other hand , m1 velocity would be expected again to increase relatively rapidly - at around a 3 - 3/4 percent annual rate in the second quarter , given the staff 's gnp projection .
b PAR 8 this outlook for velocity of m1 and m2 assumes that there is no significant increase in precautionary demands for liquidity from uncertainties about the economic and financial outlook that might conceivably arise from the recent problems in financial markets .
b PAR 11 the specifications of alternative b are expected to be consistent with borrowing from the discount window continuing at about $ 1 billion ( apart from any special borrowing related to the continental situation   , and with growth in nonborrowed and total reserves at annual rates of 8 - 1/2 and 5 percent , respectively , over may and june .
b PAR 11 this would likely be associated with a federal funds rate averaging 10 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 11 federal funds may continue to trade in a fairly wide range around this level , reflecting in part the greater scope for expectational and other influences in the two - week maintenance period .
b PAR 11 in addition , banks might manage their reserve positions more cautiously ( holding more excess reserves or seeking to conserve borrowing access at the discount window ) should the banking environment become uncertain in the aftermath of the continental package , thereby placing upward pressure on the funds rate unless compensating adjustments are made to reserve paths .
b PAR 12 interest rates generally may well continue to fluctuate around current levels under alternative b , but credit markets are in a highly sensitive state .
b PAR 12 the behavior of quality spreads will depend in part on the extent to which concerns about banks are allayed by the continental package .
b PAR 12 long - term interest rates have been extremely volatile recently , and they will no doubt continue to be sensitive to incoming economic data , statements by officials , and the outlook for the budget .
b PAR 12 nonetheless , the severity of the decline in bond prices in recent weeks suggests that this market -- where yields have risen as much or more than short - term rates -- could have overadjusted , and , if short rates do not rise further , some decline in long - term rates could develop .
b PAR 12 however , even if bond rates fell , mortgage rates probably would continue to move higher in lagged response to previous increases in market interest rates and to emerging earnings pressures on thrift lenders .

c PAR 15 discount window borrowing might rise toward $ 1 - 1/2 billion under alternative c , which probably would be associated with federal funds trading consistently somewhat above 11 percent .
c PAR 15 nonborrowed reserves would be expected to contract slightly on average in may and june .

