a PAR 12 at this point monetary policy is expected to confront greater upward price pressures next year than this , as we go into the third year of economic expansion with relatively limited excess labor and plant capacity and assuming a drop in the dollar on exchange markets .
a PAR 12 if , as currently projected by the staff , price increases next year are on the order of 5 to 5 - 1/2 percent while economic growth decelerates to a pace more consistent with its potential , it seems probable that a slowing in m1 growth in 1985 to the area of 5 - 1/2 to 6 percent - as assumed for the gnp projection and consistent with alternatives ii or iii -- might generate a little further upward pressure on short - term interest rates .
a PAR 12 in 1985 , we would anticipate m1 velocity growth of 2 to 2 - 1/2 percent associated with the projected gnp increase of around 8 percent .
a PAR 12 the increases in velocity of m1 over the third year of four previous expansions that have lasted at least that long have averaged in the neighborhood of 4 percent , but they have generally been accompanied by rather sizable interest rate increases and occurred in an era when the underlying velocity trend was probably higher than can now be expected .
a PAR 12 maintenance of an m1 range of 4 to 8 percent as in alternative a -- and with actual m1 growth expected to remain above the midpoint - might involve no further upward interest rate pressures next year .
a PAR 23 the 7 percent annual growth rate for this aggregate from june to september would bring growth from qiv ' 83 to september to just under 7 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 23 such money growth , when translated to a quarterly average basis for the third quarter , implies only a small rise in the income velocity of m1 over the months ahead and is probably consistent with some drop in money market rates from recent levels under existing circumstances , particularly considering the lingering restraining effects on money demand of the rise of interest rates over recent months .
a PAR 23 nonborrowed reserves are likely to expand at a 14 percent annual rate under this alternative , with borrowing about $ 750 million .
a PAR 23 borrowing in that area might involve a federal funds rate of around 10 - 1/2 percent - unless the recent relative reluctance of banks to borrow from the discount window abates , in which case the funds rate could be lower for such a level of borrowing .

b PAR 17 i actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class
b PAR 17 ii fomc billions of dollars
b PAR 17 v---- 7 ft " actual levels a short run alternatives 0
b PAR 17 j a 5 0 n d -j520 chart 2 actual and targeted m2 confidential ( fr ) class
b PAR 17 ii fomc billions of dollars -actual levels
b PAR 17 short run alternatives
b PAR 17 9 % - 2160s t
b PAR 17 i- chart 3 confidential ( fr ) class
b PAR 17 ii fomc actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 17 -actual levels
b PAR 17 short run alternatives 2920 fe / - 2900 6%- 2840 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 17 ml m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 17 ------monthly levels 1984 - -april
b PAR 17 growth rates monthly 1984 - -april 1984 june to sept .
b PAR 17 growth rates quarterly average alt .
b PAR 17 c memo : growth of that aggregate closer to the midpoint of its longer - run range by the end of the year .
b PAR 17 such june - to - september growth , distributed fairly evenly over the quarter , would entail a 7 - 3/4 percent quarterly average increase in m1 . that growth in money may not involve much , if any , further rise of interest rates over the summer , assuming nominal gnp grows no faster than the 9 - 1/2 percent annual rate currently projected for the third quarter and given the rise of interest rates that has already taken place .
b PAR 18 the deceleration of m1 growth under alternative b is not expected to be accompanied by any significant slowing of m2 from its rate of growth of the previous three months .
b PAR 18 growth of the latter aggregate is likely to be sustained , given the projected reasonably strong growth in personal income and assuming little change in the personal savings rate .
b PAR 18 somewhat more rapid expansion in the nontrans- actions component is expected , partly reflecting a lagged response of the public to the increased rate attractiveness of time deposits and mmdas relative to demand deposits and regular now accounts .
b PAR 18 however , expansion of m3 over the summer might well slow from its unusually rapid second - quarter pace .
b PAR 18 banks may have less need to issue cds as merger - related financing demands are reduced , and in any event the recent tightening of markets and widening of yield spreads against banks might encourage a somewhat less aggressive posture by banks in credit markets .
b PAR 18 even so , with the economy and underlying credit demands expected to be fairly strong , m3 growth would probably be high relative to its long - run range .
b PAR 20 expansion in the aggregates as specified in alternative b would probably entail growth of nonborrowed reserves at about an 8 percent annual rate from june to september , with borrowing continuing to average around $ 1 billion .
b PAR 20 if recent experience is any guide , the federal funds rate would probably average in the 11 to 11 - 1/4 percent area .
b PAR 20 however , should investors gain more confidence in banks , and should bank attitudes toward reserve management and the discount window become less cautious , the funds rate could well trade consistently below 11 percent for s1 billion in borrowing .
b PAR 20 if that occurred , it might entail greater expansion over time in nonborrowed reserves -- as banks more willingly lend and add to deposits - and hence more money growth than assumed for this alternative .
b PAR 21 interest rates generally might show little net change under alternative b , though probably edging higher from the most recent levels if funds traded consistently around 11 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 21 speculation about a discount rate increase could become more widespread in markets , and this could itself add to upward pressures , at least temporarily , on federal funds and other rates .
b PAR 21 the dollar may well remain generally firm on exchange markets .
b PAR 22 the degree of tightness in bank reserve positions under this alternative would also work to restrain money and credit growth later in the year .
b PAR 22 thus , alternative b may be consistent with growth in m1 over the year 1984 in the area of 6 - 1/2 percent with only a little further upward movement of interest rates .
b PAR 22 growth of m3 and credit for the year would probably be somewhat above the upper limits of their current longer- run ranges , though expanding somewhat more slowly in the second half than in the first half of the year .
b PAR 22 growth of m2 would be expected to be around the midpoint of its long - run range .

c PAR 25 the 4 percent annual rate of growth in m1 from june to september would bring expansion of this aggregate from qiv ' 83 to september to 6 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate .
c PAR 25 growth at a 3 - 1/4 percent annual rate from september to december would be needed to hit 6 percent for the year as a whole .


