a PAR 14 the somewhat more rapid money growth specifications of alternative a would be expected to involve a further reduction in pressures on bank reserve positions , with discount window borrowing declining to around $ 500 million .
a PAR 14 nonborrowed reserves would increase at about a 6 percent annual rate over october and november .
a PAR 14 the federal funds rate would drop to 10 - 1/4 to 10 - 1/2 percent , or possibly a little lower if the pattern of discount window borrowing evident before last may reemerges .

b PAR 9 all the alternatives specify more rapid m1 growth over the next three months relative to its sluggish behavior over the june - to- september period .
b PAR 9 transactions demands are expected to strengthen in association with the projected pickup in nominal gnp growth in the fourth quarter , while the dampening effects on money demand of earlier increases in short - term interest rates should diminish over the quarter and begin to be reversed by the recent moderate declines in short rates .
b PAR 9 on a quarterly average basis , m1 in the fourth quarter would increase at a 5 - 3/4 percent annual rate under alternative b , implying an increase in velocity of around 2 - 3/4 percent , given the staff 's gnp forecast .
b PAR 10 spurred by faster income growth and a more favorable alignment of rates on deposits relative to rates on market instruments , the nontransactions component , along with m1 , is expected to contribute to the pickup in m2 expansion in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 10 m3 growth also is expected to quicken .
b PAR 10 despite slower credit expansion at thrifts projected for the fourth quarter , the recent weakness in thrift cds and associated rapid rise in fhlb advances is unlikely to continue , assuming the condition of fca stabilizes and repercussions on the access of other thrifts to wholesale money markets remain minor .
b PAR 10 commercial bank cd issuance is likely to pick up as treasury deposits decline .
b PAR 12 the specifications of alternative b assume borrowing at the discount window remains around the recent $ 750 million level .
b PAR 12 this degree of pressure on reserve positions is likely to involve federal funds trading in the neighborhood of 11 percent , with trading on the low side more likely if rates on alternative sources of funds , such as cds , remain relatively low , and if a calmer atmosphere in money markets encour- ages banks to tap these sources more aggressively and to be less reticent about use of the discount window .
b PAR 12 nonborrowed and total reserves would each increase at close to a one percent rate over october and november .

c PAR 16 borrowing at the discount window under this alternative would return to around the $ 1 billion level prevailing over most of the spring and summer , with nonborrowed reserves declining by around 4 per- cent over october and november .
c PAR 16 the federal funds rate would be expected to return to the 11 - 1/2 to 11 - 3/4 percent area , or possibly a bit higher .
c PAR 16 the treasury bill rate would rise to around 10 - 3/4 percent , cd rates would increase by 1/2 percentage point or perhaps more , and the dollar would probably rise , at least for a while , on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 16 with upward pressures reemerging in short - term markets , longer - term yields can be expected to retrace some of the declines since early summer , leading to further reductions in demands for mortgage credit as well as to shifts in borrowing by businesses back toward short - term markets -- and also possibly to reconsideration of over - all borrowing and spending programs .
c PAR 16 directive language 

