a PAR 13 the specifications of alternative a are designed to bring m1 and m2 closer to the path adopted at the previous committee meeting , while not leading to much more rapid m3 and credit growth .
a PAR 13 they involve an easing of bank reserve positions , with borrowing dropping to around $ 750 million .
a PAR 13 nonborrowed reserves would be expected to increase at about a 6 percent annual rate , and total reserves at about half that pace , over the july - to - september period .
a PAR 13 federal funds may trade between 10 - 1/2 and 11 percent , perhaps not immediately but over time as the lower level of borrowing persists .
a PAR 13 such a reduction in bank reserve pressures does not appear to be anticipated by the market , and probably would extend the recent rally in bond and stock markets , as well as lead to a decline in short - term rates and a narrowing of quality spreads .
a PAR 13 the treasury bill rate is likely to fall below 10 percent , and 3-month cds to around 11 per- cent .
a PAR 13 the decline in interest rates would relieve some of the immediate pressures on thrift earnings and reduce tensions generally in the financial system . as interest rates fell , the dollar would tend to depreciate on foreign exchange markets .
a SENT -- ( 14 ) the easier reserve and market conditions that are expected to develop under alternative a would probably have their greatest impact on money growth in the final months of the year .

b PAR 8 under alternative b , m1 growth would be expected to pick up to around a 6 - 3/4 percent annual rate in august and september , with growth larger in the latter month .
b PAR 8 the transactions demand for m1 is expected to be somewhat less than earlier anticipated given the somewhat slower growth in nominal gnp now projected for the third quarter .
b PAR 8 while m1 growth from chart 1 actual and targeted m1 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars -actual levels short run alternatives chart 2 actual and targeted m2 confidential ( fr ) class ii fomc billions of dollars -actual levels short run alternatives , 9 % z4uu 1fiaa ~ ivv chart 3 actual and targeted m3 confidential ( fr ) class
b PAR 8 ii fomc -actual levels short run alternatives billions of dollars 9 %   - 2920 6 % - 2840 l
b PAR 8 i 2640 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates monthly levels 1984
b PAR 8 --april growth rates monthly 1984 - -april 1984 june to sept .
b PAR 8 1984 july to sept .
b PAR 8 growth rates quarterly average 1984 - -ql alt .
b PAR 8 c memo : june to september would be only about 4 percent at an annual rate under this alternative , it would grow about 5 - 1/2 percent on a quarterly average basis .
b PAR 8 m1 velocity would increase at a 2 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the third quarter , considerably below the rate of increase in the first half of the year , but still probably slightly above the underlying trend at unchanged interest rates . looking ahead to the fourth quarter , demand for m1 might be expected to pick up and velocity growth to moderate a bit further as the restraining effects of previous interest rate increases on money demand diminish .
b PAR 8 with interest rates remaining roughly around current levels into the fourth quarter , as assumed in the staff gnp forecast , m1 growth for qiv 1983 to qiv 1984 might be around 6 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 11 the specifications of alternative b assume borrowing at the discount window remains around $ 1 billion .
b PAR 11 given the recent attitudes of banks toward the discount window , this is expected to be consistent with federal funds trading around 11 - 1/2 percent or a bit higher .
b PAR 11 should uncertainties in connection with fca raise broader questions about the stability of the banking and financial system , even more conservative reserve management might be expected , and the funds rate could run higher relative to the level of borrowing or to free reserves .
b PAR 11 if the fca situation is well contained , though , and incoming economic data suggest a moderation of credit demands , the funds rate could fall back some , given prevailing levels of borrowing , as market uncertainties diminish .
b PAR 11 over the july - to - september period total reserves can be expected to increase at about a 2 - 1/2 percent annual rate , while nonborrowed reserves would rise less .
b PAR 12 there is little reason to expect the average level of short - term rates to change much over the balance of the quarter under alternative b , but the structure of these rates could well vary , depending on such factors as the evolution of the fca situation and the progress of negotiations with latin american borrowers .
b PAR 12 it seems most probable that lingering uncertainties would keep quality spreads , which have narrowed modestly on balance since the last meeting , from improving further .
b PAR 12 long - term bond markets , too , are unlikely to continue the improvement that was seen in the early part of the intermeeting period , unless economic activity appears to be much weaker than anticipated .
b PAR 12 a noticeable back - up in rates can not be ruled out in the weeks ahead , particularly should money growth accelerate more rapidly than projected in the context of strong economic indicators .

c PAR 15 borrowing at the discount window would be expected to increase to $ 1 - 1/4 to $ 1 - 1/2 billion and nonborrowed reserves to decline at around a 6 percent annual rate .
c PAR 15 the federal funds rate would probably rise to the 12 - 1/4 to 12 - 1/2 percent area , and other market interest rates also would adjust upward , with treasury bill rates climbing into the 10 - 1/2 to 11 percent range , and cd rates perhaps rising even more rapidly to around 12 to 12 - 1/2 percent as strains on the financial system increased .
c PAR 15 the associated increases in the prime rate , bond yields , and mortgage rates would probably soon restrain credit growth and spending relative to the staff 's current projection .
c PAR 15 the dollar would tend to appreciate further on exchange markets , at least temporarily .

