a PAR 14 this alternative may also be viewed as compensating in some degree for the recent shortfall in m1 growth .
a PAR 14 for instance , the 8 percent growth of m1 over november to march that is specified would bring it by march to a level that would be near the midpoint of the fomc 's tentative long - run growth range if that range were based not on the actual fourth - quarter average but on the fourth - quarter midpoint level of the 1984 long - run range .
a PAR 14 the more rapid growth of m2 under this alternative would reflect , in addition to faster expansion of its m1 component , continued strong inflows to mmdas and money market mutual funds , given the further drop assumed in market rates and the lag in reduction of yields on these instruments .
a PAR 15 the money supply specifications of alternative a are expected to entail an increase in total reserves of about 15 percent at an annual rate from november to march , accompanied by a drop in the funds rate to 8 percent or a little below .
a PAR 15 absent a decline in the discount rate , discount window borrowing is likely to be at a bare minimum , and excess reserves perhaps somewhat higher than usual , with nonborrowed reserves rising at about a 21 percent annual rate through march .
a PAR 15 if the discount rate were reduced from the present 8 - 1/2 percent level , reserve growth consistent with this alternative could be accomplished with somewhat less expansion in nonborrowed reserves than otherwise .
a PAR 15 under this alternative , the 3-month treasury bill rate may drop to around 7 - 1/2 percent , but yield declines in long - term markets may be more limited .
a PAR 15 the dollar probably would come under downward pressure in foreign exchange markets , although any depreciation would be moderated if foreign monetary authorities allowed their domestic rates to fall as well under the circum- stances .

b PAR 9 the aggregates specifications of alternative b , which are expected to be consistent with maintenance of about the current degree of pressure on reserve positions , would place all of the money supply measures in march close to the upper limits of their tentative longer - run ranges for 1985 established last july .
b PAR 9 growth of m1 under this alternative from november to march would be expected to be at about a 6 - 3/4 percent annual rate .
b PAR 9 the acceleration of m1 growth from the slower pace that has pre- vailed on average since around mid - year reflects strengthened transactions demands , given the projected pickup in gnp growth , as well as the lagged effects of the sizable drop in short - term rates over recent months .
b PAR 9 the income velocity of m1 would be about unchanged in the first quarter .
b PAR 9 some models , on the other hand , suggest a drop in income velocity , associ- ated with higher money growth at current interest rates , because they embody greater responsiveness of m1 to earlier interest rate declines .
b PAR 9 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m1 m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 9 c monthly levels -- ----
b PAR 9 -- growth rates monthly growth rates quarterly average .
b PAR 9 tentative 1985 ranges q4 84 to q4 85 4 to 7 6 to 8.5 6 to 9 - actual level --- estimated level short run alternatives
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m1 billions of dollars s7 % s .. . '' "
b PAR 9 " % . . , 4 5707 .. < o/ .. .
b PAR 9 " chart 2 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars -actual level --- estimated level short run alternatives , % ' 8 6 % •
b PAR 9 6 % , 6 % o9r1fi chart 3 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars -actual level -- estimated level9 % sshort run alternatives ° * / , 3 6 %
b PAR 9 we have assumed , however , a more moderate m1 growth partly because its recent behavior suggests the possibility that the demand for narrow money may have become a little less responsive to interest rate changes .
b PAR 12 discount window borrowing under alternative b is expected to average around $ 400 million .
b PAR 12 that level of borrowing appears to be somewhat in excess of the likely " frictional " level , which now is probably around $ 150 to $ 250 million .
b PAR 12 seasonal borrowing has declined to close to $ 100 million since the last fomc meeting in accord with its normal seasonal pattern and in response to the slimmer spread between market and discount rates .
b PAR 12 under these circumstances , federal funds might average mostly in a range around 8 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 12 nonborrowed reserves would be expected to increase at a 16 percent annual rate , and total reserves at a 12 - 1/2 percent rate over the november - to - march period .
b PAR 13 short - term rates are not likely to show much change on balance over the intermeeting period under alternative b , with the 3-month treasury bill rate generally in an 8 - 1/8 to 8 - 3/8 percent range ; the prime rate may drop a little further , given current rate relationships .
b PAR 13 in long - term markets , yields could move somewhat higher
b PAR 13 should there be no real progress toward putting together a credible deficit reduction package ,
b PAR 13 if there were signs of strengthened economic activity , and if m1 growth were sustained as expected under alternative b . mortgage rates may stabilize in the period immediately ahead , and could begin to rise , parti- cularly should bond rates turn up as the first quarter progresses .

c PAR 16 borrowing might rise back toward $ 800 million , with the federal funds rate returning to the 9 - 1/2 to 10 percent area .
c PAR 16 nonborrowed and total reserves would increase at rates of around 10 percent from november to march .
c PAR 16 such a change in reserve conditions at this time would be quite unexpected by market participants , and both short- and long - term rates would back up considerably , with treasury bill rates rising almost a percentage point to 9 percent or a bit higher .
c PAR 16 rates on private instruments might increase by even more should investor concerns about creditworthiness be revived .
c PAR 16 the dollar would probably rise further on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 16 directive language 


