a PAR 25 borrowing at the discount window would drop to minimal levels of around $ 150 - 200 million , or a more modest reduction in borrowing might be accompanied by a cut in the discount rate to 7 percent .
a PAR 25 the federal funds rate under this alternative would be expected to decline toward 7 percent .
a PAR 25 total and nonborrowed reserves would increase at 5 - 1/2 and 9 - 1/4 percent annual rates , respectively , over the summer .
a PAR 25 other market interest rates would fall relatively little under this alternative from most recent levels - levels that appear to reflect anticipations of some easing by the federal reserve over the near - term .
a PAR 25 the three - month bill would probably trade in a 6 - 1/2 to 6 - 3/4 percent area .
a PAR 25 private short - term rates might decline more than bill rates as the lower overall level of rates was seen as helping those financial institutions currently under some stress .
a PAR 25 the dollar would decline in foreign exchange markets .

b PAR 9 the table below focuses on the arithmetic of achieving the upper bounds of the current and proposed m1 long - run growth ranges for the year 1985 , given growth of 10 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the first half of 1985 ( qiv ' 84 to qii ' 85 ) .
b PAR 9 a particular problem arises because m1 was so strong in the latter part of the second quarter .
b PAR 9 this high jumping off point means that attainment of , say , the 7 percent upper limit of the current long - run range would entail virtually no month - by- month growth on average over the balance of the year - as can be seen from the table , one - half of one percent at an annual rate .
b PAR 9 however , implied growth over the second half measured from qii ' 85 to qiv ' 85 would be higher - about 3 - 1/4 percent annual rate - owing to the carry - over effect of the acceleration of m1 late in the second quarter .
b PAR 9 the upper limit of the alternative b range could be achieved with 5 percent , annual rate , month - by - month growth , which would yield substantial quarterly average growth .
b PAR 9 ml growth rate from implied m1 growth qiv
b PAR 9 ' 84 to qiv ' 85 qii ' 85-qiv ' 85 june - december 
b PAR 15 in general , money growth on the high side would likely be needed if nominal interest rates were , contrary to our expectation , to notch down further next year .
b PAR 15 indeed , even the upper limit of alternative b may not encompass developments in the event of a substantial downward adjustment of interest rates , as the experience of 1982 - 1983 and from late last year through the first half of this year tends to suggest .
b PAR 15 nominal interest rates could drop if the present level of real interest rates turns out to be too high , as the expansion matures further , to sustain real growth at a satisfactory pace ( assuming the level of real rates is not reduced by acceleration of inflation ) .
b PAR 15 nominal rates could also drop in the event of a further decline of inflation expectations .
b PAR 15 the evolution of fiscal policy could also affect interest rates , though perhaps not substantially given the range of probable fiscal outcomes .
b PAR 15 in principle , a move toward greater fiscal restraint than the $ 50 billion federal deficit cut in the fiscal year 1986 assumed by the staff should exert greater downward presure on interest rates , with potential one - time feedback effects on money demand .
b PAR 15 on the other hand , a failure to act on the deficit would exert some upward impact on interest rates and possibly also inflation expectations .
b PAR 19 federal funds would generally trade in a 7 - 1/2 to 7 - 3/4 percent area .
b PAR 19 growth in total and nonborrowed reserves would slow to 3 - 1/2 and 5 - 1/2 percent annual rates respectively over the june - to - september period as the expansion of transaction deposits moderates .
b PAR 20 in part , the slowing of m1 growth under alternative b is expected to result from a substantial weakening in the demand deposit component , working off a portion of its recent unusually large bulge .
b PAR 20 the rapid growth of m1 late last quarter has brought money balances to a point where they might be considered to be sufficiently high to finance at least some significant gnp growth in the third quarter without further alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 20 m1 m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 20 c growth rates monthly growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m1 billions of dollars
b PAR 20 600- actual level -- projected level short run alternatives
b PAR 20 i " chart 2 actual and targeted m2
b PAR 20 bi ll ions of doll ars -- actual level --- projected level short run alternatives .
b PAR 20 * y 2450 . , " * ^
b PAR 20 " ~2400 225c chart 3 actual and targeted m3 bill ions of dollars - actual level --- projected level short run alternatives
b PAR 20 3200 chart 4 debt bill ions of do
b PAR 20 actual level --- projected level
b PAR 20 j j a s n d 5600i
b PAR 20 i ' 1 expansion of m1 .
b PAR 20 indeed , if m1 remained at its june level during the third quarter , average growth for the quarter would be more than 5 - 3/4 percent at an annual rate .
b PAR 20 while this suggests that transactions needs of the third quarter may have been in some measure already satisfied , m1 growth over the months ahead is likely to be sustained by the continuing effect on money demand of the recent declines of interest rates , if for no other reason .
b PAR 20 on a quarterly average basis , m1 would be expected to increase at around a 10 percent annual rate , implying another appreciable decline in velocity of more than 3 - 3/4 percent at an annual rate given the greenbook gnp forecast .
b PAR 21 under alternative b , m1 by september would be about 10 percent at an annual rate above the fourth - quarter 1984 long - run target base .
b PAR 21 it would of course be less high relative to a long - run target rebased to qii ' 85 , with growth from that base to september at an 8 - 1/2 percent annual rate .
b PAR 21 m1 expansion would be expected to slow further on a month - by - month basis in the fourth quarter , to a 3 to 4 percent annual rate , if reserve market conditions remain essentially unchanged , as the effects on money demand of recent interest rate declines wear off and velocity returns to around its expected trend rate of growth ( absent interest rate changes ) .
b PAR 21 as a result , m1 by the fourth quarter on average might be about 8 - 3/4 percent above its qiv ' 84 level and 7 percent , annual rate , above a qii ' 85 level .
b PAR 22 growth of m2 and m3 under alternative b would also be expected to slow relative to their average pace of may and june .
b PAR 22 in addition to the moderation of m1 growth , the nontransaction components of m2 and m3 should expand less rapidly over coming months , with inflows to money market funds and mmdas tapering off as their yields fall into more normal alignment with market interest rates .
b PAR 22 moreover , issuance of managed liabilities in the broader aggregates is unlikely to strengthen greatly , given expectations of some weakening in bank credit growth and continuing constraints on thrift asset expansion from capital requirements and market concerns about the thrifts ' financial condition .
b PAR 22 under alternative b , m2 in september would be just below the upper end of its current long - run range , while m3 would be expected to be a little above the midpoint of its range .
b PAR 24 unchanged reserve and money market conditions , as under alternative b , are likely to be associated with a modest back - up in short- term interest rates as the summer progresses , given fairly widespread expectations of some easing of federal reserve policy over coming months .
b PAR 24 the 3-month treasury bill rate might rise to around 7 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 24 bond yields , although increasing a bit initially in sympathy with short - term rates , might change relatively little on balance , since long - term rates are high in real terms and relative to short - term rates .
b PAR 24 some upward movement in long - term rates may develop , however , should there be sub- stantial disappointment with congressional action on federal deficits .
b PAR 24 in foreign exchange markets , the dollar is expected to remain within the trading range prevailing in the last few months .
b SENT -- under those conditions , growth of m1 , m2 and debt for the qiv 1984 to qiv 1985 period could be around the upper ends of the specifications of alternative b .


