a PAR 15 the federal funds rate would drop to around 7 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 15 the 3-month treasury bill rate would probably move down to the 6 - 1/2 to 6 - 3/4 percent range , around the low reached briefly in mid - june .
a PAR 15 private short- term rates would also decline .
a PAR 15 quality spreads , which have tended to widen in recent months , would probably narrow somewhat as debt servicing burdens are lessened by lower market rates and in reflection of more favorable odds of a strengthening in real economic growth .
a PAR 15 market edginess about farm credit system and fhlb securities is likely to persist , however , until resolution of the problems of these agencies seem more clearly in prospect .
a PAR 15 the international value of the dollar could be expected to move lower , perhaps substantially given the context of the recent g-5 announce- ment and intervention policy .
a PAR 15 in that case bond yields might not decline in sympathy with short - term rates , partly for reasons noted in paragraph ( 14 ) but also partly because of possible concerns about inflationary impli- cations of a rapid drop in the dollar occurring in tandem with an easing of money markets and relatively rapid m1 growth .
a SENT -- the fall in market rates under alternative a could retard a movement by the public away from highly liquid monetary assets .

b PAR 12 growth of m2 and m3 is also expected to slow in the september - to - december period under alternative b , owing primarily to the deceleration of their m1 component .
b PAR 12 this slowing would bring m2 to the upper bound of its annual range by the fourth quarter , implying average growth in the fall quarter more in line with , though still above , the projected expansion of nominal gnp .
b PAR 12 m3 should remain around the middle of its long - run range .
b PAR 12 issuance of managed liabilities is anticipated to pick up as core deposit growth slows .
b PAR 12 banks may more actively offer such liabilities , however , should they decide to enlarge their securities portfolios greatly given the unusually heavy fourth - quarter issuance of treasury debt and tax - exempt securities .
b PAR 14 both total and nonborrowed reserves are likely to grow at around a 7 percent annual rate over the final three months of the year , given reserve pressures assumed under alternative b . with federal funds trading persistently around 8 percent , other private short - term rates would rise from current levels .
b PAR 14 a relatively larger upward adjustment of bill yields could occur once the debt ceiling is raised and net issuance of bills is resumed .
b PAR 14 the 3-month bill rate might increase to the 7 - 1/4 percent area .
b PAR 14 bond yields would also rise , at least temporarily , as the treasury , partly because of debt ceiling problems , markets about $ 47 billion of notes and bonds ( $ 26 billion for new cash ) within a short period in the latter part of october and early november .
b PAR 14 the firming of interest rates that appears possible under this alternative could exert sane upward pressure on the dollar in foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 14 under those conditions , a continued decline in the dollar would depend in part on the timing and extent of exchange market intervention activity .
b PAR 14 the interaction between the dollar and interest rates is , of course , two - way .
b PAR 14 as the dollar declines , interest rates could come under further upward pressure , reflecting market concerns that more attractive returns would be required on u.s .
b PAR 14 securities at a time when external financing needs remained large and foreign investors may come to expect further exchange losses .
b SENT -- ( 16 ) an easing of reserve pressures would be expected to keep m1 farther above its upper bound than under alternative b and increase the likelihood that m2 would remain slightly above the upper end of its range through december .



