a PAR 12 growth of the monetary aggregates under this alternative would be expected to be consistent with the 6 to 7 percent range for the september- december period adopted for all three aggregates at the last meeting .
a PAR 12 m1 would increase at a 9 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year , and growth from the second quarter base of its long - run range would remain above 11 percent through december .
a PAR 12 a somewhat larger increase can not be ruled out , though , as the spread of market rates over now account rates narrows further into a range where we have had limited experience with saver response in the now account era .
a PAR 12 m2 growth would also be stronger , bringing this aggregate closer to , though still a little below , the upper end of its range ; flows into mmdas and money market funds would accelerate as rates on these instruments lagged the decline in market rates .
a PAR 12 the pickup in m3 , on the other hand , might be restrained as business loan demand at banks was held down by a greater issuance of bonds .
a PAR 13 the drop in market interest rates under alternative a may be appreciable .
a PAR 13 the 3-onth treasury bill rate could fall to 6 - 3/4 percent , or perhaps somewhat lower if expectations of a discount rate cut became widespread .
a PAR 13 the large volume of treasury coupon issues expected over the next few weeks would be easily absorbed by strong investor demand to lock in relatively high yields .
a PAR 13 the dollar would probably drop noticeably further on foreign exchange markets .

b PAR 9 borrow- ing of $ 450 to $ 550 million , with federal funds continuing to trade around 8 percent .
b PAR 9 nonborrowed and total reserves would be expected to grow at roughly a 4 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year .
b PAR 9 m1 under these conditions would probably increase at about an 8 percent annual rate over november and december , bringing growth over the last three months of the year to 5 percent and growth from the second quarter through december to 11 percent.1 demand deposits are projected to increase only slightly on balance over the remainder of the year , while now account growth should remain below the unusually rapid advance of the summer .
b PAR 9 on a quarterly average basis , m1 would increase at a 7 - 1/4 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 9 given the greenbook gnp forecast , this implies a further drop in velocity , though at only about a one percent annual rate .
b PAR 9 this behavior of velocity would still be a bit weaker than predicted by most models of money demand , although the disparity would be considerably narrower than in the third quarter .
b PAR 10 growth of the broader aggregates under alternative b would be at the lower end of , or somewhat below , the 6 to 7 percent annual rate for september to december adopted at the previous meeting .
b PAR 10 m2 would be expected to grow by 5 - 1/4 percent over the period , with its nontransac- tions as well as m1 components picking up in november and december from their relatively sluggish pace in october .
b PAR 10 stronger expansion of core deposits in the nontransactions component than in recent months is 1 .
b PAR 10 although , as noted above in paragraph 1 , concurrent seasonal adjust- ment yields m1 growth for october that is several percentage points faster than the current seasonal factors , it has very little effect on the seasonally adjusted growth rate for the second half of this year , calculated using the specifications of alternative b . anticipated , partly in association with somewhat greater household saving in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 10 m3 would be expected to increase at a 6 percent annual rate from september to december .
b PAR 10 issuance of the managed liabili- ties in m3 over the balance of the year should decline from the rapid pace in september and october , as asset expansion at banks remains fairly moderate and treasury deposits rebound once the debt ceiling is lifted .
b PAR 10 for the year as a whole , m2 growth under this alternative would be around 8 - 1/2 percent , somewhat below the upper end of its long - run range , while m3 growth of 7 - 3/4 percent would be at the midpoint of its long - run range .
b PAR 11 with federal funds continuing to trade around 8 percent under alternative b , other short - term interest rates would probably show little net change over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 11 the foreign exchange value of the dollar also might tend to remain around recent levels , or edge off particularly if incoming data suggest a relatively sluggish economy .
b PAR 11 under the latter circumstances , long - term rates might decline somewhat further on balance despite relatively strong credit demand .
b PAR 11 the treasury will be in the market in volume to replenish its cash balance , depleted by debt ceiling problems , and to finance the large fourth - quarter deficit .
b PAR 11 private borrowing meanwhile is expected to continue at near the third - quarter pace .
b PAR 11 business credit usage is likely to strengthen as inventories are rebuilt and in response to enlarged merger activity .
b PAR 11 household borrowing , however , should moderate , reflecting a drop - off in consumer durable spending .
b PAR 11 all in all , the debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to increase at an annual rate of a little more than 13 per- cent over the fourth quarter , bringing growth for the year on a quarterly average basis to nearly 13 percent .



