a SENT -- should reserve conditions ease , as contemplated under alternative a , long - term interest rates would probably continue to drop , though probably not as rapidly as in recent weeks because further rate declines may begin to foster an actual or anticipated increase in longer - term borrowing .

b SENT -- the specifications of alternative b assume borrowing at the discount window around $ 400 to $ 450 million , with federal funds likely to average just below 8 percent .
b PAR 9 growth of m1 is expected to slow in the early months of next year under all of the alternatives , following rapid expansion in december , with growth decelerating to around 6 to 7 percent under alternative b . relationships in the first quarter among m1 , interest rates , and income are more than usually difficult to predict , however , largely because of uncer- tainties about when the unusual weakness of m1 velocity in recent quarters will wane or be reversed .
b PAR 9 in addition , the minimum balance requirements on super now accounts and mmdas will be eliminated on january 1 .
b PAR 9 given the already advanced state of deposit deregulation , and present indications that depository institutions intend to take a conservative approach to setting rates and terms on super now and mmda accounts , the staff does not expect this deregulatory step to have any appreciable immediate impact on ml .
b PAR 9 all things considered , the velocity of m1 would be expected to decline further in the first quarter under all three alternatives , given the green- book gnp forecast , but this is largely attributable to the boost to quarterly average growth from the recent rapid expansion of m1 .
b PAR 9 the more restrained growth in m1 over the december - to - march period implied by the alternatives is roughly consistent with the results of available money demand models , and presumes an abatement of outsized inflows into demand deposits and now accounts but no reversal of the recent bulge .
b SENT -- specifically , under alternative b , m1 growth from the fourth- quarter 1985 base to march would be around 8 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate -- above the upper end but within the parallel band associated with its tentative 1986 range .
b SENT -- ( 13 ) assuming little change in reserve market conditions as under alternative b , long - term interest rates are likely to stabilize around their recently reduced levels , or perhaps back up somewhat .
b SENT -- short - term rates under alternative b could reverse much of their very recent declines , which appear to have been influenced by anticipation of some easing in monetary policy by early next year .

c SENT -- a slight firming of money market conditions is assumed under alternative c , involving an increase in discount window borrowing to around $ 550 to $ 600 million , with federal funds likely to trade in the neighborhood of 8 - 1/8 percent .


