a PAR 14 total and nonborrowed reserves might increase at rates of 10 and 13 per- cent , respectively , over the next three months .
a PAR 14 other short - term interest rates might fall sharply under this alternative , with the 3-month treasury bill rate dropping below 8 percent .
a PAR 14 the easing of money markets would also tend to relieve the sensitivity of markets to the condition of financial institutions .
a PAR 14 bond yields , too , would drop , and in foreign exchange markets , the dollar would fall substantially further .
a PAR 16 from the fourth quarter to june , m1 would increase at an 8 - 3/4 percent annual rate under alternative a . growth would have to slow to about a 3 - 1/4 percent annual rate over the last six months of the year , if growth for the year ( qiv - to - qiv basis   were to be just below the upper limit of the long - run range .
a PAR 16 this would increase the odds that interest rates will rise in the second half of the year .

b PAR 12 the money growth objectives of alternative b are expected to involve continuation of about the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions , with reserve paths based on adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window averaging around $ 350 million and federal funds expected to trade around 8 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 12 seasonal borrowing has averaged around $ 80 million in recent weeks , and with the spread of the federal funds rate over the discount rate likely to remain fairly narrow under this alternative , seasonal borrowing would ordinarily be expected to increase only moderately further over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 12 if availability of the temporary simplified seasonal borrowing program or liquidity pressures at some agricultural banks were to result in an unusual rise in seasonal borrowing over the intermeeting period , or if adjustment borrowing rose substantially for special reasons , such as the situation in ohio , such borrowing increases above normal could be treated as in effect " nonborrowed " reserves in the conduct of open market opera- tions .
b PAR 12 nonborrowed reserves are anticipated to expand at about a 10 percent annual rate over the next three months , and total reserves by about 9 percent , to meet the money objectives of this alternative and if demands for excess reserves are in the $ 600 to $ 700 million range .

c PAR 17 under alternative c , the 5 percent pace of m1 growth from march to june would keep this aggregate below the upper limit of the band .
c PAR 17 and the slower growth specified for m2 and m3
c PAR 17 would place both of these aggregates within their respective long - run cones in june .
c PAR 17 such a deceleration of money growth would likely involve a significant tighten- ing of reserve conditions .
c PAR 17 borrowing might increase to around $ 750 mil- lion , and the federal funds rate would probably rise to around 9 - 1/2 percent .
c PAR 17 nonborrowed and total reserves would increase at 4 - 1/2 and 7 percent annual rates , respectively .

