a PAR 13 while some monetary easing may be anticipated in the current structure of market rates , those interest rates probably would decline further under this approach , partly on more widespread expecta- tions of another reduction in the discount rate .
a PAR 13 depending on the pervasive- ness of such expectations , the 3-month treasury bill rate may fluctuate around a 6 to 6 - 1/4 percent area .
a PAR 13 long - term rates are not likely to decline by more than short - term rates , and probably by less , assuming no further change in inflation expectations .
a PAR 13 the dollar would probably again come under donward pressure , particularly if other leading central banks did not also ease monetary conditions .
a PAR 14 m1 growth would be expected to strengthen under alternative a to around 9 percent over march to june , noving this aggregate further above the upper end of its long - run range , though within its parallel band .
a PAR 14 even more rapid growth could occur , given the very narrow spread that could develop between rates on market instruments , mmdas and time deposits and those on now accounts -- especially if institutions are reluctant to reduce the latter in the fluid competitive environment following full deregulation .
a PAR 14 strong demands for money may well continue later in the year partly in lagged response to the rate declines associated with this alternative .
a PAR 14 under those circumstances , and particularly if transactions- related demands were also on the strong side , greater restraint on reserve positions and an increase in interest rates might be needed at some point later in the year if m1 were to be constrained within its longer - run range for 1986 .
a PAR 15 under alternative a , the stronger growth of m2 - -bolstered by inflows from market instruments mainly into mmmfs and mmdas -- would move this aggregate up into its longer - run range by june .
a PAR 15 the acceleration of m3 would probably be less .
a PAR 15 bank credit growth through the second quarter would be further restrained by softness in business loans as corporations rely more heavily on bond financing in response to a further drop in long - term rates .

b PAR 8 under alternative b , which assumes maintenance of about the current degree of pressure on bank reserve positions as indexed by $ 300 million in borrowing , m1 would be expected to grow at about a 7 - 1/2 percent annual rate from march to june .
b PAR 8 this would leave it a little above the upper end of its 3 to 8 percent longer - run range in june .
b PAR 8 m2 growth at 7 percent over the three months would lift this aggregate to around the lower end of its long - run range .
b PAR 8 m3 would be somewhat below the midpoint of its range .
b PAR 9 with reserve conditions unchanged under alternative b , federal funds would be expected generally to trade in the 7 - 1/4 to 7 - 3/8 percent area .
b PAR 9 other interest rates may change little , although some reversal of recent declines can not be ruled out , and on foreign exchange markets the dollar may remain around current levels for a time .
b PAR 9 to some degree , a further easing in monetary policy over coming months may be built into the alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 1986-january monthly growth rates
b PAR 9 1986-january quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth 1985-q2 1986-q1 june 86 june 86 q4 85 to june 86 1986 target ranges : rates 3 to 8 6 to 9 6 to 9 chart 1 actual and targeted
b PAR 9 m1 bi ll iona of do
b PAR 9 i ars - actual level --- projected level short run alternatives -h
b PAR 9 a a s 0 n do n 600i i
b PAR 9 i chart 2 actual and targeted m2 b 1 i1 ions of do lars i 2850 - actual level --- projected level short run alternatives
b PAR 9 ^ chart 3 actual and targeted m3 bill ions of doi iars - actual level -- projected level - * short run alternatives
b PAR 9 chart 4 debt
b PAR 9 bi ll ion of dol lar i 7700 -- actual level --- projected level
b PAR 9 i l existing interest rate structure .
b PAR 9 thus , should the market come to view such an easing as unlikely , the 3-month bill rate could back up into the 6 - 1/2 to 6 - 3/4 percent area .
b PAR 9 bond yields may come under upward pressure as well , though they are likely to continue to be influenced importantly by movements in oil prices .
b PAR 9 on the supply side of the bond market , offerings are expected to remain relatively heavy .
b PAR 9 though corporate issuance may ease back from recent record levels reached in response to the decline in rates so far this year , treasury bond issuance will pick up now that the congressional ceiling on high coupon bonds has been lifted .
b PAR 10 m1 growth in the march to june period under this alternative is expected to remain at about the same rate on average as over the first three months of the year .
b PAR 10 the transactions demand for m1 is projected to slacken , given the slowing in nominal gnp growth expected by the staff in the second quarter and probably also a drop - off in the heavy volume of financial transactions that accompanied the surge in stock and bond prices of recent months .
b PAR 10 on the other hand , demands for m1 are likely to be boosted somewhat over the next few months by the recent declines in short - term interest rates .
b PAR 10 the accompanying flattening of the yield curve , by working to reduce offering rates on small time deposits , would also seem to add to demands for interest - bearing m1 balances.1 on a quarterly average basis , m1 would be expected to expand at a 9 percent annual rate in the second quarter under alternative b , implying a drop in velocity at around a 4 percent annual rate , given the staff gnp forecast .
b PAR 10 m1 is not expected to be affected by limits on daylight overdrafts that went into effect on march 27 .
b PAR 10 only a small number of institutions are constrained by the initial caps .
b PAR 10 moreover , results of a survey of large institutions indicate that , in adapting to the new regulation , banks are not looking to higher demand deposits but are emphasizing other approaches , such as restructuring federal funds transactions and adjusting the timing of payments .
b PAR 11 m2 under alternative b would be expected to increase considerably more rapidly from march to june than its relatively sluggish rate of growth in the first quarter , partly as shifts to bond and stock investment vehicles moderate as portfolio adjustments to the recent surge in securities prices abate .
b PAR 11 1 the continued moderate m3 growth under this alternative presumes that bank credit growth will remain relatively sub- dued .

c PAR 16 the federal funds rate would probably move up to the 7 - 3/4 to 8 percent area .
c PAR 16 such a tightening is not anticipated by market participants , and substantial upward rate movements would probably occur .
c PAR 16 the 3-month bill rate would rise to above 7 percent .
c PAR 16 long - term rates would also back up considerably for a time , but upward pressures should abate as corporate bond issuance drops off and as incoming data continue to suggest low inflation .
c PAR 16 the foreign exchange value of the dollar would tend to firm over the short run .
c PAR 17 m1 growth under the money market and reserve conditions of alternative c would be expected to slow over the march to june period , bringing this aggregate to within its long - run range by june .
c PAR 17 however , m2 would remain noticeably below the lower end of its long - run range , though within its parallel band .
c PAR 17 moreover , if growth of m2 within its longer - run range for the year is to be attained , the higher level of rates is likely to prove unsustainable , particularly if it worked to restrain economic expansion significantly .
c PAR 17 directive language 

