a PAR 8 the ranges of alternative a are roughly consistent with the staff 's current gnp projection on the assumption that interest rates , if they decline , drop only moderately .
a PAR 8 with such a decline in rates , m1 seems likely to grow near the upper limit of the 4 to 7 percent range , and the velocity of m1 again to drop , though only a bit and much less than last year .
a PAR 8 the expectation that m1 expansion will slow substantially this year , despite some projected pick - up in gnp growth , is based partly on a smaller upward effect on the amount of m1 demanded because of interest rate behavior .
a PAR 8 but it also depends on the thought that the substantial portion of the quite rapid demand deposit growth of last year unexplained by usual interest rate or income relationships will not be repeated .
a PAR 8 m1 growth could tend to be reduced further in the degree that velocity shows more strength than expected , either because interest rates turn out to be higher or the public 's prefer- ences for cash diminish appreciably following last year 's exceptional build- up in balances .
a PAR 8 we have assumed that the removal of minimum balances on mmdas 1 . for background information , appendix b provides a brief description of monetary ranges recently adopted by key foreign industrial countries .
a PAR 8 and super nows and , at the end of march , the lifting of ceiling rates on savings and now accounts will have only minimal effects , given the wide- spread availability for a number of years of other ceiling - free accounts and the relatively small size of previous minimum balance requirements .
a PAR 9 growth of m2 and m3 this year should be reasonably well within their alternative a ranges , given the gnp projection .
a PAR 9 while slowing from last year 's pace , the growth of debt from q4 1985 to q4 1986 is projected a little above the upper limit of its 8 to 11 percent range .
a PAR 9 a range of 8 - 1/2 to 11 - 1/2 percent would include an upper limit about at the staff 's projection using quarterly averages .
a PAR 9 the moderation this year in credit demands by domestic sectors reflects a slowing in tax - exempt bor- rowing following last year 's surge ; some projected abatement of corporate debt financing , including for mergers and buyouts , that may in part be a product of the improved stock market ; and a deceleration in u.s .
a PAR 9 government borrowing as fiscal restraint begins to take hold .
a PAR 21 federal funds would probably trade around the present 7 - 1/2 percent discount rate or a little less , and expectations of a discount rate cut would probably revive .
a PAR 21 the 3-onth treasury bill rate would fall to around 6 - 3/4 percent or so , and long - term rates would drop .
a PAR 21 rates on large cds might decline by even more if concerns about bank asset quality -- recently reinforced to a degree by the drop in oil prices -- are relieved a little by the general decline of interest rates .
a PAR 21 also , bank cd issuance would be more muted under this alternative by heavier inflows of core deposits and some diversion of business credit demands away from banks as long - term markets become more attractive .
a PAR 21 additional downward pressure on the dollar would emerge , with the extent depending in part on whether the market comes to anticipate even further easing action -- and particularly if key foreign countries do not lower their interest rates .
a PAR 22 under alternative a , m1 growth would be expected to pick up to about an 8 - 1/2 percent annual rate over february and march , as interest rates decline .
a PAR 22 growth from the fourth quarter to march in this aggregate would be at an annual rate of about 7 - 1/2 percent -- somewhat above the tentative longer - run range -- and the lower rates would work to sustain money growth in the ensuing months .
a PAR 22 the 7 - 3/4 percent growth of m2 for february and march under this alternative would be bring this aggregate to around the lower bound of its tentative range by quarter - end .

b PAR 11 it would also depend on the growth potential of the economy .
b PAR 11 if the nation 's growth potential were below , say , 3 percent per annum -- taking account of labor force expansion and productivity -- a more stimulative monetary policy that led to higher growth would run a greater risk of setting in motion upward price pressures , with assessment of the timing and extent of risk depending on one 's view of the level of the natural rate of unemployment .
b PAR 18 the specifications of alternative b envision a continua- tion of discount window borrowing in a range of $ 300 to $ 400 million , with federal funds likely to trade around 7 - 3/4 percent or a little higher .
b PAR 18 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 18 ml m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 18 c levels in billions
b PAR 18 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 18 growth rates
b PAR 18 long - run base long - run base tentative 1986 target ranges :
b PAR 18 4 to 7 6 to 9 6 to 9 07-feb-86 chart 1 actual m1 and tentative target range --
b PAR 18 actual level sshort run alternatives bill ions of
b PAR 18 do i iars chart 2 actual m2 and tentative target range
b PAR 18 do ii ars --
b PAR 18 actual level short run alternatives b b bbg
b PAR 18 i chart 3 actual m3 and tentative target range bill ions of do ilars -- actual level short run alternatives a s 0 n
b PAR 18 do n chart 4 actual debt and tentative range
b PAR 18 i ions of do lars - actual level --- projected level growth in m1 would be expected to pick up to near a 7 percent annual rate in february and march , about the same as its december - january average .
b PAR 18 by march m1 would be a little under the upper bound of its tentative 4 to 7 percent 1986 range .
b PAR 19 a pickup in m2 growth is expected under alternative b in february and march , after its sluggish performance in january , as rp behavior ceases to be a drag and core deposits advance more in line with income .
b PAR 19 nonetheless , m2 in march would remain somewhat below the lower bound of its tentative growth cone for 1986 .
b PAR 19 growth in m3 over the remainder of the quarter is expected to slow a bit from its january pace as bank credit expan- sion moderates .
b PAR 19 m3 in march would be somewhat above the lower end of its tentative range for this year .
b PAR 20 with current reserve pressures unchanged as assumed in alternative b , the 3-month treasury bill rate would trade around 7 - 1/4 percent , the yield area reached following release of january 's employment figures .
b PAR 20 bond yields , too , would be likely to fluctuate around very recent levels , though still sensitive to incoming news about oil prices or the strength of economic activity .
b PAR 20 underlying demand pressures on credit markets are expected to show little net change this quarter .
b PAR 20 a sharp drop in the growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is in train , but most of the slowing represents cessation of unusual borrowing activity late last year connected with the special situation in the tax - exempt market .
b PAR 20 the recent pace of decline in the exchange value of the dollar may not continue under alternative b , though if the dollar is fundamentally tending downward , a significant rise in the exchange rate is unlikely .

c SENT -- in the tightening alternative c , both m1 and m2 would be expected to fall short of the december meeting ranges .
c PAR 24 the tightening assumed under this alternative would come as something of a surprise to participants in foreign as well as domestic markets .
c PAR 24 short - term rates would back up appreciably , and the exchange value of the dollar would partly reverse some of its recent decline .
c PAR 24 long - term rates would also rise , at least in the short - run , particularly if the current treasury refunding were not well distributed .
c PAR 25 growth in the monetary aggregates through march under this alternative would be low relative to the short - run ranges adopted at the previous meeting .
c PAR 25 m1 would move further down in its tentative long - run range , and m2 would remain below its range .
c PAR 25 the restraint on the aggregates would probably continue to some degree into the spring , assuming the higher interest rates were sustained .
c PAR 25 thus , this alternative might be viewed as most consistent with the long - run ranges of alternative c .
c PAR 25 directive language 1986 ranges 


