a PAR 14 in either event , the funds rate would move down to the 5 - 1/4 to 5 - 1/2 percent area .
a PAR 14 other short - term rates would also decline , with the three - month bill rate dropping somewhat below 5 percent .
a PAR 14 the response of bond yields would depend on indicators of the outlook for economic activity and prices .
a PAR 14 initially , bond yields might respond little to easier money market condi- tions , but declines in short - term yields could reinforce tendencies for longer - term yields to move lower if economic indicators pointed to a slug- gish economy and little likelihood of greater underlying price pressures .
a PAR 14 the dollar might weaken appreciably under this alternative , absent any further easing actions abroad .

b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates 6 to 9 6 to 91986 ranges : 3 to 8 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 bill onsofr dol are -- actual level -estimated level short run alternatives 9 . ' 2700 ' '
b PAR 9 o. ' 25 on d
b PAR 9 j j a s n d chart 2 actual and targeted m3 b 111
b PAR 9 one of do i lara - actual level --- estimated level chart 3 actual and targeted m1 b11
b PAR 9 i ons of - actual level
b PAR 9 --- estimated level .
b PAR 9 short run alternatives a. '
b PAR 9 720 s610 chart 4 debt billi ons of
b PAR 9 do ii re --
b PAR 9 actual level sn
b PAR 9 d the discount window around $ 300 million .
b PAR 9 federal funds are likely to re- main near 5 - 7/8 percent and the treasury bill rate in the vicinity of 5 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 9 bond yields also would be expected to fluctuate around current levels .
b PAR 9 these rates might be especially sensitive to changing perceptions of foreign demands for u.s . securities and accompanying movements in the dollar on foreign exchange markets through the upcoming period of auction and distribution of the treasury 's mid - quarter refunding issues .
b PAR 9 and credit market participants are likely to be watching developments in the oil market particularly closely , given the uncertainty about future price movements .
b PAR 9 mortgage rates might continue to edge down relative to treasury bond yields as concerns about accelerated repayments ebb further in a relatively stable interest rate environment .
b PAR 9 the dollar is expected to drift lower , retracing its recent gains , in light of the continuing large u.s . current account deficit .
b PAR 10 m2 , under alternative b , is expected to expand at an 8 per- cent rate over november and december , a little below the average pace of september and october and appreciably slower than over the summer months .
b PAR 10 this growth would leave m2 right at the upper end of its 6 to 9 percent long- run range .
b PAR 10 m2 growth over the remainder of the year should be restrained by diminishing effects of earlier declines in market rates , and perhaps even some increase in opportunity costs as depository institutions lower offering rates on liquid retail deposits .
b PAR 10 the prospects for a substantial slowing of retail deposit growth , however , are limited by a continued reluctance on the part of many depositories to breach the former regulatory ceilings of 5 - 1/2 percent on savings accounts and 5 - 1/4 percent on ordinary now accounts .
b PAR 10 m2 growth in the fourth quarter would continue to exceed the expansion of income , although by a little smaller margin than in the third quarter .
b PAR 10 the specifications of alternative b imply a 5 percent rate of decrease in m2 velocity in the fourth quarter , given the staff gnp forecast , bringing the drop in velocity for the year to an historically large 4 percent .
b PAR 11 growth of m3 under alternative b also would be expected to slow slightly further over november and december , coming in a little below the 9 percent upper limit of its long - term range .
b PAR 11 issuance of managed liabilities over the balance of the year is expected to be modest as the treasury rebuilds its cash balance at banks and as bank acquisitions of securities remain below the unusually rapid pace over the summer months .
b PAR 11 the use of purchased funds by thrifts may remain light if these institutions continue to sell a large portion of their substantial mortgage originations in the market .
b PAR 11 on a quarterly - average basis , m3 growth for the fourth quarter would be about 7 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate , considerably below that of the previous two quarters .
b PAR 11 the implied decline in m3 velocity would be at a 3 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter and nearly 4 percent over the year as a whole , the largest annual drop since 1982 .
b PAR 12 m1 , under alternative b , would be anticipated to expand in november and december at about the reduced average september - october pace- as a rebound in demand deposit growth would offset some moderation in in- flows to ocds .
b PAR 12 opportunity costs of holding ocd balances would likely widen a little more as offering rates on now accounts continue to edge lower in adjustment to earlier rate declines .
b PAR 12 m1 growth on a quarterly - average basis would be at a 14 percent rate in the fourth quarter , implying a 10 percent rate of decline in its velocity .
b PAR 12 for the year , m1 velocity would register an 8 - 1/2 percent drop , the steepest annual decline in the postwar period .

c PAR 16 federal funds would be expected to trade around the 6 - 1/4 to 6 - 1/2 percent area .
c PAR 16 the tighter reserve conditions of this alternative would be expected to restrain growth in m2 and m3 , raising the odds that these aggregates would come within their long - term ranges for 1986 and would enter 1987 within their new growth cones .
c PAR 16 higher short - term interest rates also would act to damp m1 growth , although with opportunity costs still relatively small this aggregate would continue to expand rapidly , well in excess of income growth .

