a PAR 14 in either case , the funds rate would gravitate into the 5 - 1/4 to 5 - 1/2 percent area .
a PAR 14 short - term market rates would adjust downwards , with the 3-month bill rate likely moving below 5 percent .
a PAR 14 while bond yields might come down initially , they would probably remain above the low points reached in the spring ; indeed , recent experience suggests some risk that long - term yields could even back up in the face of a decline in short - term rates if the easing in policy taken together with signs of strength in the economy and prices exacerbated fears of inflation .
a PAR 14 absent monetary easing abroad , lower short - term rates would tend to lessen the attractiveness of dollar assets , and any heightening of inflationary concerns in this environment could place the foreign exchange value of the dollar under considerable down- ward pressure .
a PAR 15 under alternative a , growth in m2 and m3 of around 9 - 1/2 and 8 - 1/2 percent , respectively , would be anticipated from august through december .
a PAR 15 such growth would leave these aggregates a little above the upper band of their annual ranges .
a PAR 15 offering rates on retail deposits and money market mutual funds would become even more favorable , at least for a while , fostering heavy inflows into these instruments .
a PAR 15 absent a policy reversal in coming months , deposit flows are likely to remain strong into early 1987 supported in part by the emergence of somewhat more robust economic activity than in the staff projection .
a PAR 15 m1 growth from august to december would be expected to continue near its rapid pace for the year to date , bringing growth for the year to 14 - 3/4 percent .

b SENT -- ( 8) under alternative b , which assumes continuation of the cur- rent degree of pressure on reserve positions , growth in m2 and m3 expected over the next four months would leave these aggregates at the 9 percent upper ends of their annual ranges .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , reserve paths would continue to be constructed assuming $ 300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window .
b PAR 9 federal funds would be expected to continue to trade around 5 - 7/8 percent , confirming expectations of no near - term policy change , and the treasury bill rate would remain near 5 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 9 bond yields should fluctuate around recent higher levels , with financial markets continuing to be unusually sensitive to developments affecting the economic and policy outlook .
b PAR 9 while forthcoming inflation indicators may suggest only a moderate uptick in price pressures , as in the staff forecast , strength in near - term data on economic activity , expansion of broad money measures along the upper bounds of their ranges , and the continued downtrend in the dollar in foreign exchange markets expected under this alternative would tend to limit the potential for retracing the recent climb in bond yields .
b PAR 10 m2 growth under alternative b is expected to average around 8 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate over the remainder of the year , appreciably below its average pace in july and august , but still well in excess of in- come growth .
b PAR 10 based on the staff greenbook forecast , m2 velocity would decline further -- at a 3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter . with money market rates staying around current levels under alternative b , in- flows from market instruments to liquid retail accounts should continue to be stimulated by their relatively attractive returns , though flows would tend to be somewhat smaller than in recent months , reflecting the diminishing impacts of earlier declines in market rates .
b PAR 10 in addition , opportunity costs may widen a bit as offering rates adjust down a little more .
b PAR 10 the expectation of a moderate slowing of inflows to retail m2 accounts is based on an assessment that rates on savings and regular now accounts will continue to be reduced very sluggishly over the balance of the year , despite unusually low spreads to market rates ; should depository institutions show more willingness to cut offering rates , m2 growth could slow somewhat more .
b PAR 10 growth in m2 also may be restrained by further ebbing in the expansion in overnight rps as net purchases of treasury securities by banks continue to abate as interest rates stabilize .
b PAR 11 m3 also is expected to decelerate from august to december in the specifications of alternative b -- to an 8 percent annual rate .
b PAR 11 this slowing would be accounted for entirely by the reduced growth in m2 ; the non - m2 component of m3 is projected to continue expanding at the average pace of recent months .
b PAR 11 bank credit growth should slow substantially over the balance of the year as loan demand remains moderate and acquisitions of tax - exempt as well as treasury securities drop off .
b PAR 11 thrifts ' asset expansion , meanwhile , is expected to pick up only marginally in coming months .
b PAR 12 m1 growth , though expected to moderate somewhat from its july - august pace , is still likely to be quite rapid over the rest of the year under alternative b . with offering rates on now
b PAR 12 accounts adjusting only slowly , inflows to other checkable deposits would continue to be boosted by funds shifting from small time deposits as well as from market instruments , though abating from their recent extraordinary pace .
b PAR 12 growth in demand deposits should taper off , as holdings become more fully adjusted to the earlier declines in short - term market rates .
b PAR 12 based on the staff 's gnp projection , transactions needs are likely to increase in the fourth quarter at around the third - quarter pace . reflecting the influence of the previous narrowing in opportunity costs of m1 balances , m1 velocity is expected to contract at a 7 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter , after a 12 percent decline in the current quarter .



