a PAR 11 under alternative a , which entails discount window borrowing falling to frictional levels of $ 100 to $ 150 million , the funds rate would tend to move below the current 6 - 1/2 percent discount rate .
a PAR 11 an easing in reserve pressures at this time would probably be taken by the market as signaling federal reserve willingness to tolerate a substantial overshoot of m1 in the context of moderate economic growth and favorable price developments .
a PAR 11 the 3-month treasury bill rate likely would decline to around 5 - 3/4 percent , or perhaps lower , and bond yields could reverse much , if not all , of their recent increases .
a PAR 11 in the absence of similar interest rate reductions abroad , the dollar could cane under considerable downward pressure in foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 11 concerns about the future attractiveness of dollar assets could possibly intensify under these cir- cumstances , tempering declines in long - term interest rates .
a PAR 12 the specifications of alternative a contemplate a less marked deceleration of m over the rest of the quarter , with growth in june close to 9 percent .
a PAR 12 indeed , even this degree of slowing might not emerge by midyear , given the possibility of a very substantial interest sensitivity of this aggregate as opportunity costs narrow even further .
a PAR 12 growth of the more liquid components of nontransactions m2 also would remain quite strong , limiting the slowing in m2 growth , and this aggregate would be boosted to near the middle of its long - run range .
a PAR 12 with the strength in core deposits holding down needs for managed liabilities , m3 would be expected to grow around 7 - 1/2 percent over the last two months of the quarter , remaining a bit above the midpoint of its range .

b PAR 8 under alternative b discount window borrowing would continue around $ 300 million , with the federal funds rate remaining generally between 6 - 3/4 and 6 - 7/8 percent .
b PAR 8 m1 under these circumstances is expected to slow considerably in june , though still increasing at a 13 percent rate over the march - to - june period .
b PAR 8 the effects of earlier market rate declines on demands for transactions balances should be abating in june , and incentives to shift into nows should diminish as their offering rates decrease further in lagged response to the previous drop in market rates .
b PAR 8 moreover , growth in demand deposits could moderate in coming weeks following their recent bulge .
b PAR 8 even with its slowing in june , on a quarterly average basis m1 would grow at a 13 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter , implying an extraordinary 9 percent decline in velocity , assuming the staff 's gnp forecast .
b PAR 8 over the last two quarters of the year , m1 growth would have to slow to a 5 percent annual rate to hit the upper end of its annual range .
b PAR 8 this could entail some rise in interest rates over the second half , especially if economic activity strengthens as expected .
b PAR 9 m2 growth under alternative b also would slow over the rest of the second quarter -- though still recording a much faster advance than during the first three months of the year .
b PAR 9 inflows to liquid retail accounts , while remaining sizable , would moderate compared with april and early may as yields on mmdas and mmmfs move into closer alignment with market rates .
b PAR 9 as growth of core deposits ebbs , banks should resume issuance of large cds to help finance some pickup in bank credit growth from its recent depressed pace , and thus m3 is expected to slow relatively little in june .
b PAR 10 under alternative b market interest rates are likely to fluctuate near recent levels in coming weeks , with the 3-month treasury bill rate between 6 and 6 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 10 the dollar could continue to drift lower in foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 10 with long - term rates remaining around current relatively low levels , credit demands are likely to continue to be focused on long - term markets .
b PAR 10 bond issuance by businesses should remain heavy and mortgage borrowing very strong .
b PAR 10 however , weakness in investment spending and some further slowing in equity retirements are projected to restrain overall business credit needs , and , in the aggregate , growth of the debt of private nonfinancial borrowers from march to june should be only a bit above its first - quarter pace .
b PAR 10 federal government debt issuance , on the other hand , is projected to be stronger in the current quarter , contributing to an appreciable pickup in total debt growth .
b PAR 10 this growth would leave the debt aggregate in june well above its long - run range .

c PAR 13 the federal funds rate prob- ably would move back into the 7 - 1/4 to 7 - 3/8 percent neighborhood .
c PAR 13 m1 growth in june would be expected to be reduced to around 5 percent under these circumstances .
c PAR 13 although this aggregate would still be above its parallel band in june , the near - term tightening of market conditions would raise the odds that m1 would move to within its longer - run range later in the year as the increase in rates and its effects on spending tended to damp demands for transactions balances in the second half .
c PAR 13 m2 would remain in the lower portion of its range through midyear , though well above the lower end , while m3 would be at about the middle of its range .
c PAR 14 market rates would back up considerably under alternative c , at least initially , given the absence of market sentiment that such a move is imminent .
c PAR 14 the three - month bill rate would rise to around 6 - 3/4 percent , and bond yields also would increase , though the rise might be moderated a bit to the extent that this action was viewed as reducing the potential for a reemergence of price pressures later this year .
c PAR 14 the current wide spreads between long - term private and treasury rates might tend to narrow if the back - up in rates led potential borrowers to defer long - term financing . with u.s .
c PAR 14 interest rates rising relative to foreign rates , the dollar would be likely to strengthen on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 14 directive language 


