a PAR 13 borrow- ing to a near - frictional level of $ 150 million or a reduction in the dis- count rate of one - half percentage point with borrowing maintained at $ 300 million .
a PAR 13 the federal funds rate , in either event , would decline to the 5 - 1/4 to 5 - 1/2 percent area .
a PAR 13 other short - term rates also would move lower , with the three - month bill likely dropping to 5 percent or a little below .
a PAR 13 the dollar could come under greater downward pressure on foreign exchange markets , unless other major central banks were similarly to ease .
a PAR 13 a weaker dollar and possibly heightened concerns about inflation could limit the scope for bond rate declines .
a PAR 13 that scope could widen , though , should incoming indicators on the economy point to more softness early in the year than is now generally expected and to subdued price pressures .
a PAR 14 under alternative a , growth in m2 would slow only a little from its average pace of recent months , and by march this aggregate would be in the upper portion of its tentative long - run range .
a PAR 14 growth in m3 would strengthen a bit , but still would be below the midpoint of its tentative range in march .
a PAR 14 m1 would be expected to expand at about the very rapid pace of 1986 . unless greater interest cost pressures break the resistance of banks and thrifts to lowering offering rates on savings deposits and other liquid accounts , opportunity costs on these accounts would remain very low -- or even decline further -- drawing funds from small time deposits and the open market .
a PAR 14 m3 would tend to be boosted by inflows to money mar- ket funds , as their yields lagged the decrease in market interest rates .
a PAR 14 in addition , bank funding needs might be enlarged by more lending to busi- nesses , especially if long - term rates did not similarly decline .

b PAR 8 the specifications of alternative b assume borrowing at the discount window of $ 300 million .
b PAR 8 federal funds would be expected to trade around 5 - 7/8 percent , though perhaps more often above than below this level through year - end .
b PAR 8 the three - month treasury bill is likely to edge back to the 5 - 3/8 percent level , especially as federal funds trading comes to center alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 8 c levels in billions 1986-october
b PAR 8 1987-january monthly growth rates
b PAR 8 1986-october
b PAR 8 1987-january quarterly ave .
b PAR 8 growth 1986-q1 1987-q1 q4 85 to q4 86 rates 1986
b PAR 8 1987 ranges(tentative ) : 6 to 9 5.5 to 8 6 to 9 5.5 to 8 3 to 8 3 to 8 chart 1 actual and targeted m2
b PAR 8 i lons of dol ilra - actual level .s - 3000 sshort run alternatives .. ondj fmam
b PAR 8 j j as o ndj fmam
b PAR 8 as nd chart 2 actual and targeted m3 bill ions of dol wre - -- actual level short run alternatives - s--
b PAR 8 i ondjfmamjjasondjfmamj
b PAR 8 ja son d 3100i
b PAR 8 i chart 3 actual and targeted m1 8111 lor of
b PAR 8 780 - - actual level sshort run alternatives - ./. c .. -
b PAR 8 a .. o ndjfmamj
b PAR 8 j ason dj fmam
b PAR 8 i chart 4 debt
b PAR 8 bi ll ions of dol irs - actual level --- estimated level
b PAR 8 .^'/~. > . '
b PAR 8 ondj fmamj jas ndj fmam
b PAR 8 j j as nd more evenly around 5 - 7/8 percent after year - end pressures abate .
b PAR 8 bond rates are expected to vary around current levels ; consistent with the staff forecast , incoming indicators of domestic output growth and inflation should not provide the basis for a major shift in sentiment .
b PAR 8 however , mar- kets are likely to remain sensitive to developments in oil markets--
b PAR 8 especi- ally given the current opec meeting -- and in foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 8 ward pressures on the dollar could re - emerge in light of continued large current account deficits , especially absent evidence of a greater willing- ness of foreign authorities to lower interest rates .
b PAR 9 m2 , under alternative b , is expected to slow further from its average growth over october and november , expanding at a 7 percent pace over the november - to - march period -- in the middle of its tentative range .
b PAR 9 the boost to m2 growth from previous market rate declines is likely to diminish further over this period , reinforced by additional reductions in offering rates on passbook accounts and other liquid deposits .
b PAR 9 the degree of moderation , though , probably will be limited by a continuation of slow adjustment of offering rates on these accounts .
b PAR 9 in addition , nominal in- come growth is projected to pick up in the first quarter , bolstering demands for m2 .
b PAR 9 adding to uncertainty about m2 growth in 1987 are tighter restric- tions on ira deductions imposed by tax reform , which will tend to reduce the appeal of this non - m2 investment .
b PAR 9 while this could act to boost inflows to m2 accounts over time , its effects are less certain early in the year , when flows are dominated by contributions for the previous tax year .
b PAR 9 1 under 1 .
b PAR 9 the new mortgage - backed securities favored by tax reform -- remics -- appear unlikely to attract many funds from retail m2 accounts , especially in the near - term .
b PAR 10 under the specifications of alternative b , m3 would expand at a 6 percent rate from november to march , near the reduced pace of recent months and in the lower half of its tentative range .
b PAR 10 credit growth at banks is expected to moderate in early 1987 as business and household loan demands slacken , and stiffer capital requirements for thrifts should further restrain their asset growth .
b PAR 10 under these circumstances depository institu- tions will be under little pressure to issue cds and other managed liabili- ties in m3 .
b PAR 10 the margin of growth of m3 over gnp would narrow and the con- traction of m3 velocity in the first quarter would be small -- about in line with its long - term trend .
b PAR 11 the outlook for m1 remains quite uncertain , given the extra- ordinarily low opportunity costs of holding ocds and the erratic behavior of demand deposits .
b PAR 11 however , underlying conditions would seem to continue to point to some moderation in m1 growth under alternative b from the exceptional pace of recent quarters .
b PAR 11 with market rates fairly stable for some months now , interest rate effects on ocds are likely to diminish as offering rates are reduced further and as the public 's portfolio becomes more fully adjusted to earlier rate declines .
b PAR 11 demand deposit growth also should subside , in part as compensating balances are brought into line with lower interest rates .
b PAR 11 nevertheless , m1 would be expected to grow in the first quarter at a rate well in excess of gnp and its velocity would register another sharp decline , on the order of an 8 percent annual rate .

c PAR 15 under alternative c , reserve paths would be drawn with an assumed $ 500 million of discount window borrowing .
c PAR 15 the federal funds rate would rise to the 6 - 1/4 to 6 - 1/2 percent area .
c PAR 15 the tighter reserve condi- tions of this alternative would act to damp growth in m2 and m3 ; m2 would be in the lower half and m3 close to the lower end of their tentative ranges in march .
c PAR 15 opportunity costs of the more liquid components of m2 , in parti- cular , would widen appreciably , restraining inflows to retail accounts , and reduced overall funding needs of banks and thrifts associated with slower asset growth would limit expansion of managed liabilities in m3 .
c PAR 15 growth in ml also would be damped by tighter reserve market conditions and accompany- ing larger opportunity costs , although it probably would continue to advance considerably more rapidly than gnp .


