a PAR 11 specification of a revised target range , as in alternatives i or ii , would tend to suggest somewhat less uncertainty about the behavior of m1 over the second half of the year and perhaps a greater willingness on the part of the committee fomc to react to growth outside that range .
a PAR 11 this possibility could be downplayed somewhat if the new range were designated a " monitoring " range .
a PAR 11 the base for a new range could be kept as the fourth quarter of 1985 , as in the alternatives presented above , or shifted forward to the second quarter of 1986 .
a PAR 11 a rebasing would essentially " forgive " the growth of the first half of the year on the thought that it represented relatively permanent additions to cash balances as interest rates fell to levels more consistent with reduced inflation and sustainable economic growth .
a PAR 11 rebasing might also be considered appropriate if the period of unusual m1 growth were thought to be past and more normal velocity relationships were expected to re - emerge .
a PAR 11 all the alternatives assume slower growth over the second half , and therefore imply lower growth rates from a second - quarter base than from a fourth - quarter base .
a PAR 11 for example , the 10 and 11 percent upper ends of the alternative a and ii ranges imply 7 - 3/4 and 9 - 1/2 percent growth , respectively , from the second to the fourth quarters of 1986.1 
a SENT -- under alternative a the current 1986 ranges would be carried over into 1987 .
a PAR 16 the choice between the two alternatives in these circum- stances depends on an assessment of the risks to velocity behavior and to the outlook for the economy and inflation .
a PAR 16 the higher upper limits of the alternative a ranges allow some greater scope for the possibility of con- tinued declines in the velocities of the monetary aggregates .
a PAR 16 this could occur should interest rates need to move lower to maintain satisfactory economic growth , owing for example to unanticipated effects of tax reform on investment or on the stance of fiscal policy , or weaker than expected performance of net exports , perhaps as economic expansion abroad remained sluggish .
a PAR 16 m1 velocity , in particular , might continue to fall sharply under these circumstances , and growth of this aggregate well in excess of the proposed 8 percent upper limit might be needed to support satisfactory economic expansion .
a PAR 16 with a decline in interest rates , the associated growth of m2 might be in the upper part of its range .
a PAR 16 while the long - run interest elasticity of this aggregate probably is now small , m2 remains sensitive in the shorter run to rate movements , owing in part to the lags in adjustment of deposit offering rates .
a PAR 16 growth close to the upper limits of the alternative a ranges also might be appropriate if the committee wished to foster somewhat faster economic growth than in the staff forecast , on the view that the risks to inflation would not be excessive .
a PAR 22 ( alternative a would also be consistent with a combination of a 6 percent discount rate and maintenance of borrowing at the current $ 300 million level . )
a PAR 22 m1 growth is projected to average around 10 percent over the three months under these circumstances .
a PAR 22 m2 growth would be likely to remain near its june pace , ending the quarter somewhat above the midpoint of its range .
a PAR 22 with short - term rates drawing even closer to rates custom- arily paid on savings deposits and regular nows , there could be some risk of even faster m1 and m2 growth than specified over the summer months , especially if depository institutions are reluctant to reduce offering rates on these accounts .
a PAR 22 m3 growth , though , would not be expected to accelerate as much since some of the pickup in core deposits would be offset by reduced issuance of managed liabilities .

b PAR 7 the table below presents the current objectives for growth in money and credit from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986 , along with two alternatives .
b PAR 7 the alternatives specify more rapid growth for m1 and , in alternative b , for the debt of nonfinancial sectors as well .
b PAR 7 m1 and debt have expanded through midyear at rates well above their current long - run ranges and a slowing in the second half sufficient to bring them within their current ranges is not likely to be consistent with expansion of the broad monetary aggregates within their ranges this year or with the moderately stronger gnp growth projected by the staff in the second half of this year and 1987 .
b PAR 7 alternatives for 1986 ranges current ranges alt .
b PAR 7 ii ml 3 to 8 5 to 10 6 to 11 m2 6 to 9 6 to9 6 to 9 m3 6 to 9 6 to 9 6 to 9 debt 8 to 11 8 to 11 9 to 12 
b PAR 10 alternatively , the committee could choose a new range for ml that it thought would encompass growth consistent with its objectives for the broader aggregates in 1986 and for the economy and inflation in 1986 and into 1987 .
b PAR 10 this approach is embodied in alternatives i and ii .
b PAR 10 the 10 percent upper end of the alternative
b PAR 10 i range would allow around 7 - 3/4 percent growth over the second half ( and 5 - 1/2 percent from june to december ) , implying a further decline in velocity of around 2 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate , given the staff 's gnp forecast .
b PAR 10 while such a slowing in m1 , or even somewhat lower growth , seems quite possible at around current interest rates -- especially if some of the unusual factors recently boosting m1 growth abate -- the 11 percent upper end of the alternative b range would seem to offer better odds of encompassing m1 growth over the second half of the year .
b PAR 10 m1 expansion would be required to decelerate to a 9 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the second half ( 7 - 3/4 percent from june to december ) to come within the upper end of this alternative , generating a 4 percentage point decline in velocity at an annual rate .
b PAR 10 such a decline in velocity might be consistent with some small further easing in money markets , but even the higher upper end of the alternative b range might well not be adequate to support economic expansion along the lines of the staff forecast should interest rates need to drop substantially further .
b PAR 10 under these circumstances very little m1 deceleration would be expected , and growth for the year could be around 12 percent .
b PAR 13 debt growth in the second half of the year is expected to run around the pace of recent months , buoyed by large federal deficits and strong net flows into home mortgages .
b PAR 13 borrowing by business is projected to moderate a bit ; the pace of share retirements is expected to slow , while underlying business needs for external funds may rise somewhat in the second half .
b PAR 13 1 in the aggregate , debt is expected to remain above the upper end of its current range in 1986 .
b PAR 13 in recognition of this , alternative b incorpo- rates a one point increase in this range , though debt expansion may still run around the top of , or even a bit above , this higher range .
b PAR 19 m1 growth under alternative b , which assumes reserve pres- sures remain unchanged , would average 8 percent at an annual rate over the next three months .
b PAR 19 adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window would continue around $ 300 million and federal funds trading would stay in an area around 6 - 7/8 percent .
b PAR 19 demand deposit expansion would be expected slow markedly , as the effects of lower interest rates on growth in corporate compensating balances and of heavy refinancing activity begin to ebb .
b PAR 19 even if depository institutions do not reduce now account offering alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m1 m2 m3 alt .
b PAR 19 c levels in billions
b PAR 19 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 19 growth rates 3 to 8 6 to 91986 target ranges : 6 to 9 chart 1 actual and targeted
b PAR 19 i lone of dol lar -- actual level -- projected level short run alternatives
b PAR 19 chart 2 actual and targeted m2
b PAR 19 bi i ions of dolla r -- actual level -- projected level short run alternatives sso 55555
b PAR 19 j a s 0 n d chart 3 actual and targeted m3 111bllon of dollr
b PAR 19 i i 3600 -- actual level --- projected level - * short run alternatives -q
b PAR 19 i 3100 .- ' ' , - ' chart 4 debt 11
b PAR 19 i ons of dol
b PAR 19 i ar - actual level --
b PAR 19 projected level sn d
b PAR 19 a s 0 n d rates further , inflows to other checkable deposits should tail off toward more normal levels as adjustments to the current structure of interest rates and opportunity costs wind down .
b PAR 19 m1 growth on a quarterly average basis , though , would drop only to 11 - 1/2 percent in the third quarter under alternative b , owing to the arithmetic carryover effect of the rapid buildup of cash balances in recent months .
b PAR 19 such an increase in m1 , given the 4 - 3/4 percent growth in nominal gnp projected in the third quarter , implies a decline in m1 velocity somewhat in excess of 6 percent-- about the same as the average pace over the past year and a half .
b PAR 20 m2 growth under alternative b would slow further from june , remaining close to the midpoint of its longer - run range through september .
b PAR 20 within the nontransactions component of m2 , a moderation of inflows to liquid retail deposits and money fund shares is expected to about offset reduced outflows from small time deposits .
b PAR 20 m3 would grow at around its pace of both may and june under alternative b , also keeping it close to the midpoint of its longer - run range .
b PAR 20 cd issuance at banks and thrifts is expected to pick up in the face of slower core deposit growth and some modest quickening in loan demand .
b PAR 20 overall debt growth , however , is likely to remain in line with the pace of recent months .
b PAR 21 the current market optimism regarding the likelihood of a decline in the discount rate presumably would not be validated under alternative b , and some edging up of rates from their most recent lows could be expected , especially should economic activity begin to show signs of the moderate strengthening as anticipated in the greenbook forecast .
b PAR 21 the 3-month treasury bill rate might well end the quarter closer to 6 - 1/4 percent than to its current quote of a little below 6 percent , and the 30-year treasury bond rate also would tend to back up a little from its most recent level around 7 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 21 given the unusually wide spread between treasury and private long - term rates , the latter might increase by somewhat less , especially if volume in bond and mortgage markets drops off .
b PAR 21 despite the slight firming of interest rates , the downward trend of the dollar on foreign exchange markets is likely to persist in light of the continued large external deficit .

c PAR 24 m1 growth over june to september , at 6 percent , would be restrained to only about one - third of its march - to - june pace , cutting into sane of the present overshoot of this aggregate relative to the upper bound of its current annual range .
c PAR 24 both m2 and m3 would grow more slowly over the next three months than the midpoint of their ranges for the year , and the levels of these broader aggregates would edge a bit below the middle of their ranges by september .
c PAR 24 discount window borrowing would rise to around $ 500 million , with the federal funds rate backing up into the 7 - 1/4 to 7 - 3/8 percent area .

