a SENT -- additional easing would be sought under alternative a , either through a further reduction in the bor- rowing assumption to $ 250 million or a 1/2 point cut in the discount rate ; the funds rate would be likely to fall to , or a little below , the 6 - 1/2 percent area .
a PAR 16 under alternative a , the further easing of the funds rate could help allay investor concerns about immediate financial strains .
a PAR 16 other private rates in money markets would slip off further , although the 3-month bill rate might rise into the 5 - 1/2 percent area .
a PAR 16 precautionary demands for liquid monetary assets might unwind more rapidly under this alternative .
a PAR 16 but the sharply narrower spreads of market over deposit rates would seem likely to encourage large inflows into liquid accounts .
a PAR 16 growth in ocds would be especially affected , with expansion in m1 likely to average 9 per- cent over september to december .
a PAR 16 m2 would be expected to increase at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over this interval as its nontransaction components picked up noticeably from september when inflows had been damped by pre- vious increases in interest rates .
a PAR 17 under alternative a , long - term bond yields would likely continue to decline as market perceptions of impending weakness in the economy tended to work against a revival of inflation concerns .
a PAR 17 however , should the dollar fall precipitously on foreign exchange markets or the further easing of policy be seen at some point as imparting substantial strength to the outlook for the economy or prices , any drop in long - term yields might be quite limited . while downward pressure on the dollar could well intensify under this alternative , foreign central banks might be more likely to ease monetary policies as the outlook for their export industries weakens further .

b PAR 13 under alternative b , persistence of the federal funds rate near 7 percent implies that a substantial rise of treasury bill rates would accompany a partial restoration of normal interest rate relationships .
b PAR 13 as exceptional demands for short - term treasuries unwind , the 3-month bill rate could move from the current 5 - 1/4 percent level to perhaps around 6 percent , while private rates might rise relatively little .
b PAR 13 even with a rate backup , short - term rates would be 1/2 to 1 full percentage point below their aver- age levels prior to the stock market crash .
b PAR 13 as a consequence , opportunity costs of liquid deposits would still be appreciably below early fall peaks .
b PAR 13 interest rate incentives could thus begin to reinforce the impact of any alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 13 c levels in billions 1987 july
b PAR 13 monthly growth rates
b PAR 13 1987 july quarterly ave .
b PAR 13 growth rates 1986 q4 1987
b PAR 13 1987 target ranges :
b PAR 13 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level -- estimted level short - run alternatives
b PAR 13 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level --- estimated level - * short - run alternatives
b PAR 13 6.5x chart 3 billions of dollars --- actual letvl --- estimated level ------- growth from fourth quarter short - run alternatives ox -01 - 15z soc
b PAR 13 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level s- - estimated level added liquidity preference in bolstering inflows to the liquid deposit and money market fund components of the aggregates .
b PAR 13 at the same time , however , a return toward more normal volumes of financial transactions would tend to depress demand deposits from recently elevated levels .
b PAR 13 under these condi- tions , m2 might expand from september to december at around a 6 percent annual rate .
b PAR 13 this outcome would bring m2 growth for the year to 4 - 1/2 per- cent , compared with its 5 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 percent long - run range .
b PAR 13 growth of its m1 component would be expected to slow substantially following its october bulge , with growth at 8 percent over the september to december period and about 7 percent for the year .
b PAR 14 m3 growth over the fourth quarter at around 7 percent is expected under alternative b , bringing growth for the year to 5 - 3/4 per- cent , just within its annual range .
b PAR 14 bank and thrift assets are expected to grow at a moderate pace .
b PAR 14 the recent bulge in security loans at banks is likely to be at least partly reversed ; business loans might be fairly strong , however , despite somewhat greater issuance of investment - grade bonds , as inventory accumulation boosts financing needs and planned funding with junk bonds of loans for leveraged buyouts is postponed .
b PAR 14 overall , the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at around an 8 percent rate from september to december , implying growth of 9 percent from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987 .
b PAR 15 under the reserve market conditions of alternative b , most bond yields might edge higher as the increased preference for fixed - income securities subsides and the possibility of further near - term monetary ease is seen as diminishing .
b PAR 15 however , market concerns about potential softness in economic activity and the associated scaling back of inflation
b PAR 15 expecta- tions could keep long - term rates below their levels at the time of the last fomc meeting .
b PAR 15 downward pressures on the value of the dollar in foreign ex- change markets could continue as market attention focuses on u.s . external imbalances , and would be accentuated by any perceptions that foreign mone- tary authorities were unwilling to adopt more expansionary policies .
b PAR 15 if dollar weakness occurred in the context of subdued growth in the u.s .
b PAR 15 econ- omy and , particularly around the time of the treasury 's midquarter refunding , of continued foreign participation in u.s .
b PAR 15 securities markets , bond prices might be little affected .
b PAR 15 but if pressures on the dollar are accentuated by disappointing progress in federal deficit reduction or if u.s .
b PAR 15 economic activity remains robust , an inverse relationship between the dollar and bond yields could reemerge .

c PAR 18 the small increase in reserve pressures under this alternative would better guard against substantial further weakness in the exchange value of the dollar , but would leave bor- rowing and the federal funds rate a bit below levels prior to the stock market crash .
c PAR 18 even so , the choice of alternative c before any dollar decline were generally linked with renewed inflation concerns would risk further disquieting domestic financial markets .
c PAR 18 a downward movement of prices in private credit and equity markets would be likely , although if the tightening were seen as contributing to economic weakness or damping any incipient inflation , the rally in the treasury bond market could be extended .
c PAR 18 the 3-month treasury bill rate could move into the 6 - 1/2 per- cent area , with private short - term rates also rising appreciably .
c PAR 18 growth in the aggregates under alternative c would be retarded a little over the rest of the quarter by the renewed upward movement in opportunity costs on monetary assets .
c PAR 18 m2 growth would be expected to be around a 5 - 3/4 percent rate over september to december , though its m1 component still would register growth around 7 - 1/2 percent given its october bulge .
c PAR 18 both aggregates would be entering the new year on fairly slow underlying growth paths .
c PAR 18 the restraining effect on m3 would be muted as business credit demands shifted more to banks and other short - term sources in response to less attractive long - term financing .
c PAR 18 directive language 


