a PAR 14 borrow- ing to a near - frictional $ 150 million or a 50 basis point decrease in the discount rate with borrowing maintained at $ 300 million .
a PAR 14 in either case , the federal funds rate would decline to close to 5 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 14 this easing in money market conditions would be expected to bolster the expansion of the aggregates , increasing the odds that m2 and m3 will be in the long - term ranges at midyear , even if economic growth turns out to be somewhat weaker than the staff projects .
a PAR 14 without such unanticipated economic weakness , m2 growth would be expected to strengthen to a 7 percent annual rate over the march - to - june period , and m3 to 6 - 1/2 percent , lifting both noticeably above the lower boundaries of their long - run ranges by june .
a PAR 14 flows into retail accounts would strengthen again , boosted by lagging offering rates on these accounts , especially ocds and passbook savings .
a PAR 14 m1 likely would accelerate appreciably over the coming months .

b PAR 9 federal funds would be expected to trade around 6 percent or a touch above .
b PAR 9 the treasury bill rate is expected to remain around current levels or perhaps move lower in response to a further reduction in supply ; although the treasury is likely to sell cash management bills in coming days , they would mature shortly after the april tax date , and net redemptions of bills at regular weekly auctions are expected alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 bi
b PAR 9 ll ions of dol irs -- actual level -estimated level sshort run alternatives
b PAR 9 ° • • • ° b & 5z 1
b PAR 9 2700 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 81
b PAR 9 ii lons or dol fars -- actual level --- estimated level & 5z - ili
b PAR 9 i chart 3 81 i lone or dol iar .'*-
b PAR 9 -^ - 820 - actual level
b PAR 9 -estimated level . ' .
b PAR 9 -- 810 * short run alternatives ' ...
b PAR 9 growth from fourth quarter .. -
b PAR 9 " - 790 • 101 a .. ' - 750 , ' f
b PAR 9 " - 750 s690 nas d.
b PAR 9 " - 740 ' ... - " " " - 730 . : ;
b PAR 9 ... - " - 720 1 1 i
b PAR 9 i l - 680 chart 4 debt --
b PAR 9 actual level sn d
b PAR 9 a s 0 n d bil
b PAR 9 iions or dol are s- 8300 s 8200
b PAR 9 i to continue for a time .
b PAR 9 little net movement in long - term rates is antici-
b PAR 9 pated under this alternative , consistent with staff expectations of moderate economic expansion and limited inflationary pressures .
b PAR 9 the dollar might remain under some downward pressure , but the decline in exchange rates through the spring is expected to be moderate assuming continuing efforts to stabilize rates under the paris agreement .
b PAR 9 sustained weakness in the dollar could tend to push up interest rates in u.s .
b PAR 9 markets owing to con- cerns about monetary policy responses and the strength of overall demand for dollar assets .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , growth in m2 would be expected to strengthen to a 6 percent annual rate over the march - to - june period , lifting this aggregate to the lower end of its long - run range .
b PAR 10 with market interest rates little changed for some time now , and not anticipated to move far from current levels under this alternative , m2 might grow about in line with income over coming months .
b PAR 10 shifts into non - m2 savings vehicles may diminish , especially should stock prices show less strength , and any use of m2 balances to pay down existing consumer loans in the wake of tax reform might abate if those with a significant tax incentive have moved relatively promptly .
b PAR 10 the deadline for 1986 ira contributions is in mid - april , but with the tax law changes it is difficult to predict the effects on m2 growth .
b PAR 10 on a quarterly average basis , m2 would rise at only a 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter , given the pattern of growth over the first quarter , and the staff 's gnp forecast would imply a small rise in m2 velocity , the first increase in more than a year .
b PAR 11 m3 growth under alternative b also would be expected to strengthen to a 6 percent rate over the march - to - june period .
b PAR 11 inflows to m2 deposits at banks are expected to be augmented by some pickup in the issuance of managed liabilities included in m3 ; borrowing from foreign branches should drop back from recently elevated levels , and overall needs for funds are projected to increase reflecting in part a turnaround in business loans now that much of the year - end bulge has been worked off .
b PAR 11 the pace of cd runoffs at thrifts is expected to moderate as their asset growth rebounds a bit from the recent depressed pace , though any intensi- fication of concerns about the health of these institutions or their insurance fund could work in the other direction .
b PAR 11 on a quarterly average basis , m3 would grow at only a 4 - 3/4 percent rate , the slowest pace in more than a decade and a half ; m3 velocity , which has trended downward , would post a small increase .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , expansion of m1 is anticipated to strengthen to a 9 percent annual rate over march to june .
b PAR 12 the acceleration in m1 would reflect a resumption of growth in demand deposits , which are anticipated to increase at a rate only a little below the projected growth of spending .
b PAR 12 ocds are expected to grow at around the reduced pace of february and march ; however , with opportunity costs widening only a little further with the continued downward drift of offering rates , the pace of growth would still considerably exceed that of income .
b PAR 12 on a quarterly average basis , m1 would rise at a 7 - 1/2 percent rate in the second quarter , the slowest rate since late 1984 , and its velocity would decline at only a 2 percent annual rate .
b PAR 12 over the first half of the year m1 would increase at about a 10 percent annual rate .

c PAR 16 under alternative c , reserve paths would be drawn with a borrowing level of $ 500 million , which would push the federal funds rate up to the 6 - 1/2 percent area .
c PAR 16 the three - month bill rate would rise about 50 basis points under this alternative and cd rates possibly by more .
c PAR 16 the increase in interest rates would tend to relieve downward pressure on the dollar , at least for a while .
c PAR 16 bond rates would rise , as there appears to be little expectation in the markets of a tightening , although any such increase would be limited by sentiment that such a move was acting to contain inflationary pressures , in part through its effect on the dollar .
c PAR 17 a rise in interest rates would limit the extent of the pick- up in m2 - -as opportunity costs of holding m2 balances widened .
c PAR 17 given the weakness of this aggregate in the first quarter , which may have reflected shifts in portfolio preferences , alternative c would tend to bring m2 farther below the lower end of its long - run range over the second quarter .
c PAR 17 slower expansion of assets at banks and thrifts would act to restrain m3 growth to along the lower end of its long - run range .
c PAR 17 growth in its m1 component would be expected to remain subdued but still be above that of income .
c PAR 17 directive language 


