a PAR 15 since markets have not yet adjusted to the current $ 600 million objective , this alternative implies only a modest drop in money market rates from current levels .
a PAR 15 the federal funds rate would drift lower to below 7 percent , somewhat above its trading range before the recent run - up in rates .
a PAR 15 other private short - term rates also would decline , perhaps by a quarter of a percentage point .
a PAR 15 bill rates might drop very little on balance once potential supply constraints eased .
a PAR 15 even so , absent a clear indication of weakness in the economy or lessened inflation concerns , market participants probably would be surprised by any easing action caning on the heels of the discount rate hike .
a PAR 15 the dollar might well come under consider- able downward pressure , and this would tend to limit possible declines in bond yields .
a PAR 16 under alternative a , all of the monetary aggregates likely would accelerate from their pace of recent months , bringing m3 to the lower bound of its long - run range .
a PAR 16 both m2 and m3 would be expected to end the year growing at rates that fall within , but in the lower portions of , their tentative ranges for next year .
a PAR 16 as short - term rates retraced much of their recent advances , opportunity costs would act as only a minor drag on m2 in the caning months , especially on its m1 and other liquid components .
a PAR 16 sequently , m1 and m2 would expand at rates more in line with income over the fourth quarter .
a PAR 16 m3 would be expected to strengthen to a 6 - 1/4 percent rate over the august - to - december period as larger core deposit inflows to banks and thrifts would not be offset completely by smaller issuance of managed liabilities .
a PAR 16 directive language 

b PAR 9 under alternative b , reserve paths would continue to be drawn with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the $ 600 million level that has been specified since early september .
b PAR 9 money markets do not yet appear to reflect this higher level of borrowing , and the federal funds rate would be expected to firm a little , into a 7 - 1/4 to 7 - 3/8 percent range , as borrowing came to average around $ 600 million and the market perceived the federal reserve 's intentions .
b PAR 9 the three - month treasury bill rate would climb by alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars --- actual level short run alternatives " " 2950 o5.5 % , o _ : 2900 , * c - " 2850 sii -i\1
b PAR 9 j a 8 0 n d1986 198 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars s3850 - actual level short run alternatives
b PAR 9 s-3400 3350i
b PAR 9 i chart 3 billions of dollars
b PAR 9 - _ actual level --
b PAR 9 ...... growth from fourth quarter short run alternatives -015z 10x _ o- -
b PAR 9 i chart 4 debt billions of dollars actual level - --- estimated level
b PAR 9 8z - about 1/4 percentage point toward 6 - 3/4 percent , consistent with the slight firming of the federal funds rate and an unwinding of distortions associated with potential debt - ceiling disruptions .
b PAR 9 private short - term rates also would rise , but by even smaller amounts .
b PAR 9 in light of the higher federal funds rate compared with its level expected at the last fomc meeting , the federal funds range associated with alternative b , given in the last line of the table , is suggested at 5 to 9 percent ; this would be 1 percentage point above the range now in the directive , and more nearly centered on the federal funds rates thought likely to prevail under this alternative .
b PAR 10 the slight further firming of short - term rates likely under alternative b would tend to support trading of the dollar on foreign exchange markets at around current levels for a while .
b PAR 10 under these circumstances , the treasury bond rate would be expected to continue to fluctuate a little above 9 - 1/2 percent , although corporate bond yields and rates on fixed - rate mort- gages could drift higher into more normal alignment with treasuries .
b PAR 10 legis- lative developments could have a significant effect on the dollar and domestic financial markets over coming weeks , however .
b PAR 10 agreement on a mechanism for substantial and continuing budget deficit reductions would tend to bolster bond prices and possibly the dollar .
b PAR 10 however , should little substantive progress be made on the budget , or should relatively restrictive trade mea- sures seem to be in train , bond yields could come under upward pressure .
b PAR 10 in addition , if incoming information pointed to continued massive current account deficits , significant downward pressure on the dollar could well reemerge .
b PAR 10 in this event , long - term rates would be expected to rise in re- flection of associated concerns about inflation and demand for dollar assets , while short - term rates also would tend to move higher in anticipation of further monetary restraint .
b PAR 10 indeed , the staff gnp forecast envisions further declines in the dollar over coming quarters and upward movements of short- term interest rates ; in that forecast a portion of these movements has been assumed to occur in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 11 the monetary aggregate specifications of alternative b assume that the reserve pressures of this alternative are maintained through year- end .
b PAR 11 under these conditions , m2 is expected to grow at a 4 - 1/2 percent rate , near its pace of recent months .
b PAR 11 this would bring growth in m2 for the year to 4 percent , well below the lower end of the committee 's 5 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 percent long - run range .
b PAR 11 adjustments of portfolios to the recent increase in open market rates would act to restrain m2 growth over the months ahead , especially its more liquid components , resulting in a further rise in m2 velocity .
b PAR 11 opportunity costs of holding ocds , savings deposits and mmdas have risen appreciably over recent weeks and are likely to remain high owing to sluggish adjustment of offering rates .
b PAR 11 moreover , similar to the experience thus far this year , demand deposits could well remain about flat , as the effects of the expected growth in economic activity over the remainder of the year are about offset by the impact of the recent upward movement in interest rates .
b PAR 11 growth in small time deposits , in contrast , should be well maintained as banks and thrifts have been adjusting yields on these accounts more promptly to those in the open market .
b PAR 11 given its relatively large interest sensitivity , m1 would be expected to grow at only a 3 percent rate over august to december , 1 .
b PAR 11 this forecast might be considered consistent with the reserve conditions of alternative b over the intermeeting period followed by a firming later in the quarter , or with a path intermediate between alternatives b and c. implying quarterly average growth of 3 - 1/4 percent in the fourth quarter and a 2 - 1/4 percent rate of velocity expansion .
b PAR 12 growth in m3 from august to december is anticipated at a 6 percent rate under alternative b .
b PAR 12 this would be a little stronger than its pace earlier in the year , and would move this aggregate close to , though not quite within , its longer - run range .
b PAR 12 bank credit growth , and associated issuance of managed liabilities in m3 , should be buoyed by additional reli- ance by businesses on short - term sources of funds , given increasing financing needs and the rise in bond rates .
b PAR 12 despite some moderation in total mortgage flows owing to higher interest rates and reduced housing market activity , the renewed borrower interest in arms should support growth in thrift assets and managed liabilities in m3 .
b PAR 12 consumer credit growth may slacken substantially after the current round of automobile incentive programs ends and spending on cars and other durables weakens .
b PAR 12 total borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to strengthen a bit in the fourth quarter , reflecting entirely a pickup in federal borrowing to finance a larger deficit .
b PAR 12 for the year , debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to rise by 9 - 1/2 percent on a quarterly average basis , in the middle of the annual range for this aggregate .

c PAR 13 under alternative c , the borrowing assumption would be raised to $ 800 million .
c PAR 13 the federal funds rate would move up to 7 - 3/4 percent or a little above , after the markets had adjusted to this further tightening of pressures on reserve positions .
c PAR 13 other short - term market rates might also rise by around 1/2 percentage point , with the 3-month bill rising to about 7 percent .
c PAR 13 the prime rate would be boosted , perhaps by even more , given the relatively narrow spread of this rate over cds now prevailing .
c PAR 13 the dollar could firm a little , at least in the near term , and the perceived willingness to tighten policy could postpone emergence of any subsequent downward pressure on the dollar .
c PAR 13 bond yields probably would move higher , although if the mar- kets were to view this measure as forestalling future inflationary pressures , any rise in long - term rates could be rather small .
c PAR 14 under alternative c , m2 growth over the august - to - december period would slow to about a 3 - 1/2 percent pace , as opportunity costs of holding m2 balances widened substantially further .
c PAR 14 at the most liquid end of the spectrum , m1 might expand only a little over this period , with demand deposits declining .
c PAR 14 banks and thrifts , faced with even smaller inflows to core deposits , would step up their issuance of managed liabilities to fund only marginally weaker credit demands , and m3 would expand at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate over the august - to - december period , leaving growth for the year at 5 - 1/4 percent .


