a PAR 15 the easing of reserve pressures would tend to boost m2 growth in june to a 7 percent annual rate , thereby limiting , though not preventing , a widening by june of the shortfall of m2 relative to the 5 - 1/2 percent lower bound of its annual range .
a PAR 15 lower interest rates and stronger nominal income growth than in the staff greenbook forecast would be expected to boost m2 demand in the second half of the year , providing greater assurance that this aggregate would grow within its range for the year .
a PAR 15 the specified growth of m3 over these two months , at 6 - 1/4 percent , would move this aggregate in june to just above the lower bound of its range .
a PAR 15 m1 under this policy alternative would be expected to grow at only a 4 - 3/4 percent average rate over the last two months of this quarter , but its june pace of 10 percent would be more suggestive of its underlying momentum entering the remainder of the year .
a PAR 16 under alternative a , short - term interest rates would retrace their recent increases . unless it were accompanied by substantial easing moves abroad , the exchange value of the dollar would move sharply downward , heightening inflation concerns .
a PAR 16 under these conditions bond yields would be unlikely to decline much , if at all .
a PAR 16 directive language 

b PAR 8 alternative
b PAR 8 b assumes maintenance of the current $ 400 million allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing .
b PAR 8 this is expected to in- volve some decrease in the federal funds rate from recent levels , which have alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 8 c levels in billions
b PAR 8 1987-january 2822.0
b PAR 8 3515.3 3515.3
b PAR 8 3515.3 737.6 737.6 737.6- monthly growth rates april 5.9 5.9 5.9 5.8 5.8 5.8 17.9
b PAR 8 17.9 17.9 r
b PAR 8 quarterly ave .
b PAR 8 growth rates 5.5 to 8.5 5.5 to 8.51987 ranges : chart 1 actual and targeted m2
b PAR 8 i lone of dol lar -- actual level short run alternatives
b PAR 8 * e 8£5 sil -j 2900
b PAR 8 j a s 0 n d chart 2 actual and targeted m3
b PAR 8 b ii ions of dol lars --
b PAR 8 actual level - * short run alternatives chart 3 bi11 ions of dol - actual level .
b PAR 8 short run alternatives .growth from fourth quarter -
b PAR 8 " s01 r , _ , r - r - rrrrlr
b PAR 8 -rrr~~rr~~rr .. -*''101 -
b PAR 8 ~_l - ti irs 680i
b PAR 8 _ l chart 4 debt - actual level estimated level
b PAR 8 s ' .- ' . '
b PAR 8 iii ions of dol iir
b PAR 8 i 7200 partly reflected market perceptions that the system is , or soon would be , seeking firmer reserve conditions than those assumed in this alternative .
b PAR 8 under normal circumstances , attainment of the alternative b borrowing path and its broad perception as the system 's operating objective might be as- sociated with the federal funds rate dropping to appreciably below 6 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 8 however , continuation of concerns about the dollar and infla- tion and related uncertainties about the stance of monetary policy might prevent the funds rate from falling below the 6 - 1/2 percent area .
b PAR 8 if the funds rate were to settle around 6 - 1/2 percent , treasury bills probably would trade in a 5 - 3/4 to 6 percent range .
b PAR 8 the lower level of the funds rate could encourage a decline in rates on other private short - term instruments .
b PAR 9 the slight drop in money market rates expected under this alternative may not be accompanied by an improvement in bond yields .
b PAR 9 term markets are likely to remain highly sensitive to the behavior of the dollar on foreign exchange markets and indications of emerging price pressures in the united states .
b PAR 9 while increases in some price measures should moderate a bit from the elevated rate of earlier months , they are expected to remain considerably in excess of the pace of last year .
b PAR 9 moreover , the staff expects the dollar to remain under downward pressure with alternative b , in light of slow progress in the adjustment of nominal external imbalances , arising in part from weak growth in our major trading partners .
b PAR 9 under these conditions , markets are likely to continue to anticipate a firming in monetary policy before very long .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , m2 growth is expected to be held down in may , in part by the unwinding of tax payment effects .
b PAR 10 expansion of this aggregate is projected to rebound in june to a 5 - 3/4 percent rate -- roughly in line with the pace that might be expected based on interest rate movements and projected income growth .
b PAR 10 but this would still mean rather slow growth over the second quarter and
b PAR 10 by june this aggregate would have grown a full percentage point below its lower bound .
b PAR 10 balances depleted by april tax payments are not likely to be replenished quickly .
b PAR 10 rates paid on m2 assets should continue to lag behind recent increases in market rates , although small time deposit rates in some areas of the country are moving up quickly .
b PAR 10 the velocity of m2 implied by the staff 's gnp forecast would rise at a 3 percent annual rate this quarter , compared with a gain less than half that size in the first quarter .
b PAR 10 while an increase in velocity would be expected with the further rise in the average opportunity cost on m2 , under alternative b this increase would be somewhat greater than predicted by most available models of m2 demand .
b PAR 10 m2 growth in the second quarter apparently is being depressed by special factors , perhaps related to a draw- down of balances accumulated late in 1986 when capital gains were realized , and to shifting preferences for financing consumer purchases out of liquid assets rather than with credit .
b PAR 11 m3 growth is expected to average around 6 percent in may and june under alternative b , keeping this aggregate near the lower end of its long - run range .
b PAR 11 expansion of m3 should be sustained by an anticipated pickup in net issuance of large time deposits and other managed liabilities to support asset growth at depository institutions .
b PAR 11 however , m3 growth may be held down by increased borrowing by banks from their foreign branches , espe- cially if foreign central banks continue to intervene heavily and place the proceeds in the euromarkets .
b PAR 11 business borrowing at commercial banks , which already has accelerated so far this quarter in response to higher costs of longer - term corporate financing , is expected to continue strong .
b PAR 11 some bounce - back of thrift asset expansion from the depressed first - quarter pace is anticipated in the second quarter , in part as higher mortgage rates boost originations of arms , which are much less likely than fixed rate mortgages to be sold into pools .
b PAR 11 expansion of all credit to nonfinancial sectors , in markets as well as through depositories , is expected to continue at around a 10 percent rate over may and june , placing the debt aggregate just below the upper end of its monitoring range .
b PAR 12 owing to the clearing of tax payments in late april and early may , m1 likely will be flat in may on a monthly average basis before rebound- ing in june to around an 8 percent annual rate under alternative b . june growth would represent a moderation from the average pace since the fourth quarter of last year , in response to the upward movement of market interest rates .
b PAR 12 there is some chance that the deceleration could be even more marked , should depositors be particularly sensitive to widening spreads between rates on small time deposits and ocds .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , quarterly average growth for m1 , at 7 - 1/2 percent , still would slightly exceed projected gnp expansion , implying a decline in m1 velocity for the tenth straight quarter .

c PAR 13 with the market already anticipating some firming of policy , any increase in the federal funds and other market rates under this alternative might be rela- tively muted , although a discount rate increase could have a more sizable , temporary impact on very short - term rates .
c PAR 13 federal funds might settle into a 6 - 3/4 to 7 percent range , and bill rates might rise to around 6 - 1/4 percent or a little higher .
c PAR 13 any upward adjustment of treasury bond yields probably also would be comparatively small , as this policy action would tend to temper bearishness about the dollar in exchange markets , especially if it were accompanied by further easing moves abroad , and relieve some anxieties about the outlook for u.s . inflation .
c PAR 13 quality spreads could widen some , however , if the higher rates were seen as raising the odds on a weak economic perform- ance , or were to intensify concerns about the international debt situation .
c PAR 13 an additional increase in the prime rate seems likely under this alternative .
c PAR 14 the continued widening of opportunity costs of monetary assets implied by alternative c would further depress demands for core deposits , with m2 growth from april to june likely slowing to a 2 - 1/4 percent pace .
c PAR 14 growth at this rate would leave m2 at the lower end of the parallel band associated with its longer - run range .
c PAR 14 the implied expansion -- of around 7 percent -- in the second half of the year needed to attain the lower end of the long - run range would seem to require a considerable easing of policy later in the year .
c PAR 14 transactions deposits would be especially affected by an upward movement of market rates , which would substantially boost opportunity costs on now accounts and constrain demand deposit growth partly because compensat- ing balance requirements were reduced .
c PAR 14 m3 growth would be expected to remain at about its april pace as bank credit growth stayed strong , placing this aggregate at the lower bound of its long - run range in june .


