a PAR 12 such an outcome could arise from exceptionally strong demands for liquidity , given income and interest rates , perhaps associated with continued brisk increases in total financial assets . or a sizable drop in velocity also could result from sub- stantial declines in interest rates should they be needed to sustain economic expansion , perhaps in the face of faltering growth worldwide or an absence of any pressures in prices .
a PAR 12 the effects of any further rate declines on velocity could be quite large if the adjustment of deposit rates remains very sticky .
a PAR 12 sizable interest rate decreases , especially if they occurred in the early part of the year , might be enough to augment demands for broad money suffi- ciently to threaten the upper ends of an 8 or 8 - 1/2 percent range later in the year , potentially constraining policy at that time .
a PAR 22 borrow- ing to $ 150 million , a near - frictional level , or a one - half percentage point cut in the discount rate with the borrowing allowance maintained at $ 300 million .
a PAR 22 in either case , the federal funds rate would move down to around 5 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 22 other short - term rates would decline by nearly this amount , with the three - month bill dropping to close to 5 percent , as there appears to be little market expectation of monetary easing in the period immediately ahead .
a PAR 22 downward pressure on the dollar would intensify , absent comparable policy moves by central banks abroad .
a PAR 22 in the context of a weaker dollar , and possibly greater concern about inflation , the scope for long - term rates to fall might be limited ; however , should the easing in money markets be followed by economic indicators pointing to a weaker economy and less inflationary pressure than is now expected , long - term rates would be more likely to fall appreciably .

b SENT -- the tentative ranges for 1987 announced by the comittee last july are given in alternative b .
b PAR 13 the staff 's expectations for m2 and m3 growth , around the middle of this alternative 's ranges , suggest com- parable odds of running either very high or very low in the range .
b PAR 13 the alternative b range would provide for some restraint on income growth should inflationary pressures tend to intensify , and the upper ends of the ranges would allow further substantial declines in velocity should they materialize .
b PAR 13 the downward adjustment of the ranges from 1986 to 1987 would convey the committee 's sense that slower money growth over time will be necessary to sustain and consolidate progress toward price stability .
b PAR 13 at least a modest slowing of money growth in 1987 would be required under alternative b , given that the upper ends of the ranges of this alternative are a little below actual growth in 1986 .
b PAR 18 the specifications of alternative b involve maintaining a reserve path allowance for borrowing at the discount window of $ 300 million .
b PAR 18 the federal funds rate would be expected to range around 6 percent , as it has in recent days .
b PAR 18 with funds trading consistently in this area , the three- month treasury bill rate might edge back down toward 5 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 18 bond rates would be expected to continue to fluctuate around current levels as incoming economic indicators are likely to point to continued moderate economic expansion .
b PAR 18 the dollar could well come under some renewed downward pressure -- given persistent large current account deficits .
b PAR 19 it now appears that maintenance of current conditions in reserve markets under alternative b will be consistent with slightly more rapid growth of the broad money aggregates over the november - to - march period than foreseen at the last fomc meeting , though within the upper bounds of the alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 19 c levels in billions
b PAR 19 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 19 growth rates 1986 ranges : 6 to 9 6 to 9 3 to 8 1987 ranges(tentative ) :
b PAR 19 5.5 to 8.5 5.5 to 8.5 3 to 8 chart 3 actual m2 and tentative target range 8 ilf ona of dol iwo
b PAR 19 -- actual level short run alternatives s.5
b PAR 19 0 n d -h 2900
b PAR 19 4 actual m3 and tentative target range
b PAR 19 i ons of doll ar - actual level short run
b PAR 19 alternatives s-
b PAR 19 3700 a.s - 3650 , ' ' - 3600 , ' -
b PAR 19 3350 chart 5 actual m1 and tentative target range
b PAR 19 bi i fionr of dol rs - actual level 780 short run alternatives 8z - 770
b PAR 19 " ' 760 s .. " --
b PAR 19 750 .. - " - 720 a .. -
b PAR 19 i 680 chart 6 actual debt and tentative range
b PAR 19 i lone or dol iar
b PAR 19 -4 8400 - - actual level --- estimated level growth cones associated with any of the long - run alternatives .
b PAR 19 m2 under this alternative would be expected to slow substantially in february and march from the average pace of recent months , but to expand at an 8 percent rate over november to march , compared with the current short - run specification of 7 percent .
b PAR 19 the year - end distortions seem to have unwound by february , and growth over the balance of the quarter should reflect underlying influences from income and interest rates .
b PAR 19 the increase in transactions balances is expected to moderate substantially and smaller inflows to overnight rps and eurodollars are likely following their recent surge .
b PAR 19 nontransactions core deposits should continue to outpace the growth of income as opportunity costs remain quite low , especially on savings accounts , given the stickiness of offering rates .
b PAR 19 the decline in m2 velocity is expected to moderate from around a 5 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter to 3 percent in the first .
b PAR 20 m3 under alternative b also is expected to slow in february and march from the average pace of recent months as credit demands on banks decrease sharply from elevated year - end levels , reducing needs to issue man- aged liabilities .
b PAR 20 overall credit growth should moderate as well , with domestic nonfinancial debt expected to grow at an 8 percent rate over the balance of the quarter .
b PAR 20 from the fourth quarter through march , debt would have expanded at a 10 percent annual rate , in the upper part of any of the long - run alternatives .
b PAR 21 the outlook for m1 growth continues to be highly uncertain owing to both erratic demand deposit movements and the difficulty of assess- ing the outlook for ocd growth at historically low opportunity costs .
b PAR 21 with demand deposits already having retraced their run - up over year - end , this component has begun to expand again .
b PAR 21 growth is projected to moderate .
b PAR 21 while this component accelerated in january , the opportunity cost of holding now accounts has been widening since late summer , albeit slowly , and the outflow of time deposits -- one source of funds shifting to ocds -- is expected to abate further .
b PAR 21 on balance , m1 growth would slow in february and march under alternative b from the exceptional pace of recent months , although continuing to outpace gnp by a substantial margin .
b PAR 21 in the first quarter , m1 velocity is projected to contract at about a 10 percent annual rate , after falling at nearly a 14 percent rate in the fourth quarter .

c PAR 11 with respect to the three alternatives for growth in the broad aggregates , all would appear broadly consistent with moderate growth in the economy accmpanied by only a modest pickup in inflation , given the staff 's assessment of the economic fundamentals and the factors affecting money demand .
c PAR 11 for m2 , such trend velocity behavior is suggested by the results of many of the money demand models , which indicate growth at or below the midpoint of this range .
c PAR 11 of all the alternatives , the ranges of alternative c would imply the potential for the greatest restraint on nominal income under those circumstances , in order to maintain progress toward price stability .
c PAR 11 in particular , if upward movements of interest rates were to accompany the tendency towards higher inflation , velocity could begin to strengthen substantially , implying the need for growth in the lower alternative c ranges .
c SENT -- similarly , the decelera- tion in m3 would be less pronounced , although this aggregate in march would be below even the upper end of its alternative c long - run range .
c PAR 24 under alternative c , reserve paths would be drawn with a borrowing level of $ 500 million , which would likely lead to a rise in the federal funds rate to the 6 - 1/2 percent area .
c PAR 24 such a policy move would exert greater restraint on m2 , bringing this aggregate well within even the alternative c range .
c PAR 24 a relatively large widening of opportunity costs of liquid retail accounts would act to damp expansion of m2 while reduced asset growth at banks and thrifts would limit issuance of managed liabilities in m3 .
c PAR 24 tighter reserve conditions also would raise the odds that m1 growth would decelerate substantially in the months ahead .


