a PAR 14 the federal funds rate would fall to within a 6 to 6 - 1/4 percent range , probably gravitating toward the lower end once the market perceived the extent of the easing of reserve pressures .
a PAR 14 other short - term rates would follow suit , with the 3- month treasury bill rate probably slipping to around 5 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 14 given the easing of reserve pressures under this alternative , against the back- ground of recent signs of monetary policy firming in some other major indus- trial countries , the dollar probably would come under renewed downward pres- sure .
a PAR 14 bond market participants , recently preoccupied with inflationary con- cerns , might react negatively to a less restrictive stance of federal reserve policy , especially should it be accompanied by a substantial weakening of the dollar .
a PAR 14 in such circumstances , bond yields might not fall much , if at all , over the intermeeting period , absent a sharp break in oil prices .
a PAR 15 owing to the decline of short - term market interest rates relative to offering rates on deposits , m2 growth under alternative a would be expected to jump to 7 percent over august and september .
a PAR 15 its m1 component likely would accelerate to a 6 - 3/4 percent rate over the two months .
a PAR 15 growth of m2 would move noticeably closer to its long - term range , but in september this aggregate still would have increased at only a 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate from its fourth - quarter base .
a PAR 15 while the easing contemplated under this alternative probably would have a pronounced effect on money growth in the fourth quarter , whether m2 could hit the 5 - 1/2 percent lower bound of its range without a further easing is uncertain .
a PAR 15 to make up the shortfall , a 10 - 1/2 percent september - to - december growth rate would be needed ( or 8 - 3/4 percent to hit the bottom of the growth cone by december ) .
a PAR 15 for m3 , the 7 - 1/2 percent growth foreseen for august and september under alternative
a PAR 15 a would lift this aggregate to around the lower bound of its annual range .
a PAR 15 prospects would be good that the aggregate would move well within its range in the fourth quarter ; the steeper yield curve expected under this alternative would provide additional incentives for businesses to focus credit demands on banks and for home mortgage credit to be met through arms at thrifts .

b PAR 9 federal funds would be likely to trade mainly in the lower portion of a 6 - 1/2 to 6 - 3/4 percent range , except perhaps around the mid - september corpo- rate tax date , when unusually large payments may impart some temporary upward pressure to the funds rate .
b PAR 9 with no major changes in supply anticipated , at least until the time of the next expiration of the treasury debt ceiling on september 23 , treasury bill rates now seem broadly consistent with a federal funds rate continuing to average a little above 6 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 9 likewise , other money market rates generally should vary around current levels under alternative b . longer - term rates also are most likely to fluctuate near alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions monthly growth rates june 1.0 1.0 1.0 5.2 5.2 5.2 -10.4
b PAR 9 -10.4 -10.4 , quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short run alternatives
b PAR 9 8.5s - 3000 s.5z chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level sshort run alternatives 8.5x 5.5 % -h
b PAR 9 3600 chart 3 billions of dollart - actual level - 830 ........
b PAR 9 growth from fourth quarter sshort run alternatives , ' -
b PAR 9 / - 820 / ' 15x s800
b PAR 9 10 -- / , ' - 770 s c
b PAR 9 750 - - , " ' .. .. - 750 -- ~- - 730 - - .--- 720 - o - 710 i - i
b PAR 9 i 680 chart 4 debt billions of dollars -- actual level --- estimated level 7200i
b PAR 9 i recent levels into the late summer , though they should remain sensitive to developments in the persian gulf and other factors bearing on the inflation outlook and the dollar .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , and the other alternatives as well , m2 growth is projected to strengthen in august and september relative to the weak expansion of recent months .
b PAR 10 this pickup would reflect primarily a waning of the damping influence of previous increases in market rates and opportunity costs .
b PAR 10 offering rates on very liquid deposits now seem roughly in line with the current levels of short - term market rates ; however , some additional upward adjustment in rates on longer - term small time deposits probably can be expected , given recent increases in yields on market instru- ments of comparable maturity .
b PAR 10 with opportunity costs unchanged or narrowing a bit under this alternative , growth in m2 over the balance of the quarter is expected to average near 6 percent , around the trend of income .
b PAR 10 this growth would bring expansion over june to september to the 5 percent short- run growth path specified by the committee at its last meeting .
b PAR 10 owing to its recent weakness , largely reflecting the earlier widening of opportunity costs , m2 would expand this quarter at only a 3 - 1/4 percent annual rate on a quarterly average basis .
b PAR 10 given the staff 's greenbook projection for nominal gnp , m2 velocity would be expected to increase at a 3 percent rate , around the pace of the first half of the year .
b PAR 11 m3 growth over august and september would be expected to accelerate substantially from its unusually depressed july pace , to a rate of 7 percent under alternative b . bank credit should resume its expansion , boosting issuance of large cds .
b PAR 11 demand for adjustable rate mortgages likely will continue to support thrift asset growth , funded in part by continued expansion of large cds , especially if the recent tendency to pull back from reliance on fhlb advances continues .
b PAR 11 even with the pickup in m3 growth , this aggregate would fall short of the committee 's current 7 - 1/2 percent short - run range for june to september by about 2 percentage points .
b PAR 11 total debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow in august and september around the more moderate july pace , leaving the debt aggregate in september about 9 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter base .
b PAR 11 while federal government borrowing has picked up following the debt ceiling disruption , private credit demands may be damped a bit , especially in long - term credit markets in response to the higher level of bond yields .
b PAR 12 moderate increases in m1 also are expected over the balance of the quarter as interest - rate effects recede .
b PAR 12 since mid - july , growth of both demand deposit balances and now accounts has resumed , and expansion of m1 at a 5 - 1/4 percent rate is expected on average over august and september under alternative b . but the arithmetic effect of weakness in june and july implies quarterly average growth of less than 1 percent in the current quarter and a velocity increase of almost 6 percent , the largest advance since early 
b PAR 13 with respect to the long - run ranges , m2 growth from the fourth quarter to september is expected to come to only 4 - 1/4 percent under alternative b . expansion at around an 11 - 1/2 percent rate over september to december would be required to hit the lower end of the long - run range in the fourth quarter ; 9 - 1/2 percent growth would be needed to bring this aggregate to the lower end of its growth cone in december .
b PAR 13 while a further strengthen- ing of m2 growth is possible over the fourth quarter should some of the unusual weakness of earlier this year be reversed , an acceleration of this magnitude would seem unlikely without a very substantial decline in interest rates by early in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 13 m3 growth from its fourth - quarter base would be at a 5 - 1/4 percent rate by september under alternative b . with moderate increases in bank and thrift credit projected , this aggregate is likely to climb to within the lower portion of its range in the fourth quarter , even if interest rates moved a little higher in the latter part of the year , as in the staff forecast .
b PAR 13 nonfinancial debt is still expected to grow 9 - 1/2 percent in 1987 on a quarterly average basis , in the middle of its 8 to 11 percent range .
b PAR 13 growth of m1 from the fourth quarter of 1986 to september is projected at 6 - 1/2 percent under alternative b ; with rates re- maining close to current levels under this alternative through the third quarter , m1 growth for the year is not likely to differ very much from its growth through september .

c PAR 17 the backup in short - term market rates under alternative c , together with lagging returns on deposits , would widen opportunity costs of holding liquid monetary assets .
c PAR 17 expansion of m2 over august and september would be expected to average 5 - 1/4 percent , bringing growth from the fourth quarter through september to around 4 percent .
c PAR 17 given the continuing effects of the rise in interest rates , this aggregate would be unlikely to accelerate much in the fourth quarter .
c PAR 17 the 6 - 3/4 percent growth anticipated for m3 over the last two months of this quarter would imply that growth of this aggregate from the fourth quarter base to september would be around 1/4 percentage point below the lower limit of its 1987 range .
c PAR 17 even so , this aggregate could climb to the lower end of its range in the fourth quarter , assuming continued moderate expansion of assets at depository institutions .
c PAR 17 m1 might expand at only a 3 percent rate from june to september under this alternative , with growth for the year decelerating further to 6 - 1/4 percent by september , and dropping noticeably below 6 percent for the year .
c PAR 17 directive language 


