a PAR 14 the 1/2 percentage point lowering of the federal funds rate under alternative a would bring it to the 6 - 1/4 to 6 - 3/8 percent area .
a PAR 14 this probably would be associated with minimal borrowing in the near- term and perhaps in a range around $ 150 million in the new year .
a PAR 14 such an easing is not expected by financial market participants , at least in the absence of much hard evidence indicating that the stock market decline or other factors have begun to retard spending significantly .
a PAR 14 choosing this alternative thus would depress short - term market rates below recent levels , with the 3-month treasury bill rate likely to fluctuate around 5 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 14 yields on private short - term instruments probably would decline by more , as the policy easing improved prospects for continued economic expansion and helped relieve worries about credit quality .
a PAR 14 such an action would tend to restore differentials between u.s .
a PAR 14 and european short - term interest rates to levels prevailing before recent cuts in official lending rates abroad , increasing downward pressure on the dollar .
a PAR 14 if inflationary concerns in financial markets are intensified , declines in bond yields may be limited .
a PAR 15 lower short - term market rates relative to deposit offering rates under alternative a would prompt more rapid inflows into m2-type accounts .
a PAR 15 m2 growth from november to march would be expected to pick up to 6 percent .
a PAR 15 higher compensating balance requirements in response to reduced market rates would boost business demand deposits , while more savings - type balances would be diverted to now and other liquid accounts in response to reduced opportunity costs .
a PAR 15 m1 growth of 6 percent expected over november to march implies expansion at almost an 8 percent rate in the early months of 1988 , given the slow growth now in train for december .
a PAR 15 the faster growth in core deposits likely would produce only a partial offset in reduced issuance of managed liabilities in m3 , as greater loan demands would be placed on banks and thrifts in response to generally easier credit conditions .
a PAR 15 with this alternative , m3 might expand at around a 6 - 1/2 percent pace from november to march .
a PAR 15 by then , m2 would be within , and m3 around the midpoint of , the fomc 's tentative ranges for 1988 .

b PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 -- actual level short - run alternatives billioni of dollars
b PAR 9 2700 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars -- actual level sshort - run alternatives
b PAR 9 j a so n chart 3 billions of dollars s---
b PAR 9 actual level 9 sshort - run alternatives , ' s,- ' - 920 / - 900 -sa
b PAR 9 s820s- 740 820 , , -l   - 800.-
b PAR 9 680 i996 19,7
b PAR 9 1988 chart 4 debt billions of dollars --- actual level ---
b PAR 9 estimated level window associated with this level of federal funds trading seems espe- cially difficult to gauge for the coming two maintenance periods , which surround year - end , as depository institutions position themselves for anticipated year - end pressures .
b PAR 9 given continuing uncertainties in financial markets and concerns about bank credit quality , some reluc- tance on the part of banks to be seen at the window is likely to persist after year - end .
b PAR 9 borrowing of perhaps around $ 300 million could be consistent with the assumed federal funds rate in the new year .
b PAR 10 with federal funds continuing to trade around recent levels , short - term rates might show mixed movements in coming weeks .
b PAR 10 private short - term rates should decline once year - end pressures have passed , while treasury bill yields could edge higher , with the 3-month bill rate rising to above 6 percent under alternative b . however , any narrowing of spreads could be limited , as economic uncertainties here and abroad , combined with the overhang of previous financial difficulties , sustain market concerns about the financial strength of debtors and the institu- tions that have extended them credit .
b PAR 10 the dollar would probably continue under general downward pressure , although a new g-7 accord could lend an element of stability for a time .
b PAR 10 should dollar weakness abate , and eco- nomic indicators point to a softer economy along the lines of the staff forecast , bond yields could drop somewhat from the elevated levels of recent days .
b PAR 11 under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alternative b , m2 growth from november to march likely would pick up from the 3 - 1/2 percent average pace of october and november , placing this aggregate just below the 5 percent lower bound of the growth cone associated with its tentative 1988 range by march .
b PAR 11 the decline in market interest rates since mid - october has lowered opportunity costs on retail deposits to around their summer levels .
b PAR 11 as the effects of increases in opportunity costs earlier this year fade , deposit inflows should pick up .
b PAR 11 m2 is thus expected to grow nearly apace with gnp through the first quarter of next year , with its velocity essentially unchanged .
b PAR 11 this compares with an increase in v2 that averaged 3 percent at an annual rate over the first three quarters of this year .
b PAR 12 m3 is expected to grow at a 6 percent annual rate from novem- ber to march under alternative b , about the same pace as in recent months ; such growth would keep this aggregate through march well within its tentative range for 1988 .
b PAR 12 flows to institution - only money funds should weaken substantially as their returns move down into more normal alignment with market rates .
b PAR 12 however , bank credit expansion is likely to rebound in coming months from its november pause , and thrift asset growth should be well maintained , buoyed by continued large acquisitions of arms .
b PAR 12 overall household mortgage and consumer credit expansion in the first quarter is expected to stay around the reduced fourth - quarter pace , as housing activity and consumer durables spending remain about flat .
b PAR 12 business borrowing is expected to be sizable , as the financing gap remains appreciable , while share retirements fall back only modestly .
b PAR 12 state and local bond issuance should continue near its recent subdued pace , but a substantial volume of federal government borrowing is anticipated to finance the higher deficit .
b PAR 12 in all , the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors in march is expected to stand 9 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter base -- the midpoint of its 7 - 1/2 to 10 - 1/2 percent tentative range for 1988 .
b PAR 13 m1 growth is expected to average 4 percent over the next four months under alternative b . this represents a slight pickup from its average pace over october and november , abstracting from the effects of the bulge .
b PAR 13 little expansion is expected on a month - average basis in december , given the pattern of growth in late november and early decem- ber .
b PAR 13 but with interest rates essentially flat , increases averaging 5 percent at an annual rate are projected over the first three months of next year .
b PAR 13 even so , the monthly pattern of m1 growth is expected to produce an increase in velocity of 2 percent in the first quarter .

c PAR 16 the firming of reserve market conditions embodied in alternative c would also take market participants by surprise .
c PAR 16 federal funds rates could rise back to the 7 - 1/4 to 7 - 3/8 percent area , with borrowing perhaps around the $ 500 million range in early 1988 .
c PAR 16 rates on private instruments could rise appreciably , especially if a negative reaction in stock markets induced a renewed flight to safety and liquidity .
c PAR 16 higher funding costs would cause banks to increase their prime rates by at least 1/2 point , while rates on consumer installment and mortgage loans also would be raised . but higher interest rates would enhance the attractiveness of dollar assets to international investors , and a ten- dency for the exchange value of the dollar to appreciate in the near- term could emerge .
c PAR 17 the higher interest rates of alternative c can be expected to prevent m2 from accelerating much from its recent pace .
c PAR 17 growth could slow somewhat , especially as money funds experienced outflows when mar- ket rates rose .
c PAR 17 in march , m2 would be well below , and m3 somewhat above , the lower bounds of their tentative 1988 ranges .
c PAR 17 given its rela- tively greater interest sensitivity , m1 would probably grow at only a 2 percent rate through march , well below its average growth to date this year .
c PAR 17 directive language 

