
b PAR 9 financial markets in recent days have largely built in a federal funds rate of around 8 - 1/8 percent , although some further adjust- ments may occur under alternative b . for example , the 3-month treasury bill rate might edge higher to around 7 - 1/8 percent as some of the remain- ing uncertainties about any further responses of capital markets in the
b PAR 9 and financial markets and policies abroad are resolved .
b PAR 9 bond yields should remain around current levels , especially if the dollar , as expected , continues fairly firm .
b PAR 9 the dollar could come under downward pressure , however , and bond yields resume their rise , if incoming data suggested that the pace of international adjustment was proceeding considerably less alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates 4.0 to 8.0 4.0 to 8.01988 target ranges :
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives 2800"i ^^^
b PAR 9 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars s
b PAR 9 actual level short - run alternatives chart 3 billions of dollars actual level ------ growth from fourth quarter - * short - run alternatives , 15 % , '' 10 % v -- 800 ~,------ -- -- -- - - ------- 5 % chart 4 debt billions of dollars ---- actual level projected level 7 % - rapidly than previous trade reports had suggested , other data were seen as portending greater odds of inflation pressures , or foreign monetary author- ities tightened aggressively .
b PAR 9 in any case , the long - term treasury bond yield would tend to move higher , perhaps by 10 to 20 basis points , if the treasury receives authority to issue more of such securities .
b PAR 10 m2 under alternative b is expected to increase at a 3 - 3/4 percent pace over the last two months of the quarter , slightly higher than in july .
b PAR 10 this speedup is associated with a strengthening in overnight rps and eurodollars , already evident in recent weekly data , in part as banks rebuild their government security positions .
b PAR 10 the retail component of m2 should decelerate in response to wider opportunity costs .
b PAR 10 within m2 , liquid household deposits , which have begun to soften in early august , are expected to be relatively weak .
b PAR 10 small time deposit growth should quicken as the public takes advantage of the more attractive returns offered on fixed - maturity accounts , but not by enough to offset the moderation in liquid deposits .
b PAR 10 slower ocd growth , along with weakness in demand deposits as compensating balance requirements are scaled back , should damp m1 expansion over the next two months to an average of just under 4 percent .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , average m3 growth over august and september is projected to stay at its 5 - 1/2 percent july pace , despite a pickup in bank and thrift credit .
b PAR 12 outflows from institution - only money funds are expected to follow the recent rise in market rates , and inflows to treasury deposits will be holding down needs for managed liabilities .
b PAR 12 with credit at depository institutions projected to continue in the fourth quarter at around the rates of august and september , m3 could grow at close to a 6 percent rate over the balance of the year , bringing its growth for the year to around 6 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 12 the debt of domestic nonfinancial sec- tors is projected to grow at around an 8 percent annual rate over the remainder of the year , placing it a little below the midpoint of its moni- toring range by year - end .

c SENT -- b maintains the current $ 600 million assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing and alternative c increases intended borrowing to $ 800 million .
c SENT -- federal funds likely would trade between 8 - 1/2 and 8 - 3/4 percent under alternative c , perhaps more toward the lower end of this range if the additional firming acted to dispel expectations of still further near - term policy moves .
c PAR 13 the tightening of reserve positions under alternative c immediately following the discount rate hike would be somewhat surprising to market participants and the associated 1/2 percentage point increase in the funds rate probably would show through nearly fully in private money market rates .
c PAR 13 nominal bond yields probably would rise by less .
c PAR 13 this action might allay market concerns about future inflation , implying that the rise in nominal interest rates would reflect at least as large an increase in real rates .
c PAR 13 the higher real rates would boost the dollar on foreign exchange markets , at least for a time , and the greater foreign demand for dollar assets could cushion somewhat the effects on bond and stock prices .
c PAR 14 with the higher interest rates of alternative c , m2 is pro- jected to record only 3 percent growth over august and september .
c PAR 14 the upward movement of rates would slow m2 even further in the fourth quarter , moving this aggregate appreciably below the midpoint of its annual growth range .
c PAR 14 growth of m3 , by contrast , would probably not be damped enough under alternative c to move below its midpoint , even by year - end .
c PAR 14 long- term debt issuance by businesses likely would be more restrained under alternative c , shifting some business credit demands to banks , despite a probable further increase in the prime rate .
c PAR 14 directive language 

