a PAR 14 under alternative a , money market interest rates would decline about 1/2 percentage point , with the 3-month treasury bill drop- ping to a little below 7 percent .
a PAR 14 the dollar would come under sharp downward pressure , especially in view of the remote prospects for a com- parable easing of policy abroad .
a PAR 14 long - term interest rates would decline further but the extent of the drop might be limited by the weaker tone of the dollar and would depend in any event on market interpretations as to whether incoming data suggested a sustained easing of pressures on domestic resources and prices .
a PAR 14 in the absence of particularly weak economic data , the yield curve could steepen a bit .

b PAR 10 maintenance of current reserve conditions under alternative b is in line with market expectations about the near - term course of policy , and as a consequence any changes in interest rates and dollar exchange rates are likely to be relatively small .
b PAR 10 the federal funds rate under the borrowing specifications of this alternative would be expected to remain mostly in an 8 to 8 - 1/4 percent range .
b PAR 10 while con- tinuation of the recent firmness can not be ruled out , the funds rate may move a little lower in this range as the effects of the temporary fac- tors that appear to have reduced demands for borrowed reserves wear off .
b PAR 10 in this case , other short - term rates would edge down as well .
b PAR 10 however , very short - term rates could firm a bit in december as banks and other borrowers position themselves in anticipation of year - end pressures ; some year - end pressures have already began to show through in short - term rates , though far less than last year .
b PAR 10 while rates already have ad- justed to an extent to anticipated buyouts , further temporary effects may accompany the financial flows associated with the actual transac- tions .
b PAR 10 cd and commercial paper issuance should balloon , possibly putting some upward pressure on private short - term rates , and substan- tial new supplies of low - grade corporate bonds also may be forthcoming .
b PAR 10 in the treasury market , some increases in bond rates could occur if the treasury were to announce a larger - than - usual offering on the mid- quarter refunding to take advantage of the shortage of bonds created by the absence of a long bond at the previous refunding as well as by skimpy offerings of investment - grade corporate bonds .
b PAR 11 under alternative b , m2 growth would strengthen modest- ly -- to a 3 percent rate -- from the 1 - 1/4 percent pace of september and october , largely reflecting some turnaround in overnight rps and eurodollars .
b PAR 11 in addition , growth in retail accounts in m2 would firm a little ; the damping influence of earlier increases in market interest rates should diminish , in part as opportunity costs edge down with rising deposit offering rates .
b PAR 11 m1 would be expected to be about un- changed over november and december as demand deposits and ocds continue to run off through year - end .
b PAR 11 on a quarterly average basis , m1 would be about flat in the fourth quarter and growth in its velocity would strengthen to a 6 - 1/2 percent rate given the staff gnp forecast .
b PAR 11 m2 would grow at only a 2 percent rate in the fourth quarter on this basis , implying a 4 - 1/2 percent rate of increase in its velocity .
b PAR 11 such an increase in velocity is a little larger than implied by the staff models of m2 demand , which show the rise in interest rates from earlier this year damping m2 growth in the fourth quarter by about 3 - 1/2 percent , but within their usual margin of error .
b PAR 11 under this alternative , m2 would enter the year at around the lower end of its provisional range for 1989 , and absent a significant subsequent change in policy , would strengthen only gradually next year , remaining well down in its range for some time .
b PAR 12 m3 growth is expected to pick up to a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over november and december under alternative b , implying quarterly average growth of 4 - 1/2 percent in the current quarter and a further rise in its velocity -- at a 2 percent rate .
b PAR 12 under this alternative , m3 would begin the year in the upper half of its tentative range .
b PAR 12 however , m3 growth might weaken a bit in the early part of 1989 as bank loans to finance buyouts were repaid or sold to other investors .
b PAR 12 and , in general , trend growth in bank and thrift credit should remain damped in response to capital requirements and regulatory pressures .

c PAR 16 with little anticipation of a near - term tightening of policy remaining in the market , short - term interest rates would climb about 1/2 percentage point under alternative c .
c PAR 16 the dollar probably would reverse some of its recent decline , and long - term interest rates also would rise .
c PAR 16 the extent of this rise could be relatively small if the tightening of policy were interpreted as damping activity and reduc- ing inflationary risks in an economy that was already seen to be experiencing more moderate growth .
c PAR 17 under alternative c , m2 would expand at only a 2 percent rate over the remainder of the year .
c PAR 17 this aggregate would be well below the lower end of its provisional range at the beginning of 1989 and given the lagged effect of the change in interest rates , growth would remain quite damped for a while .
c PAR 17 wider opportunity costs would reduce inflows to retail accounts , and m1 balances would contract .
c PAR 17 m3 still would continue to strengthen under this alternative -- the pickup , though , being limited by rate - induced outflows from money funds -- and enter 1989 well within its tentative range .
c PAR 17 directive language 

