a PAR 14 such a measure on the heels of the two recent tightening steps clearly would be unexpected by market participants and , in the absence of considerably weaker economic and price data , might raise doubts about the federal reserve 's anti - inflationary resolve .
a PAR 14 the exchange value of the dollar would come under strong downward pressure , and there is some risk that heightened inflationary expectations would have adverse implications for bond prices .
a PAR 14 the prospect that such a policy easing could not long be sustained also would limit associated declines in short - term interest rates , with the three - month treasury bill rate perhaps not falling much below 6 percent .
a PAR 14 this decline in money market rates would encourage somewhat faster growth in the broader monetary aggregates , although the march - to - june growth of m2 and m3 still would remain well below their december - to - march pace , and in june these aggre- gates still would be below the upper limit of their 4 to 8 percent long - run ranges .
a PAR 14 directive language 

b PAR 8 the table below gives growth rates for the monetary aggre- gates from march to june expected to be associated with the reserve market conditions for each alternative .
b PAR 8 under all the alternatives , m2 growth should be appreciably slower on average over may and june compared with its advanced april pace , reflecting the effects of higher interest rates and the unwinding of the tax - related build - up .
b PAR 8 under alternative b , the effects on money demand for the march - to - june period of somewhat higher interest rates than anticipated at the last fomc meeting are offset by upward revisions to income , and the growth rates of m2 and m3 , respectively , are projected to be 2 .
b PAR 8 the intermeeting consultation range for the federal funds rate suggested for alternative b in the table below is 5 to 9 percent , up from 4 to 8 percent at present , in order to be better centered on expected federal funds rates .
b PAR 8 at the upper end and in the middle of the committee 's current 6 to 7 percent short - run specifications .
b PAR 8 the detailed table and charts on the following pages indicate that the broad aggregates would be expected under all the alternatives to remain within the upper halves of their annual target cones through midyear .
b PAR 8 c growth from march to june m2 7 - 3/4 7
b PAR 8 6 - 1/4 m3 6 - 3/4 6 - 1/2 6 - 1/4 m1 6 - 1/2
b PAR 8 5 - 1/2 4 - 1/2 associated federal funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 5 to 9 
b PAR 9 market interest rates now appear to incorporate the policy stance of alternative b . thus , with federal funds continuing to trade around 7 percent , the three - month treasury bill rate could remain in the 6 - 1/4 percent area in the near term .
b PAR 9 but if economic data in coming weeks confirm the second - quarter strength of economic activity envisioned in the greenbook forecast , heightened market concern about inflation and anticipa- tion of further policy restraint could well induce a further firming in short- and long - term rates as midyear approaches .
b PAR 9 pressures on the dollar will depend not only on incoming information about the trade deficit and on movements in relative interest rates , but also on market views of how macro- economic developments and policies are affecting the sustainability of improvements in external imbalances .
b PAR 9 a substantial firming of monetary policies abroad in the wake of recent federal reserve action , or emerging alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions monthly growth rates may 4.8 4.5 4.2 5.6 5.5
b PAR 9 5.4 1.5 1.2 0.9 , quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates 4.0 to 8.0 4.0 to 8.01988 target ranges :
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars
b PAR 9 actual level short - run altenatives , o ' chart 2 actual and targeted m3 - actual level short - run alternatives billions of dollars ^ ^ -- actual level ------ growth from fourth quarter short - run alternatives
b PAR 9 chart 3 billions of dollars s100/% , -
b PAR 9 i i\i - i \i\ -
b PAR 9 --- 720 chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level - --- estimated level 11 % i iiiii market perceptions over coming weeks of a need for more u.s . policy restraint in the face of the maintenance of the reserve conditions of alternative b , could result in a decline in the dollar .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , opportunity costs of holding liquid retail accounts would remain higher through midyear than in recent months , given the likely very gradual response of offering rates on such accounts to the recent rise in market rates .
b PAR 10 the unwinding of tax - related balances also have considerably smaller impacts on m2 than on m1 .
b PAR 10 the latter was boosted more substantially in april by the temporary build - up of transactions depos- its and will be more affected by the rise in interest rates as depositors shift funds from ocds into small time deposits , whose yields adjust more promptly to market rates .
b PAR 10 growth in m1 is projected to drop below 3 percent on average over may and june from 11 - 1/4 percent in april .
b PAR 10 in light of weakness early in may , probably related to clearing of tax checks , m2 is projected to increase at only a 4 - 1/2 percent rate this month .
b PAR 10 in june , m2 expansion is expected to rebound to around 6 - 1/2 percent -- a little below the projected growth of nominal income over the current quarter , owing to higher opportunity costs .
b PAR 10 implied m2 growth from march to june would be held to 7 percent , but , with the rapid m2 expansion through april , quarterly average growth would amount to around 8 percent . assuming the staff projection of second - quarter growth in nominal gnp of around 7 percent , m2 velocity would fall by about 1 percent , approximately half of the decline in the first quarter .
b PAR 11 m3 growth should moderate to around a 6 - 1/4 percent rate over may and june under alternative b . money market mutual funds in m3 probably will decline further for a while as returns lag behind recently elevated short - term market rates .
b PAR 11 the drop in core deposit inflows in may and june is likely to be only partly offset by increased issuance of managed liabili- ties by banks and thrifts because depository institution credit is antici- pated to slow .
b PAR 11 at banks , business loan growth , though likely to remain strong given the rise in bond rates , should drop back from the april pace , which was boosted by an extraordinary volume of merger - related and other special borrowing , and households may tap consumer credit and home equity lines to a lesser extent in coming months with the scaling back of auto incentives and the passing of the april tax date .
b PAR 11 at thrifts , however , the restraining effects on asset expansion of the recent upturn in mortgage rates will be cushioned some by a growing share of arms .
b PAR 11 total household borrowing over the remainder of the quarter is expected to edge down , while overall business credit demands should remain robust into the summer given the elevated financing gap and continuing merger activity .
b PAR 11 but with federal government borrowing light over the rest of the second quarter , the growth in the debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors by june is expected to be moving closer to , though still staying a little above , the 9 percent mid- point of the committee 's annual range .

c PAR 12 the increase in discount borrowing to $ 600 million under alternative c would raise the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point and carry treasury bill rates up by similar amounts .
c PAR 12 banks very likely would raise the prime rate by another 1/2 point , and business financing costs on open market paper also could rise by a like amount .
c PAR 12 downward pressure on the exchange value of the dollar would be forestalled , at least for a time .
c PAR 12 as is typical , bond yields would go up by less than short - term rates , though the initial declines in bond and possibly stock prices in response to an unanticipated firming of the size contemplated under this alternative could be substantial .
c PAR 12 over time , however , movements in securities prices will depend on perceptions both of underlying strength in credit demands and of the likely success of the federal reserve in checking any emerging accelera- tion of inflation .
c PAR 12 while the course of economic activity and prices would not be much affected by small variations in the time path of interest rates , alternative c is closer to what was contemplated in the staff gnp forecast , which anticipates a fairly substantial rise in money market yields through early 1989 .
c SENT -- ( 13 ) the higher market interest rates associated with alternative c would further damp money growth .

