a PAR 15 this might involve a judgment that there was a good chance that the policy tightening that has already occurred along with developing cyclical forces , such as the unsustainable pace of inventory accumulation , were already pointing to growth in income at an acceptable pace next year , without further monetary restraint .
a PAR 15 in these circumstances , m2 would be expected to grow more in line with nominal gnp as the damping effects of recent rate increases subside .
a PAR 15 on balance , m2 growth of around 5 - 1/2 percent in 1989 might be associated with nominal gnp growth on the order of that in the staff forecast with no further change in interest rates .
a PAR 15 this alternative would allow for even faster m2 growth and an appreciable pickup from 1988 should an easier policy be needed to support the economy .
a PAR 15 such an outcome might be associated , for example , with a tighter fiscal policy than markets now anticipate , resulting from credible actions this fall to meet gramm - rudman targets or a major new initiative on the budget deficit early in 1989 .
a PAR 15 this alternative might also be preferred if the committee saw a higher path for income as desirable .
a PAR 15 more rapid gnp expansion might be needed to keep unemployment from rising from current levels , and would be consistent with no uptick in underlying inflation rates if current labor market conditions were seen as consistent with an absence of feed - through into wages of price level adjustments associated with imports or farm commodities .
a PAR 15 short - run policy alternatives 
a SENT -- under alternative a , borrowing is assumed to decline only $ 100 million , to $ 450 million , reversing the most recent increase and part of the tightening early in the period .
a PAR 23 the reversal of part of the recent tightening , as envisioned under alternative a , would result in some edging down of short - term rates , espe- cially on private securities , perhaps heading off any increase in the prime rate .
a PAR 23 the dollar probably would reverse some of its recent strength .
a PAR 23 the extent and persistence of any downward movement in the dollar and the effect of an easing in policy on bond yields would depend partly on whether such an action raised questions about the federal reserve 's policy intentions .
a PAR 23 m2 would slow relatively little under these conditions , leaving this aggregate on a trajectory that would tend to keep it noticeably above the midpoint of its annual range , while m3 would move up in its range .
a PAR 23 directive language 

b PAR 18 market rates appear to have incorporated the recent firming of policy , which would be retained under alternative b , and most rates should remain near current levels over the near term .
b PAR 18 however , the prime rate may be raised in response to recent increases in funding costs .
b PAR 18 and , the trea- sury bill rate could move up toward 6 - 3/4 percent , a more typical alignment with the funds rate , as the treasury resumes net issuance of bills to cover larger financing needs .
b PAR 18 over time , yields on long - term bonds and mortgages could retrace some of their recent declines should incoming data fail to show any significant easing of price pressures .
b PAR 18 a back - up in yields would be reinforced if the dollar came under some downward pressure , for example , because incoming data suggested a less rapid pace of reduction in external imbalances .
b PAR 19 under alternative b , the widening of opportunity costs over the spring would continue to exert a restraining influence on m2 and m1 in the months ahead .
b PAR 19 growth in m2 would be expected to average 5 - 1/2 percent over the june - to - september period .
b PAR 19 growth of the more liquid components should be most subdued , reflecting very sluggish adjustment of their offering rates , while small time deposits , whose rates adjust rather promptly , would alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 19 c levels in billions monthly growth rates september 5.9 5.0 3.1 7.4 7.0 6.2 4.6 3.2 0.6 m quarterly ave .
b PAR 19 growth rates 4.0 to 8.0 4.0 to 8.01988 target ranges :
b PAR 19 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level - estimated level short run alternatives chart
b PAR 19 2 actual and targeted m3 billons of dollars actual level --- estimated level short run alternatives
b PAR 19 chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level --- estimated level ------ growth from fourth quarter s * short run alternatives , ' 15 % -'10 % s --
b PAR 19 * a 5%/ _ , ,
b PAR 19 720i i chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level --- estimated level projected strengthen a bit following their recent lull .
b PAR 19 in reflection of this pattern , m1 would slow to only a 3 - 1/2 percent pace under this alternative .
b PAR 20 m3 , under alternative b , is expected to pick up a little over june to september from the pace of recent months as outflows from money funds abate with the stable interest rates assumed under this alternative .
b PAR 20 credit demands on banks and thrifts and their issuance of managed liabilities should remain strong .
b PAR 20 corporate merger activity is projected to decline appreciably , but business credit demands are expected to slow only a bit , remaining focused on bank loans and short - term paper , as external financing needs rise further .
b PAR 20 household borrowing should remain moderate , but treasury financing will strengthen in the coming months along with the deficit , leading to a pickup in federal debt growth .
b PAR 20 total nonfinancial debt is expected to expand at around an 8 percent annual rate over the june- to - september period , about in line with that of the second quarter , placing this aggregate 8 - 1/2 percent above its fourth - quarter 1987 base .

c PAR 13 of the long - run ranges , alternative c would be most appro- priate if the risks were seen to be on the side of demands outpacing productive capacity , threatening progress toward price stability .
c PAR 13 this is the assessment implicit in the staff gnp forecast , and the degree of monetary restraint needed in that forecast to damp domestic demand and check inflationary pressures would seem to require some reduction in the lower bound of the m2 range .
c PAR 13 even with the one - point decrease under this alternative , m2 would be expected to be in the lower half of its range given the staff forecast .
c PAR 13 m3 and debt would be in the middle of their alternative c ranges .
c PAR 13 the upper bounds of the reduced ranges of this alternative allow some scope for less restraint and lower interest rates if the economy turns out to be weaker than anticipated , but relative to the other ranges would provide for fairly prompt resistance to unexpected strength in the economy .
c PAR 13 on balance , the alternative c ranges would seem to imply an intention that nominal income decelerate in 1989 , thus underscoring a commitment of policy to work toward gradually slowing inflation rates in 1989 and beyond .
c SENT -- ( 14 ) the larger reduction in the m2 range than in the m3 and debt ranges under alternative c recognizes the greater interest sensitivity of m2 , and hence the need to have it decelerate more markedly should substantial restraint be appropriate .
c SENT -- but there is some greater risk than under alternative c that , should demands on the economy prove strong , the lower end of the m2 range would not be consis- tent with the degree of restraint the committee might want to consider .
c PAR 21 the market does not appear to be anticipating an immediate further monetary tightening as contemplated in alternative c . thus , the half - point increase in the funds rate under this alternative would prompt other private short - term rates to move up by a similar amount .
c PAR 21 in view of still higher funding costs , a boost in the prime rate of at least 1/2 percentage point would seem much more likely .
c PAR 21 the treasury bill rate would rise to 7 percent or above .
c PAR 21 such a firming in policy , at a time of market concern about resource constraints and inflationary pressures , would tend to assuage some inflation worries and any rise in bond rates could be quite small .
c PAR 21 recent firmness of the dollar could be sustained for a time unless foreign authori- ties took this opportunity to tighten their policies substantially .
c PAR 22 the boost in opportunity costs under alternative c would reduce monetary growth substantially below the pace of recent months .
c PAR 22 m2 would slow to 4 percent over the june - to - september period , with inflows to its liquid components being most affected .
c PAR 22 m1 would edge up at a 1 - 1/2 percent annual rate as demand deposits declined and inflows to ocds slowed to a trickle .
c PAR 22 by september , m2 would be only a little above the midpoint of its annual range and m1 would be 3 - 3/4 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter level .
c PAR 22 credit demands on banks and thrifts would be damped only a bit and these institutions would respond to smaller inflows to core deposits by stepping up their issuance of managed liabilities .
c PAR 22 m3 should grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate from june to september under this alternative and drift down only slightly within its annual range .


