a PAR 13 under alternative a , m2 and m3 would strengthen over the august - to - december period .
a PAR 13 partly owing to some narrowing of opportunity costs , m2 by december would likely be growing at a rate around the 5 per- cent midpoint of its provisional range for next year , and m3 at 7 percent .
a PAR 13 an immediate easing would come as a surprise to market participants , given the recent policies and statements of the federal reserve and current per-
a PAR 13 ceptions that inflationary pressures , though perhaps less certain to mount , are not likely to moderate substantially .
a PAR 13 short - term market rates would drop immediately by about the full extent of the easing in the funds rate , and bond yields would also decline .
a PAR 13 the initial bond market response could be substantial , but if data failed to confirm some further moderation in the economy and price pressures , bond yields could retrace much of these declines , especially if downward pressure on the dollar persisted .
a PAR 13 directive language 

b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would be expected to continue to trade generally in the 8 to 8 - 1/4 percent area .
b PAR 9 with markets now expecting no change in policy over the near term , short - term rates likely would remain near current levels under alternative b ; the 3-month treasury bill rate should stay around 7 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 9 the dollar will probably trade around recent levels for a while under this alternative especially if , as seems likely , foreign monetary policies are also unchanged over coming weeks .
b PAR 9 in this environment , the behavior of bond yields will depend importantly on the strength of incoming data on the long - run ranges 4 to 8 4 to 8 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates 4.0 to 8.0 4.0 to 8.01988 target ranges :
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 9 i chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level sshort - run alternatives -h 4020 8 %
b PAR 9 3960 i 1987
b PAR 9 i1989 chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level -------
b PAR 9 growth from fourth quarter 15 % -- 880 10 % .-- 5 % ec - 780 -------------- ..
b PAR 9 ----------- ..
b PAR 9 ' " " 0 % chart 4 debt billions of dollars actual level projected level 11 % -q 8600 economy and prices .
b PAR 9 if such data confirm market perceptions of moderate growth and little additional pressure on prices , these yields probably would hold at recent lower levels .
b PAR 9 but bond yields would retrace some of their recent declines if incoming information shows less moderation in demands and more strength in oil prices than now seems built into market expectations .
b PAR 9 in addition , bond yields may have been held down by a paucity of supply , which could be reversed by congressional passage of long - bond authorization for the treasury or by decisions by corporations or state and local governments to take advantage of recently reduced long - term rates .
b PAR 10 m2 is expected to continue to grow at a 3 percent annual rate from august to december under alternative b , with particular weakness in liquid deposits ; m1 is projected to increase at only a 1/2 percent annual rate over this period .
b PAR 10 although offering rates should move closer to cur- rent levels of market interest rates , growth of m1 and m2 relative to income will be restrained by the earlier widening of opportunity costs and the other factors discussed above .
b PAR 10 m2 velocity would rise at a 3 percent rate in the fourth quarter , somewhat faster than in the current quarter , and m1 velocity at a 5 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 11 m3 likely would continue to grow at a 5 percent rate under alternative b , and its velocity would edge up again in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 11 a further moderation in credit growth at thrifts , and associated funding needs , is likely to be offset by some pickup in bank credit , as lending to businesses and securities acquisitions rebound following weakness over july and august .
b PAR 11 total borrowing by businesses is expected to strengthen some- what over the balance of the year , reflecting larger external financing needs and substantial further share retirements , with credit demands still focused to a large extent on the short- and intermediate - term markets .
b PAR 11 domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to rise at a 8 - 1/2 percent rate over the last four months of the year and for the year as a whole , leaving it somewhat below the midpoint of its 7 to 11 percent monitoring range .

c PAR 12 with markets not now expecting a near - term tightening of policy , the rise in the federal funds rate under the firmer reserve condi- tions of alternative c would be about matched by increases in other short- term rates -- perhaps including the prime rate .
c PAR 12 bond yields and the dollar also would back up ; the amounts would depend on surrounding circumstances , but could be considerable if market participants extrapolated a renewed tightening trend for policy in the context of incoming data suggesting continued momentum in the economy .
c PAR 12 foreign monetary authorities might follow suit to temper the rise in the dollar .
c PAR 12 the further rise in oppor- tunity costs under alternative c would likely damp m2 growth to only a 2 percent rate over the august - to - december period , and its m1 component would be expected to decline a little .
c PAR 12 by the end of the year , m2 would be growing at only a 1 percent rate .
c PAR 12 m3 growth also would slow from its pace of recent months , mainly reflecting further weakness in institution - only money market mutual funds .


