a SENT -- under alternative a , federal funds would be expected to trade around the current 6 percent discount rate ; this could be accomplished by reducing the discount rate by 1/2 point while keeping the $ 200 million borrowing objective , or by decreasing this objective .
a PAR 16 under alternative a , the easing of reserve market condi- tions would ripple through other financial markets .
a PAR 16 the 3-month treasury bill would drop to below 5 - 1/2 percent , but declines in longer - term rates might be small .
a PAR 16 absent a weaker economic picture than contemplated under the staff forecast , market participants may not expect such a policy easing to be sustained for long .
a PAR 16 the dollar could come under substantial downward pressures , particularly if concerns about inflation and external adjustment increased .
a PAR 17 with the lower short - term market interest rates of alternative a , m2 growth would not be expected to moderate much over the next three months .
a PAR 17 expansion of this aggregate , at an 8 percent rate from march to june , would leave m2 only a little below the upper end of its annual target cone .
a PAR 17 opportunity costs of holding retail deposits within m2 would continue the declines begun last fall .
a PAR 17 inflows into small time deposits might abate as their rates completed their downward adjustment , but growth of nows , savings deposits and mmdas could pick up noticeably .
a PAR 17 with some boost to required compensating demand balances of businesses also coming from lower market rates , m1 might well grow at a 6 percent annual rate from march to june .
a PAR 17 m3 would be strengthened somewhat less than the other aggregates over the three months , as lower market interest rates shift some credit demands to nonbank sources in light of lagging bank lending rates , but this aggregate would still record a 7 percent increase from march to june .
a PAR 17 directive language 

b PAR 10 with recent conditions in the reserves market maintained under alternative b , interest rates would tend to remain around current levels , at least for a time .
b PAR 10 but given the staff economic forecast , which implies a flow of data that would not allay market concerns about potentially inflationary pressures on resources , the market might well remain edgy .
b PAR 10 in addition , if signs of further expansion in domestic demand were combined with trade data suggesting sluggish adjustment of u.s . external imbalances , the dollar could come under further downward pressure which , in this context , would be likely to contribute to some increases in u.s . interest rates .
b PAR 11 given the financial conditions associated with alternative b , m2 and m3 are expected to grow at 7 and 6 - 1/2 percent annual rates , respectively , from march to june , leaving them well into the upper halves of their 4 to 8 percent annual ranges .
b PAR 11 although the broader aggregates would be expected to slow somewhat from the pace of the last three months , growth would still exceed the projected expansion of nominal income .
b PAR 11 an important impetus to growth of m2 will continue to be the reduced oppor- tunity cost of holding retail interest - bearing accounts .
b PAR 11 to be sure , opportunity costs are likely to widen a little once again in coming months as returns on retail balances edge off further in lagged response to the 2 . on a quarterly average basis the growth rates of m2 and m3 would increase somewhat in the second quarter ; this pattern primarily reflects the damping effects on the first quarter growth of the weakness in money growth late in 1987 .
b PAR 11 the velocities of m2 and m3 would be expected to decline in the second quarter by 2 - 1/2 and 1 - 1/2 percentage points , respectively , somewhat more than seems in train in the first quarter .
b PAR 11 previous decline in market rates .
b PAR 11 nevertheless , the expected second - quar- ter spread between market rates and the average return on retail balances in m2 still would represent a very substantial reduction from its peak in the third quarter of last year .
b PAR 11 inflows to these accounts might be sup- ported by other influences as well : the personal saving rate is projected to remain high relative to last year , and additions to iras should be considerably smaller than in recent years in response to tightened tax- reform restrictions .
b PAR 13 m1 growth in april might be boosted by a buildup in trans- action balances associated with tax payments , which are projected to exceed the typical volume reflected in the transactions account seasonals , though not matching last year 's exceptional surge .
b PAR 13 any such effect will have at a rate of about 4 - 1/2 percent under alternative b . demand deposits are anticipated to strengthen only a little on balance over the next three months , after the somewhat inexplicable weakness through the first quarter .
b PAR 13 now account growth , while moderating from recent rapid rates , would remain above the pace of the second half of 1987 .
b PAR 13 m1 velocity would continue to increase , but at a slower rate than in the first quarter .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the borrowing objective would be raised to $ 400 million and the funds rate would move up to the vicinity of 7 percent .
c PAR 14 the more restrictive monetary posture of alternative c , at least at this time , would come as some surprise to financial markets .
c PAR 14 with the funds rate averaging around 7 percent , the 3-month treasury bill rate could move into an area around 6 - 1/4 percent .
c PAR 14 rate spreads between bank and thrift paper and treasury bills could widen , if concerns about their asset quality and earnings prospects intensify , which might be more likely , given the already troubled status of many depository institutions .
c PAR 14 a good portion of the increases in short - term rates might show through in longer- term rates .
c PAR 14 but , an upward movement in u.s . interest rates , especially if viewed as reflecting federal reserve resolve to avoid inflation and faster external adjustment by containing domestic demand , would help to support 3 .
c PAR 14 a special adjustment was made to prevent last year 's tax payments from distorting demand deposit seasonal factors .
c PAR 14 the dollar in the near term , and over time the net increase in bond yields could be limited .
c PAR 15 the broader monetary aggregates under alternative c would post a more marked slowing over the course of the quarter than under the other alternatives , as the effects of the rebound in market interest rates increasingly took hold .
c PAR 15 both aggregates would end the quarter a bit closer to , though still above , the midpoints of their longer - run ranges .
c PAR 15 the attractiveness of transactions and other liquid accounts would be lessened further , as their rates lag in typical fashion behind market yields .
c PAR 15 m1 probably would be growing very sluggishly by june , leaving its growth from the fourth quarter to june a bit below its current 4 percent rate through march .

