
b PAR 8 two policy alternatives are presented below for committee consideration .
b PAR 8 the relation between federal funds rates and borrowing under both alternatives is unusually uncertain , in light of the recent shortfalls in borrowing relative to the spread of the funds rate over the discount rate .
b PAR 8 the possibility of year - end pressures in the funds market and the scope for changing expectations of near - term policy actions add to this uncertainty over coming weeks .
b PAR 8 under alternative b , a borrowing objective of $ 400 million would be retained , and federal funds would be expected to settle mainly into an 8 - 3/8 to 8 - 1/2 percent range , though slightly higher rates are possible through year - end .
b PAR 8 alternative
b PAR 8 c incor- porates an increase in intended discount borrowing to $ 600 million , with the federal funds rate likely to move up to around 8 - 7/8 to 9 percent .
b PAR 8 similar conditions in the funds market also could be engendered through a 1/2 point rise in the discount rate to 7 percent , while keeping borrowing at $ 400 million .
b PAR 8 these relations assume that most , though perhaps not all , of the recent shortfall in borrowing will persist ; smaller banks may well remain less willing to tap the discount window , but large bank borrowing , while subject to the usual vicissitudes of computer problems , could return toward normal once the year - end , with its anticipated money market pressures , is past .
b PAR 10 short - term market interest rates are likely to retreat some-
b PAR 10 what under alternative b . these rates now embody some near - term firming of policy , and as funds ease back a bit from their recent trading range and as no subsequent tightening move materializes , short - term rates are likely to drop .
b PAR 10 the 3-month treasury bill rate should fall from around the recent 8 percent level to 7 - 3/4 percent or even below .
b PAR 10 the extent of any decline could be damped for a time , however , reflecting the effects of normal year- end activity and a potential surge in credit demands associated with corporate restructuring over coming months .
b PAR 10 these developments will have their greatest impact on short - term rates , especially in light of the large volume of bank financing of equity retirements .
b PAR 10 any declines in long - term alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 10 c levels in billions 1988 october 1989 january monthly growth rates 1988 october
b PAR 10 1989 january quarterly ave .
b PAR 10 growth rates 1988 q1 1989 q1 1988
b PAR 10 target ranges :
b PAR 10 1989 ranges ( tentative ) :
b PAR 10 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars
b PAR 10 actual level sshort - run alternatives - - - v
b PAR 10 , ' chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars s actual level short - run alternatives on d
b PAR 10 j a s on d chart
b PAR 10 3 billions of dollars - actual level ------ growth from 1987:04 short - run alternatives -- 15 % 10 % , - ^ -- 820 -i 800 .---- " 5 % ------- .--------.-.-
b PAR 10 ------------
b PAR 10 j a s n d chart 4 debt billions of dollars sactual level - - - - projected rates might be quite limited , given the recent rally in bond markets .
b PAR 10 these markets already seem to be building in some prospective budget deficit reduction , and would be sensitive to any indication of disappointing progress .
b PAR 10 moreover , the dollar likely would come under downward pressure under this alternative , raising concern about future inflation trends , especially if the decline occurred in the context of continued strength in the economy as envisioned in the staff forecast .
b PAR 11 from a november base , m2 growth is expected to average 4 per- cent at an annual rate through march under alternative b , maintaining its average pace of october and november .
b PAR 11 liquid balances may be boosted a little over the near term by the spate of corporate buyouts .
b PAR 11 this effect should be minimal for m1 , since share sellers are unlikely to keep funds in idle or low - yielding balances for long .
b PAR 11 for m2 , any such effects are ex- pected to dissipate over the first quarter as funds are redeployed .
b PAR 11 even though short - term rates might drop from recent levels under this alterna-
b PAR 11 tive , they would remain above those of late summer and early fall .
b PAR 11 this net advance in interest rates and deposit opportunity costs coming on top of the earlier increases would damp m2 demand in the first quarter about as strong- ly as it was restrained in the second half of this year .
b PAR 11 based on the greenbook forecast for gnp , m2 velocity is expected to rise at a 4 percent annual rate in the first quarter , near its estimated pace in each of the last two quarters of 1988 .
b PAR 12 m3 growth of 7 percent at an annual rate is anticipated from november to march under alternative b , somewhat above the average of the last two months .
b PAR 12 this aggregate should accelerate around year - end , spurred by massive lbo and merger financing requirements , which will require a sub- stantial pickup in managed liabilities , including large cds .
b PAR 12 however , m3 growth is expected to moderate to around 6 - 1/2 percent in february and march , as bank credit growth returns to its former trend .
b PAR 12 quarterly aver- age m3 growth would be associated with a gain of m3 velocity in the first quarter of about 1 - 1/2 percent , close to the pace of the previous two quarters .
b PAR 13 credit - financed corporate restructuring is expected to boost the growth rate of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors to a 10 percent annual rate from november to march , leaving this aggregate in the upper half of its tentative 6 - 1/2 to 10 - 1/2 percent range for 1989 .
b PAR 13 net equity retirements over these four months are projected at a record pace , with business borrowing at banks and in the commercial paper market bearing the brunt of the outsized credit demands .
b PAR 13 abstracting from the effects of the pickup in equity retirements , business borrowing would be expected to con- tinue at about the pace of earlier this year .
b PAR 13 in the household sector , mortgage borrowing is likely to continue near the pace of the last few quarters as home sales are anticipated to hold close to recent levels for several months , especially to the extent that interest rates stabilize or ease off under alternative b . consumer credit growth may pick up
b PAR 13 tempo- rarily early next year if , as expected , auto makers step up their sales promotions to boost demand .
b PAR 13 the federal government is expected to increase further its issuance of coupon securities , now that the treasury has long- bond authority , but as seasonal financing needs ease with a pickup of tax receipts , the treasury is expected to lessen net bill issuance .
b PAR 13 state and local government offerings are likely to stay relatively subdued , though any tendency for rates to drop under this alternative might foster a renewed interest in refunding outstanding debt .

c PAR 9 the money growth paths from november to march associated with each alternative are presented in the table below .
c PAR 9 under both alternatives , m2 growth over coming months would be relatively restrained , reflecting recent and , under alternative c , prospective increases in mar- ket interest rates .
c PAR 9 as a consequence , this aggregate in march would be in the lower portion of its tentative 3 to 7 percent range for 1989 .
c PAR 9 m3 through march would be above the midpoint of its tentative 3 - 1/2 to 7 - 1/2 percent range under either alternative , boosted by the expected surge in managed liabilities at banks to fund lending associated with mergers and buyouts .
c PAR 9 c growth from november to march m3 7 6 - 1/2
c PAR 9 m1 1 - 1/2 0 associated federal funds rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11
c PAR 14 although market rates incorporate some near - term firming of policy , an immediate rise in federal funds to the 8 - 7/8 to 9 percent area associated with alternative c likely would elicit some further increase in short - term market interest rates .
c PAR 14 such increases , however , are likely to be less than the nearly half point upward movement of the federal funds rate .
c PAR 14 in addition , the prime rate would be boosted further .
c PAR 14 long - term rates would be likely to rise by somewhat less , especially if federal reserve actions were seen as further reducing the potential for higher inflation .
c PAR 14 a dis- count rate increase would be viewed as a more forceful step , prompting a more immediate increase in short - term rates and one that might be larger as well if markets interpreted it as portending even further policy tightening .
c PAR 14 downward pressure on the dollar would be offset , and the currency could even firm for a time , especially if the tightening took the form of a discount rate increase .
c PAR 14 any upward pressure on the dollar would likely be mitigated by firmer policy abroad , as foreign monetary authorities took advantage of this opportunity to respond to the potential for inflation pressures in their own economies .
c PAR 15 m2 growth probably would be held down to a 3 percent annual rate from november to march under alternative c , placing this aggregate just at the lower end of its tentative 1989 target range .
c PAR 15 the higher funds rate of this alternative would reinforce the restraining influence on m2 demand of rate increases earlier this year .
c PAR 15 given the still flatter market yield curve , however , household demands for those liquid assets whose rates do adjust promptly -- such as money funds -- could be relatively strong .
c PAR 15 with higher market interest rates , m1 likely would remain about unchanged on balance through march .
c PAR 15 some restraint also would show through to m3 , which would be expected to post a 6 - 1/2 percent annual growth rate over the next four months .
c PAR 15 higher market interest rates would curb inflows to institu- tion - only money funds , and should damp credit extensions by depository institutions somewhat , even as a further shifting of business credit demands from long - term markets toward banks also is induced .
c PAR 15 by march m3 still would be well above the 5 - 1/2 percent midpoint of its 1989 target range .
c PAR 15 directive language 


