a PAR 12 the more rapid growth associated with the alternative a ranges could be considered necessary to offset the shortfall from last year , if that shortfall were thought to point to substantial risks on the side of weak demands in the economy .
a PAR 12 significantly lower interest rates might be needed to support income growth if demands in the u.s . economy from domestic or foreign sources were appreciably below expectations .
a PAR 12 such a fall in rates is likely to involve much faster m2 growth , perhaps even exceeding the upper end of its tentative range , and a substantial decline in velocity would be anticipated , as in 1985 and 1986 .
a PAR 12 this alternative also would allow room for a reversal of the unexplained portion of weakness in money growth in 1987 . if this were to occur , relatively high rates of money growth might be needed to promote satisfactory economic performance .
a PAR 19 although some easing of reserve conditions is now thought by market participants to be in train or at least in prospect , the reserve specifications of alternative a embody a larger move by the federal reserve than has been anticipated in market rates .
a PAR 19 the downward movement of rates associated with this alternative might be especially large if it were accomplished through open market operations , since the resultant narrow spread of the funds rate over the discount rate could foster expectations that a further easing through a discount rate cut was imminent .
a PAR 19 the easier conditions of alternative a are likely to put considerable downward pressure on the dollar , though the extent to which this would show through in dollar declines over the near - term would be affected by the incoming trade data .
a PAR 19 the response of bond yields to an easing of policies and possible drop in the dollar would depend importantly on perceptions of the situation in the economy at the time .
a PAR 19 if economic conditions were thought to be quite soft-- weaker than consistent with the staff forecast -- and incoming price data suggested no more inflationary pressures , the drop in the dollar would be less likely to adversely affect the bond market , which could register further substantial gains .
a SENT -- under alternative a , growth of the aggregates would accelerate noticeably relative to the pace of the last two months , leaving both m2 and m3 at or a little above the midpoints of their tentative long - run ranges in march .

b SENT -- ( 11 ) the staff 's expectations for growth in money and credit would be around the middle of the committee 's tentative ranges , given in alternative b .
b PAR 13 m1 would be expected to expand around 5 percent with the staff 's economic forecast .
b PAR 13 given the projected pattern of interest rates , ocds should expand about in line with income , but with domestic spending sluggish , currency expansion might be damped .
b PAR 13 the velocity of demand deposits should rise at a moderate pace reflecting continuing efforts to economize on zero - interest deposits and ongoing shifts from compensating balances to fees to pay for services .
b PAR 13 because of the higher interest elasticities of m1 , a range about twice the width of those for m2 and m3 would be needed to encompass the same set of possible outcomes for income and interest rates .
b PAR 13 thus a range for m1 of 3 to 9 percent would appear consistent with alternative b , placing expected m1 growth a little below the midpoint of its range , as would be the case for m2 under this alternative .
b PAR 13 alternatives i and iii would seem to be consistent with m1 ranges of a percentage point more and less ,
b PAR 13 respectively.2 2 . m1a
b PAR 13 might increase at about 4 - 1/2 percent over the year .
b PAR 13 over an annual horizon , m1a is less interest elastic than m2 , but given uncer- tainties about the behavior of demand deposits in recent years , a 3 percentage point range might also be appropriate for this aggregate , should the committee choose to set one .
b PAR 13 an m1a range consistent with alternative
b PAR 13 ii might be 3 - 1/2 to 6 - 1/2 percent , with 1/2 of a percentage point more or less for alternatives i and iii respectively .
b PAR 13 short - run policy alternatives 
b PAR 14 three short - run policy alternatives are presented for con- sideration by the committee .
b PAR 14 current reserve and money market conditions would be maintained under alternative b while alternatives a
b PAR 14 and c would involve somewhat easier or somewhat tighter conditions , respectively .
b PAR 14 the level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing associated with alternative b , $ 250 million , is expected to entail federal funds trading around recent 6 - 1/2 to 6 - 3/4 percent levels .
b PAR 14 such a relationship between borrowing and the funds rate would be broadly consistent with recent behavior but would involve a lower amount of borrowing than indicated by model relationships , reflecting some continued unusual reluctance by banks to borrow from the window .
b PAR 14 remaining uncertainties about the borrowing relationship , as well as lingering sensitivities in financial markets , might call for some continued flexibility in implementing open market operations .
b PAR 14 alternative
b PAR 14 a would be associated with a reduction in the federal funds rate of about 1/2 percentage point -- achieved by a lowering of the borrowing objective to $ 100 million , a near - frictional level -- or by a 1/2 percentage point cut in the discount rate .
b PAR 14 alternative
b PAR 14 c would be associated with an increase in the borrowing objective to about $ 450 million and a rise in the federal funds rate of approximately 1/2 percentage point .
b PAR 16 although market participants may be uncertain as to whether a reduction in reserve pressures has already occurred , the structure of market interest rates suggests that some easing has already been discounted .
b PAR 16 with federal funds around the 6 - 5/8 percent area , the three - month treasury bill rate would likely fluctuate around or a little above its recent 5 - 5/8 percent level .
b PAR 16 this bill rate is unusually low relative to the expected funds rate , but public supplies of treasury bills continue to be reduced by treasury paydowns .
b PAR 16 rates on private money market instruments also would be expected to remain around current reduced levels prompting another 1/4 percentage point cut in the prime rate as the spread between the prime and money market yields still remains wide after this week 's reduction .
b PAR 16 the recent rally in alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 16 c levels in billions monthly growth rates 1988 january
b PAR 16 9.8 9.8 9.8 8.3 8.3 8.3 13.3
b PAR 16 c quarterly ave .
b PAR 16 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives range for 1988
b PAR 16 are those adopted tentatively at the july meeting .
b PAR 16 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 16 -actual level short - run alternatives ranges for 1988 are those adopted tentatively at the july meeting .
b PAR 16 j a s on d chart
b PAR 16 3 billions of dollars - - actual level ........
b PAR 16 growth from 1986:04 short - run alternatives '
b PAR 16 * 5 % . .. ......
b PAR 16 ................
b PAR 16 o ° .. - .
b PAR 16 j a s on d 680i
b PAR 16 ' chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level --
b PAR 16 - estimated level
b PAR 16 ii oct nov dec jan feb mar
b PAR 16 apr may june july aug sep
b PAR 16 oct nov dec the long - term credit markets appears to reflect an outlook for sluggish economic growth , broadly consistent with the staff forecast ; consequently , long - term rates are expected to vary around current levels , absent renewed substantial downward pressure on the dollar .
b PAR 17 under the specifications of alternative b , m2 would be expected to grow in february and march at nearly a 7 percent annual rate , a little above the average pace of december and january .
b PAR 17 on a quarterly average basis , growth would accelerate from 4 percent in the fourth quarter to 6 - 1/4 percent in the current quarter as the response of demand to the drop in interest rates since october more than offsets the effects of slower income growth .
b PAR 17 consequently , m2 velocity would decline at around a 1 per- cent rate -- the first drop in more than a year .
b PAR 17 from its fourth - quarter base , m2 by march would advance at a 6 - 1/2 percent annual rate , the midpoint of its tentative long - run range .
b PAR 17 within m2 , rate relationships would tend to increase the attractiveness of the more liquid interest - earning com- ponents owing to the stickier adjustment of their offering rates following the recent declines in market rates .
b PAR 17 from the fourth quarter , m1 by march would rise at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate .
b PAR 18 m3 , under alternative b , would advance at a 6 percent annual rate from november to march as growth over february and march strengthens somewhat from the 5 percent average of december and january .
b PAR 18 by march , m3 would be 6 - 1/4 percent above its fourth - quarter base , also near the center of the tentative range .
b PAR 18 inflows to core deposits at banks and thrifts are likely to fall short of credit demands , leading both types of institutions to issue a moderate volume of managed liabilities in m3 .
b PAR 18 credit growth at banks is expected to slow somewhat in february and march from its exceptional january pace , which was boosted by a resurgence of security lending .
b PAR 18 overall credit growth is forecast to increase slightly over coming months , reflecting primarily a pickup in borrowing by the federal government from its recent reduced pace .
b PAR 18 a continued wide financing gap along with a quickening pace of corporate acquisitions and restructurings are expected to give rise to sizable business credit demands .
b PAR 18 in addition to heavier borrowing from banks and in the commercial paper market , businesses are expected to tap the bond markets to avail themselves of reduced long - term borrowing costs .
b PAR 18 by march domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to be around 9 percent above its fourth - quarter base , also in the middle of its tentative range .

c SENT -- they are also near the middle of the slightly lower growth rates associated with alternative c .
c SENT -- but the alternative c ranges would better allow for another shortfall in money demand in 1988 , if , for example , households finance spending more from liquid assets and less from borrowing as the tax deductibility of consumer debt interest is phased down further , or if banks once again tap the eurodollar market in size .
c PAR 20 the tightening of conditions under alternative c would be entirely unexpected , and probably would result in substantial increases in both short-
c PAR 20 and , at least initially , long - term interest rates .
c PAR 20 stock prices could drop , perhaps sharply , if the higher rates were seen as contributing to weakness in the economy as well as raising the rate at which future earnings are discounted , and risk premiums could widen again .
c PAR 20 the effects on long - term rates and markets might be muted over time , however , if this policy initiative bolstered confidence in the future purchasing power of the dollar , in circumstances in which inflation concerns had been aggravated by strong downward pressure on the dollar or greater economic strength than now generally anticipated .
c SENT -- thus , this alternative might be considered most consistent with the higher paths for money growth envisioned under long - run alternative a. under the tighter reserve conditions of alternative c , the broad aggregates would remain within the lower halves of their tentative ranges through march .

