a PAR 13 under alternative a , short - term interest rates are likely to fall in tandem with the 50 basis point drop in the funds rate .
a PAR 13 the dollar would decline , and the decline might be substantial if the federal reserve 's action were interpreted as a willingness to use monetary policy to bring about a depreciation of the dollar .
a PAR 13 bond rates probably would move lower , though by less than short - term rates .
a PAR 13 limiting the response of bonds might be a sense that following the unanticipated easing of policy , the economy could be a little stronger than previously expected in 1990 and price pressures somewhat amplified , especially if the drop in the dollar were particularly sharp .
a PAR 13 the decline in rates would tend to boost m2 growth to a somewhat faster pace than in august and september .
a PAR 13 early next year , the continuing effects of the further decline in opportunity costs , along with a tendency for income growth to begin to strengthen , likely would result in growth of m2 at a rate above the committee 's tenta- tive range for 1990 .
a PAR 13 m3 growth would strengthen to a 5 percent rate over the september - to - december period under alternative a . 

b PAR 10 interest rates would be expected to remain near current levels under alternative b . markets do not now appear to be anticipating any near - term change in policy , and incoming economic data consistent with the staff greenbook forecast are not likely to provoke significant change in market sentiment .
b PAR 10 in the weeks ahead , treasury markets may be buffeted by the possible sale of sizable volumes of refcorp bonds and by shifting odds on triggering a debt ceiling decline on november 1 , which could affect the mid - quarter refunding .
b PAR 10 the dollar would be expected to fluctuate around current lower levels , or weaken a little further should some key foreign central banks tighten policy -- as to a degree now seems to be expected by markets .
b PAR 10 should the dollar rebound strongly , however , domestic interest rates might edge off if market participants saw this as implying reduced inflation pressures and greater prospects for policy easing in the united states .
b PAR 11 under alternative b , m2 is expected to grow at a 6 - 1/2 per- cent annual rate over the september - to - december period , a little below the recent pace .
b PAR 11 this implies quarterly average growth at a 6 - 3/4 percent rate and a further decline in velocity at about a 1 - 1/2 percent rate , re- flecting the lagged effects of earlier interest rate declines .
b PAR 11 monthly inflows to retail m2 would be expected to moderate as the effects of pre- vious declines in opportunity costs abate , and as money funds no longer are boosted by shifts from junk bond funds and by special promotional efforts .
b PAR 11 retail deposit growth at thrift institutions is likely to remain sluggish owing to the less aggressive bidding posture of these institu- tions recently .
b PAR 11 on the other hand , overnight rps are not expected to run off further and demand deposits might strengthen if compensating balances need to be boosted by year - end to take account of the lower level of mar- ket interest rates .
b PAR 11 overall , ml should grow at around a 4 - 1/2 percent rate over this period , near its september pace .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , m3 growth would pick up a bit from its august and september pace to a 4 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 12 in addition to the slowing of reductions in assets and m3 liabilities at thrifts , bank credit may strengthen .
b PAR 12 while banks continue to enjoy relatively favorable core deposit inflows , banks will need to tap additional managed liabilities to fund the faster credit growth and replace balances withdrawn by the treasury .
b PAR 12 banks should continue to make further large acquisitions of mortgage assets , whose returns are still relatively attractive .
b PAR 12 more generally , enlarged issuance of mortgage - backed securities and heightened activity by sponsored agencies will facilitate the redistribution of mortgage lending without further significant effects on its cost and availability .
b PAR 12 in the business sector , borrowing is expected to remain around the reduced pace of recent months , despite some dropoff in cor- porate share retirements owing in part to the higher cost of leveraging .
b PAR 12 although treasury borrowing also will slacken , this deceleration merely represents - the movement of rtc financing off budget in the new fiscal year , rather than a decline in underlying credit demands .
b PAR 12 in total , domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to grow at around an 8 percent annual rate over the fourth quarter , implying similar growth for the year , a little below the midpoint of its annual monitoring range .

c PAR 14 the tightening of policy under alternative c would come as a surprise to the markets , especially in the present international environ- ment .
c PAR 14 money market interest rates would rise by around the 50 basis point hike in the federal funds rate , and the dollar would strengthen .
c PAR 14 with such a tightening not built into yield curves , bond rates would be expected to firm somewhat in the near term as the market reassessed the degree of aggressiveness by the system in pursuing its price stability objective .
c PAR 14 m2 growth over the september - to - december period would slow to a 5 percent rate .
c PAR 14 the composition of inflows would move toward small time deposits , whose rates adjust more promptly , and away from liquid accounts ; its m1 component would slow to a 2 - 1/2 percent rate .
c PAR 14 the restraining effects of higher interest rates and opportunity costs under this alterna-
c PAR 14 tive should be sufficient to hold m2 to around the middle of its tentative 1990 range in the early part of next year .
c PAR 14 m3 would grow at only a 4 percent annual rate , ending the year very close to the lower end of its 1989 range .
c PAR 14 directive language 


