a PAR 21 alternative
a PAR 21 i gives the most scope for even faster growth of the aggregates than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 21 that room might be needed , especially for m2 , should the committee wish to avert a slackening in chart 2 actual and projected velocity of m1 and debt m1 velocity ratio scale domestic nonfinancial debt velocity ratio scale projections are based on staff forecasts of gnp , money , and debt .
a PAR 21 resource utilization as under the long - term strategy iii discussed above .
a PAR 21 in addition , the money and debt specifications of alternative a would seem most compatible with a view that the risks for aggregate demand predom- inantly are on the side of more weakness than in the greenbook .
a PAR 21 in these circumstances , faster money growth would be needed to offset the potential effects of a shortfall in aggregate demand on spending and output .
a PAR 21 the increases in the bounds for m2 from the current year 's range , though , could be interpreted by the public as insufficiently guarding against the possibility of faster inflation .
a SENT -- the easing of policy under alternative a might be associated with less than the usual $ 200 million reduction in borrowing .
a SENT -- as a consequence , the staff estimates that a funds rate in the 9 to 9 - 1/8 percent area under alternative a would be consis- tent with borrowing of perhaps around $ 550 million .
a PAR 29 the extent of the easing of policy embodied in alternative a would be larger than expected by market participants for the very near term , although the current structure of market rates appears to reflect expectations of a drop in rates of this magnitude in the next few months .
a PAR 29 with federal funds moving immediately to around 9 percent or a bit above , short - term rates would edge lower .
a PAR 29 the three - month treasury bill rate would settle below 8 percent .
a PAR 29 the dollar likely would come under downward pressure , especially if , in light of the recent increases in monetary restraint abroad , policy easing were viewed by the market as , in part , a coordinated effort to stem strength in the dollar .
a PAR 29 long - term rates would tend to move lower , although with some easing already built into the yield curve the decline could be minor .

b SENT -- even so , the slower m2 growth of alternative b results in more noticeable progress toward price stability by 1991 .
b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade in the 9 - 1/2 to 9 - 5/8 percent area .
b PAR 27 under alternative b , m2 would grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over the june - to - september period , lifting this aggregate to the bottom of its annual target cone in september .
b PAR 27 despite the small rise in short - term interest rates expected under this alternative , opportunity costs of hold-
b PAR 27 ing m2 balances would remain below levels of the first quarter .
b PAR 27 further contributing to a pickup in m2 growth is the likelihood that outflows from demand deposits -- which have been much larger than expected -- will diminish appreciably and possibly cease over this period , as the recent decline in market rates is reflected in compensating balance requirements .
b PAR 27 retail deposit growth at thrifts should remain near that of commercial banks , as it has recently .
b PAR 27 on a quarterly average basis , m2 would grow at about a 5 - 1/4 percent annual rate in the third quarter , a bit above the rate of expansion of nominal gnp in the staff forecast .
b PAR 27 its m1 component would edge higher over the june - to - september period , but owing to the declines in may and june would decline at a 3 percent rate on a quarterly average basis .
b PAR 28 m3 growth would strengthen to a 7 percent clip over the june - to - september period under alternative b . bank credit is projected to be somewhat stronger in coming months , partly reflecting the possibility of major corporate restructuring activity , which would be funded initially by banks .
b PAR 28 on a quarterly average basis , m3 would grow at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate , implying some decline in its velocity .
b PAR 28 domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to expand at a 7 - 1/2 percent rate from june to september , leaving this aggregate 7 - 3/4 percent at an annual rate above its fourth- quarter base .

c SENT -- the faster money growth of alternative c is sufficient to maintain real growth at around its potential rate and to forestall an appreciable rise in the unemployment rate .
c PAR 31 the tightening of reserve conditions under alternative c would come as a surprise to the financial markets .
c PAR 31 with federal funds moving to 10 percent or a bit higher , money market rates would climb about 1/2 percentage point or more .
c PAR 31 the dollar could well take on a firmer tone on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 31 bond rates would tend to rise under this alternative , although the extent of any such rise would be limited to the degree that market participants saw the move as unsustainable or focused on its impact on inflation pressures over time .
c PAR 32 under alternative c , m2 would expand over the june - to - sep- tember period at a 5 percent rate and would remain below the lower bound of its annual growth cone in september ( though on a trajectory to touch that lower bound in the fourth quarter   .
c PAR 32 growth of liquid retail accounts in m2 would be weak and m1 would decline further .
c PAR 32 m3 would be expected to grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent pace over june to september under this alternative , moving up only gradually within the lower portion of its annual target range .
c PAR 32 directive language 

