a PAR 15 with the lower money market rates of alternative a , m2 growth would strengthen to a 4 percent pace , lifting it above the lower bound of its growth cone by june .
a PAR 15 m3 would move more into the middle portion of its range .
a PAR 15 the decline in other short - term market rates might be less than the one - half point drop in the federal funds rate , depending on per- ceptions of the sustainability of the policy easing .
a PAR 15 the dollar could fall substantially .
a PAR 15 investors are likely to be confounded by this policy action , which would be seen as reversing the thrust of policy over the past year . unless subsequent data suggested substantial weakness in the economy and price pressures , inflation expectations and bond yields ultimately could rise under this alternative .
a PAR 15 directive language 

b PAR 10 the existing structure of interest rates appears to incor- porate some expectation that monetary policy may be a little firmer in the near term than is assumed under alternative b . as a consequence , with federal funds continuing around 9 - 3/4 percent or even a little above under alternative b , money market rates might tend to decline a bit .
b PAR 10 three- month treasury bills at the current level of 9 percent would seem appro- priately priced in relation to the prevailing federal funds rate under usual supply and demand conditions ; but if strong retail demands continue , these rates also might edge lower , especially once the early - april cash management bill is absorbed .
b PAR 10 the dollar might come under some downward pressure as short - term rates softened and the prospects for further near- term monetary tightening in the united states were reassessed .
b PAR 10 given recent mixed signals about the strength of the expansion , bond markets are alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 10 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 10 c levels in billions
b PAR 10 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 10 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level - - - estimated level short - run alternatives -- , .. stimted eve -- i
b PAR 10 3150 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level -- - estimated level short - run alternatives
b PAR 10 chart 3 billions of dollars actual level - - - estimated level ------ growth from fourth quarter short - run alternatives vfsf 0 10 % 5% .. -- ' 5 % - - ' ----
b PAR 10 l ~ ~ , ' 5 % i -- 875 chart 4 debt billions of dollars actual level projected level 10.5 % -i 9750 i.5 % likely to be especially sensitive to incoming information about devel- opments in the economy .
b PAR 10 should the incoming data point more clearly to continued strength in the economy and prices , consistent with the greenbook forecast , bond yields would be unlikely to fall with an unchanged system policy stance and could even move higher .
b PAR 11 growth in m2 under alternative b , at 3 percent from march to june , would be stronger on average than over the first three months of this year .
b PAR 11 as discussed above , deposit weakness at thrifts is expected to continue , but to abate .
b PAR 11 in addition , with short - term market rates moving a bit below current levels and rates on deposits edging higher in response to previous increases in market rates , opportunity costs would be narrow- ing , rather than rising as in recent months .
b PAR 11 even so , the lagged effects of earlier substantial increases in opportunity costs would continue to restrain m2 growth and result in a 4 - 1/2 percent increase in its velocity in the second quarter , somewhat faster than in the second half of 1988 .
b PAR 11 m1 would continue about flat over the march - to - june period as outflows of transactions deposits about match growth in currency ; consequently , its velocity would increase at around the projected 7 - 3/4 percent increase in nominal gnp .
b PAR 12 - m3 is projected to grow at a 5 percent annual rate over the march - to - june period under alternative b , somewhat faster than from december to march .
b PAR 12 commercial banks are expected to continue issuing substantial amounts of large cds to fund still strong merger - related loan demands .
b PAR 12 at thrifts , even if asset growth does n't pick up , m3 could still be boosted relative to earlier this year as less weakness in retail deposits is reflected in reduced reliance on fhlb advances .
b PAR 12 contributing to the pickup in m3 growth would be a resumption of inflows to institu- tion - only money funds as their returns catch up to market rates .
b PAR 12 on a quarterly average basis , m3 would grow at a 5 percent rate , implying an increase of 2 - 1/2 percent in its velocity .

c PAR 14 the extent of immediate policy tightening embodied in alternative c is more than currently seems to be built into market interest rates .
c PAR 14 in response to the federal funds rate moving into the 10 - 1/4 per- cent area , other short - term market rates would be expected to rise some-
c PAR 14 what less ; the prime rate would be hiked again , probably by 1/2 percentage point .
c PAR 14 the dollar would be expected to firm .
c PAR 14 bond rates are likely to increase under this alternative , but the extent of any rise might be limited , and over time yields could drop back , if market participants saw the tightening action as reducing the risks of greater inflation and raising the odds on an appreciable moderation in economic growth .
c PAR 14 with the further rise in market rates , m2 would expand at a 2 percent annual rate over the march - to - june period under alternative c , only a bit faster than the december - to - march pace .
c PAR 14 growth at this rate would place this aggregate noticeably below its 3 to 7 percent growth cone by june .
c PAR 14 higher market rates along with the lagged adjustment of offering rates on m3 type - money market mutual funds would weaken inflows to such funds .
c PAR 14 m3 expansion , at 4 - 1/2 percent over the march - to - june period , while picking up some from the sluggish rate of recent months , would remain in the lower portion of its long - run range .


