a SENT -- under alternative a , seasonal credit would have to drop significantly from current levels .
a PAR 10 a 50 basis point reduction in the trading range for federal funds would come more promptly , and be larger , than the easing currently built into the structure of interest rates .
a PAR 10 money market interest rates could drop 1/4 percentage point or so -- and somewhat more if the action itself fostered the notion that the federal reserve would be inclined to undertake additional steps to loosen reserve pressure in the months ahead .
a PAR 10 a rally in bond markets also would seem probable , espe- cially because inflation concerns do not now seem to be weighing on market psychology ; however , should spending prove reasonably strong , there is some risk that such concerns would be reignited against the background of the further easing of policy in alternative a .
a PAR 10 some downward adjustment to the exchange value of the dollar also could occur since foreign author- ities would be unlikely to follow up with comparable easing actions in light of inflationary pressures abroad .
a SENT -- the lower interest rates of alternative a could boost m2 growth to a 7 - 1/2 percent rate in september , and , with comparable growth in the fourth quarter , to 4 - 3/4 percent for the year .

b PAR 9 markets still seem to expect a slight easing of policy over the months ahead .
b PAR 9 the stability of the funds rate around the current level under alternative b , especially if combined with incoming economic data in line with the greenbook forecast of sustained economic growth , would raise further doubts in securities markets about the likelihood of such an easing .
b PAR 9 the alteration of market perceptions about future policy moves may induce a small rise in private money market rates .
b PAR 9 treasury bill rates already have adjusted upward relative to private short - term rates in reflection of actual and near - term heavy supply .
b PAR 9 thus , they could edge up by less than private rates -- to the 8 percent level -- as the recent surge in bill issuance recedes after the initial rtc funding is completed .
b PAR 9 intermediate- and long - term yields could move up over coming months , though by limited amounts should inflation remain moderate in line with the staff forecast .
b PAR 9 supported by slightly higher market rates , strength in the dollar on foreign exchange markets could persist , at least for a time .
b PAR 13 although passage of thrift legislation should bolster depos- itor confidence and forestall some thrift deposit outflows , the substitu- tion of rtc funds ( not in the aggregates   for deposits and other liabili- ties , along with discouragement of asset expansion at thrifts , are alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 13 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 13 c levels in billions
b PAR 13 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 13 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billlons of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives 3 % -13150 -i
b PAR 13 3000 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level short - run altematives ' .5
b PAR 13 % i - / -i 3900
b PAR 13 i chart 3 billions of dollars 10 % actual level , ' ------ growth from fourth quarter , , -
b PAR 13 ' 5 % _ - -5 % sn d
b PAR 13 a s 0 n d ccrrr rl ~ c ^ ' .
b PAR 13 chart 4 debt billions of dollars -actual level projected level 10.5 % expected on balance to damp growth of the broader aggregates.2 the restraining effect might be particularly evident in the period just ahead owing to the inducement for the rtc to spend $ 20 billion by the end of september .
b PAR 13 most of those funds are likely to replace current s&l liabili- ties , with particular focus on high - yielding liabilities .
b PAR 13 with respect to m2 , premia on offering rates on small time deposits at insolvent thrifts should decline , with a more general softening of deposit rates possible at both banks and thrifts as competitive pressures become less intense.3   in response to the higher opportunity costs on deposits , some portion of the funds withdrawn is likely to be transferred by the public into investments outside m2 .
b PAR 13 this would be particularly true of brokered deposits , which often are of high denomination ( $ 80,000 to $ 100,000 ) and may be held by especially rate - sensitive investors .
b PAR 13 partly as a consequence , m2 growth under alternative b is projected to slow from around 8 percent in august to 6 percent in september , with the resolution impact accounting for per- haps as much as 1 percentage point of the moderation .
b PAR 13 moreover , the rebound in market rates since their lows in late july has widened oppor- tunity costs , which will also tend to damp m2 growth .
b PAR 14 the influence of the legislation on m3 will be considerably larger .
b PAR 14 those government funds not substituting for m2 liabilities will 2 .
b PAR 14 in addition to outright deposit payouts , rtc will use its resources to make advances or deposits at operating insolvent institutions ; the staff presumes that even in the case of deposits these liabilities will not be counted in the monetary aggregates .
b PAR 14 depositories purchasing the deposits of liquidated thrifts apparently will have the right to lower rates on the acquired deposits to the passbook savings rate .
b PAR 14 thrifts under conservatorship , but not yet liquidated , will be discouraged from offering above - market rates ; this is likely to have its most important effect on brokered deposits , which usually are included in the small - time category . be available to substitute for managed liabilities , including those in m3 .
b PAR 14 moreover , assets held by insolvent thrifts will decline as these institu- tions are liquidated or pared in size by rtc conservators ; some assets will be sold into markets and others may be acquired by the rtc , which would fund them from non - m3 sources .
b PAR 14 tighter capital requirements and more restrictive asset standards also should hold down asset expansion at other thrifts , whose sales of mortgage - backed securities may begin to be supplemented by sales of junk bonds .
b PAR 14 while thrift rps and large time deposits should continue to decline , some of the reduction in managed liabilities at thrifts will take the form of repayments of fhlb advances and other non - m3 borrowing , muting the decline in m3.5 moreover , responding to the higher spreads on mortgages , banks are likely to absorb a portion of thrift assets , boosting their needs for funds .
b PAR 14 on balance , the thrift situation is projected to damp m3 growth by about 2 percentage points in september to 5 percent under alternative b . 

c PAR 11 under alternative c , market interest rates would back up abruptly , given that the federal reserve policy tightening would come as a surprise .
c PAR 11 increases in short rates by more than the 1/2 percentage point rise in the funds rate could well occur , as market participants reassessed not only current but also future money market conditions in light of a more restrictive policy stance than they anticipated .
c PAR 11 the advance in bond yields probably would be more restrained in view of the implications of higher short - term rates for future economic activity and inflation .
c PAR 11 such monetary policy tightening would result in some additional upward pressure on the dollar .

