a SENT -- the ranges of alternative a are those adopted on a tentative basis by the committee in late june .
a SENT -- although alternative a encompasses staff money growth fore- casts thought to be consistent with the greenbook economic projection for 1989 ,
a PAR 18 on the other hand , alternative a already represents reductions in the m2 and m3 ranges for 1989 of 1 and 1/2 percentage point , respec- tively , from those for last year , and the federal reserve 's resolve at least to resist any increase in inflation is not widely questioned .
a PAR 18 more- over , should a major initiative to close the deficit over time be forth- coming , market interest rates would come under downward pressure , and alternative
a PAR 18 i would better encompass the somewhat faster money growth needed
a PAR 18 should the system wish to assure that economic growth would not slacken over the near term .
a PAR 18 alternative
a PAR 18 i may be a more natural transi- tion to the appropriate sequence of monetary ranges in future years , when nominal interest rates may not be rising and velocity would level out or even decline .
a PAR 18 for example , in 1990 m2 and m3 are seen as accelerating to 5 and 5 - 1/2 percent , as interest rates are assumed to move lower later in the year .
a PAR 18 if the committee wishes to have scope to continue reducing the ranges in 1990 and beyond , it may be desirable to avoid larger decreases at this time .

b SENT -- at the same time , should constant or moderately declining interest rates prove consis- tent with satisfactory economic performance , the upper bound of alternative b would provide adequate room for the implied faster money growth .
b PAR 22 short - term rates seem to have built in a further firming step for policy in the near term .
b PAR 22 with funds continuing to trade at or a little above 9 percent , as expected under alternative b , some of the rate increases registered most recently may unwind , with treasury bill rates moving back to around 8 - 3/8 percent or a little below .
b PAR 22 bond yields are unlikely to move substantially , absent more indications of strength in the economy or intensifying pressures on prices .
b PAR 22 as maintaining the reserve pressures of alternative b causes international investors to begin recon- sidering the likelihood of an imminent u.s .
b PAR 22 monetary policy tightening , the value of the dollar could begin to slip .
b PAR 22 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 22 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 22 c levels in billions
b PAR 22 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 22 growth rates chart 3 actual and targeted m2 actual level - --
b PAR 22 estimated level short - run atenatives
b PAR 22 the range for 199 is th one doapld tentativly a the jaiy mnwg .
b PAR 22 billions of dollars
b PAR 22 i i 2850 , - ' chart 4 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level
b PAR 22 --- estimated level short - run altematives the range for 198e
b PAR 22 adoped tentahvely al the jiy mteag .
b PAR 22 j a s on d chart
b PAR 22 5 billions of dollars ---- actual level -- - estimated level ------ growth from 1987.04 short - run altematives 15 % - 860 --- ' 10 % se 5 % .. .
b PAR 22 , i chart 6 debt billions of dollars -- actual level projected level
b PAR 22 the range or 1989 s u m on
b PAR 22 adoped sentilvly
b PAR 22 he y mn - e .
b PAR 23 increases in short - term market rates over recent months should restrain m2 growth through this quarter under alternative b . some rebound from a weak january seems in store in february and march , but m2 growth is expected to reach only about 3 percent over the next two months , given the glacial adjustment speed of offering rates recently , especially for liquid accounts .
b PAR 23 with demand deposits expected to continue to run off in february and march , m1 would decline slightly further .
b PAR 23 the 2 percent m2 growth of alternative b from december to march implies quarterly average growth of only 3 percent for this aggregate .
b PAR 23 m2 demand is not expected to respond to the anticipated bulge in nominal gnp in the current quarter resulting from an imputed bounceback of farm activity from the drought last year .
b PAR 23 consistent with the gnp outlook in the greenbook , the income velocity of m2 would increase this quarter at a 5 - 3/4 percent annual rate , nearly twice its rate of change over the second half of 1988 .
b PAR 24 m3 growth under alternative b should strengthen from its january lull to a 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate over february and march , bringing growth from december to march to a 3 - 1/2 percent annual rate .
b PAR 24 total thrift deposits , flat in december and january , are expected to ex- pand weakly over february and march , and s&ls should continue their reli- ance on new fhlb advances and other non - m3 borrowing .
b PAR 24 a bulge in bank credit associated with financing of the rjr - nabisco takeover , while other lbo and merger - related lending remains heavy , should induce substantial issuance of large cds this month and next .
b PAR 24 corporate restructuring 5 . growth of m2 may be somewhat elevated in february , and depressed in march , by short - term placement of funds borrowed for the rjr - nabisco buyout .
b PAR 24 these funds reportedly will be held in highly liquid instru- ments for a time prior to disbursement to shareholders .
b PAR 24 activity also will be boosting overall debt issuance by domestic nonfinan- cial sectors for a time .
b PAR 24 the debt aggregate is projected to grow at a 9 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the first quarter -- somewhat faster than in 1988 and in the upper half of its tentative range .
b PAR 24 net equity retirements are forecast at a record $ 200 billion annual rate for the quarter , while the corporate financing gap holds steady at around an $ 80 billion annual rate .

c PAR 25 the rise in the funds rate to around 9 - 1/2 percent or slightly higher associated with discount borrowing of $ 800 million under alternative c would be larger than is currently built into market rates .
c PAR 25 term rates would move up across the board , though by less than 1/2 per- centage point , with the 3-month treasury bill rate rising to around 8 - 3/4 percent .
c PAR 25 the upward pressure on bond rates from market perceptions of a higher path for short rates in the intermediate term might be largely offset by expectations that policy actions of this size and speed were likely to slow growth and reduce inflation .
c PAR 25 higher short - term rates likely would induce some further firming of the exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 25 the increase in short - term rates would further damp expansion of the monetary aggregates .
c PAR 25 the projected 1 - 1/2 percent growth of m2 over the first three months of the year under this alternative would place it in march a little below the lower bound of the cone associated with its tentative annual range , and the upward movement of rates is likely to keep m2 growth relatively damped into the spring .
c PAR 25 m3 growth of about 3 - 1/4 percent from december to march would leave this aggregate just 1/2 per- centage point above its tentative lower bound by quarter end .
c PAR 25 directive language 


