a SENT -- in alternative a , a federal funds rate around 8 percent would be accompanied by a borrowing assumption of $ 100 million .
a PAR 10 the 1/2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate under alternative a would come sooner and be larger than market partici- pants are now expecting .
a PAR 10 rates on other short - term instruments would decline by nearly the same amount , with the 3-month bill rate dropping ultimately toward the 7 percent area .
a PAR 10 in response to the further narrow- ing of differentials between u.s . and foreign interest rates , the exchange value of the dollar could be expected to adjust downward .
a PAR 10 bond yields probably would decline noticeably under alternative a ; market participants may interpret an immediate further easing as suggesting a more aggressive policy posture by the federal reserve , and perhaps an assessment of sub- stantial underlying weakening in the economy .
a PAR 10 however , should incoming data show the economy continuing to advance at its recent pace over coming months , in the context of a weaker dollar , the cumulative effect of past easing measures and alternative a over a short time might be viewed as setting the stage for a subsequent strengthening of the economy , raising questions about prospects for prices .
a PAR 14 under alternative a , growth of m2 and m3 through december would be boosted slightly by the associated decline in market interest rates and easing of lending conditions .
a PAR 14 september - to - december m2 and m3 growth would rise to 8 and 4 - 3/4 percent rates , respectively .

b PAR 9 market interest rates generally are expected to remain around current levels under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alterna-
b PAR 9 the structure of market interest rates appears to embody another slight easing of monetary policy , but most probably not until late this year or early next year .
b PAR 9 in addition , impressions of a sluggish economy , consistent with data flows likely under the staff forecast , may continue to foster expectations of future policy easing , even if federal funds rates remain near 8 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 9 unlike most other rates , those on short- term treasury bills may drop once the large supply of cash management bills is absorbed into portfolios , with the 3-month bill rate moving down toward 7 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 9 the exchange value of the dollar could exhibit little net change over the intermeeting period under alternative b , though any policy tightening abroad may tend to exert downward pressure on the dollar .
b PAR 12 even under the unchanged interest rates of alternative b , m2 growth would remain close to last month 's brisk pace , buoyed by recent declines in market interest rates and opportunity costs .
b PAR 12 under this alternative , m2 is expected to expand at a 7 - 1/4 percent average annual rate in november and december ; growth from september to december and on a fourth - quarter average basis would be 7 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 12 this combines with the staff 's nominal gnp projection of 5 percent for the quarter to imply a 2 - 1/2 percent rate of decline in m2 velocity , roughly consistent with model - based forecasts incorporating the recent reductions in opportunity costs .
b PAR 12 m1 is projected to slow to a 6 - 1/4 percent rate in the last two months of the year from the elevated pace of october . representing a partial offset , however , inflows to nontransaction retail deposits are seen as strengthening somewhat this month and next , as the effects of the recent policy easings take hold .
b PAR 12 this projection includes a strengthening in demand deposits in december , reflecting an expected need to adjust compensating balances upward before closing the books on 1989 , as a consequence of interest rate declines this quarter .
b PAR 12 such year - end adjustments have occurred in several recent years .
b PAR 12 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 12 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 12 b levels in billions
b PAR 12 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 12 growth rates 3.0 to 7.0 3.5 to 7.51989 target ranges :
b PAR 12 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level -- - estimated level short - run alternatives , -
b PAR 12 i chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level - - - estimated level short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level / -- - estimated level ------ growth from fourth quarter , short - run alternatives -5
b PAR 12 830 s0 % s790
b PAR 12 i chart 4 debt billions of dollars 10.5 % i - actual level - --- estimated level projected level 6.5 % 
b PAR 13 m3 growth under alternative b will continue to be damped by the ongoing shedding of assets by undercapitalized s&ls and by funds supplied through rtc resolutions .
b PAR 13 however , m3 is expected to grow in november and december a bit faster than in october , leaving expansion over the last three months of the year at a 4 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 13 the pace of decline in s&l assets is expected to wane a little over the next two months from the extremely rapid pace of the last few months , and rtc resolutions should slow after the fiscal year - end spurt .
b PAR 13 as a consequence , outflows of large time deposits and term rps at thrifts should abate somewhat .
b PAR 13 commercial bank credit is likely to slow but expansion of managed liabilities will be maintained , in part to compensate for reduced rtc funds of thrift deposit transfers .
b PAR 13 growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to moderate to around 7 percent over the rest of the year , owing mainly to a slowing of federal government debt .
b PAR 13 this would leave the debt aggregate in the fourth quarter 8 - 1/4 percent above its year - earlier level , close to the midpoint of its monitoring range .
b SENT -- under alternative b , m2 would expand around the 7 percent upper limit of its tentative range in the early months of 1990 .



