a PAR 9 m2 under all the alternatives embodies some impetus from the decline in market rates over the intermeeting period , as well as a common catch - up factor .
a PAR 9 in addition , any effect that thrift deposit outflows might have had on m2 growth earlier in the year is likely to be even smaller , as such outflows continue to abate .
a PAR 9 nevertheless , owing to the impact of tax payments in late april and early may , m2 is projected to decline in may , before growing in june .
a PAR 9 as a consequence , this aggregate through june should remain below the 3 percent lower bound of its target cone , even under the reduced interest rates of alternative a . however , if money market conditions of either alternative a or b were maintained through the summer , the waning effects of earlier increases in market interest rates , reinforced by the delayed upward adjustment of liquid deposit rates , likely would bring m2 within its annual range by the end of the third quarter , assuming spending and income growth close to the green- book projections .
a PAR 9 m1 also is expected to strengthen , though given its adverse opportunity costs , this aggregate would only level out in june under b , and under all three alternatives would remain substantially below its march level .
a PAR 9 the velocity of m2 would be expected to increase between a 5 and 6 percent rate in the second quarter under the three alternatives ; this is substantially faster than would be predicted from our models of money demand , given the interest rates of the three alternatives and greenbook gnp , reflecting in part the depressing effect of the tax - related drawdown on quarterly average m2 .
a PAR 12 the easing of the federal funds rate under alternative a would result in further declines in short - term rates of an additional 1/4 percentage point .
a PAR 12 with a policy move of this dimension this soon still unexpected by market participants , it could reinforce the perception that market rates have peaked , fueling a further rally in fixed - income and stock markets .
a PAR 12 on the other hand , if the federal reserve were seen in light of subsequent developments to have moved prematurely , the easing could rekindle inflation concerns .
a PAR 12 in any case , some downward pressure on the exchange value of the dollar would be likely as interest differentials favoring dollar assets narrowed further .

b SENT -- under alternative b , funds would continue to trade in the 9 - 3/4 to 9 - 7/8 percent range ; in light of recent experience , unchanged reserve market conditions are likely to involve borrowing of around $ 600 million .

c PAR 13 the tightening of policy under alternative c would be a considerable surprise to financial markets , and would likely induce a substantial - backup in rates .
c PAR 13 increases in short - term interest rates could exceed the nearly 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate , as the market reassessed the federal reserve 's monetary policy strategy .
c PAR 13 if such a tightening were not followed by stronger economic data , risk premi- ums on private paper might widen further , as worries spread about a pos- sible recession and its effect on credit quality .
c PAR 13 long - term treasury rates likely would rise , at least initially , but by less than yields on corporate bonds and mortgage - backed securities ; over time , any rate increase might be reversed if such a policy came to be seen as raising the odds on disinflation .
c PAR 13 additional upward pressure on the dollar would emerge from the higher u.s . real interest rates , absent similar tightening actions abroad .


