a SENT -- under alternative a , the federal funds rate would decline to the 8 percent area accompanying a decline in adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to $ 100 million .
a PAR 15 the easing of policy under alternative a would be a little more than now seems to be anticipated by market participants over coming weeks .
a PAR 15 in response to a drop in the federal funds rate to the 8 percent area , money market interest rates would decrease about 3/8 percentage point , with the three - month bill trading around 7 - 1/4 percent .
a PAR 15 bond rates should move lower , especially if market participants viewed the economy as being fairly weak so that such a measure would not appreciably raise the risk of higher inflation , though judging from the tepid response of bond markets to the putative easing around thanksgiving , any declines might be small .
a PAR 15 the dollar could weaken significantly further .
a PAR 16 with the further drop in interest rates , growth in m2 would strengthen under alternative a to a 9 percent annual rate over the novem- ber - to - march period , placing this aggregate noticeably above the upper end of its tentative growth cone .
a PAR 16 in the absence of a subsequent tightening of policy , expansion of m2 would be likely to remain quite strong for some time , especially if the lower interest rates fed through to greater spend- ing and demand for money than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 16 under alternative a , growth in m3 would firm to a 6 percent rate over the november - to - march period , a bit above the midpoint of its tentative 1990 range .
a PAR 16 a decline in market rates might not boost m3 in line with previous experience , since higher prices on mortgages and mortgage - backed securities could encourage the sale of assets by thrifts .

b SENT -- the specifications of alternative b involve federal funds continuing to trade in the 8 - 1/2 percent area in association with adjust- ment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 150 million .
b PAR 11 the markets have built in some additional easing of policy in the near term , and as federal funds continue to trade around 8 - 1/2 percent under alternative b , money market rates might firm a little.7 any tendency for rates to rise is likely to be tempered if incoming infor- mation points to sluggish economic growth , consistent with the staff fore- cast , so that markets retain but push back their expectations of the next easing step .
b PAR 11 bond yields are likely to stay around current levels under these circumstances .
b PAR 11 bond prices could rally should more definite pros- pects for substantial deficit reduction emerge from the upcoming adminis- tration budget as well as the implications of developments overseas for future defense expenditures .
b PAR 11 with policy unchanged , the dollar might show little further depreciation , unless key foreign central banks tighten policies further .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , m2 would expand at an 8 percent annual rate over the november - to - march period , near the pace of recent months.8 growth would continue to be buoyed by previous declines in market interest rates , causing a further reduction in the velocity of this aggregate at a 1 - 3/4 percent annual rate in the first quarter .
b PAR 12 expansion would remain concentrated in its more liquid components , whose opportunity costs have narrowed the most . small time deposits could strengthen a little now that rtc no longer is providing additional funds to replace high - cost deposits .
b PAR 12 the federal funds rate may temporarily exceed this level around year - end ; markets now appear to have built in funds rates in the area of 10 percent over the long new year 's weekend .
b PAR 12 the staff does not believe that the availability of foreign cur- rency deposits in the united states beginning in january will have much impact on the monetary aggregates .
b PAR 12 such deposits will be excluded from the aggregates , and the amount of shifting to foreign currency accounts from dollar deposits in the aggregates is expected to be small .
b PAR 12 in these circumstances , intervened thrifts may continue to bid more ag- gressively to retain or replace maturing brokered deposits , as they have in recent weeks , prompting other depository institutions to raise their offering rates .
b PAR 12 while most of the small time deposits would come from other m2 sources , some might be diverted from outside m2 , given the more favorable deposit rates .
b PAR 12 growth in the m1 component would be expected to be around 6 percent over the november - to - march period , sustained by in- flows to ocds and some augmenting of demand deposits around year - end to meet compensating balance requirements .
b PAR 12 by march , m2 would have grown 8 percent at an annual rate from its fourth - quarter base ; but absent any significant changes in the funds rate , m2 subsequently would be expected to moderate to within its tentative annual target cone in the third quarter .
b PAR 13 m3 is expected to grow at a 5 - 1/2 percent annual rate under alternative b , in line with its faster pace of october and november .
b PAR 13 growth of this aggregate may decelerate over the quarter , damped by run- offs of assets at capital - deficient thrifts as well as by a resumption of rtc activity at insolvent institutions .
b PAR 13 credit growth at banks should remain close to the pace of recent months ; these institutions will con- tinue to fill some of the void in residential and consumer installment lending and acquisitions of mortgage securities caused by the withdrawal of the thrift industry .

c SENT -- federal funds would return to the 9 percent area under alternative c , associated with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 200 million .
c PAR 17 the accompanying slowdown in m3 - -to an expected 5 percent annual rate over the november - to - march period -- would cause this aggregate to drift downward in the lower half of its tentative 1990 growth range .
c PAR 17 a tightening of policy would come as a surprise to market participants , and short - term interest rates would rise by more than the 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 17 bond rates initially would rise , though this increase might be retraced if markets came to see the move as part of a longer - term strategy to restrain spending and prices .
c PAR 17 an aspect of this restraint would be a transition period that involved a weaker outlook for profits , downward pressure on various asset prices , and an intensification of strains in certain vulnerable areas of the financial system , with implications for intermediaries and other lenders .
c PAR 17 directive language 

