a PAR 10 in view of the expectations of some easing already built into rates , short - term interest rates would decrease somewhat less than the 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate , under alternative a . banks may be encouraged to advance credit less reluctantly by the wider margins they would enjoy , and by greater confidence of repayment as lower interest rates countered weakness in the economy and bolstered asset prices .
a PAR 10 banks eventually would pass the drop in funding costs on to their customers through a lower prime rate , though the adjustment could be slug- gish , especially given the desire to limit footings at year - end , and mar- gins will remain unusually high .
a PAR 10 in the context of the softer economy and lessened pressures on resources , long - term rates , too , should decline , with fixed - rate mortgages dropping below 10 percent .
a PAR 10 the extent of the decline in long - term rates might be limited should the likely drop in the foreign exchange value of the dollar be especially steep , which would be seen as accentuating price pressures , possibly limiting the scope for further policy easing .
a PAR 10 the odds on a sharper drop in the dollar would be greater if the easing seemed to reflect especially heightened federal reserve concern about the strength of the financial system and the real economy , with reduced priority given to restraining price pressures .
a PAR 10 from this perspective , the risk that market participants would interpret a 1/2 percentage point cut in the federal funds rate as conveying such signals might be increased if the cut were accomplished by a reduction in the discount rate .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the drop in opportunity costs would boost m2 to a 2 - 3/4 percent rate over the alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
a PAR 14 m3 would be little changed over november and december under any of the alternatives .
a PAR 14 some pickup in rtc resolution activity from the pace of recent weeks also will tend to restrain growth of the aggregates , especially m3 .
a PAR 14 the slight differences in the growth of m3 under alternative a and c in december would owe largely to inflows to money market mutual funds , as their rate advantage temporarily rose or declined , respectively .
a PAR 14 in all cases , growth in m3 through the first quarter of next year would be around the lower end of its tentative range .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue trading around 7 - 3/4 percent .
b SENT -- the associated level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing under alternative b would be set at $ 250 million in the first maintenance period after the meeting and might need to be lowered another $ 50 million over the intermeeting period to accommodate the ongoing decline in the demand for seasonal credit .
b PAR 9 interest rates currently embody anticipation of a 1/4 point drop in the funds rate in the near - term .
b PAR 9 nevertheless , market rates are not likely to back up significantly under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative b , since expectations of an easing would be maintained if , as expected , incoming information confirms a weakening economy .
b PAR 9 an un- changed policy would provide some underpinning for the foreign exchange value of the dollar , especially if market participants see that stance as in part motivated by concerns about potential further weakening in the dollar .
b PAR 9 quality spreads may widen further , reflecting year - end position- ing and mounting concerns about defaults .
b PAR 9 a number of large banks , espe- cially those with weak capital positions and eroding access to capital markets , expect to be holding down balance sheet totals to bolster capital positions and investor confidence .
b PAR 9 at the same time , many investors , particularly mutual funds and others publishing year - end statements , are likely to intensify efforts to shed assets of less than top quality , including holdings of some bank obligations .
b PAR 9 under these conditions , it will be difficult to distinguish transitory disturbances in relative interest rates and credit flows from signals of more fundamental and last-
b PAR 9 ing problems of borrowers .

c PAR 11 under alternative c , the dollar would retrace at least some of its recent decline in response to a rise in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 11 a tightening of policy would come as a surprise to market participants , especially in light of the recent decline in the funds rate on the heels of the budget accord .
c PAR 11 short - term rates would generally rise by 1/4 percentage point or more , as expectations of further easing were extin- guished .
c PAR 11 bond rates also would increase initially .
c PAR 11 quality spreads might widen appreciably , with strains on lower - rated borrowers seen as being heightened as the federal reserve appeared willing to tolerate a weaker path for economic activity .
c SENT -- the firming in m2 growth under alternative c would be quite modest and this aggregate would be entering the new year around the lower end of its tentative 1991 range .

