a PAR 25 the policy easing embodied in alternative a , with the funds rate moving to 7 - 3/4 percent , would induce a nearly comparable decline in other short - term interest rates .
a PAR 25 the lowering of u.s .
a PAR 25 short - term rates 12 .
a PAR 25 currency growth should work as a partial offset , retreating from its rapid january pace .
a PAR 25 despite the acceleration in total reserves in line with that of transaction deposits , the monetary base is projected to slip to around an 8 percent average rate of growth in february and march .
a PAR 25 would cause a sharp downward adjustment in the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 25 nonetheless , some declines in bond rates are probable , as investors scale down their forecasts of the intermediate - term path of short rates .
a PAR 25 but the declines would be muted to the extent that the policy easing and accompanying dollar depreciation were to intensify con- cerns about future inflation pressures and the scope for further policy easing .
a PAR 25 m2 demands would be boosted , to perhaps an 8 - 1/2 percent average rate of growth over february and march , bringing december - to - march growth to 7 - 1/2 percent and leaving m2 a bit above the 7 percent upper end of its tentative range .
a PAR 25 m3 would rise at a 4 percent rate over the two months , rapidly enough to engender a december - to - march growth rate of 3 - 3/4 per- cent and place this aggregate a little above its 3 - 1/2 percent tentative lower bound .

b PAR 17 as noted above , alternative b could be considered equiv- alent to the tentative ranges adopted in july .
b PAR 17 the staff projection of nominal gnp and associated m2 growth over 1990 is little different than in july , so that keeping the 3 to 7 percent range for that aggregate implies , as it did last july , about the same greater scope for a tighter than for an easier policy relative to that in the staff forecast .
b PAR 17 the reductions in the m3 and debt ranges do not reflect a tighter policy stance .
b PAR 17 in the case of debt the decrease is roughly comparable to the staff 's reduced es- timate of net equity retirements , rather than a decrease in funds to finance spending .
b PAR 17 the reduction in the m3 range recognizes that a smaller share of mortgage flows will be financed by depository institutions .
b PAR 17 the decline in the m3 range of only 1/2 percentage point represents only 1/4 of the estimated effect of the rechanneling of flows on m3 growth .
b PAR 17 in the 10 . inclusion of $ 40 billion of rtc working capital in the debt
b PAR 17 aggre- gate would raise its growth by 1/2 percentage point .
b PAR 17 absence of the thrift restructuring , the staff likely would be projecting about 6 percent m3 growth , unchanged from that projected last july .
b SENT -- under alternative b , adjustment credit may average only $ 75 million , not far above the frictional amount , as the reluctance of depositories to tap the window for such credit is rein- forced by questions about the general health of the banking industry that are raised by developments in the real estate and lbo lending areas and by the problems of the bank of new england .
b PAR 22 under alternative b , the continuation of the federal funds rate around 8 - 1/4 percent would accord with current market expectations for the near term .
b PAR 22 at some point , the narrow spreads between treasury bills and private paper will widen , but any tendency for this to occur as runoffs of official accounts abate will be offset to a degree by large bill issuance through the end of march and by the continued potential of a further increase to finance rtc working capital .
b PAR 22 treasury bond yields may edge down once the mid - quarter refunding issues are distributed , espe- cially if foreign interest appears to be holding up . however , without a surprise in macroeconomic fundamentals or monetary policy , only limited scope for a flattening of the treasury yield curve seems in prospect .
b PAR 22 increases in bond yields since the last fomc meeting have restored the more typical upward - sloping term structure , apparently on the basis of expectations that federal funds trading not far from current levels will be consistent with continued economic expansion and underlying inflation persisting at its recent pace .
b PAR 23 growth in m2 under alternative b is expected to strengthen in february and march from its january pace , owing largely to a rebound in transaction deposits .
b PAR 23 demand deposits in particular should recover ap- preciably after their sharp january slide considering the presumed in- crease in desired holdings in response to the fall in short - term interest rates over the second half of last year .
b PAR 23 m1 expansion would be brought up to a 6 - 3/4 percent pace over february and march .
b PAR 23 together with a slight pickup in its nontransaction component , m2 is projected to grow at a 7 - 3/4 percent rate over the two months , and 7 percent from a december base .
b PAR 23 m2 would continue to outpace nominal gnp in the first quarter , implying a contraction of its velocity at a 1 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 24 under alternative b , m3 would grow at a 3 - 1/2 percent rate from december to march .
b PAR 24 thrift assets continue to run off rapidly .
b PAR 24 bank credit expansion , though picking up a little , is expected to remain moder- ate , and bank issuance of managed liabilities to continue subdued in the face of stronger core deposit growth .
b PAR 24 inflows to institution - only money market mutual funds should pause after the bulge in january , as their yields move down into more normal alignment with market rates .
b PAR 24 overall debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow at an 8 percent rate from december to march , placing this aggregate a bit below the mid- point of its 6 - 1/2 to 10 - 1/2 percent tentative monitoring range .
b PAR 24 in the federal sector , borrowing quickens over the balance of the quarter , while the average growth of the overall debt of the other sectors should about maintain the estimated january pace .

c PAR 19 although the tentative m2 range would allow for a substantially tighter policy than assumed in the forecast , the 6 - 1/2 percent upper limit of the m2 range of alternative c conveys an intention to respond promptly and forcefully to any tendency for inflation pressures to intensify .
c PAR 19 the m2 range of this alternative also would tend to constrain any easing response to a weaker economy , signalling a willingness to take risks on that side to better assure a lessening of price pressures .
c PAR 19 the m3 and debt growth ranges would be reduced by 1 percentage point to allow room for the slower growth that might be associated with a tighter policy , given expectations for sluggish growth in these measures under the staff forecast .
c PAR 19 short - run policy alternatives 
c PAR 26 by contrast , the 1/2 percentage point increase in the funds rate under alternative c would restrain december - to - march growth of m2 and m3 to 6 - 1/2 and 3 - 1/4 percent , respectively , positioning them just below the upper bound and at the lower bound of their respective tentative ranges by march .
c PAR 26 most short - term rates would rise in tandem with the federal funds rate ; some widening of risk premiums could occur if reces- sionary concerns reemerged , given already heightened attention to credit problems .
c PAR 26 such concerns , along with a sense that policy might be more focused on achieving price stability , would tend to damp the rise in bond yields .
c PAR 26 higher interest rates and lower expected inflation could prompt an upward movement in the exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 26 directive language 


