a PAR 12 barring an immediate , credible agreement that had already reduced interest rates , the decline in the federal funds rate under alternative a would be expected to show through in other money market interest rates .
a PAR 12 private rates might drop a little more than those on treasury bills if the lower rates were seen as lessening financial stresses .
a PAR 12 with market participants generally viewing the economy as weak , some decline in bond yields may accompany this policy action .
a PAR 12 in the absence of a cred- ible budget agreement or a lessening of tensions in the middle east , any bond market rally would be quite limited , however , if the easing raised questions about the system 's commitment to containing inflation .
a PAR 12 the dollar could come under renewed downward pressure in response to the reduction in u.s . interest rates .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the drop in opportunity costs would boost alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 8 percent .
b PAR 11 it appears that the expectation of an immediate easing of monetary policy is no longer so prevalent in the markets , although some relaxation still seems to be anticipated over coming months , partly reflecting an expected budget accord .
b PAR 11 the market response to unchanged policy under alternative b will depend crucially on budget developments in coming days .
b PAR 11 should an inadequate agreement appear to be in train , rates could reverse some of the declines of recent days , but there would be no effect from holding monetary policy unchanged . as noted above , however , a significant budget agreement would extend the recent market rally and engender expectations of near - term policy action .
b PAR 11 in this case , maintaining unchanged money market conditions for an extended period would disappoint these expectations and cause rates to back up .

c PAR 13 the tightening of monetary policy under alternative c would be seen under current circumstances as signalling an aggressive stance against the inflationary consequences of the oil shock .
c PAR 13 such a tightening is not anticipated by market participants .
c PAR 13 given concerns about financial fragility , yields on private obligations could rise significantly , while the increase in bill rates could be limited by greater demands for safe assets .
c PAR 13 perceptions that the central bank would not permit inflation to rise permanently as a result of the oil shock would hold down any increase in yields on longer - term instruments .
c SENT -- velocity would still decline under alternative c , though by less as opportunity costs widened with the rise in short - term market interest rates .

