a SENT -- under alternative a , the drop in the federal funds rate to 7 - 1/2 percent would accom-
a PAR 14 the easing of reserve market conditions under alternative a would engender a like - sized decline in short - term interest rates .
a PAR 14 the response of long - term interest rates to an easing is unclear .
a PAR 14 if incoming information suggests sluggish economic growth or tighter credit condi- tions , inflation concerns may not be heightened further by the policy easing , and bond yields would fall .
a PAR 14 however , especially in the context of the oil price shock , if the easing were interpreted as signalling greater concern by the fomc with maintaining output growth than with containing inflation , the decline in the dollar could be particularly sharp , and bond yields could rise .
a PAR 14 m2 , and to a lesser extent m3 , would be a bit stronger under alternative a than with an unchanged funds rate ; the staff projects growth rates from june to september of 4 - 1/2 percent for m2 and 2 - 3/4 percent for m3 .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 8 percent in association with an initial specification for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window of $ 500 million .
b PAR 11 market participants no longer seem to be expecting a near- term easing in policy , and short - term rates would be unlikely to move substantially on balance with federal funds remaining near 8 percent under alternative b . absent a significant change in oil prices , long - term interest rates may stay around recent elevated levels .
b PAR 11 scope for a rally in bond markets seems to exist should a budget accord involving signif- icant deficit reduction be reached after all , counter to current investor skepticism .
b PAR 11 the exchange value of the dollar would be unlikely to retrace much , if any , of its decline since the last committee meeting .
b PAR 13 under alternative b , m3 over august and september is pro- jected to expand at a 3 - 1/2 percent average rate , implying growth of 2 - 1/2 percent from june to september .
b PAR 13 the pickup in m3 does not reflect a pro- jected acceleration in credit at depository institutions .
b PAR 13 rather , it re- flects some strength in elements of this aggregate that are not direct funding sources to such institutions -- money market mutual funds and term- eurodollar deposits.5 bank lending is projected to stay subdued as banks continue to exercise extra caution in extending credit , while thrift balance sheets will shrink further , especially as rtc activities pick up over the balance of the quarter .
b PAR 13 even so , the debt of nonfederal sectors 4 .
b PAR 13 the somewhat stronger incoming data for m2 , including revisions to past months , have led the staff to revise its projection for m2 growth consistent with the greenbook forecast to 4 percent for 1990 , from 3 - 1/2 percent in the last bluebook .
b PAR 13 nominal gnp growth for 1990 is now expected to be lower than in the previous greenbook , but its effects on m2 demand are about offset by the slight reduction in short - term nominal interest rates and opportunity costs .
b PAR 13 5 . data revisions , along with faster money fund inflows , have led to an upward revision to projected m3 growth for 1990 - -from 1 - 1/2 to 2 percent . is projected to continue to grow at a 6 percent rate over the third quarter , about in line with nominal income .
b PAR 13 federal debt growth , on the other hand , is expected to balloon to a 14 percent annual rate over the three months , as rtc working capital needs boost federal marketable borrowing to a record $ 68 billion level ( n.s.a . ) .
b PAR 13 total domestic non- financial debt growth as a consequence is projected at 7 - 3/4 percent over the three months , keeping this aggregate around the midpoint of its annual range .

c PAR 15 under alternative c , a considerable backup in short - term rates would appear likely , as a monetary policy tightening would fly in the face of market expectations .
c PAR 15 long - term rates might rise only a little , as the increase in real interest rates would be at least partly offset by a lessening in inflation expectations .
c PAR 15 the moderation in inflation expectations would accompany a further downward adjustment of market participants ' outlook for real economic activity -- as the effects of higher real rates were reinforced by an even more cautious attitude of lenders -- and evidence that the federal reserve was leaning against the price effects of the oil shock .
c PAR 15 the dollar could find renewed strength on foreign exchange markets as interest differentials moved in favor of dollar investments .
c PAR 15 m2 and m3 growth over the third quarter would be restrained to 3 - 1/2 and 2 - 1/4 percent , respectively .
c PAR 15 directive language 


