a PAR 25 under alternative a , the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate could be expected to show through nearly in full to other money market rates , as market participants generally do not antici- pate such an action in the period just ahead .
a PAR 25 this alternative also could spark a bond market rally ; given the market outlook for sluggish economic activity , investors ' inflation concerns probably would not be much inten- sified by the choice of alternative a . the value of the dollar could be expected to weaken on foreign exchange markets in response to the drop in u.s .
a PAR 25 interest rates relative to returns abroad .
a PAR 25 m1 is projected to grow at a 4 percent pace from june to september .
a PAR 25 growth in currency at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over this interval , along with a 3 percent growth rate of total reserves , would imply expansion of the monetary base at a 6 percent rate .
a PAR 26 under alternative a , rates of return on retail deposits , especially small time accounts , may be somewhat more responsive than normal to declines in market rates , considering the already ample avail- ability of retail deposits relative to the flat projected level of deposi- tory credit .
a PAR 26 even so , the public 's opportunity costs of holding m2 bal- ances would be expected to decline enough to stimulate growth in m2 to a 4 - 1/2 percent rate over the june - to - september period .
a PAR 26 credit growth at banks would not be expected to pick up much in response to the decline in short - term rates in current circumstances of diminished willingness to extend certain types of credit .
a PAR 26 thus , an easing of monetary policy would be less likely to work through increased money and credit supplies at intermediaries , and would work more importantly through the movement of rates in securities and foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 26 m3 from june to september would be expected to expand at only a 1 - 1/2 percent rate , placing growth from the fourth - quarter base of its annual range through september at 1 - 1/4 percent .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 8 - 1/4 percent in association with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window starting out at $ 450 million .
b PAR 22 under alternative b , market interest rates probably would vary around current levels .
b PAR 22 the structure of interest rates does not appear to have built in strong convictions of a near - term adjustment to monetary policy , but does contain a hint of a 1/4 percentage point decline in the funds rate by fall .
b PAR 22 this impression could persist for some time , if incoming data conform to the greenbook forecast of continued slow economic growth and no visible change in price trends .
b PAR 22 under these cir- cumstances , the foreign exchange value of the dollar also should remain around recent levels , absent unexpected repercussions of the economic and monetary union in germany or policy moves by other major trading partners .
b PAR 22 both interest and exchange rates could be affected , however , by develop- ments regarding prospective federal borrowing .
b PAR 22 unless rtc activity slows appreciably after midyear , which the staff does not believe likely , trea- sury borrowing could raise federal debt to its current statutory ceiling , possibly as soon as early august , adding uncertainty to the credit markets by potentially disrupting the midquarter refunding .
b PAR 22 the approach of the debt ceiling also could heighten expectations of an imminent budget accord , and intensify speculation on a possible shift in monetary policy .
b PAR 23 growth rates for the monetary aggregates projected to accom- pany the three alternatives are presented in the table below .
b PAR 23 ( the table and charts on the following pages show more detailed data . )
b PAR 23 these growth rates reflect the staff 's assessment that the thrift restructuring and other factors have reduced the path of money growth consistent with any given combination of income and interest rates .
b PAR 23 thus , even under the essentially stable interest rates of alternative b , the staff now foresees m2 increasing at a 3 percent annual rate from june to september , only a little faster than in june , leaving this aggregate 3 - 1/2 percent at an alt .
b PAR 23 c growth from june to september m2 4 - 1/2 3 1 - 1/2 m3 1 - 1/2 1 1/2 m1 5 - 1/2 4 2 - 1/2 growth from qiv'89 to september m2 4 3 - 1/2 3 m1 4 - 1/2 4 3 - 1/2 associated federal funds rate ranges 6 to 10 6 to 10 7 to 11 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 23 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 23 c levels in billions
b PAR 23 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 23 growth rates 3.0 to 7.0 2.5 to 6.51990 target ranges : chart 3 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level -- estimated level sshort - run alteratives -'v , ' " chart 4 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 23 actual level - - estimated level - * short - run alternatives -- " - ,
b PAR 23 7 ' 2.5%- - sa .. mr
b PAR 23 * rr - chart 5 billions of dollars 10 % actual level - -- estimated level ------ growth from fourth quarter short - run altematives ob- ^ ^ chart 6 debt billions of dollars - actual level 9 % - - estimated level - ' projected level 9500i
b PAR 23 i annual rate above its qiv 1989 base .
b PAR 23 5 m2 velocity is projected to climb at a 3 - 3/4 percent annual rate in the third quarter , about the same as in the second quarter .
b PAR 23 owing primarily to the continued rapid pace of rtc activity , m3 is projected to grow at only a 1 percent rate from june to september under alternative b , remaining well below its current range .

c PAR 27 the tightening of monetary policy under alternative c would not accord with the prevailing expectations of investors , and interest rates across the maturity spectrum , along with the exchange value of the dollar , would ratchet higher .
c PAR 27 the rise in longer - term yields could be restrained by concerns about the resilience of economic activity , espe- cially given the likelihood of some further tightening of credit avail- ability , as well as by the implied lessening of future inflationary pres- sures .
c PAR 27 the associated widening of opportunity costs , as market interest rates rise relative to deposit and money fund rates , would serve to damp m2 to a 1 - 1/2 percent rate of growth over the june - to - september period , dropping that aggregate to around the lower end of its current range .
c PAR 27 m3 would be anticipated to slow to only a 1/2 percent pace over these months .
c PAR 27 directive language 


