a SENT -- ( 11 ) implementing alternative a through a reduction in borrowing would bring the funds rate below the discount rate and borrowing to fric- tional levels .
a SENT -- funds rate volatility would tend to increase a bit if borrowing were reduced to implement alternative a . in any case , over the intermeet- ing period the desk 's task will be complicated by uncertainties both about year - end effects on required and excess reserve demands and about the impact of the reserve requirement change on demands for excess reserves .
a SENT -- the potential for volatility in the funds rate under alternative a would be reduced a little if instead this alternative were implemented through a 1/2 percentage point cut in the discount rate , leaving a larger cushion of borrowing .
a PAR 13 with the easing of the funds rate by 1/2 percentage point under alternative a , other short - term market rates would decline , but by smaller amounts given current market expectations .
a PAR 13 however , the prime rate likely would be reduced , perhaps promptly , by the full 1/2 percentage point .
a PAR 13 the policy easing also might make lenders a bit more willing to extend credit to marginal borrowers , in part as lower interest rates im- prove the economic outlook and borrowers ' prospective creditworthiness .
a PAR 13 bond yields would continue to move lower , but the extent of the rally would depend in part on the reaction in foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 13 the dollar would decline , especially if investors saw the action , coming on the heels of recent easing moves , as evidence of an inclination toward a more aggressive easing posture by the federal reserve .
a PAR 13 the reaction of foreign exchange and other financial markets to alternative a may depend on how it is implemented .
a PAR 13 however , any tendency for a discount rate cut to have an independent announcement effect would be muted in the current circumstances , given perceptions that for technical reasons an easing of this magnitude would necessarily involve a discount rate cut .
a PAR 18 selection of alternative a would provide added impetus to m2 growth but would affect m3 and credit expansion only a little , at least over the next few months .
a PAR 18 opportunity costs on retail balances would fall further , lifting m2 growth to a projected 5 percent rate over the november to march period .
a PAR 18 by march , m2 would be near the midpoint of the pro- visional range for next year .
a PAR 18 with banks slightly more inclined to lend , m3 growth would be stimulated a bit : its expected 1 percent rate of 7 .
a PAR 18 at the end of the third quarter , a sizable decline in large time deposits was accompanied by a surge in net eurodollar borrowing .
a PAR 18 the average level of domestic deposits at the ends of the third and fourth quarters of 1990 determine the base for the assessment of the deposit insurance premium over the first half of 1991 .
a PAR 18 growth from november to march would place this aggregate at the lower bound of its tentative annual range .
a PAR 18 directive language 

b PAR 12 securities markets appear to be anticipating another small policy adjustment at some point in the coming intermeeting period , though not necessarily immediately after the meeting .
b PAR 12 hence , market interest and exchange rates would not react much to the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative b , at least initially .
b PAR 12 moreover , expectations of further ease likely would be sustained if incoming data confirm the markets ' impression of a significant economic downturn .
b PAR 12 although borrowers and lenders 5 . a more moderate policy easing that involved a 1/2 percentage point cut in the discount rate to 6 - 1/2 percent , combined with an initial borrowing specification of $ 125 million , could lessen a bit further the potential volatility of the funds rate , at least once the market recog- nized the new intended trading area of 7 percent for the funds rate .
b PAR 12 in this case , the funds rate would decline 1/4 percentage point , but its spread over the discount rate would return to 1/2 percentage point .
b PAR 12 already have made substantial adjustments to their portfolios in anticipa- tion of year - end pressures , strains still could emerge at times in coming weeks .
b PAR 12 in january , with the threat of year - end pressures and portfolio adjustments behind them , banks may reduce the prime rate . were current reserve conditions to be maintained through the intermeeting period in the face of weak economic data , markets might begin to reassess the federal reserve 's intentions , and interest and exchange rates might edge higher-- although favorable effects on inflation expectations would work to moder- ate any such rise in bond rates .
b PAR 15 in the staff 's judgment , m2 growth under the unchanged funds rate of alternative b will pick up to a 3 - 1/2 percent pace from november to march , placing the aggregate just above the lower bound of the cone associated with the committee 's provisional growth range of 2 - 1/2 to alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 15 b levels in billions 1990 october 1991 january monthly growth rates
b PAR 15 1990 october
b PAR 15 1991 january quarterly ave .
b PAR 15 growth rates 1990 q1 1991 q1 1990 target ranges :
b PAR 15 1991 target ranges :
b PAR 15 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 15 the range for 1991 is the tentative range adopted at the july meeting .
b PAR 15 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 s actual level short - run alternatives the rnge for 1991
b PAR 15 sb he tmntaib range adptd
b PAR 15 a he july mnweng , billions of dollars
b PAR 15 chart 3 billions of dollars , f% actual level ------- growth from 1989:04 short - run alternatives
b PAR 15 a - e -ac a - chart 4 debt billions of dollars
b PAR 15 actual level projected level
b PAR 15 the rage for 1991 is te len rang adopted at
b PAR 15 the dy me*ng .
b PAR 15 j j ason d 6 - 1/2 percent for 1991 .
b PAR 15 stronger growth of nominal income should bol-
b PAR 15 ster money balances in the first quarter .
b PAR 15 in addition , money market mutual funds and , to a lesser extent , retail deposits are expected to respond to the drop in their opportunity costs brought about by the de- clines in short - term market rates over recent months .
b PAR 15 even so , m2 growth on a quarterly average basis would edge up to only a 2 - 3/4 percent rate in the first quarter , which would be below the projected pace of nominal gnp and represent a reversal of the decline in m2 velocity experienced this quarter .
b PAR 16 some of the acceleration in m2 under alternative b would show through to m3 .
b PAR 16 nonetheless , m3 expansion would be held to a 1/2 percent rate from november to march , displaying only slightly less weak- ness than in recent months and coming in below the one percent lower bound of the committee 's provisional growth range for 1991 .
b PAR 16 a variety of fac- tors are expected to continue to limit growth in this aggregate .
b PAR 16 thrift credit is projected to contract further ; bank credit expansion , though likely to pick up after the turn of the year , should remain subdued , espe- cially if further losses in loan portfolios continue to put pressure on capital positions .
b PAR 16 in the near term , banks are likely to use some of the reserve balances released by the drop in reserve requirements to pay down managed liabilities and shrink their footings .
b PAR 16 for a time , this scale effect should dominate the longer - term impact of the reduced reserve cost of issuing nonpersonal time deposits and borrowing from own foreign branches .
b PAR 16 finally , the hike in the insurance premium from 12 to 19 - 1/2 6 .
b PAR 16 m1 growth of 4 percent is foreseen from november to march .
b PAR 16 with projected growth rates of 6 percent for currency and 3 percent for transaction deposits over the four months , the implied growth of the monetary base would be 5 percent .
b PAR 16 basis points on domestic deposits at commercial banks may marginally deter bank intermediation and encourage a shifting of large time deposits into term rps or offshore .
b PAR 16 of course , m3 would be little affected on net by such shifting since term rps and term eurodollars owned by u.s .
b PAR 16 residents are included in m3 .



