a PAR 10 an immediate policy easing under alternative a that brought the federal funds rate down to 7 - 3/4 percent would run counter to market sentiment and ripple through the money market , with other short - term rates likely declining a similar amount .
a PAR 10 lower short - term funding costs also should engender reductions in lending rates on business and consumer credit .
a PAR 10 the exchange value of the dollar would tend to adjust downward .
a PAR 10 a dollar depreciation might combine with prospects for somewhat stronger u.s .
a PAR 10 economic activity to heighten domestic inflationary expectations , limiting the declines in longer - term yields .
a SENT -- ( 15 ) under the less restrictive policy posture of alternative a , m2 and m3 growth from march to june would be boosted to 7 and 4 - 1/2 per- cent rates , respectively .

b SENT -- under alternative b , maintaining federal funds trading around 8 - 1/4 percent is anticipated to be associated with about $ 150 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing , the assumption used since the last fomc meeting in constructing reserve paths .
b PAR 9 financial market participants evidently expect no monetary policy change in the near term , meaning that a funds rate around the 8 - 1/4 percent level of alternative b is built into the current structure of market interest rates .
b PAR 9 even so , alternative b would involve some easing in treasury bill rates from most recent levels to the extent that supply pressures in the market dissipate .
b PAR 9 that will depend to some extent on the pace of rtc activity and associated working capital needs .
b PAR 9 greater rtc alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions monthly growth rates may 6.9 6.0 5.1 4.4 4.0 3.6 5.9 4.5 3.1 " june 7.5 6.0 4.4 4.9 4.0 3.0 6.7 4.4 2.2 ?
b PAR 9 quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives - - projected level - actual level short - run altemat - - projected lev
b PAR 9 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars 6.5 % ives '
b PAR 9 el 4300 , -''sss - 4250
b PAR 9 * - 4100s- 42504200 s• 2.5%- 4150
b PAR 9 4050 billions of dollars actual level ------ growth from fourth quarter - - projected level 10 % d , .
b PAR 9 * ' . , -5 % chart 3 actual level sprojected level billions of dollars , u10250
b PAR 9 9500 funding needs would be met in the first instance by a drawdown in treasury cash balances -- since some rtc working capital usage has already been financed -- and only subsequently by augmenting treasury borrowing .
b PAR 9 quently , we are projecting a substantial paydown in treasury bills over the intermeeting period after the tax date .
b PAR 9 moreover , central bank sales of treasury securities to fund their dollar sales in foreign exchange markets could drop off at any time should intervention activity decline .
b PAR 9 the staff anticipates relative stability in the exchange value of the dollar under alternative b . decisions regarding economic and monetary union of east and west germany , which are to be made by the end of april , could affect the dollar 's value against the mark .
b PAR 9 if those decisions heighten expectations of german inflation , the dollar could continue under upward pressure against the mark ; increases in german interest rates owing solely to such expectations would not necessarily affect real and nominal interest rates in the united states .
b PAR 9 bond prices in the u.s . will remain most sensitive to prospects for u.s . economic growth and inflation .
b PAR 9 incoming data on prices and the economy about in line with staff expecta- tions should not change market expectations that federal reserve policy will remain essentially unchanged for a time , and consequently would be associated with only minor movements in bond yields .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , m2 growth from march to june is pro- jected at a 6 percent annual rate -- about 1/2 percentage point below its average growth rate over the first three months of the year .
b PAR 12 nominal income growth is projected to slow next quarter .
b PAR 12 opportunity costs may narrow only a little from recently elevated levels .
b PAR 12 thrifts are discour- aging deposit inflows as part of their effort to trim balance sheets ; many of these deposits are going to banks instead , and these deposit shifts would be augmented as the rtc steps up the rate at which it resolves institutions .
b PAR 12 banks may be unwilling , however , to expand their assets in line with deposit inflows , given concerns about loan quality and the capital requirements associated with a pickup in asset growth .
b PAR 12 in such circumstances , offering rates on retail deposits are likely to stay some-
b PAR 12 what depressed relative to treasury bill rates .
b PAR 12 with opportunity costs little changed , velocity probably will be about flat in the second quar- ter.3 m1 is expected to continue expanding at a 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate from march to june , as a slowing of currency growth is offset by a little faster inflow to transactions deposits than over the first quar- ter.4 
b PAR 13 m3 growth under alternative b is projected at a 4 percent pace , somewhat higher than the december - to - march rate of advance .
b PAR 13 the acceleration primarily owes to some pickup in bank credit growth from 6 - 1/2 percent over the first quarter to around a 7 - 1/4 percent pace , reflecting a resumption of business lending ; as a consequence , the decline in large time deposits at commercial banks should cease .
b PAR 13 in addition , the runoff of the term eurodollar component of this aggregate is likely to ebb .
b PAR 13 greater rtc activity would tend to hold down m3 growth to the extent that such activity necessitated additional government borrowing ; the expenditure of funds previously borrowed by the treasury would not affect m3 because such funds are already on deposit at commercial banks .
b PAR 13 thrifts are assumed to continue trimming their large time deposits at about the 25 percent annual rate of the first quarter , while their runoffs of term rps abate a bit because the outstanding stock of these liabilities has fallen to a rather low level .
b PAR 13 3 . revisions to the staff greenbook forecast for 1990 have counter- vailing effects on projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates for the year as a whole .
b PAR 13 projected m2 and m3 growth remains unchanged at 6 - 1/2 and 4 percent , respectively , as the impact of stronger gnp growth is about offset by higher nominal interest rates .
b PAR 13 4 . owing to the outlook for slower currency growth , the monetary base is projected to record a 4 - 3/4 percent annual rate of change from march to june , compared with the 10 percent increase from december to march .

c SENT -- while the 8 - 3/4 percent funds rate of alternative c reflects borrowing of $ 200 million . predicting the rela- tionship between the federal funds rate and discount window borrowing remains difficult , however , justifying continued flexibility in the desk 's approach to the borrowing objective .
c PAR 11 the rise in the federal funds rate under alternative c to 8 - 3/4 percent also would surprise market participants , inducing an across- the - board increase of comparable size in other short - term rates .
c PAR 11 recent upward pressure on the exchange value of the dollar would continue .
c PAR 11 bond yields would tend to rise , though with inflation expectations lessened by the monetary policy tightening , the increases could be muted .
c PAR 11 the addi- tional policy restraint might reinforce current concerns about default risk on some loan categories , and would tend to encourage a further firm- ing in credit standards , implying additional restraint on economic activity .
c SENT -- under the tighter financial market conditions of alternative c , m2 and m3 growth from march to june likely would slow to 5 and 3 - 1/2 percent rates , respectively .

