a SENT -- under alternative a , federal funds would trade around 5 - 1/4 percent ; this level could be achieved either by a reduction in the initial borrowing specification to $ 175 million together with the current 5 - 1/2 percent discount rate , or by a cut in the discount rate to 5 percent combined with the $ 225 million initial borrowing specification .
a PAR 9 money growth projections under the two alternatives are shown below .
a PAR 9 ( more detailed data appear in the table and charts on the following pages . )
a PAR 9 under both alternatives , the monetary aggregates are expected to strengthen in may and june from their reduced april rates , keeping m2 and m3 in the middle portions of their annual ranges through midyear .
a PAR 9 the projected pickup in m2 growth primarily reflects the unwind- ing of apparently tax - related weakness in april .
a PAR 9 the effects of previous 5 .
a PAR 9 under any of these policy approaches , further increases in seasonal borrowing are likely to necessitate upward technical adjustments to the borrowing assumption over the intermeeting period .
a PAR 9 declines in interest rates continue to contribute to the growth of m2 relative to income .
a PAR 9 however , largely because of the downward revisions to forecasts for nominal income in the second quarter , we now expect m2 growth over march to june to fall short of the pace specified in the last directive .
a PAR 9 this shortfall occurs despite the slight easing in money mar- ket rates at the end of april and persists even with the further drop in rates under alternative a .
a PAR 9 the march - to - june growth projected for m3 also has been lowered since the last meeting , but in this case the reduction results entirely from the aggregate 's unexpected weakness in april .
a PAR 9 jected expansion of m3 in may and june is about the same as in the last bluebook , as additional issuance of cds by u.s .
a PAR 9 branches and agencies of foreign banks offsets the effect of slower growth in m2 and depository credit .
a PAR 9 b growth from march to june m2 4 - 1/2 4 m3 2 - 1/4 2 ml 3 - 3/4 3 implied growth from 1990:q4 to june m2 4 - 3/4
a PAR 9 4 - 1/2 m3 3 - 1/2 3 - 1/2 m1 5 - 3/4
a PAR 9 5 - 1/2 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
a PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
a PAR 9 b levels in billions
a PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
a PAR 9 growth rates 2.5 to 6.5 1.0 to 5.01991 target ranges :
a PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billlons of dollars actual level short - run alternatives chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level sshort - run aternatives ^ ô ' 1 % -j 4150 -i
a PAR 9 4100 chart 3 billions of dollars actual level ------ growth from fourth quarter , -'10 % i
a PAR 9 . . . . . . . . . .
a PAR 9 0 % chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level -i 11000 4.5 % 
a PAR 13 because the immediate 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate under alternative a would come as a surprise to finan- cial market participants , most of it would be passed through to other short - term market interest rates , and the prime rate likely would be reduced again .
a PAR 13 bond yields are likely to decline in response , especially if this action were seen as signalling the federal reserve 's assessment that the economic situation was worsening or price pressures were sub- stantially reduced .
a PAR 13 however , with this easing coming on the heels of the recent discount rate reduction , alternative a would be seen as especially aggressive and could arouse concerns about the expected downward trajec- tory for inflation unless softness in the economy or prices were confirmed by subsequent data .
a PAR 13 with quality spreads already having narrowed con- siderably , any further decline in private interest rates relative to trea- sury yields is likely to be quite limited .
a PAR 13 the exchange value of the dollar would tend to adjust downward ; this movement would be limited to the extent the upward pressure on foreign currencies , against a backdrop of a general softening in economic performance abroad , occasioned a relaxation of monetary policy in some major trading partners .
a SENT -- ( 14 ) the lower market rates of alternative a would further en- hance the attractiveness of retail deposits , likely boosting the average growth of m2 in may and june to around a 5 - 1/2 percent rate , and to 4 - 1/2 percent from march to june .

b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would remain in the 5 - 3/4 percent area , in association with an initial specification for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 225 million -- an increase of $ 25 million from the current level to take account of the likely rise of sea- sonal borrowing .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , m2 is expected to strengthen to a 4 - 3/4 percent pace in may and june .
b PAR 10 much of the acceleration in m2 is likely to be concentrated in its transaction component .
b PAR 10 m1 should resume growing at nearly a 5 percent pace over the two months , as demand deposits and ocds recover from their tax - related weakness and are buttressed later in the quarter by the expected strengthening in nominal income .
b PAR 10 moreover , currency expansion is expected to reemerge with the waning of reflows from the persian gulf region .
b PAR 10 the nontransaction component of m2 also is likely to accelerate ; money funds should rebound a bit , and , with a smaller amount thought to be maturing , the runoff of retail time deposits probably will abate from the unusually rapid pace of april .
b PAR 10 the 4 percent growth of m2 from march to june under alternative b implies a quarterly average growth rate of 5 percent ; this exceeds the staff 's projected growth of nominal gnp by 2 percentage points , producing a third straight quarter of m2 velocity decline .
b PAR 10 still , the projected m2 growth remains below that forecast by the staff 's econometric model , but , at less than a percentage point , the model overprediction would be considerably smaller than in the last three quarters .
b PAR 10 some lessening of concerns about the soundness of depositories and the virtual cessation of rtc activity and associated disruptions to deposit flows may be the main factors behind the closer alignment of second - quarter m2 growth with historical patterns .
b PAR 11 the growth of m3 under alternative b is seen as picking up to a 3 percent average pace in may and june , lifting its march - to - june 6 .
b PAR 11 depositor confidence , however , might again erode should proposals to limit deposit insurance progress through congress , or should bank failures pick up .
b PAR 11 in the event of losses to uninsured depositors , any effect of these failures on m3 could be amplified .
b PAR 11 rate of change to 2 percent .
b PAR 11 in addition to heavier projected inflows to m2 deposits , rapid issuance of yankee cds seems to be resuming .
b PAR 11 more , the paydown by domestic banks of large time deposits , which was especially pronounced in april , should abate over may and june .
b PAR 11 under- lying depository financing needs should increase as a turnaround in lend- ing to businesses and households produces some expansion in bank credit in the last two months of the quarter .
b PAR 11 nevertheless , growth in overall private nonfinancial debt is expected to remain quite damped , in line with sluggish spending and reflecting the effects of continuing restraint on credit availability and still - elevated loan rates at depository institutions .
b PAR 11 in the federal sector , debt growth is expected to surge over the balance of the second quarter , in part to fund enlarged rtc payouts .
b PAR 11 even so , total domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to grow at only a 4 - 1/2 percent rate from march to june , putting expansion from its fourth - quarter base close to the lower bound of the aggregate 's monitoring range .
b PAR 12 the current structure of interest rates appears to embody market expectations of no further monetary policy move in the near term , so implementation of alternative b is unlikely to engender any immediate reaction in domestic financial or foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 12 over the intermeeting period , market participants no doubt will encounter mixed evidence about the outlook , as is typical in a period near a turning 7 .
b PAR 12 the likely gearing up of rtc activity as the quarter comes to a close will shift assets and associated funding needs from thrifts to the federal government and will accelerate the decline of large time deposits at thrifts , but the pickup is coming so late in the quarter that the effects on monthly m3 will not be felt until july .
b PAR 12 with expectations somewhat fragile , there may be frequent adjust- ments to financial asset prices in the face of these mixed signals .
b PAR 12 markets also may be particularly sensitive to clues about the federal reserve 's policy strategy around the cycle trough ; the unchanged policy stance of alternative b -- if maintained through the intermeeting period in the absence of clear evidence of a trough -- could be seen as incorporating a more cautious policy approach to assuring an upturn .


