a SENT -- under alternative a , federal funds would tend to trade around 4 - 3/4 percent , which could be fostered either by lowering the borrowing specification by $ 50 million to $ 275 million or by lowering the discount rate by a further 1/2 point to 4 - 1/2 percent .
a SENT -- the latter approach to alternative a would preserve the present spread of the funds rate over the discount rate and thus the current degree of cushioning of transitory shocks to the supply and demand for reserves .
a PAR 9 the size and timing of the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate of alternative a would tend to catch financial markets unawares , inducing almost as large a drop in other short - term interest rates .
a PAR 9 in the context of weak money growth , such an easing might be seen as signifying federal reserve concern that financial conditions , including credit availability , were not consistent with a moderate expansion of the economy .
a PAR 9 in these circumstances , long - term rates would be likely to drop , at least initially , in normal propor- tion to the decline in short - term rates .
a PAR 9 should subsequent data suggest , however , that the recovery is already on track and inflation progress only moderate , long - term rates might back up a bit , as the lower level of short - term rates appeared unsustainable .
a PAR 9 the value of the dollar on exchange markets would ratchet lower in response to the downward movement of interest rates in the united states relative to those abroad .
a SENT -- this reasoning yields projected m2 growth over the next three months under alternative a of 4 percent at an annual rate .

b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would be expected to remain centered on 5 - 1/4 percent , in as- sociation with an initial specification for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 325 million.7
b PAR 8 market participants in recent days appear to have built in some prospects for additional easing of monetary policy in the period ahead .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , the unchanged federal funds rate associ- ated with alternative b is unlikely to engender a marked backup in yields in financial markets over the intermeeting period , so long as incoming nonfinancial and monetary data are mixed , as would be the case under the staff 's forecast .
b PAR 8 under those circumstances , the re- cently lower exchange value of the dollar , too , probably will be sustained .
b PAR 8 with elevated federal borrowing needs over the intermeet- ing period continuing to place upward pressure on treasury yields , rate spreads on private instruments over treasury securities also would be anticipated to stay relatively narrow .
b PAR 8 7 . over the intermeeting period , seasonal borrowing would be expected to diminish , necessitating downward technical adjustments to the borrowing specification .
b PAR 12 under the unchanged interest rates of alternative b , m2 growth is projected to pick up to a 3 percent rate over the last three months of the year , leaving this aggregate at the lower bound of its alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 12 b levels in billions
b PAR 12 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 12 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives 6.5 % 2.5 % i 1990
b PAR 12 i1992 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level -
b PAR 12 ------ growth from fourth quarter short - run alternatives , ' 10 % -i 910 -i 890 , s " 5 % chart 4 debt billions of dollars -ctual level projected level 8.5 % 4.5 % long - run range .
b PAR 12 m1 is expected to grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent pace from september to december , producing a similar growth rate on a quarterly average basis and another decline in m1 velocity in reflec- tion of the recent drop in its opportunity costs.9   on a quarterly average basis , a 2 - 1/4 percent rate of m2 growth would be implied for the year 's final quarter , up from the slight decline posted in the third quarter .
b PAR 12 the gain in the velocity of m2 in the fourth quarter-- given the staff 's projection of 6 percent growth for nominal gnp-- would be somewhat below the estimated 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate of increase in v2 estimated for the third quarter .
b PAR 12 the implied 3 - 1/2 percentage point error in the staff 's standard econometric model for m2 growth would be about half the size of the record miss of the third quarter .
b PAR 13 under alternative b , growth in m3 from september to december is expected to strengthen to a 1 - 1/2 percent annual rate .
b PAR 13 the runoff of commercial bank loans posted over the third quarter is forecast to cease over the fourth quarter .
b PAR 13 with the strengthening of bank capital positions progressing , and the default risk on some loan applicants tempered by improving income prospects , bank lending terms and conditions should remain stable and perhaps even start to ease a 8 .
b PAR 13 we have made no allowance for unusual runoffs of time deposits in october , when , according to news stories , there will be a bulge in maturing retail cds .
b PAR 13 the staff has no data to assess whether such a bulge will indeed occur .
b PAR 13 seasonally adjusted time deposits have not exhibited unusual volatility in past octobers relative to the ad- jacent months , nor did they last april when another bulge was said to be in train and time deposit rates had already decreased substan- tially .
b PAR 13 total reserves are projected to grow at an 8 percent annual rate from september to december .
b PAR 13 combined with a 7 percent growth of currency , the monetary base is anticipated to expand at a 7 percent annual rate .
b PAR 13 little . bank funding needs would be bolstered , cutting into the paydown of their managed liabilities .
b PAR 13 the contraction of thrift balance sheets , however , is likely to continue unabated in the fourth quarter , in association with sustained heavy rtc activity , assuming congressional appropriation of requested funding .
b PAR 13 large time deposits would still run off , albeit at a slower pace than over recent months , and m3 expansion would continue to be lower than growth of m2 .
b PAR 14 the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors under alternative b is projected to grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent annual rate from august to december , somewhat faster than the pace now estimated over july and august .
b PAR 14 the implied growth from the fourth quarter of 1990 of 5 - 1/4 percent to december would move this aggregate further into its 4 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 percent annual monitoring range .
b PAR 14 with the pickup in gnp expansion , nonfederal debt growth is projected to rise to around a 4 percent rate over the last four months of this year .
b PAR 14 the strengthening is expected in a number of components , though growth continues to be relatively sluggish , reflecting persisting credit supply restraint and high spreads of lending over borrowing rates at intermediaries .
b PAR 14 in the household sector , home mortgage debt growth strengthens a little through year - end in the forecast , as the recovery in housing sales remains subdued .
b PAR 14 consumer credit is expected to continue to contract , albeit at a slower rate .
b PAR 14 for businesses , issuance of long - term debt should be sustained if intermediate- and longer - term interest rates remain around current levels , while business loans at banks and commercial paper outstanding should fall noticeably less rapidly as inventory liquidation abates .


