a SENT -- ( 18 ) as noted above , the provisional ranges of alternative a would seem to be broadly consistent the money and debt paths embodied in the staff economic forecast .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the funds rate would decline to the area of 5 - 3/4 percent .
a SENT -- an alternative approach to achieving the money market conditions of alternative a would be through another half - point cut in the discount rate
a SENT -- under alternative a , m2 still would be in the lower portion of its range by march , but would be on a trajectory to move around the midpoint by june .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds trading would be expected to average around 6 - 1/4 percent , with the assumption for ad- justment plus seasonal borrowing remaining at $ 100 million .
b PAR 21 following the recent series of policy moves by the federal reserve , market participants probably are not anticipating much if any further easing in the near term .
b PAR 21 consequently , maintenance of current reserve market conditions under alternative b likely would have relatively little impact on interest rates .
b PAR 21 the dollar would remain around the lower levels reached recently , though subject to an unusual extent to political and military developments .
b PAR 21 over a more extended period , however , long- term interest rates could back up a bit if information suggesting some revitalization of the economy , as in the staff forecast , led market par- ticipants to conclude that the easing of monetary policy had run its course for the current business cycle .

c PAR 14 the table below presents three alternative sets of ranges for growth of money and debt over 1991 .
c PAR 14 ( appendix b gives the ranges and outcomes for money and debt growth since 1979 . )
c PAR 14 alternative
c PAR 14 i represents the provisional ranges selected by the committee last july ; the staff projections for m2 and debt growth consistent with the greenbook forecast fall at the midpoint of these ranges .
c PAR 14 the staff projection of m3 , how- ever , is lower in the provisional range .
c PAR 14 alternative
c PAR 14 ii allows for a somewhat tighter policy stance by reducing the ranges uniformly by 1/2 percentage point .
c PAR 14 this alternative could be interpreted as more consis- tent with the 1 percentage point slower m2 growth of longer - run strategy ii in the preceding section .
c PAR 14 i ( tentative memo : staff ranges ) alt .
c PAR 14 iii forecast growth from qiv ' 90 to qiv ' 91 m2 2 - 1/2 to 2 to 6 3 to 7 * 4 - 1/2 6 - 1/2 m3 1 to 5
c PAR 14 * 1/2 to 1 - 1/2 to 2 4 - 1/2 5 - 1/2 debt 4 - 1/2 to 4 to 8 5 to 9 * 6 - 1/2 8 - 1/2 memo : m1 5 nominal gnp 6 range used for qiv ' 89 to qiv ' 90 .
c PAR 19 this alternative would seem most appropriate if the committee were primarily concerned about the risk of a deep and sustained recession , especially if that risk were seen to arise from disruptions to the credit intermediation process and the associated shortfall in m2 last year .
c PAR 19 raising the lower bounds would suggest a greater willingness to ease policy in the event that slow m2 and m3 growth were to continue .
c PAR 19 the upper bounds would ensure more scope for a pickup in money growth in response to any additional policy easing that may be warranted by economic developments .
c PAR 19 and , as the economy recovers this year , the higher ranges would allow more scope before policy tightening were called for in case money growth should return to a more normal relationship with movements in income and oppor- tunity costs , reversing the largely inexplicable weakness of recent quarters .
c PAR 19 the increases in all the ranges from their tentative specifica- tion last july could raise questions about federal reserve resolve to contain inflation , though such questioning would be muted in the context of a recession .
c PAR 19 short - run policy alternatives 

