a SENT -- however , the discount window becomes a marginally less effective buffer to unpredictable changes in reserve supply or demand , and the federal funds rate likely would be a little more volatile than if alternative a were achieved through a discount rate cut .
a PAR 10 under alternative a , money market rates would likely decrease by close to the full amount of the reduction in the federal funds rate , and the prime rate would be lowered 1/2 percentage point , given its already wide margin over funding costs .
a PAR 10 the dollar would decline promptly and substantially .
a PAR 10 the drop in interest rates and the dollar could be seen by market participants as adding further stimulus at a time when a rebound in the economy already is expected .
a PAR 10 in such circumstances , bond rates might not decline by much , and could even back up .
a PAR 10 a reversal of any adverse reaction would occur , however , if incoming data began to con- firm that the easing had correctly anticipated weaker money growth , more favorable trends in prices , or a substantial further shortfall in economic activity .
a PAR 17 under alternative a , m2 would strengthen to a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over the march - to - june period .
a PAR 17 the pickup would be concentrated in retail liquid accounts as their opportunity costs fell further .
a PAR 17 by june , this aggregate would be well into the upper half of its annual range .
a PAR 17 m3 would expand at a 4 percent rate over this period , buoyed by larger inflows to money funds and by some spillover of the strength in m2 .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 6 percent and would be associated with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing initially of $ 125 million .
b PAR 9 the structure of market interest rates does not now appear to incorporate expectations of any further easing in monetary policy in the weeks ahead ; thus under alternative b , short - term interest rates are unlikely to change substantially , though they may edge lower .
b PAR 9 private rates should slip off with the passing of quarter - end , and bills could well benefit from steeper reductions in outstanding supplies after the april tax date .
b PAR 9 the greenbook forecast implies some further unwinding of the recent sharp rise in the dollar under the unchanged policy of alternative b . still , with interest rate differentials now more favorable to dollar assets , the dollar should remain well above its february lows .
b PAR 9 longer - term securities markets are likely to continue to be quite sensi- tive to data about developments in the real economy over the intermeeting period , as investors search for indications as to whether consumer and business responses to the end of the war are helping to propel a turn- around in the economy .
b PAR 9 bond yields already seem to have built in some rebound in the economy , judging by their levels relative to inflation expectations and to short - term rates .
b PAR 9 thus , they might not rise much , if at all , even should incoming information confirm that the economy was reaching a trough .
b PAR 14 on a quarterly average basis , m2 under alternative b would expand at a 6 percent annual rate in the second quarter , a shade faster than nominal gnp .
b PAR 14 expansion at this rate would be a bit higher than pre- dicted by the staff money demand models , implying a partial makeup of the shortfall of recent quarters .
b PAR 14 the projection thus assumes a continuation of the very recent experience , in which some of the unusual factors that 5 . growth rates for individual months are likely to be influenced by tax payments this year .
b PAR 14 reflecting weakness in income last year , non- withheld tax payments due by april 15 could well fall short of those embedded in the seasonal adjustment factors for monetary aggregates .
b PAR 14 thus , both the buildup of balances prior to that date and the decline in balances after it may be smaller than usual ; in these circumstances , june growth could speed up a little more as the economic recovery fore- seen by the staff shows through to demands for money .
b PAR 14 6 . under alternative b , m1 also is projected to grow at an annual rate of 5 - 1/2 percent over the march - to - june period , as transaction deposits complete their adjustments to interest rate changes , and as currency demand abates with the end of war - related uncertainties .
b PAR 14 the level of demand deposits may be boosted to some degree by greater mortgage refinancing at the reduced levels of rates on fixed - rate mortgages of recent months ; prepayments of securitized mortgages generally are held in demand deposits for some time before being passed through to security holders .
b PAR 14 however , at current interest rates , the effects of this on m1 growth rates are expected to be quite small in coming months .
b PAR 14 growth of the monetary base is expected to slow to a 5 - 1/4 percent rate in the second quarter . had been damping money growth in earlier quarters seem less pronounced .
b PAR 14 the recent recovery in confidence by depositors and investors in the bank-
b PAR 14 ing system is not expected to be reversed , and against this backdrop , constriction of credit supplies by banks should not intensify .
b PAR 14 while opportunity costs will rise as offering rates continue to adjust , they are not expected to become unusually wide in coming months .
b PAR 15 growth in m3 would slow to a 3 - 1/2 percent rate over the march - to - june period in the case of alternative b . to be sure , a modest pickup in bank lending and in the associated needs for funds is antici- pated as credit demands strengthen with spending ; banks should be willing to meet this demand in light of improved prospects for borrowers , enhanced access to capital markets and the recent regulatory initiatives .
b PAR 15 however , rate relationships are expected to be less favorable to money funds .
b PAR 15 in addition , the unusual issuance of large time deposits by u.s . branches of foreign banks related to the reserve requirement cut is assumed to slow in the second quarter .
b PAR 15 rtc resolution activity will pick up over the quar- ter , so that increasing quantities of thrift assets will end up financed by treasury securities instead of m3 .
b PAR 15 even with its slowing , m3 would remain above the midpoint of its annual range by june .
b PAR 15 on a quarterly average basis , m3 would grow at a 4 - 1/2 percent rate in the second quar- ter , once again lagging growth in nominal income .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the federal funds rate would rise to 6 - 1/2 percent and the initial borrow-
c PAR 11 the tightening of policy under alternative c would surprise market participants , coming on the heels of recent easing measures , and bill rates would rise by 1/2 percentage point .
c PAR 11 private money market rates could well rise by more and quality spreads retrace some of their recent declines .
c PAR 11 in particular , a portion of the improvement since year - end in the prices of securities of financial firms likely would be reversed by the unexpected increase in short - term rates .
c PAR 11 increases in bond yields might be limited , however , by a sense that the federal reserve was taking early action to check potential inflation pressures in the coming recov- ery .
c PAR 11 in this environment , the dollar would be subject to further upward pressure .
c PAR 18 the tighter money market conditions of alternative c would slow m2 from the pace of december to march , holding this aggregate down to the midpoint of its 1991 range by june .
c PAR 18 growth over the three months would moderate to a 3 percent rate , with some risk that expansion could be even more damped if there were an appreciable adverse reaction in bank capital and funding markets .
c PAR 18 directive language 

