a PAR 12 the easing contemplated in alternative a exceeds that now envisioned by the markets and thus money market interest rates would decline , perhaps by at least 1/4 percentage point .
a PAR 12 long - term rates , too , would come under some downward pressure , although declines would be muted if earlier market concerns about the stickiness of inflation reemerge at some point .
a PAR 12 the prime rate probably would be lowered 1/2 percentage point , still preserving the recently widened spread over funding costs .
a PAR 12 the dollar likely would fall somewhat on foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 13 m2 is projected to strengthen to a 4 percent rate by december under alternative a and would be entering the new year well into its tentative range .
a PAR 13 enlarged inflows to liquid deposits would boost both its nontransactions and m1 components , as sluggish deposit rates contribute to the attractiveness of such accounts .
a PAR 13 tending to limit the pickup in m2 , though , would be declines in rates on retail cds and money funds in relation to expected returns on capital market instruments ; also , cost pressures might induce more banks to overcome their hesitancy to lower rates on passbook and now accounts , which could prompt established customers to reconsider investment options and move account balances to market instruments .
a PAR 14 under alternative a , m3 would expand at a 1 - 1/4 percent rate in november and december , on a trajectory to begin the new year within its tentative range .
a PAR 14 buoying m3 would be heightened inflows to institution - only money market funds , whose holders would respond to the temporary improvement in their yields relative to those of money market instruments .
a PAR 14 in addition , banks ' needs for m3 liabilities would be raised by a little additional lending .
a PAR 14 improvement in some lending margins and firmer asset values would enhance access of many banks to capital and funding markets and encourage lending to some previously marginal credits .
a PAR 14 nevertheless , the major credit - market beneficiaries of the easing would continue to be those more highly rated credits having ready access to the commercial paper and capital markets .
a PAR 14 directive language : 

b PAR 9 the markets appear to have built in a high probability of a further easing move in the period just ahead , and thus with the unchanged funds rate of alternative b , other market interest rates may tend to firm .
b PAR 9 the reversal in yields would be modest should incoming data on the real economy point more decisively to faltering near - term expansion , as in the staff forecast , engendering the expectation that the next easing has only been postponed .
b PAR 9 any rise in long - term yields also would be mitigated to the extent that indications of a softening in the economic outlook were seen as improving prospects for disinfla- tion .
b PAR 9 however , quality spreads on bank and corporate debt would widen marginally if the market 's economic outlook turns more downbeat .
b PAR 9 if rates do firm a little , the dollar could rise a bit on foreign ex- change markets .
b PAR 9 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 b levels in billions
b PAR 9 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 9 growth rates chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives 6.5 % 3250ii
b PAR 9 i. 2.5 % ^<r chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 9 chart 3 billions of dollars actual level ------- growth from fourth quarter 910 short - run alternatives , ' 10 % - 870i1 i ,
b PAR 9 b - 890 -i- 830 i ii - ' '
b PAR 9 r - i chart 4 debt billions of dollars s actual level sprojected level
b PAR 9 ^<r j f m. a m
b PAR 9 a s o n d j
b PAR 10 m2 would be expected to continue to expand at a 3 per- cent rate in the november and december period under alternative b , the same as expected at the october fomc meeting .
b PAR 10 the negative impact on m2 of the weaker picture for income and spending growth is likely to be about offset by the effects on opportunity costs of the most recent policy easing and by what promises to be a larger than previously expected slowdown in rtc resolution activity in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 10 in october , resolutions fell to a much reduced level that now seems likely to persist through year - end owing to legislative delays , which largely removes one restraining influence on retail deposits .
b PAR 10 growth of demand deposits , however , is expected to fall back from october 's atypical surge and show through to a slowing in m1 growth to a 7 - 1/4 percent pace over november and december.4   in the fourth quarter of this year , m2 expansion at a 2 percent rate on a quarterly average basis would imply a rise in its velocity of 1 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate , down markedly from the 4 - 1/2 percent pace of the third quarter .
b PAR 10 under this policy alternative , m2 would be on a trajectory to enter 1992 only a bit above the lower end of its tentative 1992 growth range of 2 - 1/2 to 6 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 11 m3 under alternative b is seen as continuing to grow at a 1 percent annual rate over november and december , which would mean this aggregate would be entering next year around the bottom of its tentative 1992 range of 1 to 5 percent .
b PAR 11 despite the reduced projection for rtc activity , growth of m3 over the rest of the year is likely to be a little slower than expected at the last fomc meeting .
b PAR 11 the weaker outlook for m3 stems from our anticipation that the 4 . total reserves , currency , and the monetary base all are ex- pected to grow at rates of 8 to 9 percent over the last two months of the year .
b PAR 11 substitution of non - m3 liabilities for yankee cds at branches and agencies of foreign banks surfacing in october probably will persist to some degree .
b PAR 11 projected weakness in bank credit continues to damp the outlook for m3 .
b PAR 11 growth of c&i loans will be anemic owing to continued restraint by banks and , more important , to weak demand .
b PAR 11 business outlays for fixed capital and inventories are likely to be soft , and offerings in bond and equity markets should remain robust , as those firms that can access these markets seek to strengthen balance sheets .
b PAR 11 lending for commercial properties will remain depressed by sustained difficulties in this sector .
b PAR 11 household mort- gage growth will be restrained by the modest recovery in housing activity envisioned in the staff forecast .
b PAR 11 consumer credit should contract further over the remainder of the year , largely reflecting subdued spending on durables .
b PAR 11 in the aggregate , borrowing of domestic nonfederal sectors is expected to remain sluggish through year - end .
b PAR 11 in contrast , federal borrowing will stay brisk to finance a burgeoning deficit .
b PAR 11 overall debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to register a 5 percent rate of expansion over the september - to - december period , placing growth for the year about 1/2 percentage point above the bottom of the fomc 's 4 - 1/2 to 8 - 1/2 percent monitoring range for this aggregate .


