a SENT -- although the former variant of alternative a , which involves funds trading 1/2 percentage point below the discount rate , would be technically possible , it likely would be associated with somewhat greater day - to - day volatility in the funds rate .
a PAR 12 under alternative a , the 1/2 percentage point fall in the funds rate to 4 percent would foster a smaller drop in other short - term interest rates , given the expectations of near - term policy easing al- ready incorporated in current market quotes .
a PAR 12 the three - month treasury bill rate would probably drop to around 4 percent or a bit below .
a PAR 12 the prime rate would be cut by 1/2 percentage point , preserving its current wide spread over funding costs .
a PAR 12 bond yields also probably would decline immediately , though by less than the drop in short rates . unless data were clear - cut in pointing to continuing weakness in the economy , the half - point easing of alternative a -- closely following the quarter - point decline in the funds rate last week -- would be seen as signalling a priority on encouraging a strong recovery .
a PAR 12 as a result , any reduction in inflation expectations would tend to be delayed .
a PAR 12 the exchange value of the dollar likely would extend its recent decline .
a PAR 12 the staff anticipates only modest decreases in foreign interest rates on average over coming months , as cost pressures in germany remain intense and german interest rates put a floor under rates in other ec countries .
a SENT -- even under the lower short - term inter- est rates associated with alternative a , these aggregates probably would remain noticeably below the midpoints of their ranges .
a PAR 17 the lower short - term interest rates associated with alternative a would put m2 on a path that would carry it toward the middle portion of its range later in 1992 .
a PAR 17 this impetus would be supplied in the first months of the year by lower opportunity costs of holding money , and later by the boost to income flows from the decline in interest rates .
a PAR 17 from november to march , m2 is projected to turn in a 3 - 3/4 percent growth rate under alternative a .
a PAR 17 the acceleration would be wholly concentrated in liquid deposits , which should respond to the narrowing of their opportunity costs .
a PAR 17 while deposit rates will be reduced further -- perhaps appreciably at some institutions , if lower market rates jolt them into reassessing long - standing rates on now accounts and passbook savings -- they are not likely to drop enough to eliminate the additional stimulus to money growth of the lower interest rates in alternative a . the induced pickup of inflows to liquid depos- its should more than offset greater outflows from small time deposits and m2-mmmf shares into capital market instruments with increasingly attractive relative returns .
a PAR 17 the faster m2 growth under alternative a will show through to m3 , though in muted form , since bank and thrift credit growth will accelerate by less than m2 in the short run .
a PAR 17 directive language 

b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would continue to center around 4 - 1/2 percent , in association with the allowance for ad- justment plus seasonal borrowing staying at $ 75
b PAR 11 under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b , interest rates may exhibit an initial tendency to firm a little , as market expectations of another modest policy easing in the near term are disappointed .
b PAR 11 if incoming data tend to confirm the staff 's forecast of some slippage in economic activity this winter , however , expectations of policy easings of the scope now contemplated by the market are likely to resurface , restoring the three - month treasury bill rate to around its current quote of 4.15 percent .
b PAR 11 similarly , the exchange value of the 3 .
b PAR 11 on january 9 , the rate on seasonal credit will begin to float with market interest rates , which presumably will affect the demand for such credit .
b PAR 11 in the past , seasonal credit has begun to rise in february .
b PAR 11 dollar could edge higher temporarily , but would probably end up trading around recent lower levels .
b PAR 11 bond yields could well move lower on bal- ance by early next year , as the market 's realization of the extent of economic sluggishness tends to reduce both real rates and inflationary expectations .
b PAR 11 however , any such bond market rally could be derailed if it looks as though a political consensus is emerging on measures for substantial fiscal stimulus ; the effects on bond yields would be especially adverse if it appeared that such measures would undermine the discipline in last year 's budget agreement intended to produce smaller deficits over time .
b PAR 11 announcement of a significant shift in treasury auctions away from longer - term notes and bonds and toward bills would precipitate some decline in bond rates and rise in bill rates -- judging from recent market reactions to such proposals .
b SENT -- under alternative b , both m2 and m3 are projected to be only somewhat above the lower edges of their tenta- tive 1992 target cones in march .
b PAR 15 under alternative b , both m2 and m3 are projected to grow a little more slowly than their average rates over october and november .
b PAR 15 m2 would be expected to post a 3 percent growth rate from november to march , and m3 a 1 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 15 nominal income is projected to grow at about the same rates in the fourth and first quarters , and given the usual lags , the effects on money demand of the declines in interest rates through early december also would be roughly comparable in the two quarters .
b PAR 15 it is the resumption of rtc activity early next year that is responsible for the slight ebbing of m2 growth .
b PAR 15 restraint 4 .
b PAR 15 over the four months through march , m1 is expected to grow at a 10 - 1/2 percent rate , spurred by strong growth of transactions depos- its . required and total reserves are projected to advance at a 16 percent rate , while the monetary base expands at an 8 percent rate .
b PAR 15 this projection has made no allowance for an unwinding of an ongoing reserve avoidance practice involving now accounts and large time deposits , which would be disallowed under a proposed revision to regulation d to be considered by the board in january .
b PAR 15 the staff estimates that closing this loophole could add around 1 percentage point to growth in m1 over the first quarter .
b PAR 15 on m3 growth will be exerted not only by heavier rtc activity but also by a moderation in the expansion of bank credit and funding needs with the fading of special factors that have boosted bank lending recently .


