a PAR 10 the steepening yield curve for maturities out to two years and the pattern of futures market quotations suggest some firming of expectations that policy will tighten beginning later in the year .
a PAR 10 in this context , the unexpected easing of money market conditions of alternative a might cause a market reassessment of the intentions of the federal reserve , leading to a significant downward revision in the expected course of short - term interest rates for the next year or so .
a PAR 10 short - term rates would fall by about the 1/2 percentage point drop in the funds rate , and some intermediate - term rates might drop quite sub- stantially as well .
a PAR 10 effects on expected rates at longer
a PAR 10 horizons are more difficult to judge .
a PAR 10 in the absence of a worsening in the economic outlook , the easing might be interpreted as expansionary -- and poten- tially inflationary -- and short - term rates would be expected to rebound ultimately to even higher levels than market participants now antici- pate ; in this event , bond yields might drop relatively little , if at all .
a PAR 10 if the policy ease came to be seen as needed to counter threats to the expansion , however , arising perhaps from recent upward movements in long - term interest rates and exchange rates , the action could be viewed as promising lower short - term rates for a considerable period , and bond rates would move down appreciably .
a PAR 10 in either case , the dollar would fall .
a PAR 15 under the lower interest rates of alternative a , m2 is expected to grow at a 4 - 1/2 percent rate over the march - to - june period , keeping this aggregate around the midpoint of its 1992 target range .
a PAR 15 the decline in market rates would boost inflows to m1 accounts and money market mutual funds , although the still - lower return on retail balances in m2 relative to those seen on capital market instruments would again encourage some m2 holders to divert balances to the bond and equity markets .
a PAR 15 m3 would continue to grow at a 2 percent rate over the march- to - june period , remaining noticeably above the lower end of its range .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 4 percent in association with an initial bor- rowing allowance of $ 100 million .
b PAR 9 markets appear to anticipate no change in policy over the intermeeting period , and thus interest rates should remain close to current levels under alternative b . nevertheless , there could be a downward bias to rate movements over coming months .
b PAR 9 information on the economy consistent with the greenbook forecast may be somewhat more mixed than recent releases , and with aggregate price measures damped and money growth slower , expectations of future inflation and the likelihood of monetary tightening later in the year could be revised down .
b PAR 9 any tendency toward rate declines might be reinforced if the market became convinced that a fiscal stimulus package had been definitively ruled out .
b PAR 9 under these circumstances , the dollar could reverse some of its recent gains .
b PAR 12 absent an easing of reserve conditions , expansion in m2 and m3 is expected to be slower over the second quarter than over the first .
b PAR 12 projections for money growth over the march - to - june period under all three alternatives are given in the table below and on the table and charts on the following pages .
b PAR 12 under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative b , m2 growth is projected to moderate to a 3 - 1/2 percent rate from march to june .
b PAR 12 leaving this aggregate below the midpoint of its annual range .
b PAR 12 although more rapid income growth would tend to boost demands for m2 at the relatively stable interest rates of this alternative , the lagged effects of the rise in market interest rates over the past few months will be restraining money growth relative to income .
b PAR 12 in addition , a number of the special factors boosting money growth in the alt .
b PAR 12 c growth from march to june m2 4 - 1/2 3 - 1/2
b PAR 12 2 - 1/2 m3 2 1 - 1/2 1 implied growth from 1991:q4 to june m2 4 - 1/4 4
b PAR 12 2 1 - 3/4 1 - 1/2 first quarter will no longer be at work , and in some cases their effects will be reversing .
b PAR 12 one such factor is the shifting of tax refunds into february from later months .
b PAR 12 another involves mortgage refinancing ; such activity already may have leveled out with depressing effects on growth of demand deposits , and refinancing could well decline subsequently in response to the rise in mortgage rates , causing currently swollen demand deposit accounts of mortgage servicers to be drawn down .
b PAR 12 the slowdown in m2 over the march - to - june period would be concentrated in the m1 component , which still is expected to expand at a 11 percent rate.8   given that opportunity costs on its more liquid 7 .
b PAR 12 projections of money growth are especially uncertain at this time of year owing to the massive payment flows associated with the april 15 tax date .
b PAR 12 changes in nonwithheld tax payments this year are projected to be well within the experience of recent years .
b PAR 12 thus , we are assuming that these flows are captured by existing seasonal factors .
b PAR 12 the cut in the reserve requirement on transaction deposits is expected to have little net effect on m1 .
b PAR 12 banks may bid slightly more aggressively for now accounts , but compensating balance requirements , which are usually calculated to incorporate the cost of reserve re- quirements , will be lower .
b PAR 12 the continued strength in transaction components results in projected growth over march to june in required and total reserves at rates of 13 - 1/2 and 14 - 3/4 percent , respectively , after adjusting for the effects of the change in reserve requirements .
b PAR 12 the monetary base would expand at a 7 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 12 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 12 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 12 c levels in billions
b PAR 12 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 12 growth rates 2.5 to 6.5 1.0 to 5.01992 target ranges :
b PAR 12 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars 6.5 % actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 3650 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 12 actual level short - run alternatives chart 3 billions of dollars actual level 15 % 99010 %
b PAR 12 990 - ----- growth from fourth quarter
b PAR 12 • - / -970 -
b PAR 12 ' - 950 / s 5 % , , ..
b PAR 12 ° - 930 s0 %
b PAR 12 1 - - -- i-- -- i-1-
b PAR 12 - -- \-- -- \-\-- ----- - --- 970i
b PAR 12 i --r chart 4 debt billions of dollars - - actual level - --
b PAR 12 estimated level projected level 4.5 % 8.5 % components remain favorable , inflows to nontransaction m2 are expected to continue to be concentrated in savings deposits ( including mmdas ) , while sizable outflows from retail time deposits persist .
b PAR 13 as a consequence of rising opportunity costs and waning effects of special factors , m2 velocity is projected to increase sig- nificantly in the second quarter -- at about a 2 percent annual rate under alternative b . the modest deceleration of m2 embodied in this alterna-
b PAR 13 tive is expected to be consistent with the greenbook forecast of a con- tinued pickup in the economy .
b PAR 13 with credit flows concentrated in longer- term markets , depositories will remain fairly unaggressive bidders for deposits , and households will continue to direct savings to capital market instruments .
b PAR 13 in these circumstances , the staff is forecasting a 1 - 1/2 percent increase in m2 velocity over the four quarters of 1992 under the greenbook forecast , the same change in velocity as was fore- cast in february .
b PAR 13 for the year , m2 now would be expected to increase around 4 percent , a little faster than projected in february in line with stronger projected nominal gdp .
b PAR 14 growth in m3 under alternative b would moderate slightly to a 1 - 1/2 percent pace over the march - to - june period .
b PAR 14 in addition to weaker m2 growth , m3 money funds should be about unchanged over the second quarter under conditions of stable money market rates .
b PAR 14 on the other hand , deposit inflows at banks might firm as their asset growth strengthens a bit . with improving capital positions and better access to funding markets , banks might become a little more willing to hold the loans that they originate , rather than sell them .
b PAR 14 demands for
b PAR 14 commer- cial and industrial loans are likely to strengthen a little , as inven- tory liquidation abates .
b PAR 14 nonetheless , businesses are expected to con- tinue to concentrate much of their financing in bond and equity markets as they repair balance sheets .
b PAR 14 net mortgage borrowing by households is expected to rise , accompanying the recovery in housing activity , with the bulk of these funds coming from the open market through mortgage securities .
b PAR 14 indebtedness of the nonfederal sectors should grow a little faster over the march - to - june period , but , at only a 3 percent annual rate of expansion , will remain quite anemic .
b PAR 14 federal debt , in contrast , will accelerate noticeably , boosting overall debt growth to a 6 percent pace over the second quarter and lifting the debt aggregate to within its 1992 monitoring range at quarter - end .

c PAR 11 the tightening of policy under alternative c would lead to about a 50 basis point rise in money market rates , which likely would be passed through fully to the prime rate .
c PAR 11 long - term rates also would rise and the dollar would firm , especially if the federal reserve 's action were taken as confirming views that a robust expansion was well established with inflationary potential .
c PAR 11 on the other hand , to the extent that market participants saw the early move as improving pros- pects for disinflation or that the action would be reversed quickly because it risked undermining an acceptable economic recovery , effects on bond yields would be limited .
c PAR 16 m2 growth would slacken to a 2 - 1/2 percent rate over the march - to - june period under alternative c , bringing this aggregate ap- preciably below the midpoint of its annual range .
c PAR 16 much of the slowing would be in its m1 component .
c PAR 16 in the context of a somewhat more uncer- tain outlook for the recovery , bankers might remain highly cautious lenders and continue to hold their balance sheets in check ; sluggish bank credit growth and likely runoffs of m3 money funds would imply m3 growth of only 1 percent at an annual rate over the march - to - june period .
c PAR 16 directive language 

