a SENT -- ( seasonal borrowing ordinarily would be expected to edge down in january , but with such borrowing already at a very low level of about $ 20 million , little change is likely over the intermeeting period . ) alternative a incor- porates a 1/2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate .
a PAR 8 the 1/2 percentage point decline in the federal funds rate under alternative a would be passed through fully to other short - term interest rates .
a PAR 8 the three - month treasury bill rate would drop into the 2 - 3/4 percent area , or a bit below , and the prime rate would be reduced to 5 - 1/2 percent .
a PAR 8 market expectations about the trajectory of interest rates over the next few months would be marked down , but anticipations that the easing move might need to be reversed before much time had passed -- especially in the context of possible fiscal stimulus -- would limit declines in longer - term rates .
a PAR 8 the foreign exchange value of the dollar could drop noticeably , although in present circumstances , foreign central banks might ease their own policies somewhat sooner than they are likely to otherwise , muting the dollar 's decline .
a SENT -- ( 13 ) the lower interest rates of alternative a would boost m2 growth well into 1993 , putting this aggregate near the lower end of the current provisional range by march .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent , in association with the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing remaining at $ 50 million .
b PAR 7 in view of the stronger tone of economic data in recent weeks , market participants seem to be anticipating a firming in the stance of monetary policy some time next year , but likely not between now and the early february fomc meeting .
b PAR 7 with an unchanged federal funds rate under alternative b , other private short - term rates will decline over the intermeeting period as remaining year - end pressures unwind .
b PAR 7 apart from year - end effects , rates along the maturity spectrum might tend to drift lower should developments unfold as in the staff forecast ; in these circumstances , expectations of substantial policy tightening in 1993 are likely to fade , albeit slowly , as inflation re- mains subdued and the pace of expansion stays moderate .
b PAR 7 intermediate- and
b PAR 7 longer - term rates may be importantly influenced by new proposals on fiscal policy .
b PAR 7 markets apparently are anticipating some modest fiscal stimulus , but there is considerable uncertainty about the size of any short - term package and the scope and credibility of proposals for longer - term deficit reduction .
b PAR 7 interest rates could also be affected by discussions of other policy measures apparently being considered by the new administration , which also have not been assumed in the staff fore- cast .
b PAR 7 for example , efforts to increase bank lending by relaxing regula- tions , intended to ease the cost and availability of credit to borrowers dependent on banks , might boost some market interest rates if such a relaxation were seen as having a significant impact on spending and as shifting bank portfolios toward loans and away from government securities .
b PAR 7 proposals to put greater emphasis on shorter maturities in treasury debt management , while motivated primarily by possible saving in federal interest expense , may flatten the yield curve a little .
b PAR 12 m3 is expected to be unchanged on balance over the november - to - march period under the reserve market conditions of alternative b , as a decline that appears to be in train in december offsets sluggish growth over the following three months .
b PAR 12 restraint on balance- sheet growth by depository institutions and slack demands for loans at banks and thrifts will continue to stunt the growth of this aggregate .
b PAR 12 around year - end , certain bank liabilities , including large time depos- its , could decline noticeably , as banks seek to minimize deposit in-
b PAR 12 surance charges and capital requirements , but such maneuvers in them- selves should have little effect on growth over the november - to - march period .
b PAR 12 growth would be about 3/4 percentage point below its tenta- tive 1 to 5 percent target range in march .
b SENT -- much of the higher money growth over coming months relative to alternative b would reflect stronger expansion of m1 .
b SENT -- with issuance of managed liabilities weak , growth in m3 would be boosted only slightly as compared with alternative b , and that aggregate would remain below its provisional target range in march .

c SENT -- the 1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative c could be implemented by raising the borrowing allowance by $ 25 million .
c PAR 14 m2 is projected to expand at only a 1 percent rate from november - to - march under alternative c and m3 would decline at a 1/4 percent rate .
c PAR 14 m1 growth would be limited to 4 percent over november - to- march by the higher opportunity costs of demand deposits and now ac- counts under this alternative .
c PAR 14 losses on capital market instruments as long - term rates rise could limit flows into bond and stock mutual funds , cushioning the restraining effect on m2 and m3 .
c PAR 14 still , m2 would be just 1 - 1/4 percent above its fourth - quarter base by march .
c PAR 14 directive language 

