a SENT -- ( 14 )  shown below are two alternatives for money and debt growth in 1992.3 alternative a retains the current ranges for all three aggregates
a PAR 16 this range also might be pre- ferred if recent weakness in m2 were thought to be signalling slower output growth than in the staff forecast -- including a risk to the recovery itself .
a PAR 16 in addition , as noted , attempts to hit the lower end of this range would be more consistent with a strategy that endeavored to make greater progress in reducing unemployment rates than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 16 depending on how it was presented , choice of this alternative could signal that the committee would not be complacent about undershooting its current range ; in these circumstances , pressure to reexamine the system 's stance in reserve markets would be present with growth below the ranges .
a PAR 16 instead , the committee could choose to retain the current range because it was so uncertain about money - income relationships that any change was seen as implying more knowledge of those relationships and commitment to achieving the new range than it felt appropriate .
a PAR 16 in that event , the committee would need to explain that shortfalls from the unchanged range might not warrant policy action .
a PAR 16 actions to return m2 to its alternative a range would tend to move m3 closer to its range ; however , since any easing action to boost m2 growth would have less impact on m3 expansion , there is a greater chance that this aggregate would fail to move into its range .
a PAR 16 ranges for 1993 
a SENT -- in the staff forecast , m3 expansion would stay below the lower end of the alternative a range as rtc and fdic resolutions pick up .
a SENT -- under the easier alternative a , the funds rate would be reduced to 3 - 1/4 percent , placing it 1/4 percentage point below the discount rate , in association with a borrowing assumption of $ 200 million . or this same funds rate could be achieved by keeping a $ 225 million borrowing assumption and reducing the discount rate 1/2 percentage point to 3 percent .
a PAR 22 under alternative a , most of the drop of 50 basis points in the funds rate would be transmitted to other money market interest rates .
a PAR 22 the prime rate would be cut a half percentage point .
a PAR 22 the reaction of bond yields is difficult to anticipate .
a PAR 22 to the extent mar- ket participants saw the easing as warranted by prospective economic weakness , long - term rates would decline further on the policy easing .
a PAR 22 on the other hand , to the degree that the action was interpreted as more aggressive than was justified by economic fundamentals and by the pro- spects for continued disinflation , heightened inflation concerns and an enhanced possibility that a policy tightening may be needed in the not- too - distant future would temper such a decline and could even bring about some increase in nominal bond rates .
a PAR 22 still , the easing would provide some stimulus to economic activity as real long - term yields moved lower and the recent weakening in the exchange value of the dollar was extended .
a SENT -- even under alternative a , m2 would be on a trajectory that would bring it closer to , though still a bit below , its lower bound in the fourth quarter , and m3 also would be expected to remain somewhat below its current range through year - end .

b PAR 15 alternative
b PAR 15 ii would reduce the ranges , encompassing the staff projections for m2 and m3 .
b PAR 15 choice of this alternative would imply the committee 's readiness to tolerate shortfalls of m2 relative to earlier expectations , presumably because in the presence of the unusual 3 . ranges and outcomes for money and credit for years before 1992 are show in appendix a. behavior of money demand such slow growth was considered to be consis- tent with the committee 's desired outcome for spending in 1992 and early 1993 .
b PAR 15 at the same time , this range would permit a substantial accelera- tion of m2 in the event of a quick return to a more normal relationship between m2 holdings and income and interest rates ; indeed , m2 could expand at a 10 percent annual pace between june and december without breaching the upper end of this range .
b PAR 15 still , reducing the ranges , especially if coupled with the choice of ranges for 1993 that were lower than the current 1992 ranges , might also be seen as pointing in the direction of the committee 's intention to make further progress toward price stability .
b PAR 15 although the staff projection for m3 is just within the alternative b range , the chances that this aggregate could fall below the lower end are greater than for m2 , especially in light of the size of the unexpected contraction in this aggregate in recent months .
b PAR 15 by contrast , the alternative b range for debt would be nearly centered on the staff 's expectation for growth of this aggregate this year .
b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would continue to center on 3 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 21 market participants appear to have built into interest and exchange rates some probability of a near - term easing in the stance of monetary policy next week after the fomc meeting and release of june employment data .
b PAR 21 thus , in the near - term , rates would rise somewhat under alternative b . over the course of the third quarter , with infla- tion pressures subdued and the pace of economic expansion moderate , as in the staff forecast , short - term and long - term rates might come back down .
b PAR 21 long - term rates could well end up below current levels , espe- cially if the lack of federal reserve action ultimately contributes to downward adjustments to inflation expectations .
b PAR 21 the exchange value of the dollar would probably average around current levels .
b PAR 25 while m2 under all three alternatives appears likely to resume growth over the june - to - september period , under alternative b this aggregate still is projected to grow at only a 2 percent annual rate .
b PAR 25 the same forces that have been evident in recent years will continue to depress the demand for broad money .
b PAR 25 growth in m2 likely will be damped additionally by runoffs of demand deposits associated with the slowing in the pace of mortgage refinancing .
b PAR 25 partly as a result , m1 growth probably will be held down to a 6 - 1/2 percent annual alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 25 c levels in billions monthly growth rates july 2.3 2.0 1.7 0.7 0.4 0.2 7.3 6.5 5.7 o quarterly ave .
b PAR 25 growth rates 2.5 to 6.5 1.0 to 5.01992 target ranges :
b PAR 25 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives 6.5 % chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars actual level short - run alternatives chart 3 billions of dollars actual level 15 % ------ growth from fourth quarter , ' short - run alternatives
b PAR 25 * a - b 970 i
b PAR 25 j f m a m 930 -- - - -- - - -- - --
b PAR 25 ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - -
b PAR 25 - - 9 * i*i sn
b PAR 25 i870 chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level - - - estimated level sprojected level ^^^^ rate from june to september , about in line with its reduced march - to- june pace .
b PAR 25 by contrast , the runoff of the non - m1 component of m2 is expected to come to an end , leaving its level about unchanged over the june - to - september period .
b PAR 25 the declines in intermediate - term mar- ket yields relative to rates on retail time deposits of comparable maturity during the spring , as well as a prospective flattening of the yield curve , should damp the shifting out of small time deposits .
b PAR 26 the turnaround in m2 growth under alternative b should show through to m3 .
b PAR 26 after its decline over the second quarter , this aggregate is projected to expand at a 1/2 percent annual rate over the next three months .
b PAR 26 bank credit growth should strengthen some from its torpid second - quarter pace , though loan demand would still be rela- tively weak .
b PAR 26 domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to move gradu- ally above its lower bound in coming months , placing its growth from the fourth quarter of last year through september at 4 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 26 this strengthening owes almost entirely to heavy federal borrowing , as non - federal debt growth is expected to remain sluggish .

c PAR 23 the increase of 50 basis points in the funds rate under alternative c would come as a considerable surprise to market partici- pants .
c PAR 23 short - term rates would back up by at least as much , and the dollar exchange rate would strengthen appreciably .
c PAR 23 the surprise element itself could well trigger a flurry of selling pressures on longer - term securities .
c PAR 23 later , market reflection about the system 's
c PAR 23 anti - inflation- ary resolve , combined with favorable incoming price data , might well engender a bond - market rally , leaving nominal long - term rates not much above their current levels .


