a PAR 8 under alternative a , short - term interest rates would fall by nearly the full 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate , espe-
a PAR 8 cially were the easing to take the form of a discount rate cut , which 3 .
a PAR 8 the borrowing allowance likely will need to be reduced in late september to reflect the usual fall - off in demands for seasonal credit . would be seen as implying that the reduction more likely would be sus- tained .
a PAR 8 banks would be expected to trim another 1/2 percentage point off the prime rate , still preserving large spreads over funding costs .
a PAR 8 some market participants might read the easing as increased emphasis on spurring economic activity , at the cost of limiting progress against inflation .
a PAR 8 nonetheless , given the outlook for tepid economic expansion and slower inflation that recently has come to be more firmly embedded in market expectations , nominal as well as real bond yields would be likely to decline noticeably .
a PAR 8 easing in the united states might lessen constraints on more expansive monetary policies in a few other coun- tries , but with many countries , especially in europe , highly unlikely to follow suit , the dollar would tend to depreciate significantly further .
a PAR 10 growth rates of the monetary aggregates under the three alternatives are presented below .
a PAR 10 the table gives projected money growth rates through year - end , on the assumption that the contemplated reserve conditions under each alternative are maintained over that period .
a PAR 10 growth rates for m2 and m3 are projected to be quite subdued .
a PAR 10 for the june - to - september period , expansion in the broad aggregates is likely to fall well short of the rates envisioned at the time of the last committee meeting , even if alternative a is adopted .
a PAR 10 moreover , growth of m2 and m3 over the rest of the year would remain damped , leaving these aggregates below their annual target ranges under all the alternatives.4   ml , on the other hand , is likely to expand at a double - digit pace over coming months , boosted by mortgage prepayments , low time deposit rates , and special factors.5 alt .
a PAR 10 c growth from june to september m2 1 - 1/4 1 3/4
a PAR 10 ml 13 12 - 1/2 12 growth from september to december m2 3 - 1/4 2 - 1/4 1 - 1/4 m3
a PAR 10 1 1/4 -1/2 ml 11 9 - 1/4 7 - 3/4 growth from 1991:q4 to 1992:q4 m2 1 - 3/4 1 - 1/2 1 - 1/4 m3 0 0 -1/4
a PAR 10 ml 12 - 1/2 12
a PAR 14 the lower interest rates of alternative a would be expected to buoy money growth over the balance of the year .
a PAR 14 although there is some question about the strength of the near - term response of m2 to lower short - term rates , the anticipated decline in long - term rates under this alternative should damp additional adverse yield curve effects .
a PAR 14 over time , the lower real and nominal interest rates would raise income growth and , through that channel , further augment demands for money , though the effects through year - end would be small .
a PAR 14 the slightly faster growth in m2 deposits would feed through partly to m3 , as would relatively more attractive rates on m3 money funds , leading to a resumption of 1 percent expansion in this aggregate over the balance of the year .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 - 1/4 percent in combination with an initial allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 250 million.3 under alterna-
b PAR 7 market sentiment of late seems to have tilted toward some prospect of another policy ease in coming months .
b PAR 7 although money market interest rates might firm a bit over the intermeeting period under the unchanged policy of alternative b , any increase would be limited if , consistent with the greenbook forecast , information continued to suggest modest economic expansion .
b PAR 7 bond rates also should remain around their current reduced levels , and could even edge down if inaction by the federal reserve , along with indicators of wages and prices , were seen as reinforcing disinflationary trends . if political dynamics seem to portend even higher budget deficits ahead , these downward pressures on bond yields may tend to be offset .
b PAR 7 the dollar , under alternative b , would be expected to trade around its recent lower levels .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , m2 is expected to resume expanding this month and to grow at a 2 - 1/4 percent pace on balance over the remainder of the year .
b PAR 12 m2 growth will be supported by large inflows to demand deposits in the months ahead , owing to the resumption of strong mortgage refinancing activity and a buildup in compensating balances occasioned by recent declines in market rates .
b PAR 12 with flows into ocds also strong , ml is projected to expand at a 10 percent pace over the balance of the year .
b PAR 12 beyond ml , outflows from m2 money funds are projected to abate , although the very steep yield curve is expected to continue to draw balances from such accounts and
b PAR 12 6 . actual growth in the fourth quarter will be boosted relative to expectations at the last meeting effects .
b PAR 12 7 . nearly half of the growth in m2 over the balance of the year is projected to come from increases in demand deposits and mmdas associ- ated with mortgage prepayments .
b PAR 12 total reserves and the monetary base would be expected to in- crease at around a 10 percent pace over june to december .
b PAR 12 from retail time deposits to capital market investments .
b PAR 12 on a quar- terly average basis , m2 would contract slightly this quarter , and increase at a 2 - 1/4 percent rate in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 12 this projec- tion assumes the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b ex- tended through year - end and the greenbook economic forecast .
b PAR 12 it im- plies
b PAR 12 velocity growth at a 4 percent annual rate in the third quarter and 3 - 1/4 percent in the fourth .
b PAR 12 with the assumed income and interest rates , standard money demand models predict velocity decreases through this period ; experimental models that embody yield - curve effects and other alternative measures of opportunity costs are predicting veloc- ity increases in the second half of the year , though not as large as embodied in the staff forecast .
b PAR 13 the firming in m2 under alternative b shows through in part to m3 , which bottoms out in coming months and then edges higher .
b PAR 13 acting to limit any pickup in this aggregate is the likelihood of anemic advances in bank credit and funding needs and some further declines in thrift credit .
b PAR 13 the failure of m3 to grow this year , as implied in all the alternatives , would be unprecedented in the official series , which begins in 1959 .
b PAR 13 the extraordinary behavior of m3 is a function not only of weak depository credit but of restrained credit growth overall .
b PAR 13 with spending financed out of higher profits and by drawing down liquid assets , the debt of nonfederal sectors is projected to expand at only a 2 - 3/4 percent pace over the balance of the year , implying a further drop in debt - to - income ratios for both households and businesses .
b PAR 13 continued strong federal borrowing will boost total debt growth to 4 - 3/4 percent for the year -- near the lower end of its annual monitoring range .

c PAR 9 a reversal of the july easing would take market partici- pants completely by surprise and short - term interest rates would rise by at least 1/2 percentage point under alternative c . bond rates , too , would retrace some of their recent declines under this alternative , at least initially , and quality spreads on private debt could widen if such a tightening were seen as placing the recovery at risk .
c PAR 9 the dollar would rebound appreciably .
c PAR 15 under alternative c , m2 and m3 would drop further below their annual ranges , as opportunity costs widen , banks become even more cautious lenders , and income growth is more restrained .
c PAR 15 the effects on m1 would be especially marked in the fourth quarter , given the drop in mortgage prepayments that would accompany the backup in long - term rates .
c PAR 15 still , m1 would be expected to increase at a 10 per- cent rate from june to december .
c PAR 15 directive language 


