a SENT -- if the staff view of velocity is correct , m2 growth within the alternative a range would be consistent with a significant acceleration in nominal income , forestalling further progress in reducing inflation in 1994 .
a PAR 19 such an objective would be fostered by the higher money growth and lower interest rates of this alternative .
a PAR 19 alternative
a PAR 19 i might signal the federal reserve 's intent to accommodate the effects on spending of a near - term fiscal stimulus package through higher money growth .
a PAR 19 keeping the range unchanged might also be seen as better conveying the uncertainty about velocity behavior .
a PAR 19 the alternative a ranges would be more consistent with m2 and m3 growth needed to support the staff gdp projection if velocity were behaving in line with historical relation to short - term interest rates .
a PAR 19 the com- mittee could choose to retain the current range but announce its willingness to accept a shortfall if velocity were again to increase unusually .
a PAR 19 short - run policy alternatives 
a PAR 22 short - term interest rates -- including the prime rate-- would decline by the half - point drop in the federal funds rate under alternative a . availability constraints on business credit at banks might ease more noticeably should bankers come to see lower rates as improving the outlook for business profitability and lessening strains in this sector .
a PAR 22 if incoming information suggested that the economic expansion had lost some of its steam -- such as a weak employ- ment report -- or if the easing were seen as being associated with the likelihood of more fiscal policy restraint , this alternative might be viewed as needing to be reversed before long .
a PAR 22 in these circumstances , declines in intermediate- and long - term rates would be limited .
a PAR 22 the dollar would move lower on foreign exchange markets .
a SENT -- ( 27 ) under alternative a , growth in m2 would pick up to a 1 percent annual rate over february and march , returning this aggregate to its fourth - quarter 1992 level in march .
a SENT -- a buildup of institution - only money funds , as holders responded to more attractive rate relationships , would buoy m3 over february and march under alternative a , and hold down the net declines in this aggregate over these two months .

b PAR 21 the markets appear to have built in an unchanged policy in the period just ahead and thus interest rates would be expected to remain near current levels under alternative b . longer - term rates might come under a little downward pressure if , consistent with the staff greenbook forecast , news on prices continues to be good , and economic indicators point to a little less momentum in the economic expansion than in the second half of last year .
b PAR 21 intermediate- and
b PAR 21 long - term rates are likely to be especially volatile as markets digest reports and rumors of fiscal initiatives or shifts in debt management policy by the new administration , and as they assess how any initia- tives might influence monetary policy .
b PAR 21 the upcoming mid - quarter refunding announcement , scheduled for february 3 , will be watched closely by market participants for clues of the administration 's debt management plans , and the general shape of the administration 's fiscal policy plans are likely to be covered in the president 's address to the 6 .
b PAR 21 an upward technical adjustment of $ 25 million to the borrowing allowance might prove necessary in march should demands for seasonal credit prove to be stronger than now anticipated .
b PAR 21 congress on february 17 .
b PAR 21 the dollar would fluctuate around current levels under alternative b , moving up on any news of unexpected eco- nomic weakness or policy easing abroad , or down should the news about the u.s . economy prove to be softer than expected .
b PAR 26 although m3 would resume growing in march under alternative b , this aggregate would contract on balance over february and march .
b PAR 26 a rebound in institution - only money market mutual funds as year - end effects disappear and rate relationships are more favorable acts to hold down the m3 run - off in february .
b PAR 26 banks ' needs for funds are seen as remaining quite modest as businesses continue to concen- trate their financing in the capital markets and as household spending and borrowing moderate .
b PAR 26 overall private credit demands are expected to remain around the sluggish pace of recent months .
b PAR 26 federal borrowing which has been held down in january and february by unexpected tax inflows , will strengthen substantially in march , boosting growth in domestic nonfinancial debt to a 5 - 1/2 percent rate over february and march and expansion from the fourth quarter of 1992 through march to 5 percent .

c PAR 23 although market participants seem to believe that some tightening of monetary policy over the next year will be forthcoming , they do not see this happening soon and thus would be surprised by the election of alternative c . short - term rates would rise by about 1/2 percentage point .
c PAR 23 long - term rates , too , would rise , although the boost to nominal rates would be held in check by the associated better out- look for disinflation .
c PAR 23 the dollar would climb higher on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 28 under alternative c , m2 would decline over february and march as larger opportunity costs act as an additional drag on this aggregate .
c PAR 28 the rebound in its m1 component in march would about offset a decline in february and it , too , would be about unchanged over these two months .
c PAR 28 m3 would drop at a 1/4 percent annual rate over february and march , as less attractive returns on m3-money funds lead to out- flows from such funds .
c PAR 28 the weaker trajectory of this aggregate in later months implies that even by midyear it would remain well below its fourth - quarter 1992 level .
c PAR 28 directive language 


