a SENT -- under alternative a , the federal funds rate would decline to 2 - 1/2 percent , either through a reduction in the initial borrowing allowance or a cut in the discount rate by 50 basis points and an unchanged initial borrowing allowance .
a PAR 10 under alternative a , money market interest rates would drop by the full 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate .
a PAR 10 the prime rate would also decrease by this amount .
a PAR 10 intermediate - term rates would fall appreciably , as expectations of the path of short- term rates in the months ahead were revised down , and the dollar would weaken on foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 10 real long - term rates would move lower as well , and the drop in interest and exchange rates would provide additional stimulus to spending over time .
a PAR 10 the extent of the decline in nominal bond rates , however , would depend importantly on how the market interpreted the committee 's rationale for this action .
a PAR 11 this alternative might seem attractive if the committee saw the lack of progress toward full employment in the staff outlook as unsatisfactory and was willing to settle for essentially no further disinflation in this expansion ; market perceptions that the committee had down - weighted its price stability objective could limit declines in nominal long - term rates .
a PAR 11 although the longer - term effects of lower interest rates on money demand may be uncertain , over the next several months deposit rates would lag declines in market rates , boosting money growth under this alternative and providing a little more assurance that the broad monetary aggregates would finish the year within their ranges .
a PAR 11 given the staff spending forecast , m2 would expand at a 2 - 1/2 percent rate over the remainder of the year , ending the year 1 - 1/2 percent above its fourth - quarter 1992 base .
a PAR 11 the boost to growth in income beginning late in the year would tend to lift this aggregate further into its tentative 1994 range early next year .
a PAR 11 some of the more rapid growth in m2 would show through to m3 under alternative a , but expansion of this aggregate would remain quite weak as borrowers continued to direct their credit demands toward long - term markets .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in combination with an initial allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 250 million .
b PAR 7 in that forecast , short - term rates are assumed to remain at current levels through the end of 1994 .
b PAR 7 growth in output settles into a pace broadly in line with that of potential output , preserving the current modest slack in resource markets .
b PAR 7 accordingly , core inflation edges lower .
b PAR 7 market participants apparently believe that the federal funds rate will remain at 3 percent , at least for the next several months , and under alternative b , money market interest rates would remain around current levels .
b PAR 7 however , participants seem to expect stronger economic growth over coming months than implicit in the staff forecast and little further progress in reducing inflation .
b PAR 7 in the absence of stronger growth , intermediate- and longer - term rates might well drift lower as incoming data tilt market sentiment and investors continue to reach for yield .
b PAR 7 bond yields could remain unusually volatile for a time as market participants continue to assess the 7 .
b PAR 7 demands for seasonal credit are likely to diminish over the intermeeting period , as they typically do in the fall , calling for downward technical adjustment to the borrowing allowance .
b PAR 7 sustainability of the much reduced levels of long - term rates that have recently been reached .
b PAR 7 this skittishness may focus particularly on indicators bearing on the outlook for prices , partly in light of their possible implications for monetary policy going forward .
b PAR 7 consistent with the staff forecast of policy easings in germany and japan , the dollar should trade on the high side of recent levels under alternative b .
b PAR 9 as shown in the table below , m2 under alternative b is projected to grow at a 2 percent average rate over the final four months of this year .
b PAR 9 special factors , especially mortgage refinancings .
b PAR 9 c growth from august to december m2 2 - 1/2
b PAR 9 2 1 - 1/2 m3 1 3/4 1/2 m1 13 - 1/4 12 - 1/4
b PAR 9 11 - 1/4 growth from q4:1992 to december 1993 m2
b PAR 9 1 - 1/2 1 - 1/2 1 - 1/4 m3 1/4 1/4 0 m1
b PAR 9 11 - 1/2 11
b PAR 9 10 - 3/4 should boost m2 growth a little over this period .
b PAR 9 underlying growth in this aggregate , however , will remain quite sluggish .
b PAR 9 although the flatter yield curve should eventually damp the shift from m2 to capital market assets , we do not expect any slowing in the near term : indeed , with recent capital gains enhancing the advertised returns on mutual funds , inflows could remain quite brisk .
b PAR 9 on a quarterly average basis , growth in m2 would slow to a 1 - 1/2 percent rate in the fourth quarter , implying growth for the year on a q4-to - q4 basis of 1 - 1/4 percent.9 growth in m2 velocity would pick up to a 4 percent rate in the fourth quarter , bringing the increase for the year to 3 percent .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , m3 would grow at a 3/4 percent rate over the remainder of this year , leaving this aggregate just above both its fourth - quarter 1992 level and the bottom of its 8 .
b PAR 9 we expect that nationsbank will transfer its government secur- ity dealer operations , with associated rps , to a nonbank affiliate in october , reversing the transaction it made in july and depressing m2 .
b PAR 9 in part reflecting the surge in refinancing , m1 is projected to ac- celerate to a 12 - 1/4 percent pace over the august - to - december period .
b PAR 9 accompanying this strength in m1 , total reserves are expected to increase at a 16 - 3/4 percent pace over the period and the monetary base at a 10 - 3/4 percent rate .
b PAR 9 the growth of m2 continues to fall short of staff money demand models by substantial margins .
b PAR 9 more conventional models are predict- ing about 5 percent growth this year ; even the expanded models that include the effects of the steep yield curve call for about 3 - 1/2 percent growth in 1993 .
b PAR 9 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 9 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 0.0 to 4.01993 target ranges :
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives b
b PAR 9 chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives - 0 % on
b PAR 9 i chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level 15 % short - run alternatives billions of dollars - actual level projected level ..
b PAR 9 4 % - 12200 - ( 12000 chart 4 debt annual range .
b PAR 9 sluggish demand for bank loans is expected to hold down banks ' needs for funds .
b PAR 9 moreover , the rtc , with new funding author- ity , is expected to begin working down its backlog of resolutions in coming months , leading to more rapid shrinkage of thrift institutions and the substitution of treasury financing for deposit financing to carry acquired assets .

c PAR 12 under alternative c , interest rates would rise and the dollar would strengthen on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 12 money market rates would increase by the full 50 basis point rise in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 12 although markets seem still to expect a tightening in policy at some point , action under this alternative would come much sooner than now built into the yield curve .
c PAR 12 intermediate - term rates would increase significantly , especially if the tightening were seen as signalling a more aggressive posture of the federal reserve against inflation and a higher trajectory of short - term rates for a considera- ble period .
c PAR 12 however , lower prospective inflation might decrease far- ahead forward rates , limiting advances in nominal bond yields .

