a PAR 11 the easing under alternative a would come as a surprise to market participants , and short - term rates would decline by the full 50 basis point drop in the funds rate .
a PAR 11 intermediate - term rates would decrease noticeably , and longer - term rates also would move lower , at least in the immediate aftermath of the easing action .
a PAR 11 the fall in longer - term nominal interest rates might be limited if inflation expec- tations were worsened by a sense that the federal reserve was putting less weight on its longer - run price stability objective .
a PAR 11 even if longer - term nominal rates were little affected , real rates across the maturity structure would fall .
a PAR 11 however , unless the easing itself prompted a more downbeat market assessment of the underlying strength of spending , the drop in real capital market rates might be muted to some extent by questions about how long the reduced federal funds rate could be sustained , given its already low level in real terms .
a SENT -- ( 12 ) in light of the likelihood of some decline in an array of real interest rates , as well as the real foreign exchange value of the dollar , alternative a might be favored if economic growth in the staff forecast were seen to be unsatisfactory and the committee were willing to accept little or no further disinflation . or this option might appear attractive if the risks to the staff forecast were seen to be tilted significantly toward the downside , especially in view of con- tinued fiscal drag .
a SENT -- m3 under alternative a would expand slowly over the final four months of the year as bank credit growth remained damped in the context of continued heavy financing in the securities markets .

b PAR 7 market participants are not expecting a change in policy over the relatively short upcoming intermeeting period .
b PAR 7 thus , under alternative b , short - term interest rates should remain around current levels in the weeks ahead .
b PAR 7 the prime rate , at 6 percent , is unlikely to move , as banks ' increased willingness to lend will probably take the form of narrower spreads relative to benchmark rates and more attractive nonprice terms .
b PAR 7 although the passage of the deficit reduction package has removed one element of uncertainty , questions remain about its effects , suggesting that rates could be quite sensitive to information bearing on household and business spending .
b PAR 7 currently , market partici- pants appear to be anticipating a tightening of monetary policy by early next year , on the presumption that short - term rates will have to move up to forestall any incipient buildup of inflation pressures .
b PAR 7 given these expectations , intermediate- and perhaps long - term rates could drift lower if , in line with the staff economic forecast , incoming indicators point to more subdued spending and inflationary pressures than now seem 5 .
b PAR 7 the flood in the mississippi river basin and its aftermath are expected to have little effect on discount window borrowing .
b PAR 7 built into market expectations ; in such circumstances , market partici- pants would likely see tightening actions as being pushed further into the future .
b PAR 7 the dollar should trade around recent levels on foreign exchange markets , with any downward pressure from possible declines in u.s .
b PAR 7 interest rates being balanced by projected reductions in rates abroad .
b PAR 8 the interest rates under alternative b are consistent with those of the staff greenbook forecast , which has the federal funds rate around current levels through 1994 and long - term rates edging lower .
b PAR 8 in that forecast , persistent low levels of real short - term interest rates are needed to counter fiscal drag and other impediments to economic growth .
b PAR 8 under these circumstances , the unemployment rate does not de- cline from its current level , while core inflation slows only modestly .
b PAR 8 with this configuration of income and interest rates , broad money ag- gregates are projected to expand sluggishly while total nonfinancial debt increases around the pace of nominal gdp .
b PAR 9 over the balance of 1993 , m2 is projected to grow at about a 1 - 1/2 percent pace under alternative b , and , as shown in the table below , to finish the year around the lower bound of its new annual range .
b PAR 9 although special factors that have boosted m2 growth in recent months are seen as fading somewhat , underlying growth in this aggregate is boosted by a little faster growth in nominal income .
b PAR 9 the lure of capital market instruments -- from the still fairly steep yield curve and reported capital gains on securities to date -- is expected to remain strong , and inflows to mutual funds probably will stay near the record pace of the year thus far .
b PAR 9 as a consequence , the velocity of m2 6 . growth rates in the table are based on the assumption that the federal funds rate is held for the remainder of the year at the level established under each of the alternatives .
b PAR 9 is expected to increase at a 3 percent rate in the second half of the year , only a little less than the 4 percent rate of the first half.7 m3 under alternative b is projected to bottom out in august and to edge higher over the remainder of the year .
b PAR 9 although bank credit growth should slow a bit , more of it is expected to be funded by deposits , given the very comfortable capital levels of many banks .
b PAR 9 still , m3 would finish the year a little below its fourth - quarter 1992 base and the lower bound of its range .
b PAR 9 c growth from july to september m2 2 1 - 1/2 1
b PAR 9 -1/4 ml 7 - 1/2 6 - 3/4
b PAR 9 6 growth from september to december m2 2 - 1/4 1
b PAR 9 -1/2 3/4 m3 1 3/4 1/2 ml
b PAR 9 11 9 - 1/2 8 growth from q4:1992 to december 1993 m2 1 - 1/4 1 3/4 m3 0
b PAR 9 -1/4 -1/4 m1 10 - 1/4
b PAR 9 9 - 3/4 9 - 1/4

c PAR 13 the tightening of policy under alternative c would come much sooner than is now envisioned by market participants .
c PAR 13 as a conse- quence , rates at the short end would increase by the half - point boost in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 13 the prime rate would rise , likely by one - half point , although a quarter - point increase in the federal funds rate might not elicit any change in the prime rate .
c PAR 13 intermediate - term rates , both nominal and real , would move higher , with the extent of the increase depending on whether market participants viewed the action as merely moving forward the current trajectory of expected rate increases or as a fundamentally more aggressive posture that was more certain to achieve price stability .
c PAR 13 perceptions of a firmer stance against inflation would put some downward pressure on more distant forward rates , muting the likely rise in bond yields .
c PAR 13 in any case , the dollar would move higher on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 14 an outlook for economic growth and inflation stronger than in the staff forecast would bolster the rationale for a policy firming action .
c PAR 14 such an outlook might follow from a view that the more aggressive posture being adopted by banks and other lenders would provide , with lags , considerable stimulus to the economy and prices .
c PAR 14 with the staff 's outlook for spending propensities , m2 would expand at only a 1 percent pace over the final five months of this year under alternative c , ending the year about 3/4 percent above its fourth- quarter 1992 level .
c PAR 14 growth in this aggregate would be restrained not only by larger opportunity costs but also by slower income growth as year - end approached .
c PAR 14 weaker m2 would show through to m3 which would be about flat over the remainder of the year .
c PAR 14 directive language .

