a PAR 21 a higher track for m3 might be appropriate if bank and thrift credit do not fall back to the extent that the staff envisions or if the unusual use of non - m3 funding were expected to subside .
a PAR 21 the current ranges also might be retained were the committee concerned that the weak performance of m2 and m3 had been associated with unacceptably sluggish economic growth and would continue to be in the future.7 ranges for 1994 
a SENT -- under alternative a , the funds rate would be reduced to the area of 2 - 1/2 percent , either by choosing a $ 225 million borrowing allowance or by cutting the discount rate 1/2 percentage point , to 2 - 1/2 percent , while retaining a $ 250 million borrowing allowance .
a PAR 27 the easing of reserve conditions embodied in alternative a would represent an unexpected direction for policy , especially in light of the market 's understanding of the committee 's recent policy predilection .
a PAR 27 the federal reserve would be seen as putting more emphasis on supporting economic growth , perhaps in light of the recent weaker economic data and the possible restraining effects of the fiscal package .
a PAR 27 market participants would expect short - term rate declines to be reversed eventually , but still would anticipate that rates would trade around lower levels over the coming year than currently built into the term structure .
a PAR 27 consequently , the downward adjustment of short- and intermediate - term market rates would be close to the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate .
a PAR 27 as usual , bond yields would not fall by nearly as much , partly because investors might become a little more worried about future inflation .
a PAR 27 the exchange value of the dollar would be depressed .
a PAR 27 implementing this alternative would reduce financial intermediaries ' costs of funds , encouraging them to relax their terms and conditions for business and consumer loans .
a SENT -- given this damped interest rate response , even if the money market conditions of alternative a continued through year- end , m2 growth over the year would still be only 1 - 1/4 percent , notice- ably below the 2 percent lower bound of the committee 's current annual range .
a SENT -- c to 6 - 3/4 percent under alternative a . from the fourth quarter of 1992 through december ,

b PAR 25 although market participants believe that the next mone- tary policy action is more likely to be a tightening than an easing , they do not expect any move to occur over the coming intermeeting period .
b PAR 25 consequently , market interest rates would not respond initially to the implementation of alternative b . rates would tend to remain near current levels or edge lower over subsequent weeks should data on economic activity and prices prove to be about in line with the staff projection and should the congress continue to make progress on passage of a deficit reduction package .
b PAR 25 interest rates would back up across the maturity spectrum , however , if adverse information on price pressures generates expectations of a near - term tightening of monetary policy , or if a major snag occurs in the process of deficit reduction .
b PAR 25 the exchange value of the dollar is expected to fluctuate around recently established levels ; staff forecasts for continued monetary policy easing abroad are broadly consistent with expectations already embedded in interest and exchange rates .
b PAR 31 the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is anticipated to expand at a 4 - 3/4 percent rate over the four months ending in septem- ber , bringing its growth rate from the fourth quarter about 1/2 percent- age point above the 4 - 1/2 percent lower bound of its monitoring range .
b PAR 31 the growth of nonfederal debt is expected to strengthen to a 4 percent rate over this interval , but federal debt , after sizable growth in june , is poised to slow in the third quarter , as the treasury meets a portion of its funding needs by drawing down its bloated cash balance .
b PAR 31 total reserves and the monetary base are projected to grow from june to september at 5 - 3/4 and 8 - 1/4 percent rates , respectively , under alternative b . directive language 

c SENT -- the lower ranges of alternative c might better convey the committee 's expectations for money and credit and limit the risk that money might fall short of the ranges even with expected nomi-
c PAR 26 the immediate tightening of reserve market conditions under alternative c is not built into financial market quotes and would induce a rise in short - term market interest rates that about matched the 1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 26 in response to higher funding costs , banks likely would boost the prime rate , perhaps by the same amount .
c PAR 26 ( in light of the currently wide spread of the prime rate over banks ' cost of funds and their professed greater willingness to make loans , banks will be less inclined to raise the prime in reac- tion to an increase in the federal funds rate of only 1/4 percentage point . )
c PAR 26 longer - term market rates also would likely rise , though by considerably less than short - term rates , as the policy action worked to relieve the market 's residual inflation concerns and to put a damper on household and business spending and credit demands .
c PAR 26 buoyed by more attractive relative interest returns in the united states , the dollar would tend to strengthen on foreign exchange markets .


