a SENT -- in the case of alternative a , the federal funds rate would decline to 2 - 1/2 percent and borrowing would fall , perhaps to $ 25 million .
a PAR 13 the easing of policy under alternative a would come as a surprise to market participants , and short - term interest rates would fall by about the 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate .
a PAR 13 intermediate- and
a PAR 13 long - term rates would decline by less ; indeed , the extent of any decline would be quite limited if the easing were seen by market participants to be unsustainable .
a PAR 13 the dollar would weaken on foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 13 under alternative a , m2 would expand at a 2 - 1/4 percent pace , close to that evident since midyear , buoyed partly by less of a slowdown in m1 than under alternatives b and c
a PAR 13 , m3 would grow at a 1 - 1/4 percent pace from november to march .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window of $ 50 million .
b PAR 7 in that forecast , short - term rates are maintained at around current levels through most of 1994 .
b PAR 7 the spurt in output in the current quarter , related importantly to production adjustments in the automobile industry , is not sustained .
b PAR 7 output decelerates in the first quarter , and then settles into a growth pace broadly in line with that of potential over the balance of the year , held down to an extent by scheduled fiscal retrenchment .
b PAR 7 with economic slack persisting , albeit at around the current diminished level , prices decelerate modestly further .
b PAR 7 relative to the staff forecast , market participants appear to be anticipating a bit more strength in aggregate demand through next year , and have built into interest rates substantial odds that policy will begin to tighten in the first part of the year to keep inflation from increasing .
b PAR 7 nonetheless , market interest rates are unlikely to move down much on balance under the steady funds rate of alternative b in coming months , since the market would continue to expect a tightening before long .
b PAR 7 the foreign exchange value of the dollar under alternative b should stay around current levels .
b PAR 7 c growth from november to march m2 2 - 1/4
b PAR 7 2 1 - 3/4 m3
b PAR 7 1 - 1/4 1 3/4 m1 6 - 1/2 6 5 - 1/4 implied growth from 1992 : q4 to march m2 2
b PAR 7 -1/2 2 1 - 3/4 m3 1 - 1/2 1 - 1/4 1 m1 7 6 - 1/2
b PAR 8 growth of the broad monetary aggregates , shown in the table above , is expected to slow a little through march under alternative b from the faster pace of recent months , but to stay above the pace of 1993 as a whole .
b PAR 8 this moderation is entirely accounted for by identifiable special factors .
b PAR 8 in particular , the recent falloff in mortgage refinancing applications portends a marked reduction in demand deposits associated with this activity .
b PAR 8 this effect subtracts around 3 percentage points from the expansion of m1 and 1 percentage point from m2 over the november - to - march period .
b PAR 8 ( increases in refinancing over the summer and early fall added an estimated 1 - 3/4 and 1/2 percentage points of growth to m1 and m2 from august to november . )
b PAR 8 abstracting from this factor , growth of m2 is projected to pick up a little in coming months .
b PAR 8 shifts from m2 should continue to moderate a little as balance sheets become better aligned with the current structure of interest rates .
b PAR 8 we expect flows into long - term mutual funds to average below the record pace of most of 1993 , react- ing also to heightened investor perceptions of risk after the backup in yields and associated capital losses of october and november .
b PAR 8 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 8 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 8 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars -- actual level short - run alternatives the range for 1994 is the provisional range adopted at the july meeting .
b PAR 8 ondj f m a m
b PAR 8 j a s o n d chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars --
b PAR 8 actual level short - run alternatives s
b PAR 8 the range for 1994 is the provisional range adopted at the july meeting .
b PAR 8 a s o n d chart 3 s -- actual level short - run alternatives billions of dollars 15 % s'- 1300 10 %
b PAR 8 - ° **- 5 % .
b PAR 8 chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level
b PAR 8 ( november level partly projected . )
b PAR 8 projected level
b PAR 8 the range tor 1994 is the provisional range adopted at the july meeting .
b PAR 8 - .4 % 12800 s.- - 12400 ondj fmam
b PAR 8 j jaso ndj f m a m
b PAR 9 nonetheless , substantial portfolio shifts are expected to persist , as the yield curve remains relatively steep , and these shifts will continue to damp the growth of m2 relative to nominal income .
b PAR 9 the velocity of m2 in the first quarter would rise at a 4 percent rate , down only a bit from the 4 - 1/2 percent rate projected for the current quarter .
b PAR 9 m2 by march would have expanded at a 2 per- cent annual rate from its fourth - quarter 1993 base under alternative b , placing this aggregate well above the lower end of its provisional 1 to 5 percent growth range for next year .
b PAR 9 however , monthly money growth in the first quarter could be especially volatile and difficult to interpret .
b PAR 9 seasonal factors were distorted by policy - induced surges in money in early 1991 and 1992 .
b PAR 9 in addition , amounts and patterns of tax payments , and associated adjustments in money hold- ings , could be atypical , given the uncertain effects of the new tax law .
b PAR 10 under alternative b , m3 would advance at a 1 percent annual rate over the november - to - march period ; by march this aggregate would be 1 - 1/4 percent above its fourth - quarter 1993 base , well within its 0 to 4 percent provisional range for 1994 .
b PAR 10 bank credit should continue to expand around the 5 percent pace of 1993 , and banks are expected to persist in funding much of the growth with lower cost , non - m3 sources , in part to avoid deposit insurance premiums .
b PAR 10 the debt of the nonfederal sectors will grow at a 4 - 3/4 percent rate through march , in line with the stepped - up pace of the second half of 1993 .
b PAR 10 household borrowing is expected to continue to be strong , reflecting more comfortable financial positions and the high level of spending on housing and durable goods .
b PAR 10 overall financing needs of businesses are expected to grow as advances in capital spending outstrip growth in internal funds , and as net equity issuance is held down by a major merger .
b PAR 10 total debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to increase at a 5 - 3/4 percent pace from the fourth quarter of 1993 to march , well above the lower end of its provisional 4 to 8 percent range for next year .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the federal funds rate would move up to 3 - 1/2 percent and the borrow- ing allowance to $ 75 million .
c PAR 11 the rise in the federal funds rate under alternative c , to 3 - 1/2 percent , would come sooner than now anticipated by market participants and built into markets interest rates .
c PAR 11 rates at the near end of the maturity spectrum would rise by almost the full 50 basis point increase in the funds rate ; intermediate- and long - term rates would go up , but as usual by less .
c PAR 11 the extraordinary spread of the prime rate over funding costs and the more aggressive lending posture of commercial banks suggest that the prime rate might notch up only 1/4 percentage point .
c PAR 11 the eventual increase in long - term rates could be limited because such a tightening at this time might be seen as better ensuring continuing moderate expansion and disinflation in the years ahead .
c PAR 11 quality spreads would be expected to remain fairly nar- row as a firming in the policy stance in the context of market expec- tations of a more solid economic expansion would not be likely to raise many concerns about credit quality .
c PAR 11 higher yields on dollar assets would put upward pressure on the exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 11 m2 would grow at a 1 - 3/4 percent annual rate over the november - to- march period , restrained by higher opportunity costs .
c PAR 11 m3 would expand under alternative c at only a 3/4 percent pace over the november - to- march period .
c PAR 12 such concerns could arise from a view that current - quarter strength in economic activity suggested that the economy was on an appreciably higher growth track , perhaps because financial factors damping expansion have faded , allowing the current accommodative stance of monetary policy to show through more fully into aggregate demand .
c PAR 12 in that event , the output gap would be closing more quickly than in the staff forecast , raising the risks of an overshooting of activity relative to its potential and hence greater inflationary pressures over time .
c PAR 12 a timely firming in policy now could obviate a more aggressive tightening later to keep inflation from picking up , involving perhaps even higher real interest rates if delays permitted inflation expectations to deteriorate .

