a PAR 12 short - term interest rates , including the prime rate , probably would fall by about the 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate , and the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets likely would decline .
a PAR 12 in these circumstances , any lasting reduction in intermediate- and longer - term interest rates likely would be limited by a belief that the action would need to be reversed before too long , as well as by perceptions that the federal reserve was placing less weight 13 .
a PAR 12 the reduction in the federal funds rate would be accomplished either through a commensurate cut in the discount rate or through a reduction in the borrowing allowance to $ 75 million .
a PAR 12 on containing inflationary pressures and more weight on promoting near- term growth in output and employment .
a PAR 12 issuance of bonds and mortgages likely would be heavy , as borrowers reacted to a sense that this was the last window of low long - term rates for quite some time .
a PAR 13 lower short rates might also be seen as desirable if the committee were concerned about the possibility of renewed weakness in economic growth over coming quarters , perhaps brought on by tax increases becoming effective in 1994 .
a PAR 13 this alterna-
a PAR 13 tive would provide somewhat greater assurance that growth of the broad monetary aggregates would be well within their annual ranges in the first half of next year .
a PAR 13 although the steeper yield curve under alternative a would make bond and stock funds more attractive , experience of the last few years suggests some net shift of funds from market instru- ments to m2 in the months following monetary policy easings .
a PAR 13 thus , the staff projects that m2 in march would be 3 - 1/4 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter base , a little above the middle of its tenta- tive range , and m3 would be higher by 2 percent , around the middle of its range .
a PAR 13 directive language 

b PAR 7 three policy alternatives are presented for consideration by the committee .
b PAR 7 under alternative b , the federal funds rate would continue to trade around 3 percent.10
b PAR 7 this alternative is consistent with the monetary policy assumption of a steady federal funds rate for several quarters ahead that underlies the greenbook projection of eco- nomic activity and inflation .
b PAR 7 in that forecast , real gdp growth settles into a 2 - 1/2 percent pace next year , as the stimulus imparted by past interest rate declines and diminishing balance - sheet and credit supply constraints about offsets the drag from continued fiscal retrenchment ; the unemployment rate remains around 6 - 3/4 percent , and core inflation edges down .
b PAR 7 market participants generally seem to believe that the economic expansion will run a little faster than projected by the staff and to avoid a pickup in inflation down the road the federal reserve will begin to firm reserve conditions in the first half of next year .
b PAR 7 if economic and inflation data over coming months instead prove to be closer to the staff forecast , bond yields probably will retrace some of their recent runup .
b PAR 9 as shown in the lower panel of the above table , m2 under alternative b is projected to grow at a 2 - 1/2 percent rate over october to march .
b PAR 9 this would leave m2 in the fourth quarter 1 - 1/4 percent above its q4 1992 base , just within its 1 to 5 percent annual range .
b PAR 9 by next march , this aggregate would be 2 - 3/4 percent at an annual rate above its fourth quarter 1993 base , and well within its provisional range .
b PAR 9 the firming in m2 growth over the next several months reflects forecasts of stronger expansion in nominal gdp late this year , the effects of the recent surge in mortgage refinancing activity , and lagged stimulus from alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 9 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 0.0 to 4.01993 target ranges :
b PAR 9 chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 9 j19319 chart 3 billions of dollars 15 % - actual level short - run alternatives .. ' - 1200 15%10 % - . ' . ..
b PAR 9 " - 1180 .a '
b PAR 9 : - " " " 0 % o\ :
b PAR 9 .................
b PAR 9 10 % 0 % 1020-
b PAR 9 .. . ........
b PAR 9 ....................... - 1020
b PAR 9 i 1000 chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level on d
b PAR 9 j the previous flattening of the yield curve .
b PAR 9 despite the latter two effects , m2 velocity rises noticeably further in the fourth and first quarters as funds continue to be diverted from deposits into longer - term mutual funds .
b PAR 9 for that reason , the velocity of m2 + , which adds the market value of net holdings of bond and stock mutual funds to m2 , seems likely to remain more stable than that of m2 in coming quarters .
b PAR 9 ml , which is projected to expand at a 10 - 1/2 percent rate from october to march , would still account for all of the increase in m2 .
b PAR 9 the continued brisk pace of m1 growth mainly owes to earlier declines in its oppor- tunity cost , but sustained strong foreign currency demands also are seen as supporting expansion of this aggregate .
b PAR 9 with core deposits and non - deposit sources continuing to fund the bulk of moderate expansion of bank credit , issuance of managed liabilities in m3 should remain weak .
b PAR 9 m3 would increase at a 1 - 1/2 percent rate from october to march .
b PAR 9 this aggregate would be a little above the lower bound of its 0 to 4 percent range for 1993 and more distinctly within its tentative 1994 range by march .

c PAR 10 under alternative c , the federal funds rate would rise 1/2 percentage point to 3 - 1/2 percent.12 an immediate firming of reserve market conditions is not embedded in market interest rates , and consequently , short - term interest rates are likely to rise by nearly the full 1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds .
c PAR 10 long - term rates probably would rise appreciably at first , but some of those in- creases could be reversed over time as market participants interpreted that action as trimming the trajectory of economic activity and prices and reducing the need for more aggressive tightening in the future .
c PAR 10 in association with continued rapid growth in m1 and required reserves , total reserves would expand at a 9.6 percent pace over the october - march period and the monetary base at a 9.3 percent rate .
c PAR 10 the borrowing allowance would be increased to $ 125 million .
c PAR 10 with dollar - denominated returns rising significantly , the dollar likely would appreciate considerably on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 11 the committee might favor alternative c if strength in recent economic data were seen as implying that any delay in firming ran an unacceptably high risk that economic activity could develop excessive momentum that would rapidly erode the remaining degree of slack and produce an acceleration of prices .
c PAR 11 even if growth in aggregate demand turns out to be as moderate as in the staff forecast , a tightening would better ensure a resumption of a distinct downward trend to inflation .
c PAR 11 under this alternative , m2 would expand at a 2 percent rate from october through march of next year , leaving growth from the fourth quarter of this year in the lower half of its tentative range .
c PAR 11 m3 would expand at a 1 - 1/4 percent rate from october through march , also in the lower half of its provisional range .


