a SENT -- under alternative a , the federal funds rate would decline to the 2 - 1/2 percent area .
a SENT -- ( 9 ) the easing of policy under alternative a would surprise market participants and would lead to a decline in short - term rates , including the prime rate , commensurate with the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate .
a SENT -- ( 14 ) under alternative a , m2 would strengthen to a 3 percent rate over the february - to - june period .
a SENT -- m3 would grow at a 1 - 1/4 percent pace over february to june under alternative a , but would remain below its fourth - quarter base even by june .

b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing initially remaining at $ 50 million .
b PAR 8 market participants are expecting neither tightening nor easing in the stance of monetary policy for some time .
b PAR 8 they appear to anticipate that the recent runup in inflation will subside in large part .
b PAR 8 the gains in stock prices and sustained narrow quality spreads suggest that investors now also believe that the bond market rally , together with the economy 's existing forward momentum , will keep the contractionary effects of the deficit - reduction package from derailing the economic expansion .
b PAR 8 thus , under alternative b , short - term interest rates would stay around current levels .
b PAR 8 intermediate- and long - term rates will remain sensitive to news on the fiscal front and
b PAR 8 correspond- ing implications for the economy , as well as reports bearing on the inflation outlook .
b PAR 8 bond rates could edge lower should incoming news on prices confirm the extent of moderation in inflation embodied in the staff economic forecast .
b PAR 8 the dollar would be expected to fluctuate around current levels under alternative b , but could firm somewhat if rate declines in europe prove to be faster and larger than now expected .
b PAR 12 under alternative b , m2 is expected to resume growth over the february - to - june period .
b PAR 12 the projected 2 - 1/2 percent average rate implies growth of 1 - 3/4 percent for the second quarter .
b PAR 12 with nominal gdp in the staff forecast decelerating to a 5 - 1/2 percent pace , growth in m2 velocity would slow to a 3 - 1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter .
b PAR 12 slower velocity growth partly results from the positive ef- fects on m2 of the turnaround of the temporary factors related to sea- sonal adjustment and prepayments of mortgage - backed securities .
b PAR 12 their impact , which represents a diminishing drag on m2 growth in march as a whole , acts as a stimulant to growth in the subsequent months ,
b PAR 12 reflect- ing a reversal of the effects of seasonal distortions and a resurgence in prepayments.4 on balance , these factors raise money growth per- ceptibly over the february - to - june period .
b PAR 12 much of the pickup in m2 comes from its m1 component , which would expand at a 10 percent annual 4 . still another factor , related to depressed individual refunds and elevated individual nonwithheld tax payments , is expected to re- strain m2 growth in march and may and boost it in april and june , but to have a negligible effect over the february - to - june period as a whole .
b PAR 12 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 12 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 12 c levels in billions
b PAR 12 monthly growth rates quarterly ave .
b PAR 12 growth rates 2.0 to 6.0 0.5 to 4.51993 target ranges : chart 1 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars -- actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 d j chart 2 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars --- actual level 0 short - run alternatives 4.5 % - 4384.5 0.5 % . .
b PAR 12 i chart 3 billions of dollars - actual level 0 short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 10%-- 1132.8 chart 4 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level 4.5 % rate from february to june.5 outflows to bond funds from money market mutual funds and nontransactions retail deposits are seen as moderating over time if bond yields stabilize around current reduced levels and as portfolio adjustments become more complete .
b PAR 12 the pickup in m2 would still be limited by further downward adjustments of deposit rates .
b PAR 12 by june , growth in m2 from its fourth - quarter base would be only 1/2 percent at an annual rate .



