a PAR 23 the associated forecast for money and debt would involve faster growth rates this year than in the staff projections , placing their probable levels late in the year more clearly within their cur- rent ranges .
a PAR 23 the alternative a ranges also could be viewed as a long- run benchmark for money growth consonant with the attainment of nomi- nal gdp expansion over time consistent with price stability and the return to a more normal behavior of m2 velocity .
a PAR 23 even if such veloc- ity behavior does not emerge soon , keeping the current ranges in place rather than lowering them could avoid the necessity of an upward adjustment of the ranges in the future , which could be misperceived as a weakening of the committee 's anti - inflationary resolve .
a PAR 23 an under- shoot of the current ranges this year could perhaps be explained by the continued aberrant behavior of velocity .
a PAR 23 ranges for 1995 

b PAR 21 although in recent years the committee has de - emphasized monetary and debt aggregates as policy guides , the selection of par- ticular ranges does impart to the congress and the public the commit- tee 's sense of the prospective growth of these financial quantities 14 . in 1995 , m1 decelerates to a 1 percent growth rate , in part owing to substitutions out of m1 and into nontransaction components of m2 , as the average interest rate on m1 changes little , while rates on retail time deposits , money funds , and money market deposit accounts rise substantially .
b PAR 21 with required and total reserves falling at a little more than a 1 - 1/2 percent rate , the monetary base is expected to slow to a 5 - 1/2 percent pace for the year .
b PAR 21 that is likely to be consistent with the economic outlook of the governors and presidents .
b PAR 21 the table below shows two alternative sets of ranges for money and debt growth over 1994 .
b PAR 21 alternative i
b PAR 21 repre- sents the current ranges , while alternative b reduces the upper and lower bounds of all three ranges by 1 percentage point .
b PAR 21 the alternative b ranges for m2 and m3 better encompass the staff projections , and the center of the alternative b range for debt corresponds to the staff forecast .
b PAR 21 alternative money and debt ranges for 1994 ( percent ) alt .
b PAR 21 i memo : ( current staff ranges )
b PAR 21 ii projection 
b PAR 22 that is , growth of the money and debt aggregates under this alternative is less likely to fall below the lower ends of these ranges , even if the staff has underestimated either the depressing impact of further increases in the federal funds rate or the prospective underlying weakness in money and credit relative to nominal gdp .
b PAR 22 such restraint on demand might be sought to return to a path of disinflation -- as in the tighter strategy of the last section -- or could become necessary should an untoward deprecia- tion of the exchange value of the dollar threaten a general inflation-
b PAR 22 ary upturn .
b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 4 - 1/4 percent and the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would remain at $ 325 million .
b PAR 27 the staff forecast of rising interest rates does not necessarily assume tightening at this meeting , but would seem to call for aggressive action later in the quarter should underlying demand for goods and services turn out to be as strong as implied in the staff outlook .
b PAR 27 this alternative might also be preferred if the committee felt the staff had overestimated probable inflationary pressures .
b PAR 27 market participants seem somewhat uncertain about the likelihood of committee action at the july meeting ; some anticipate that the federal reserve will pause a little longer in its process of firming to assess the effects of its actions so far , but on balance they seem to have put the odds on a quarter - point move at greater than 50 - 50 . accordingly , short - term interest rates are likely to move down a little after the meeting under alternative b . long - term rates are not likely to decline , however , under this alternative ; the dollar 15 .
b PAR 27 under all of the alternatives , increases in the borrowing allowance would likely be needed over the intermeeting period to accommodate rising demands for seasonal credit .
b PAR 27 might remain under some downward pressure , and the markets might continue to focus on the potential for greater inflation , especially if data confirm brisk growth .
b PAR 31 as noted in the previous section , m2 growth will be restrained by the slower pace of nominal income growth projected by the staff in the third quarter as well as by the effects of the pre- vious and expected further widening of opportunity costs .
b PAR 31 moreover , alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 31 d levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 0.0 to 4.01994 target ranges :
b PAR 31 chart 7 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars -- actual level short - run alternatives .
b PAR 31 " 1 % ° ' i
b PAR 31 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 i
b PAR 31 i 3450 on d
b PAR 31 ~ ' ' ' chart 8 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars -- actual level short - run alternatives -i 4400 ' ''
b PAR 31 chart 9 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives .
b PAR 31 i chart 10 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level on d
b PAR 31 j the volume of flows into bond and stock funds is expected to pick up a little as concerns about capital losses in these markets diminish .
b PAR 31 partly offsetting these influences should be the gradual levelling out of mortgage refinancing activity .
b PAR 31 with interest rates on small cds rising more quickly than those on liquid deposits , inflows to small time deposits should account for an appreciable proportion of m2 growth .
b PAR 31 although currency growth also is expected to remain rapid owing to continued strength in foreign demands , transaction deposits are expected to be about flat on balance , as average yields below 2 percent on now accounts limit flows into other checkable deposits and as compensating balances fall in response to increases in earnings credit rates .
b PAR 31 m1 is expected to increase at only a 3 - 1/2 percent rate from june to september under alternative b .17 

c SENT -- 15 the federal funds rate would be boosted 1/4 percentage point to 4 - 1/2 percent under alternative c , and the borrow- ing allowance would be raised to $ 350 million .
c PAR 28 the committee could see alternative c as appropriate if it believed that sufficient evidence had accumulated to warrant a continued gradual tightening of policy to prevent the economy from overheating .
c PAR 28 because the 25-basis - point firming in the federal funds rate under this alternative is not fully incorporated in current mar- ket quotes , other short - term interest rates would probably edge up in response .
c PAR 28 this action could provide some support for the dollar ; however , if it were undertaken in the context of a seriously weakening dollar , and were seen as intended primarily to prop up the currency , it could well be viewed by the market as insufficient .
c PAR 28 that circum- stance aside , greater market confidence that inflation pressures might be restrained could help limit increases in intermediate- and long- term interest rates in response to this alternative .
c PAR 28 with market portfolios now generally aligned to expectations of gradually rising money market interest rates , the move seems unlikely to prompt further increases in actual and implied volatility in bond markets .


