
b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would continue to trade around 4 - 3/4 percent , consistent with retaining an allowance of $ 475 million for adjustment plus sea-
b PAR 8 inaction might be deemed particularly appropriate if the committee believed that strains on capacity could be less pressing than in the staff forecast , either because potential output might be greater than assumed by the staff or because more restraint on spending could be in the pipeline in view of the substantial increases in interest rates over the past year .
b PAR 8 more- over , slow growth of a broad array of monetary and credit aggregates might be seen as suggesting that financial conditions are not con- ducive to a pickup in underlying inflation .
b PAR 8 a pause would allow the committee to accumulate more evidence on these questions . such a wait - and - see posture would accord with the tone of the press statement announcing the policy action taken at the august meeting .
b PAR 9 market opinions on what the committee might do at this meeting are split .
b PAR 9 some analysts have interpreted the recent economic news as implying sufficiently greater inflation potential to overcome any presumption of a policy pause ; they expect a firming action , per- haps of 50 basis points .
b PAR 9 others still anticipate a hiatus in the process of policy tightening ; however , even many of those in the latter camp seem to expect some action no later than the november meeting .
b PAR 9 while few actually foresee a 25 basis point increase , the composite effect of these different views has produced a federal funds futures rate for october that is 25 basis points above the current funds rate .
b PAR 9 nonetheless , maintenance of existing reserve conditions under alternative b might elicit little reaction in rates beyond the very shortest maturities because market participants would assume that tightening had simply been postponed .
b PAR 9 in these circumstances , longer- term instruments might trade in their current ranges at least for a time , although security prices probably will remain quite sensitive to news bearing on inflation pressures as market participants attempt to gauge the extent of future policy restraint .
b PAR 9 in that regard , under the staff forecast , economic releases over the next few months would suggest that inflation is on a slightly higher track and that final demand remains fairly vigorous .
b PAR 9 absent unanticipated changes in policy abroad , the foreign exchange value of the dollar most likely would remain around its current level , though it could come under some downward pressure if inflation expectations began to deteriorate further .
b SENT -- for illustrative purposes , the path under alternative b was derived assuming that the funds rate would hold at its current level for the remainder of the year .
b PAR 14 over the september - to - december period , m2 would expand at a 1 - 1/2 percent rate under alternative b .
b PAR 14 the staff has assumed that deposit rates will continue to adjust sluggishly to market rates .
b PAR 14 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 14 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 14 d levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 0.0 to 4.01994 target ranges :
b PAR 14 chart 2 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 14 o n d j -h 3750 3450i chart 3 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 14 * d h 4250 -h
b PAR 14 j ' '' ' '' ' '' ' ''
b PAR 14 chart 4 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives s15 % s10 % .
b PAR 14 5 % s% d chart 5 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level in addition , declines in mortgage prepayments will continue to depress demand deposits .
b PAR 14 these factors will place a particular drag on liquid accounts , and m1 will expand at only a 2 - 1/2 percent rate over the period.6 while the growth of small time deposits should remain robust , not all the funds lost from liquid deposits will remain in m2 .
b PAR 14 direct purchases of securities , including noncompetitive tenders at treasury auctions , are anticipated to continue at a healthy clip .
b PAR 14 as a result , m2 velocity is expected to continue increasing rapidly in the fourth quarter -- at a rate near 5 percent .
b PAR 14 m3 growth should pick up a bit over the remainder of 1994 , reflecting somewhat reduced reliance of banks on nondeposit sources of funding .
b PAR 15 under alternative d , m2 would grow at a 1/2 percent rate over the september - to - december period .
b PAR 15 the sluggish adjustment of deposit rates to the rise in market rates would further widen opportunity costs , depressing m1 and savings deposits even more .
b PAR 15 however , should policy firming be accompanied by some price declines in capital markets , outflows from bond mutual funds could intensify , some of the outflows might find their way into deposits and money market mutual funds , partly offsetting the effects on m2 of the higher cost of holding deposits .
b PAR 15 m3 would grow at a 3/4 percent rate over the remaining months of the year , pulled down by a runoff of institu- tion - only money funds as their yields lag behind the increase in money market rates that would be in train under alternative d. 6 .
b PAR 15 rapid currency growth should continue to bolster m1 over the balance of the year .
b PAR 15 as a result , under alternative b , the monetary base should expand at about a 8 - 1/4 percent rate , while total reserves should grow at a 1 - 3/4 percent rate over the september - to - december period .
b PAR 15 directive language ( 17 ) presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the usual options for committee considera- tion .
b PAR 15 operational paragraph in the implementation of policy for the immediate future , the committee seeks to decrease somewhat
b PAR 15 ( slightly)/maintain / increase somewhat ( slightly ) the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions- , [ del : taking account of a possible increase in the discount rate . ]
b PAR 15 in the context of the committee 's long - run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth , and giving careful consideration to economic , financial , and monetary developments , slightly ( somewhat ) greater reserve restraint ( would / might ) or slightly ( somewhat ) lesser reserve restraint would ( might ) be acceptable in the intermeeting period .
b PAR 15 the contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in m2 and m3 over the balance of the year
b PAR 15 [ del : coming months . ]
b PAR 15 september 23 , 1994table 1 selected interest rates ( percent ) short - term long - term cds money corporate conventional home mortgages federal treasury bills secondary comm .
b PAR 15 market bank
b PAR 15 government constant a - utility municipal secondary primary funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently bond market market
b PAR 15 1-year 3 -month 1 -month fund loan
b PAR 15 3-year 10-year 30-year offered buyer fixed - rate fixed - rate arm 93 -- high -- low 94 -- high -- low monthly sep 93 oct 93 nov 93 dec 93 jan 94 feb 94 mar 94 apr 94 may 94 jun 94 jul 94 aug
b PAR 15 94 weekly daily note : weekly data for columns 1 through 11 are statement week averages .
b PAR 15 data in column 7 are taken from donoghue 's money fund report .
b PAR 15 columns 12,13 and 14 are 1-day quotes for friday , thursday or friday , respectively , following the end of the statement week .
b PAR 15 column 13 is the bond buyer revenue index .
b PAR 15 column 14 is the fnma purchase yield , plus loan servicing fee , on 30-day mandatory delivery commitments .
b PAR 15 column 15 is the average contract rate on new commitments for fixed - rate mortgages ( frms ) with 80 percent loan - to - value ratios at major institutional lenders .
b PAR 15 column 16 is the average initial contract rate on new commitments for 1-year , adjustable- rate mortgages ( arms ) at major institutional lenders offering both frms and arms with the same number of discount points .
b PAR 15 table 1 strictly confidential ( fr)- money and credit aggregate measures c fomc seasonally adjusted money stock measures and liquid assets bank credit domestic nonfinancial debt ' nontransactions components total loans lotal loans period
b PAR 15 m3 l and u.
b PAR 15 other ' total2 in m2 in m3
b PAR 15 only investments ' government annual growth rates(s ) : annually ( q4 to q4 )
b PAR 15 quarterly average monthly levels ( $ billions ) :
b PAR 15 monthly weekly 1 . adjusted for breaks caused by redassifications .
b PAR 15 debt data are on a monthly average basis , derived by averaging end - of - month levels of adjacent months , and have been adjusted to remove discontnuities .
b PAR 15 p preliminary pe preliminary estimate appendix table 2 components of money stock and related measures seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted strictly confidential ( fr)- class
b PAR 15 ii fomc september 26,1994 money market overnight small mutual funds
b PAR 15 large other rps and denomi- general denomi- term term short - term period urrency demand checkable euro- savings nation purpose institutions ation p 's euro- savings
b PAR 15 r commeral b rs deposits deposits dollars deposits time and di lae nsabd putis cesan nsa ' deposits broker only deposits nsa 's de1aler levels ( billions ) : annually ( 4th qtr . )
b PAR 15 monthly 1 .
b PAR 15 net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items .
b PAR 15 2 . includes money market deposit accounts .
b PAR 15 3 . includes retail repurchase agreements .
b PAR 15 all ira and keogh accounts at commercial banks and thrift institutions are subtracted from small time deposits .
b PAR 15 4 . excludes ira and keogh accounts .
b PAR 15 net of large denomination time deposits held by money market mutual funds , depository institutions , u.s .
b PAR 15 government and foreign banks and official institutions .
b PAR 15 p preliminary september 23 , 1994 net changes in system holdings of securites1 millions of dollars ,
b PAR 15 not seasonally adjusted strictly confidential ( fr ) class ii - fomc treasury bills treasurycoupons federal net change spurs 3 agendes outrightperiod net redeptions
b PAR 15 net ne purchases redemptions net redemptions holdings
b PAR 15 5 purchases ( - ) change w n 1 - 5 5 - 10 over 10 ( . )
b PAR 15 total 4 net rps 1994 ---q1 1993 september 1994 january weekly june 8 july 6 august 3 september 7 memo : level ( bil .
b PAR 15 6 september 21 _ .~
b PAR 15 .. ~ 1 . change from end - of - period to end - of - period .
b PAR 15 4 . reflects net change in redemptions ( - ) of treasury and agency securities .
b PAR 15 outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts .
b PAR 15 5 . includes change in rps ( + ) , matched sale - purchase transactions ( - ) , and matched purchase sale transactions ( + ) .
b PAR 15 outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts , and short - term notes acquired 6 .
b PAR 15 the levels of agency issues were as follows : in exchange for maturing bills .
b PAR 15 excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues .
b PAR 15 within 10 1 year 1 - 5 5 - 10 over 10 total september 21

c PAR 11 the 25 basis point tightening of alternative c is con- sistent with the current structure of market rates , and this policy action might well trigger only muted interest rate reactions .
c PAR 11 how- ever ,
c PAR 11 since most market participants expect either no action or a 50 basis point tightening , alternative c could raise questions about system intentions , potentially unsettling markets .
c PAR 11 a considerable portion of the 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate under alternative d would pass through to other short - term rates .
c PAR 11 in light of recent experience and the split in market expectations , it 's dif- ficult to say what immediate impact this alternative would have on interest rates in capital markets .
c PAR 11 eventually , assuming economic and price data consistent with the staff forecast , intermediate - term yields could tend to work their way a bit higher , as market partici- pants raised their expected path for federal reserve tightening in this phase of the business cycle .
c PAR 11 but the system 's evident willing- ness to deal with inflation pressures through a 50 basis point move should alleviate longer - run concerns in this regard , limiting any increases in bond yields .
c PAR 11 with the rise in real interest rates , the dollar would likely appreciate somewhat on exchange markets .
c SENT -- ( the response of the aggregates under alternative c would lie midway between the two alternatives . ) alt .

