
b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 3 - 1/4 percent in association with ad- justment plus seasonal borrowing of $ 75 million .
b PAR 9 with market participants expecting appreciable increases in the federal funds rate in coming months , including 25 basis points at the march fomc meeting , interest rates could tend to drift lower under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative b . rate de-
b PAR 9 clines would be quite small initially if market participants still believed that the next tightening step was imminent but had merely been delayed , perhaps by the unsettled market conditions of late .
b PAR 9 as the intermeeting period unfolds , economic data in line with the green- book projection should suggest moderate economic growth and no inten- sification of inflation pressures , and interest rates could fall noticeably under this alternative as markets reassessed the trajectory of federal reserve tightening .
b PAR 9 the scope for any rate decreases , especially at the long end of the market , could be quite limited , however , if the hiatus in tightening were to call into question the federal reserve 's anti - inflationary resolve .
b PAR 10 later in the intermeeting period the borrowing allowance may need to be raised to reflect normal increases in the demand for seasonal credit . head off additional inflationary pressures .
b PAR 10 the staff economic fore- cast assumes that policy needs to tighten eventually to maintain high enough real rates to avoid an overheating of the economy .
b PAR 10 however , that forecast does not necessarily assume a move as soon as the march meeting .
b PAR 10 even if long - term rates were expected to decline appreci- ably , alternative b might be selected were the economy nevertheless seen as remaining below
b PAR 10 its long - term potential and inflation pres- sures contained .
b PAR 10 such an assessment could be based on a sense that recent data suggested less momentum in the economy or on a judgment that the behavior of costs and broad price indexes has been indicating a greater degree of slack in the economy than embodied in the staff forecast .
b SENT -- ( 16 ) growth in m2 would average 2 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate over the february - to - june period under alternative b , up from only 3/4 percent over january and february , even as growth in nominal income continues to slow .
b SENT -- nonetheless , m2 velocity would con- tinue to rise in the second quarter under alternative b , but its 2 - 3/4 percent annual pace of expansion would be well below that of the two previous quarters .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the federal funds rate would increase 50 basis points , to 3 - 3/4 percent through an increase in the initial borrowing allowance to $ 100 million .
c PAR 12 in addition to possibly contributing to more settled market conditions , alternative c might be preferred if the committee saw significant risks of greater inflation going forward .
c PAR 12 to fore- stall this possibility , the committee may wish to take prompter action than assumed in the staff forecast .
c PAR 12 the 50 basis point increase in the funds rate under this alternative would tend to sustain the backup in real intermediate- and long - term rates , which may be seen as needed to restrain inflation pressures , especially in the context of a con- siderably more accommodative lending posture of intermediaries .
c PAR 13 instead of tightening to the degree contained in alternative c , the committee could firm reserve conditions by enough to raise the federal funds rate 25 basis points .
c PAR 13 such an action would validate market expectations for the outcome of the meeting , and the effect on most interest rates would be small .
c PAR 13 this alternative might be favored if the committee were not certain that the strength of demands in the economy and credit markets required a 1/2 percentage point hike in the funds rate at this time .
c PAR 13 however , such a smaller action could leave market participants with a sense that another tightening might be forthcoming fairly soon , perhaps contributing to continued market skittishness .

