
b PAR 8 such a view might follow from placing more weight on recent 8 .
b PAR 8 later in the intermeeting period it may prove necessary to reduce the borrowing allowance a little to reflect the onset of the typical unwinding of the summer bulge in seasonal borrowing .
b PAR 8 soft spending indicators , on undesired inventory buildups , or on the effects of previous policy tightenings . waiting for more clarifica- tion of how much slowing in spending growth is already in train would be seen as posing fewer risks than implied in the staff forecast if it were thought that favorable readings on price indexes suggested that some slack remained in the economy .
b PAR 9 market participants now seem to expect at least a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate at the august meeting , with some possibility of a 50 basis point increase ; a 4 - 3/4 percent funds rate is anticipated by late september .
b PAR 9 in these circumstances , the choice of no change in the stance of policy under alternative b would result in some decline in short - term interest rates , and the dollar might tend to weaken on foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 9 long - term rates could move lower , at least initially .
b PAR 9 market participants might view the absence of action as indicating a milder degree of tightening into the future as well -- perhaps because the federal reserve saw less inflation in the outlook than previously thought .
b PAR 9 however , rate de-
b PAR 9 clines would be limited to the extent that market participants ques- tioned the fed 's anti - inflation resolve ; absent subsequent data point- ing to further weakening in aggregate demand or surprisingly modest price pressures , concerns about inflation would mount , pushing up longer - term interest rates .
b SENT -- the path for alternative b is based on the assumption of no change in the federal funds rate for the rest of this year .
b PAR 15 m2 would grow at a 1 - 1/2 percent rate over the july - to- december period under alternative b , down from the july pace but quicker than that over the first six months of the year .
b PAR 15 acting to boost growth in this aggregate would be some narrowing of opportunity costs as deposit rates , especially those on small time deposits , moved up in lagged response to earlier increases in market rates .
b PAR 15 renewed outflows from bond mutual funds over recent weeks , even as bond rates 9 .
b PAR 15 the interest rate path of the greenbook forecast , because it assumes continuing increases over the balance of the year , corresponds to none of the bluebook alternatives .
b PAR 15 with the interest rates and nominal income of the greenbook , the staff would expect m2 growth at a 1 percent rate for the july - to - december period and 1 - 1/2 percent for the year , and m3 growth at a 1/2 percent pace for both intervals ; m1 growth would be at a 2 - 1/4 percent rate from july to december and 3 - 3/4 percent for the year .
b PAR 15 although these money growth rates are roughly the same as those projected for alternative d , the higher year - end level of rates assumed in the greenbook implies slower growth of money and income in the first half of 1995 than would alternative d. alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 15 d levels in billions
b PAR 15 may-94 jun-94 jul-94 aug-94 sep-94 oct-94 nov-94
b PAR 15 dec-94 monthly growth rates jun-94 jul-94 aug-94 sep-94 oct-94
b PAR 15 dec-94 quarterly averages 94 q1 94 q2 94 q3 94 q4 growth rate from dec-93 jul-94 jul-94 dec-94 93 q4 jul-94 91 q4 92 q4 93 q4 92 q4 93 q4
b PAR 15 target ranges : 1 to 5 0 to 4 chart 2 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives ~~~ .. ' ' ~ ' chart 3 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives chart 4 billions of dollars 15%-- actual level short - run alternatives .
b PAR 15 n d j chart 5 debt billions of dollars s
b PAR 15 actual level projected level
b PAR 15 j have fluctuated around levels attained in the spring , suggest that households may continue to rebalance portfolios in a way that might also impart some upward tilt to growth of the broader aggregates .
b PAR 15 restraining monetary growth is some projected slowing of nominal income growth , even under the unchanged interest rate assumptions of this alternative.10 m2 velocity would rise at around a 3 percent rate in the third and fourth quarters , somewhat slower than over the first half and about in line with predictions of traditional models of money
b PAR 15 m3 is projected to grow at a 3/4 percent pace in the july - to - december period , a bit less slowly than in the first half of the year .
b PAR 15 abstracting from the effects of fin 39 , we expect a little more growth in bank credit over the second half of the year-- though not a persistence of the unusually rapid increase in july .
b PAR 15 moreover , with short - term rates unchanged under alternative b , insti- tution - only money funds should be stable after large runoffs through the spring .
b PAR 16 under alternative d , m2 would grow at a 1 percent rate over the july - to - december period .
b PAR 16 opportunity costs would widen under this alternative , particularly damping m1 and savings deposits .
b PAR 16 how- ever , if bond yields backed up under this alternative , the additional capital losses might accentuate a redirection of savings back into m2 , offsetting some of this restraining effect .
b PAR 16 m3 would grow at only a 10 .
b PAR 16 m1 would expand at about a 3 percent rate over the july - to- december period under alternative b . continued rapid currency growth would account for this expansion , as higher opportunity costs reached earlier this year and slow mortgage refinancing activity hold transaction deposits about flat .
b PAR 16 the monetary base would grow at a 7 - 1/2 percent rate and total reserves would contract at a 3 percent rate over this period .
b PAR 16 + is predicted to grow a little more rapidly than m2 over the second half of this year , but not as fast as nominal output , and its velocity would still register an appreciable increase .
b PAR 16 1/2 percent rate from july to december , as institution - only money funds ran off appreciably owing to their lagging yields .
b PAR 16 directive language 

c PAR 11 an increase of this size , by itself , would be unlikely to have a substan- tial effect on spending or prices , but a small tightening could lend assurance that policy had firmed enough to keep the economy around its potential .
c PAR 11 although further tightening could prove to be necessary , the committee might judge that the case for a larger move is not yet estab- lished .
c PAR 11 as noted above , alternative c is about what is built into the structure of market interest rates , and neither interest nor exchange rates are likely to react very strongly to such an action .
c PAR 11 however , this would be the first move since the announcement in may that excess accommodation had been substantially removed and could be seen as mark- ing a return to the usual practice of reacting to incoming data with small changes in reserve conditions .
c PAR 11 markets could become somewhat more unsettled and volatile , especially if the rise in short - term rates were perceived as less than needed and therefore likely to be followed by another increase but of uncertain timing .
c PAR 12 the more forceful move of alternative d might be chosen if the committee viewed the economic situation as highly likely to require substantial additional monetary tightening , for example , of the scope embodied in the steep tilt to the yield curve over the next few years .
c PAR 12 alternatively , the committee also might take this action if it believed that only moderate further tightening were required to hold inflation in check .
c PAR 12 in this regard , the 50 basis points of alternative d would imply more assurance of this outcome than alternative c and , therefore , would be more likely to be followed by a period of stability of short - term rates .
c PAR 12 given these alternative rationales , the committee might want to explain its reasoning publicly -- an opportunity for which would naturally occur if the increase were accomplished through a hike in the discount rate .
c PAR 12 the market response might depend importantly on how the action was perceived . if the market saw it as one of a series of further steps , interest rates could rise substantially along the maturity spectrum .
c PAR 12 on the other hand , if markets saw the increase as the last at least for a time , short - term rates would rise , but inter- mediate- and possibly long - term rates might move very little .
c PAR 12 some forward rates would be revised down and reductions in expected volatil- ity might lower risk premiums on longer - term assets .

