
b PAR 9 choice of the unchanged policy of alternative b might be based on the judgments that most of the effects of previous increases in interest rates are still in the pipeline , that convincing signs of higher inflation have not yet appeared , and that under these circum- stances the committee can await evidence indicating whether the effects of previous monetary tightening will be sufficient to restrain spending adequately .
b PAR 9 the weakness in the monetary aggregates and moderate expansion of overall measures of credit may be seen as offering support for the view that financial conditions are not con- ducive to a sustained pickup in inflation .
b PAR 9 indeed , even without another tightening move , m2 seems likely to come in just below the 1 percent lower bound of its annual growth range this year and m1 to come in at only 2 percent .
b SENT -- under alternative b , offering rates through the first quarter would continue to adjust upward in the face of steady money market rates .
b SENT -- both m2 and m3 would record slower growth over the next five months than under alternative b .

c SENT -- a still larger increase in the federal funds rate than envisioned under alternative c is also discussed .
c PAR 11 the 50 basis point rise in the funds rate under alternative c could be favored on the grounds that the incoming data on economic activity again have been stronger than expected .
c PAR 11 with the economy perhaps overshooting its potential rather than settling into a " soft landing , " the risks of an associated future pickup in inflation pressures would seem to have increased .
c PAR 11 a 1/2 point move in the federal funds rate , perhaps accompanied by an equal increment to the discount rate , could be seen as keeping pace with the need for policy firming in a deliberate manner consistent with the size and frequency of recent policy actions .
c PAR 11 the resulting real federal funds rate would be a bit above its long - run average , but restraint of at least this magnitude might be appropriate in light of the current pressure on capacity and the stimulative effects of the drop in the dollar and the easing of terms and standards of bank lending .
c PAR 12 with market participants generally appearing to have built in a move of at least this size , interest rates could exhibit little initial reaction to the implementation of alternative c . the receipt of information on output and price developments over the intermeeting period along the lines of the relatively robust greenbook forecast might reinforce the market 's perception that additional system tightening is required , and interest rates could edge higher later in the period .
c PAR 12 the foreign exchange value of the dollar could remain around recent trading levels if nominal interest rates move sufficiently higher to offset the effects of a heightened sense of potential inflationary pressures .
c SENT -- ( 16 )  under the 50 basis point increase in the funds rate of alternative c ,


