
b PAR 7 two policy alternatives are presented below for con- sideration by the committee .
b PAR 7 the associated level of adjust- ment plus seasonal borrowing would initially be $ 125 million , but borrowing would subsequently drift lower in keeping with the typical winding down of demands for seasonal credit .
b PAR 7 alternative
b PAR 7 c entails a 50 basis point rise in the federal funds rate , to 6 percent , achieved either through an equivalent increase in the discount rate with the same path for the borrowing allowance or an increase in the initial borrowing allowance to $ 175 million , with the same seasonal reductions thereafter .
b PAR 9 keeping the stance of policy unchanged , as under alternative b , might appear warranted in light of the size of the recent action and of current financial conditions .
b PAR 9 real short- and long - term interest rates now look to be somewhat above longer - term averages , the dollar has moved higher , and all money measures have remained slug- gish . if the committee thought these developments implied a reason- able probability that policy actions to date had put in place suffi- cient restraint to contain inflation , it might want to await addi- tional information in gauging the appropriate scope and timing of any future action .
b PAR 9 moreover , the committee might have gained some leeway to pause in its tightening , despite persistent strength in production and spending indicators , because the larger move in november , together with favorable wage and price data , has helped to calm developing inflation fears .
b PAR 9 furthermore , after the news on orange county and on derivatives - related difficulties at some bank holding companies , mar- ket participants seem to be especially wary of additional announce- ments of large losses on leveraged or derivatives positions .
b PAR 9 through year - end , lenders are likely to be particularly conscious of possible credit quality problems of the counterparties that show up on their published statements .
b PAR 9 while a policy tightening on december 20 is unlikely to trigger market dislocations , such a possibility can not be ruled out ; in any case , the chances of such problems will be even more remote after year - end .
b PAR 10 as noted above , market participants now assess the probability of a near - term tightening as fairly low , but they see an intermeeting move before the next scheduled fomc meeting on january 31 and february 1 as more likely .
b PAR 10 in these circumstances , and given the seemingly greater confidence of late in financial markets that the system will act as appropriate to counter a buildup in inflationary pressures , interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar are unlikely to change very much in the immediate aftermath of a deci- sion to leave policy unchanged , as under alternative b . movements in financial markets subsequently will depend , of course , on the nature of incoming data .
b PAR 10 continued strength in employment or final demand , especially if accompanied by adverse wage and price developments , would firm market expectations of system action early next year .
b PAR 10 inaction in the face of such data could risk the re - emergence of con- cerns that the federal reserve was falling behind in its efforts to contain inflation , raising long - term interest rates and weakening the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
b PAR 15 under alternative b , m2 would strengthen to a 1 - 1/4 percent rate over the november - to - march period .
b PAR 15 opportunity costs of holding m2 - -especially the small time deposit and money market mutual funds components -- should narrow from current high levels as retail deposit and money fund rates continue to adjust upward to recent in- creases in market rates .
b PAR 15 as a result , growth in m2 velocity would slow to a 5 percent rate in the first quarter of next year from a 7 percent rate in the current quarter .
b PAR 15 m1 would continue to edge down- ward in response to previous increases in opportunity costs , although the drag from the slowdown of mortgage refinancing activity will be diminishing as such activity stabilizes at relatively low levels.7 boosted in part by faster growth in m2 , m3 would be expected to grow at a 2 - 1/4 percent rate over the november - to - march period .
b PAR 15 in addition , a pickup in m3-type money market mutual funds , as rates on such funds catch up with market rates , would act to lift m3 growth .
b PAR 15 with the deposit components of m1 contracting over the november - to - march period , total reserves would fall at a 5 percent annual rate .
b PAR 15 in contrast , the monetary base would rise at a 6 percent pace , supported by the growth of currency .
b PAR 15 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 15 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 15 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1994 target ranges : 1 to 5 0 to 4 1995 target ranges : 1 to 5 0 to 4 ( provisional ) chart 2 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives on d chart 3 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars -- actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 15 j ' ' '' ' ' ' '' ' chart 4 - actual level short - run alternatives -5%-i
b PAR 15 j billions of dollars 10%- 1220 chart 5 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level on d
b PAR 15 j bank issuance of large cds is expected to remain brisk , despite some moderation in loan growth , as bank reliance on nondeposit funding continues to abate .

c PAR 11 the 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate under alternative c might be favored if the committee viewed the recent string of surprisingly strong economic data as clearly indicat- ing that the risks are still tilted in the direction of sustained faster inflation .
c PAR 11 the resulting 6 percent federal funds rate would imply a real federal funds rate that falls more assuredly in a zone that could be characterized as moderately restrictive .
c PAR 11 following so soon after the november move , a policy tightening at this meeting would consolidate , or even extend , the gains made in reducing infla- tion expectations in financial markets .
c PAR 11 the inclination to adopt alternative c would be bolstered by a belief that financial markets have largely absorbed the orange county shock and the risks of further disruptions are de minimus .
c PAR 12 under alternative c , money market interest rates would firm somewhat , especially those at the shortest end , as the tightening would come somewhat sooner than now expected .
c PAR 12 to the degree that market participants saw such an action as evidence of an even stronger anti - inflationary resolve of the committee , nominal forward rates at intermediate- and longer - term maturities would tend to decline , limit- ing any increase in longer - term rates .
c PAR 12 real interest rates , however , would rise , bolstering the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 12 quality spreads could widen a bit as higher rates increased debt - ser- vicing burdens and raised questions about the ongoing strength of the expansion .
c PAR 14 projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates from november to march are shown below under both alternatives .
c PAR 14 ( more detailed data appear on the table and charts on the following pages . )
c PAR 14 the staff expects the growth of the monetary aggregates to remain damped over coming months , restrained by prior ( and under alternative c , current ) increases in opportunity costs .
c PAR 14 nonetheless , growth rates for the aggregates generally are a little faster than envisioned in november .
c PAR 14 expansion in nominal income is now seen as stronger over the late months of 1994 and early months of 1995 .
c PAR 14 in addition , the broader aggregates are likely to be buoyed slightly by shifts from longer - term mutual funds in the wake of less attractive returns and unfavorable publicity ; however , with deposit rates still well short of market rates , most of the savings diverted from mutual funds is likely to continue to go into direct purchases of securities .
c PAR 14 growth from november to march alt .
c PAR 14 c m2 1 - 1/4 1/2 m3
c SENT -- ( 16 ) under alternative c , opportunity costs would tend to increase as the rise in money market rates outpaced those on m2 com- ponents .


