a PAR 12 if the committee saw reasonably high odds of more restrictive effects on the economy than the staff forecast , it might favor an easing of the funds rate , as under alternative a . such effects would come at a time when the economy already is expected to be expanding at a rate less than the growth rate of its potential and with monetary policy possibly seen as also on the restrictive side .
a PAR 12 in july , the committee reversed only a portion of the move toward policy restraint it made last winter when the risks to the economy of rising inflation were much larger .
a PAR 12 real rates across the maturity spectrum remain elevated by historical standards , though , to be sure , the level of equilibrium real rates is uncertain .
a PAR 12 moreover , real rates could move up a little further over time with an unchanged funds rate , as current expectations of a policy ease were frustrated .
a PAR 13 the downward adjustment of short - term market interest rates that would accompany the unanticipated implementation of alternative a would be a little smaller than the 1/2 percentage point cut in the funds rate operating target .
a PAR 13 market participants may well interpret the action as responding to prospective fiscal restraint or to receding inflation pressures , so inflation expectations might not react adversely .
a PAR 13 on the other hand , they are not likely to project significant further rate cuts pending new information on these fac- tors , limiting rate decreases .
a PAR 13 on balance , the associated declines in intermediate- and longer - term interest rates probably would be smaller than the fall in short - term rates , which is the historically typical market reaction .
a PAR 13 the dollar 's exchange value could be expected to extend its most recent decline .

b PAR 11 although the data received over the intermeeting period have strengthened market participants ' conviction that federal reserve easing has become more likely by year - end , only a small probability of a move at the september meeting is seen .
b PAR 11 thus , choice by the commit- tee of alternative b 's unchanged funds rate likely would engender just a minor increase of short - term rates .
b PAR 11 any immediate reaction in bond or foreign exchange markets should be muted .
b PAR 11 over the upcoming inter- meeting period , economic reports consistent with the subdued growth in the staff forecast could keep alive expectations of subsequent mone- tary easing , allowing intermediate- and long - term interest rates to remain near current trading ranges .
b PAR 11 the exchange value of the dollar would be little changed .
b PAR 11 of course , markets may be buffeted by developments in the legislative process suggesting shifting odds on the extent of deficit reduction .
b PAR 16 without serious disruptions to governmental operations , federal debt growth should slow from its pace earlier in the year to a 3 - 1/4 percent annual rate over the last four months of the year .
b PAR 16 federal debt growth would continue at a 4 - 1/4 percent pace over the same interval .
b PAR 16 for businesses , borrowing will remain below the first half of the year , held down by lower inventory investment and slower growth in capital spending ; the composition of borrowing , however , should tilt back toward the bond market .
b PAR 16 for households , some pickup in mortgage borrowing should counter a further moderation in consumer credit . concerning credit supply conditions , banks remain comfortably positioned to lend , although the growing strains on households may lead to a little more caution in this area .
b PAR 16 as shown in the table be- low , total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to ex- pand at a 4 percent rate over the final four months of this year , placing this aggregate in the fourth quarter
b PAR 16 a little more than 5 per- cent above its year - earlier level .
b PAR 16 implied sept .
b PAR 16 to1   1994-q4 1995 december to 1995-q4 ranges m2 5.7 4.9 1 - 5
b PAR 16 6.7 2 - 6 total debt 4.0 5.2 3 - 7 note : growth rates based on alternative b . 1 . august to december for debt measures .
b PAR 17 the broad monetary aggregates are expected to grow over the remainder of this year somewhat more rapidly than forecasted in the last bluebook .
b PAR 17 the additional projected strength primarily owes to the recent decline in market interest rates , both short- and long- term , which has further narrowed the opportunity costs of holding retail money balances.4 under alternative b , m2 is projected to grow at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate over the final three months of the year .
b PAR 17 m3 is foreseen as expanding at a 6 percent rate , somewhat faster than the staff 's projection of bank credit expansion , reflecting the an- ticipated ongoing shift from nondeposit to deposit sources of funding .
b PAR 17 in the fourth quarter , the velocities of both monetary aggregates would continue to decline , albeit at a reduced pace .
b PAR 17 m2 in the fourth quarter would be quite near the top of its 1 to 5 percent annual growth cone , while m3 would be well above its 2 to 6 percent annual growth range .
b PAR 17 ( a table showing the growth rates of the monetary aggregates over the balance of the year under each of the alternatives is attached . )
b PAR 17 m1 is expected to continue to decline over the remainder of the year , at about a 1 - 1/2 percent rate under alternative b , as still more banks introduce sweep accounts that transfer funds automatically from now accounts to mmdas to reduce reserve requirements .
b PAR 17 assuming about $ 10 billion of additional sweeps over the last three months of the year , revised up from $ 3 billion in the last bluebook , this effect will reduce the m1 growth rate over the last three months of the year by 3 - 1/2 percentage points and over the four quarters of 1995 by 2 - 3/4 percentage points .
b PAR 17 actual m1 over the four quarters of this year is now projected to edge down by 1 percent under alternative b . alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 17 c levels in billions
b PAR 17 jul-95 aug-95
b PAR 17 sep-95 oct-95 nov-95 dec-95 monthly growth rates
b PAR 17 jul-95 aug-95
b PAR 17 sep-95 oct-95 nov-95
b PAR 17 dec-95 quarterly averages 95 ql 95 q2 95 q3 95 q4 growth rate from
b PAR 17 dec-94 jun-95 sep-95 sep-95
b PAR 17 sep-95 dec-95 94 q4
b PAR 17 94 q 4 dec-95 93 q4 94 q4 94 q4
b PAR 17 q4 95 q3 95 q4 1995
b PAR 17 target ranges : 1 to 5 2 to 6 directive language 

c PAR 14 the 1/2 percentage point policy tightening of alternative c could be favored if the inflation performance projected by the staff to accompany an unchanged federal funds rate were seen as repre- senting an insufficiently rapid approach to the committee 's ultimate objective of price stability .
c PAR 14 indeed , the staff forecast shows very little downward tilt to inflation rates .
c PAR 14 moreover , the current un- employment rate is a little below the staff 's estimate of the nairu , and economic growth going forward at a pace below potential is by no means assured -- especially in light of current bond rates and stock prices .
c PAR 14 on the basis of relationships embodied in the greenbook alternative simulation , a policy tightening of the dimensions of alternative c would nudge economic growth to below 2 percent over the next two years , opening up enough slack in labor and product markets to make more noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and beyond .
c PAR 15 the 1/2 percentage point hike in the funds rate of alternative c would catch market participants off guard .
c PAR 15 their inter- pretation of the action , of course , would be conditioned by the word-
c PAR 15 ing of the accompanying announcement , which presumably would emphasize more aggressive pursuit of the committee 's longer - run price stability objective .
c PAR 15 in that context , the sharp jump in money market interest rates may be accompanied by a much more muted increase in bond yields , if longer - term inflation expectations were favorably affected .
c PAR 15 if the impact on inflation expectations were negligible , though , an appreci- able selloff in the bond market could result .
c PAR 15 in any event , some intermediate - term rates -- real and nominal -- would rise significantly as market participants revised up their expected path for short - term rates for some time into the future .
c PAR 15 the exchange value of the dollar likely would strengthen .

