a PAR 10 a further easing of policy , as under alternative a , could be supported if recent price and wage news were read as suggest- ing that the underlying determinants of inflation were more favorable than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 10 with inflation and inflation expectations decreasing in these circumstances , nominal rates would have to be reduced to keep real rates from rising .
a PAR 10 indeed , the committee might want to lower real rates as well if it wished to realize a little higher output as well as lower inflation .
a PAR 10 in addition , the committee might want to consider lowering the federal funds rate if it were concerned that risks to the economic outlook were still seen to be concentrated on the down side .
a PAR 10 such risks might be viewed as height- ened by the recent increases in longer - term interest rates and in the foreign exchange value of the dollar , if the committee thought that markets had overreacted to stronger data , especially in light of on- coming fiscal restraint .
a PAR 11 the drop in the federal funds rate of 1/2 percentage point contemplated under alternative a would be much larger and sooner than market participants currently expect .
a PAR 11 as a consequence , short- term interest rates would fall nearly 50 basis points and banks prob- ably would cut the prime rate 1/2 percentage point .
a PAR 11 the immediate effect of an easing likely would be to reduce intermediate- and long- term rates as well , especially if the federal reserve 's perceived optimism on inflation were to influence the market 's assessment of the outlook . unless incoming data confirmed an improved inflation pic- ture , however , market participants would come to question the sus- tainability of the drop in short - term rates , and intermediate- and long - term rates could back up .
a PAR 11 in any case , the dollar likely would fall as system action reduced real interest rates .
a PAR 15 growth rates of the broad monetary aggregates are ex- pected to continue to slow from their recent very rapid pace , but to remain relatively strong .
a PAR 15 portfolio shifts into m2 assets should abate with the stability of short - term rates and now - higher long - term rates , which make bond funds more attractive .
a PAR 15 the velocity of m2 is expected to decline in the third quarter , but primarily because of the bulge in m2 growth already experienced .
a PAR 15 in the fourth quarter , velocity is projected to be flat .
a PAR 15 for the year , m2 is expected to remain below the 5 percent upper bound of its annual range , even under alternative a .4
a PAR 15 the projected softening in m3 owes primarily to lower growth in institutional money funds as their yields become better aligned with market rates .
a PAR 15 bank credit is expected to expand at a moderate pace , and issuance of managed liabilities in m3 should remain strong , perhaps encouraged to a small degree by the recent decline in deposit insurance premiums .
a PAR 15 m3 appears likely to break the upper bound of its new range under any of the alternative policy 4 .
a PAR 15 m1 is expected to continue to decline as more banks introduce arrangements to sweep funds from now accounts to mmdas to reduce re- serve requirements . assuming only a moderate amount of about $ 1 bil- lion of additional sweeps over each of the last four months of the year , this financial innovation will reduce m1 growth over the four quarters of 1995 by 1 - 3/4 percentage points .
a PAR 15 such programs , of course , leave m2 unaffected .
a PAR 15 ( a table showing the growth rates of the monetary aggre- gates over the balance of the year under each of the alternatives is attached . )
a PAR 15 m2 m3 alt .
a PAR 15 c levels in billions
a PAR 15 jul-95 aug-95
a PAR 15 sep-95 oct-95 nov-95 dec-95 monthly growth rates
a PAR 15 jul-95 aug-95
a PAR 15 sep-95 oct-95 nov-95
a PAR 15 dec-95 quarterly averages 95 q1 95 q2 95 q3 95 q4 growth rate from dec-94 jul-95
a PAR 15 94 q4 jul-95
a PAR 15 jul-95 dec-95 jul-95 95 q4 93 q4 94 q4 94 q4 95
a PAR 15 q2 94 q4 95 q4 1995
a PAR 15 target ranges : alt .
a PAR 15 c 2.0 to alt .
a PAR 15 c directive language 

b PAR 8 financial markets still see slight odds of a monetary easing by year - end , but they do not expect any action at the august fomc meeting .
b PAR 8 thus , the choice of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b should have little immediate impact on market interest rates .
b PAR 8 over the intermeeting period , data in line with the staff 's forecast of a pickup in output growth to a moderate pace might remove any lingering expectations of policy ease among market participants ; but with inflation also projected to be quite subdued , substantial shifts in the anticipated course of policy are unlikely .
b PAR 8 at the cur- rent ceiling for federal government debt , the staff does not expect the treasury to alter financing patterns much until late september or to run out of cash until the first half of november .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , as the room under the debt ceiling shrinks , absent signs of some narrow- ing of the differences between the president and congressional leaders , financial markets may begin to focus more on the implications for debt markets and the economy of a disruption in federal financing .
b PAR 8 or possibly even a temporary default .
b PAR 8 to date , interest rates appear to have been unaffected by the possibility of such a disruption , and over the intermeeting period , which ends before the new fiscal year , markets will probably remain of the view that in the end some com- promise will be reached to avert the most dire consequences .
b PAR 9 the stronger economic data available over the recent intermeeting period could be read as suggesting that policy in the latter part of 1994 and first part of 1995 might not have been as restraining as suggested by the level of short - term real rates relative to their long - run averages .
b PAR 9 nominal values of the foreign exchange value of the dollar and of bond yields are still appreciably below their levels of last fall , even though the nominal federal funds has been raised 1 percentage point on balance since that time .
b PAR 9 with inflation relatively subdued , it seems highly likely that real exchange rates and long - term interest rates have fallen notice- ably as well over the last nine months .
b PAR 9 these declines , together with generally supportive credit conditions , could be viewed as underpin- ning the continued momentum in business and household spending .
b PAR 9 in any event , an unchanged stance of policy would buy time for more in- formation to accumulate to determine whether the economy is indeed on track to a sustainable pace of expansion .
b PAR 14 moderate growth in gdp in the staff forecast is expected to be associated with some slowing in borrowing by nonfinancial sec- tors in the remaining months of the year .
b PAR 14 business requirements to fund inventory accumulation are diminishing , and borrowing for share retirements is likely to pause a bit before accelerating later this year and early next year to finance the consummation of recently announced mega - merger deals .
b PAR 14 in the household sector , debt should continue to expand around its recent pace , further increasing debt - to- income ratios .
b PAR 14 a pickup in mortgage financing in association with a little stronger residential housing activity will tend to be offset by a modest slowing in growth of consumer credit as repayments on loans for big - ticket items catch up with the earlier surge in extensions .
b PAR 14 credit should be readily available to private borrowers , though we expect an end to the trend of easing terms and conditions as lenders reassess risk and returns in an environment of moderate real income growth and rising debt of households and businesses .
b PAR 14 very large retirements of tax - exempt bonds and anemic gross issuance will further drag down the stock of tax - exempt debt , and , in the federal sector , debt growth in the near term is projected to slow even apart from debt - ceiling disruptions .
b PAR 14 consequently , as shown in the table below , total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a 3 - 3/4 percent rate over the final five months of this year , placing this aggregate in the fourth quarter 5 percent above its year - earlier level .
b PAR 14 growth in money and debt implied july to 1994-q4 1995 december to 1995-q4 ranges m2 5.2 4.6 1 - 5 m3 5.8 6.6 2 - 6
b PAR 14 -.6 total debt 3.8 5.0 3 - 7 note .
b PAR 14 growth rates based on alternative b . 

c PAR 12 the choice of the higher rates of alternative c would seem to rest on concerns about the longer - term inflation outlook .
c PAR 12 as noted , in the staff forecast , inflation holds steady through 1996 , and , with no slack in the economy at the end of the forecast period , would not be expected to decline appreciably in 1997 . if the commit- tee were intent on making measurable progress toward price stability in the next several years , a rise in the real federal funds rate from its current level would seem to be needed based on the relationships embodied in the staff forecast . to be sure , unexpected developments could reduce inflation pressures , perhaps by putting slack in the economy , but there can be no assurance of such a surprise on either the supply or demand sides .
c PAR 12 the need for a tightening of policy - reestablish a disinflationary trend might seem all the more pressing if the firmer spending data of late and the brisk pace of broad money growth , with the economy already producing around its potential , were seen as suggesting risks on the side of more inflation than in the staff forecast .
c PAR 13 intermediate- and long - term rates also would in- crease , with the extent of the rise depending on whether market par- ticipants saw the action as implying more underlying strength in aggregate demand and greater inflationary pressure than currently envisioned or whether this tightening were interpreted as suggesting more resolve by the committee to bring inflation down .


