a PAR 11 the choice of easing under alternative a might be favored if it were thought that some information about spending -- for example , soft industrial commodity prices and a sluggish manufacturing sector or slowing growth of broad money and credit -- was suggesting a weakening in aggregate demand not yet evident in more general statis- tics .
a PAR 11 these indicators might be signalling that real interest rates already have been on the high side , and these rates could be rising further , especially at the short end of the maturity spectrum , in light of the recent decline in inflation and , most likely , inflation expectations .
a PAR 11 in effect , the downward slope to the near - term yield curve and narrow spread of the entire curve could be signalling that real short - term rates are above those consistent with moderate growth , especially in the face of impending fiscal restraint .
a PAR 12 the cut in the federal funds rate of 50 basis points under alternative a would come sooner and be larger than now expected in the market .
a PAR 12 consequently , it would show through to other money market interest rates , and banks would trim 1/2 percentage point off the prime rate .
a PAR 12 the dollar would be expected to weaken on foreign exchange markets as interest rates on dollar - denominated assets fell in relation to those on other major currencies .
a PAR 12 the sustainability of any decline in bond rates would depend on whether market participants similarly saw the easing to be called for or rather viewed it to be premature and unsustainable , as might become the case if indicators in the period just ahead were broadly in line with the staff forecast .

b PAR 9 the greenbook forecast assumes no significant macro- economic effects from any temporary disruptions incurred in the process of determining the longer - run stance of fiscal policy .
b PAR 9 as noted above , the current funds rate is judged to be consistent with core consumer inflation staying at about 3 percent .
b PAR 9 despite the lack of a downward tilt to the inflation projection , the committee still might favor the unchanged stance of policy in alternative b if it viewed the benefits of further disinflation as insufficient to justify a more restrictive policy stance that pushed the economy below its potential .
b PAR 9 the case for alternative b would be even stronger if the committee viewed the staff inflation forecast as too pessimistic-- either because spending would be weaker or because the price - output relationship would be more favorable than the staff assessment .
b PAR 9 a government shutdown would disrupt the normal flow of economic data .
b PAR 9 retail sales for october would be released on november 14 , but consumer prices would not be available on the next day .
b PAR 9 moreover , uncertainties about the economic outlook might seem par- ticularly large , both because of the fiscal situation and because of conflicting signals about spending and production .
b PAR 9 such circumstances could reinforce the desire to stand pat , awaiting clarification of the outlook .
b PAR 10 earlier expectations of the possibility of easing at the november fomc meeting have largely been erased and , thus , the choice of alternative b should have little impact on market interest rates .
b PAR 10 the dollar would trade on foreign exchange markets around its current level .
b PAR 10 although market attention over the intermeeting period is likely to remain focused on the budget deliberations , evidence of persistent strength in private final demands along the lines of the staff forecast might cause markets to begin to question their expecta- tions about the path of interest rates going forward , and intermedi- ate- and long - term rates could edge higher .
b PAR 15 the table below presents expected growth of money and debt under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative b . in credit markets , supply conditions are expected to remain generally favorable .
b PAR 15 however , the likely cutback in business lending by japa- nese banks and possible tendency for consumer lenders to become more selective suggest that credit may become less freely available for some borrowers .
b PAR 15 nonetheless , borrowing by nonfederal sectors is expected to firm a little from the subdued pace of recent months .
b PAR 15 for businesses , strong cash flow and some slowing in the pace of inventory accumulation will act to hold down financing needs , although this effect will be offset by the scheduled completion of some large merg- ers and associated share retirements in coming months .
b PAR 15 in the house- hold sector , debt growth will be sustained in the near term in financ-
b PAR 15 ing further healthy advances in durable goods outlays and fairly robust housing activity .
b PAR 15 total nonfederal debt is projected to expand at below a 5 percent annual rate over late 1995 and early 1996 .
b PAR 15 fed- eral borrowing will be light in the months immediately ahead , even absent a spending lapse or debt - ceiling crisis , before strengthening late in the winter .
b PAR 15 taken together , total nonfinancial sector debt is projected to grow 5 - 1/4 percent in 1995 , around the middle of its monitoring range , and to maintain that pace early in 1996 .
b PAR 15 annualized growth from m2 4 - 1/2 m3 5 - 1/2 m1 -1
b PAR 15 -1/2 debt 5 - 1/4 federal 7 nonfederal 4 - 1/2 
b PAR 16 the broad monetary aggregates , especially m2 , are expected to strengthen after october .
b PAR 16 moderate nominal income growth and fairly narrow opportunity costs will tend to buoy expansion in household demand for m2 , helping to return growth in this aggregate to the 4 - 1/2 percent area over the october - to - march period under alternative b . the rebound in m2 growth , combined with still - brisk issuance of large time deposits to fund bank credit , would result in about 5 - 1/2 percent m3 growth under alternative b . as a consequence , m3 velocity would continue to decline over the fourth quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year , albeit at a slower pace .
b PAR 16 the velocity of m2 , in contrast , should edge up over these two quarters , reversing part of its unexpectedly large third - quarter decline .
b PAR 16 while , m1 is projected to remain on a downward trajectory , owing to the further spread of retail sweeps .
b PAR 16 for the year 1995 , the staff projects m2 to rise 4 - 1/4 percent , in the upper portion of its 1-to-5 percent range , and m3 to advance 6 - 1/2 percent , a little above its 2- to-6 percent range .
b PAR 16 in march of 1996 , both aggregates would be near the upper ends of their tentative ranges for next year .
b PAR 16 contingencies regarding a treasury default 

c PAR 13 the choice of alternative c might be favored to the extent that the committee wished to have greater assurance that infla- tion would continue to edge down .
c PAR 13 a more restrictive policy to accomplish this objective might be seen as all the more needed in light of recent strength in broad measures of output and labor input .
c PAR 13 furthermore , intermediate- and long - term interest rates have declined substantially in recent months , potentially providing considerable further impetus to spending .
c PAR 14 a move to tighten policy by 50 basis points as under alternative c would especially surprise market participants , who con- tinue to hold the view , supported by statements from some committee members , that the next policy move will be to ease .
c PAR 14 money market rates would rise by at least the 50 basis point increase in the fed- eral funds rate .
c PAR 14 the dollar would tend to strengthen on foreign exchange markets , and intermediate- and long - term interest rates would retrace some of their recent declines as a higher path for real short- term rates came to be built into market expectations .


