a PAR 21 shown below for consideration by the committee are three alternative sets of 1995 ranges for money and debt.10
a PAR 21 while the committee has in recent years deemphasized the money and debt aggregates in its policy deliberations and public statements , choice of ranges may facilitate the committee 's efforts to communicate to the 10 .
a PAR 21 appendix b gives ranges and actual outcomes for money and debt in previous years .
a PAR 21 public its expectations for financial conditions consistent with desired economic performance .
a PAR 21 the first , alternative a , contains the provisional ranges established last july .
a PAR 21 alternative ia makes a technical upward adjustment to the provisional ranges to account for the more normal m3 behavior that seems to be evolving .
a PAR 21 alternative
a PAR 21 ii contains a lower range for m2 and maintain the provisional range for m3 .
a PAR 21 alternative money and debt ranges for 1995 ( percent ) alt .
a PAR 21 i ( provisional memo : staff ranges ) alt .
a PAR 21 ii projection baseline tighter m2 1 to 5 1 to 5 0 to 4 2 - 1/2 1 - 1/2 m3 0 to 4 1 to 5 0 to 4 3 2 - 1/2 debt
a PAR 21 3 to 7 3 to 7 3 to 7 5 - 1/4 5 
a PAR 22 under alternative a , staff baseline projections for growth of m2 and debt are reasonably well centered .
a PAR 22 the staff projec- tion for m3
a PAR 22 , though , is in the upper end of its alternative a range .
a PAR 22 the committee might wish to consider raising the m3 range for techni- cal reasons .
a PAR 22 now that the contraction in the thrift industry has ended and bank credit is displaying more typical behavior , m3 is no longer expected to grow less rapidly than m2 , implying an m3 range more in line with that for m2 .
a PAR 22 this is given as alternative ia .
a PAR 23 being reasonably well centered on projected m2 growth under the baseline , the alternative a range allows for a good bit of unpredictability in m2 velocity , as might be implied particularly by uncertainties regarding the appeal of mutual funds , without breaching the upper or lower ends of the range .
a PAR 23 moreover , this range contains a fair amount of scope for the effects of a more restrictive policy stance ; thus , it would accommodate some further policy tightening should the committee find the upward drift in inflation in the staff economic forecast to be unacceptable .
a PAR 23 taking a longer perspective , alternative a might provide a benchmark under the federal reserve act for long - run growth of m2 " commensurate with the economy 's long run potential to increase production so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates " if it were believed that the unusual factors depress- ing m2 growth might be abating .
a PAR 23 this would imply a return to essen- tially trendless m2 velocity and growth of both m2 and nominal gdp averaging in the neighborhood of 3 percent over time .
a PAR 23 in these cir- cumstances , selection of a lower range for m2 could well require a reversal later , with attendant possibilities for confusion on the part of market participants regarding the committee 's intentions .

b PAR 24 the lower ranges for m2 growth under alternative
b PAR 24 ii would be better centered around the slower rate of expansion fore- cast by the staff under the tighter strategy .
b PAR 24 thus , choice of this alternative might be favored if the committee wished to underscore its commitment to resisting higher inflation in the near term and bringing inflation down over time .
b PAR 24 the experience of 1994 - -in particular , m2 growth of only 1 percent -- suggests that considerable further policy tightening , along with some slowing of nominal income growth from the brisk pace of last year , could result in a shortfall from the 1 per- cent lower bound of the provisional m2 range .
b PAR 24 the m2 range of alternative b also would better accommodate substantial shortfalls in m2 demand relative to historical patterns , as have characterized a number of recent years .
b PAR 24 short - run policy alternatives 
b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 5 - 1/2 percent , in association with keeping the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at $ 75 million .
b PAR 26 choice of alternative b might be viewed as appropriate if the committee desired additional readings on the extent of the economy 's forward momentum and of underlying inflationary pressures to provide a firmer basis for judging whether incremental restraint will be required to damp aggregate demand sufficiently .
b PAR 26 in the staff economic forecast , real gdp growth slips below 2 percent in the second half of this year , even with an unchanged federal funds rate .
b PAR 26 some recent signs of hesitancy in consumer spending and a considerable rise in inventories might be seen as pointing to a risk in the economic outlook that , especially with more monetary policy tightening , an undesirable degree of economic weakness could emerge later this year .
b PAR 26 current levels of real short- and long - term interest rates are some- what above secular averages and trend growth of money and debt has been relatively slow , suggesting that monetary policy restraint is already in place .
b PAR 26 moreover , fiscal policy over the next few years may turn even more restrictive than the staff has built into its forecast , spurred on by political initiatives to make more visible progress toward balancing the federal budget early in the next century .
b PAR 26 the effects on u.s .
b PAR 26 exports of the mexican crisis , and its possible fur-
b PAR 26 ther spillover to other economies represent potential additional de- pressants on aggregate demand ; the current situation could be exacer- bated by another u.s . monetary policy tightening , which could render the currencies of those countries even less attractive to interna- tional investors .
b PAR 26 postponing any action would allow time for the fiscal and mexican situations to become clearer .
b PAR 26 finally , the recent surprisingly quiescent u.s .
b PAR 26 price reports may also be signalling that pressures on domestic productive capacities are not as intense as conventionally estimated , so that a slowing in economic growth even along the lines projected by the staff could keep inflation in check .
b PAR 27 while market participants currently anticipate a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting , their response to the committee 's selection of alternative b would depend on how the decision were interpreted .
b PAR 27 on the one hand , the market reac- tion could be muted if the decision were seen as only a delay in tak- ing the inevitable next step , perhaps until the mexican situation settles down somewhat .
b PAR 27 in that circumstance , delay might be seen as the prudent response to a potentially volatile situation , and little adverse concern about potential inflation would be engendered .
b PAR 27 some edging lower of short - term interest rates might transpire , but bond yields and the value of the dollar could remain near recent quotes .
b PAR 27 on the other hand , the unexpected delay in policy tightening could create some confusion about the federal reserve 's intentions and strategy . if market participants viewed the delay as unwarranted by the domestic economic situation and as signalling a possible change in federal reserve priorities , heightened inflation concerns could cause an adverse reaction in the fixed income and foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 27 such a reaction could be compounded by data suggesting continued strength in employment and a pickup in inflation -- both of which are expected over the near term in the greenbook forecast .
b PAR 31 under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b , m2 growth would be supported by some narrowing of its opportunity cost , as offering rates on retail deposits rise further in partial catch - up to earlier increases in short - term interest rates .
b PAR 31 even so , this aggregate 's expansion would remain well below that of nominal gdp -- projected to grow at a 5 - 1/2 percent rate over the first half of the year -- reflecting continued flows of saving into alternative in- vestment outlets .
b PAR 31 the expected m2 growth of 2 - 1/4 percent from january to june would place this aggregate in the lower half of its m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 31 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to ( tentative ) chart 7 actual and targeted m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives the range for 1995 is the provisional range adopted at the july , 1994 meeting .
b PAR 31 ondj f m a m
b PAR 31 j a s o n d chart 8 actual and targeted m3 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 31 the range for 1995 is the provisional range adopted at the july , 1994 meeting .
b PAR 31 ondj f m a m
b PAR 31 i chart 9 - actual level - * short - run alternatives •. .**o
b PAR 31 * ' ° . . ' .
b PAR 31 * b 0 % .............................
b PAR 31 ..........................
b PAR 31 j a s n billions of dollars 10 % " - 1200 , m chart 10 debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level 14 - 7 % .*- 14000
b PAR 31 the range for 1995 is the provisional s range adopted at the july , 1994 meeting .
b PAR 31 j a so n d provisional 1 to 5 percent growth range for 1995 .
b PAR 31 growth in m3 , forecast at a 2 - 1/2 percent rate from january to june under alternative b , would leave this aggregate above the midpoint of its tentative 0 to 4 percent 1995 range .
b PAR 31 managed liabilities in the broader ag- gregate again would help to finance bank credit expansion , which is projected at a 5 percent rate over the same period .
b PAR 31 paced by federal debt growth of 5 - 1/2 percent from december to june , domestic nonfinan- cial debt is foreseen as growing at a 5 - 1/4 percent rate over the six months , near the midpoint of its provisional 3 to 7 percent monitoring range for 1995 .
b PAR 31 nonfederal debt likely would continue to grow near the 5 percent pace of last year , with some slowdown in consumer credit expansion offsetting a probable cessation of the runoff of state and local debt .

c SENT -- under the tighter alternative c , the federal funds rate would be raised 1/2 percentage point , to 6 percent , either by an equivalent rise in the discount rate to 5 - 1/4 percent with the same borrowing allowance or by an increase in the borrowing allowance to $ 125 million with the same discount rate .
c PAR 28 concern about the possibility of an adverse market reaction , combined with a view that the economic situation still pointed to significant risk of accelerating inflation , would argue for the 50 basis point firming in the federal funds rate associated with alternative c . in a situation in which the economy already has over- shot its potential , the robust advance of economic activity through last quarter might well signify the likelihood that monetary policy still has not put in place sufficient restraint to slow the growth of future aggregate demand enough to forestall a sustained upward drift in inflation .
c PAR 28 moving up the federal funds rate to 6 percent would more clearly place real short - term interest rates in a range that could be characterized as moderately restrictive .
c PAR 28 even if slower real gdp growth emerges than in the staff economic forecast , which assumes unchanged short - term interest rates , such an outcome would aid in bringing resource use over time back to less potentially inflationary and , hence , more sustainable levels .
c PAR 29 the 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate embodied in alternative c , by matching current financial market expec- tations , would have few initial repercussions on market interest rates or exchange rates against our other g-10 trading partners .
c PAR 29 however , some strengthening of the dollar against the peso can not be ruled out .
c PAR 29 banks likely would hike the prime rate by a commensurate amount and might become somewhat more cautious in their other lending terms and standards as they saw a slowing in economic growth as more clearly in train .
c SENT -- growth rates of 1 - 1/2 percent and 2 percent , respectively , from january to june are anticipated by the staff under alternative c . 11 .

