a PAR 11 although market participants expect monetary policy to be eased over the next few months , a reduction of 50 basis points in the federal funds rate implemented at this meeting , as called for under alternative a , would be larger than generally expected .
a PAR 11 other short - term rates would fall appreciably , and the value of the dollar would probably decline on foreign exchange markets .
a PAR 11 the response of long - term yields would depend on the market 's interpretation of this action , which in turn could be influenced by the content of the announcement .
a PAR 11 bond rates might decline only modestly to the extent that the action were viewed as merely realigning nominal rates to the surprisingly damped inflation of the last half of the year .
a PAR 11 if mar- kets thought the committee were anticipating further moderation of inflation , especially as a consequence of underlying weakness in aggregate demand that implied lower real as well as nominal rates going forward , then rate declines would be more pronounced .
a PAR 11 such substantial reductions in bond yields would fuel additional increases in equity prices as investors discounted expected earnings at the lower rates .
a PAR 11 while there is some risk that market participants would interpret an easing as indicating insufficient regard for the longer- term inflation outlook , this risk would be greater for a 50 basis point cut than for a 25 basis point move .
a PAR 11 the latter is closer to market expectations and , judging from the yield curve , would be seen as consistent with moderate economic growth .
a PAR 11 thus , the smaller cut is less likely to spark major changes in market rates .
a PAR 12 under the staff forecast , alternative a would risk fostering greater inflation pressures , and the move would eventually need to be reversed .
a PAR 12 thus , choice by the committee of this alterna-
a PAR 12 tive would presumably be based on an assessment that aggregate demand is more likely to flag than under the staff forecast and that infla- tion and inflation expectations are more likely to decline .
a PAR 12 optimism on inflation might be based on the observation that inflation has come in lower than expected at mid - year and inflation expectations have abated significantly .
a PAR 12 as a consequence , real short - term rates are perhaps higher than the committee had anticipated when it established the 5 - 3/4 percent funds rate .
a PAR 12 the good performance of the economy in the face of these real short - term rates may be seen as reflecting in part the rally in capital markets , which , however , has been based to a degree on expectations of policy ease .
a PAR 12 in the absence of policy action , real longer - term interest rates and exchange rates would be pushed higher , and an easing could be based on concern that these higher real rates risked an unduly sluggish economy in the future .
a PAR 12 indeed , the favorable inflation - output mix of the second half of 1995 might be seen as indicating that the economy is capable of operating on a sustained basis at a higher level of output and hence lower levels of real interest rates than in the staff forecast .

b PAR 9 in these circumstances , adoption of the unchanged money market conditions of alternative b could prompt a small backup in market interest rates .
b PAR 9 the rise in yields is likely to be damped , as investors would continue to expect monetary policy easing before long .
b PAR 9 the sense that policy action was merely postponed would be more pro- nounced if a budget agreement had not been reached by the time of the committee meeting .
b PAR 9 maintenance of the current monetary policy stance over time , however , particularly after a budget agreement has been struck , would lead market participants to reexamine their expectations for monetary policy . if they saw the current 5 - 3/4 percent funds rate being sustained for a considerable period in the context of a satis- factorily performing macroeconomy , then long - term rates might ulti- mately rise by no more than the approximately 1/2 percentage point " surprise " in the funds rate .
b PAR 9 such an increase would reverse only a small portion of the drop in rates over the last year , returning nominal long - term rates to about their levels of late summer , while leaving real rates perhaps a bit higher than they were at that time given the downward drift in inflation expectations over recent months .
b PAR 10 the greenbook forecast embodies a backup of longer - term yields of this magnitude with a flat federal funds rate through most of the forecast period .
b PAR 10 nonetheless , because the staff assessment is that aggregate demand will be slightly stronger than implicit in financial markets or the blue chip survey , the higher trajectory of interest rates is seen as consistent with output remaining close to potential and inflation running around 3 percent over the next two years .
b PAR 10 accordingly , in the staff forecast , alternative b keeps policy on a path that produces results for economic growth and inflation over 1996 closely in line with the committee 's expectations for next year that were reported in july .
b PAR 15 the table below presents staff forecasts for money and credit growth for the november - to - march period under the unchanged money market conditions of alternative b .7 broad measures of money 7 .
b PAR 15 the forecast for m2 is presented in terms of the current defini- tion but would differ little under the revised definition , to be implemented early next year , that excludes overnight rps and euro- dollars . and credit are expected to pick up some in coming months , partly in conjunction with stronger growth in nominal gdp .
b PAR 15 credit supply condi- tions should remain favorable under that outlook , especially for firms .
b PAR 15 households reduce their borrowing a bit in view of slackening growth of spending on durables and rising debt - service difficulties , but growth of their debt still outpaces that of nominal income .
b PAR 15 ness borrowing picks up , buoyed by a brisk pace of merger deals .
b PAR 15 although firms are drawn to the bond market by attractive long - term rates , borrowing from shorter - term sources , including banks , remains substantial .
b PAR 15 total debt growth accelerates to a 5 percent pace over the november - march period , leaving domestic nonfinancial sector debt near the middle of its provisional 3-to-7 percent monitoring range .
b PAR 15 annualized growth from m2 5 - 1/4 m3 5 - 3/4 m1
b PAR 15 -3 - 3/4 sweep - adjusted 1 - 3/4 debt 5 - 1/4 federal 6 - 1/2 non - federal 4 - 3/4 
b PAR 16 in the staff forecast , bank credit growth edges up in the next few months from its recent depressed rate , as banks stop running off securities .
b PAR 16 with japanese branches and agencies already having shifted financing to their home offices or other affiliates , the runoff of cds at these institutions should wind down , so that going forward depository institutions as a whole rely more on liabili- ties in m3 to finance credit growth .
b PAR 16 expansion of m3 picks up to a 5 - 3/4 percent annual rate over the november - to - march period under alternative b . m2 growth also firms from its unexpectedly weak pace so far in the fourth quarter .
b PAR 16 the projected rebound in nominal income growth supports an acceleration of retail deposits , and the lagged effects of recent declines in short - term rates and associated reduc- tions in opportunity costs also buoy money demand .
b PAR 16 m2 would be just above the upper end of its provisional 1 to 5 percent annual range in march , and m3 would be at the upper end of its tentative 2 to 6 per- cent range .

c PAR 13 with market participants expecting an easing rather than a tightening of policy , the 50-basis - point increase in the federal funds rate under alternative c would lead to a sharp jump in other money market interest rates .
c PAR 13 yields on intermediate- and longer - term issues would likely rise as well , as real interest rates expected over coming quarters firmed considerably , and probably by more in the short run than any decline in inflation expectations .
c PAR 13 the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would increase appreciably .
c PAR 14 the fomc might select alternative
c PAR 14 c if it saw the risks to inflation at current interest rates as reasonably well balanced and wished to gain more assurance of making longer - term progress toward price stability .
c PAR 14 despite declines this year , survey - based measures of inflation expectations have only reached levels of recently observed inflation and still do not anticipate further disinflation .
c PAR 14 given the demand and inflation relationships incorporated in the staff forecast , the rise in the federal funds rate under alternative c would tilt the inflation rate down slightly in 1997 .
c PAR 14 with the economy already operating in the neighborhood of its potential and aggregate demand possibly bolstered by the sharp declines in interest rates of the past year , an increase in inflationary pressures can not be ruled out .
c PAR 14 although growth of the standard monetary aggregates has been slow recently , the broad aggregates have expanded fairly briskly for 1995 as a whole , and credit through intermediaries and in the securities markets remains readily available .


