a PAR 12 the easing in reserve market conditions under alternative a could be justified if the unexpected weakness in the recent economic data were read as indicating that previous policy tightenings risked an unacceptably sharp slowdown in spending later this year-- especially since a real federal funds rate remaining above its longer- term average might add to the restraint on demand already in the pipe- line .
a PAR 12 concerns in this regard might be accentuated by the further deterioration in the mexican situation and repercussions on u.s .
a PAR 12 net exports .
a PAR 12 in this view , with pressures on resources possibly abating appreciably , the risks of worsening inflation would seem minimal .
a PAR 12 in effect , choice of alternative a would imply a view that not only have longer - term interest and exchange rates not overshot on the downside , but that policy may still be too tight to allow markets to compensate fully for oncoming economic weakness .
a PAR 13 the 50 basis point easing of the federal funds rate under alternative a also would surprise market participants .
a PAR 13 both long- and short - term rates are likely to fall substantially as a result , as would the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 13 although the federal reserve 's anti - inflationary credibility has apparently increased over the last few months , it could begin to erode if incom- ing data were to indicate that inflation pressures were not abating , prompting the market to judge that the easing had been unwarranted .
a PAR 13 under those circumstances , long - term rates would begin to retrace their initial declines , particularly if the dollar came under persist- ent , intense downward pressure .
a SENT -- the growth of the broader aggregates be expected to breach the upper or lower bands of their annual ranges , although m3 is virtually at the upper end of its range under alternative a . (

b PAR 8 a key element in assessing the appropriate stance of policy going forward is the interpretation of the causes and conse- quences of the sizeable movements in prices on securities and foreign exchange markets over recent months .
b PAR 8 as discussed in paragraph 2 , the drop in dollar interest and exchange rates seemed primarily a response to the perceived softening in aggregate demand .
b PAR 8 the question is whether the market reaction has been appropriate to the new informa- tion in the sense of leaving rates at levels consistent with the com- mittee 's objectives for the economy and prices .
b PAR 8 with an unchanged federal funds rate in the staff forecast , interest and exchange rates close to recent levels are associated with activity growing slowly enough to move the economy back to the neighborhood of its potential and core cpi inflation flattening out at a somewhat higher rate than in 1994 .
b PAR 8 if the committee believes such an outcome were both likely and acceptable , then it may be inclined to leave the current level of the federal funds rate in place , as under alternative b , unless and 6 . over the upcoming intermeeting period , the borrowing allowance likely will have to be raised to reflect the normal upturn in seasonal credit in the spring of the year . until incoming economic data or a clarification of prospective fiscal policy begin to point to a different outlook .
b PAR 9 the softer cast to recent economic data along with statements by federal reserve officials have led market participants to the virtually unanimous opinion that the fomc will keep its policy stance on hold at this committee meeting .
b PAR 9 consequently , there would likely be little change in interest rates in response to the choice of alternative b .
b PAR 9 while sentiment in foreign exchange markets has proven difficult to predict , no clear rationale presents itself for signifi- ca nt further dollar depreciation over the intermeeting period .
b SENT -- the alternative b growth from march to september m2 2 - 1/2

c PAR 10 a case for the 1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative c could be made on the grounds that , with economic activity having already overshot its potential and the persistence of the slowdown in economic growth not yet firmly estab- lished , more insurance should be taken out against a serious deterior- ation in inflation trends .
c PAR 10 the risk of such an outcome would seem even greater if it were judged that markets have overreacted , implying undesirable additional stimulus from the declines in interest and exchange rates and the rise in stock prices .
c PAR 10 the need for prompt further policy firming would be especially pressing to the extent that the committee were dissatisfied with the prospects in the staff fore- cast for a sustained higher level of core inflation .
c PAR 10 judging from the alternative simulations in the greenbook , even a 50 basis point
c PAR 10 crease in the federal funds rate would leave the core cpi inflation rate in 1996 above that in 1994 and might not be sufficient to restore a downward tilt in subsequent years .
c PAR 11 with financial markets having built in no near - term monetary policy tightening , choice of alternative c would come as a surprise .
c PAR 11 market participants might alter their perceptions of the federal reserve 's longer - term intentions and likely reactions to future economic data .
c PAR 11 the resulting higher expected path of short- term interest rates over the intermediate term would act to raise bond rates , especially in real terms .
c PAR 11 but for nominal yields , the more favorable inflation prospects for the out years , and the associated reduction in expected short - term interest rates for those years , would serve as a partial offset .
c PAR 11 the unexpected rise in u.s .
c PAR 11 real interest rates across the term structure , other things equal , would provide support for the dollar on foreign exchange markets .

