a PAR 19 as noted , m2 and debt most likely will finish 1995 with- in their current ranges ( given as alternative a   under the greenbook baseline assumption of no change in the stance of monetary policy .
a PAR 19 this outcome is likely as well under the easier and tighter policy strategies .
a PAR 19 however , in view of the recent surge in m2 growth , there is a distinct possibility that m2 could run above its current range under the baseline forecast and especially under the easier strategy .
a PAR 19 the extent of the recent surge in m2 growth suggests a significant sensitivity of that aggregate to intermediate- and longer - term inter- est rates , which is not captured by the standard econometric model .
a PAR 19 m3 very likely will exceed its current range under any of the strate- gies .
a PAR 19 in these circumstances , the committee might choose to retain the existing ranges for all of the aggregates and explain the expected overshoot of the m3 range as the result of a temporary surge in inter- mediation by depositories and money funds resulting from cyclical swings in interest rates and inventories .
a PAR 19 the explanation could emphasize that the fomc does not believe that the predicted outcome will interfere with achievement of its longer - run objectives .
a SENT -- under the easier policy stance of alternative a , the intended federal funds rate would be reduced by 1/2 percentage point to 5 - 1/2 percent .
a SENT -- ( 28 ) a reduction in the federal funds rate , perhaps of the 1/2 percentage point size embodied in alternative a , could be favored as a form of insurance against the downside risks in the economic outlook .
a PAR 29 immediate implementation of the 1/2 percentage point cut in the federal funds rate of alternative a would represent a considerably more aggressive policy action than currently is priced into financial markets .
a PAR 29 thus , short - term interest rates initially would decline further , with the rally probably showing through to some degree in bond markets as well .
a PAR 29 the exchange value of the dollar is likely to depreciate .
a PAR 29 at this point , market participants likely would be somewhat puzzled by this action , and the response of market prices would depend largely on their interpretation .
a PAR 29 a larger response in fixed - income and foreign exchange markets would be elicited to the degree that the 1/2 percentage point rate cut led the market to think that the federal reserve was responding to significant underlying weakness in the economic outlook .
a PAR 29 in this case , the policy action might be seen by market participants as only the first in a series of reductions in short - term rates .
a PAR 29 such a perception could be mitigated if the reserve market action were not accompanied by a cut in the discount rate .
a PAR 29 should the committee instead decide on only a 1/4 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate , the financial market impact could be appreciably less , though further federal re- serve action likely would be anticipated .

b PAR 20 ing expected growth of the aggregates under all three scenarios .
b PAR 20 an increase in the m3 range likely would be needed eventually in any case .
b PAR 20 historically , the velocity of this aggregate tended to decline , a result of growth of banks and thrift institutions that until the late 1980s was usually faster than that of the economy as a whole .
b PAR 20 from the late 1980s until recently , that tendency was reversed by retrenchment of depository institutions , a stricter regime of supervi- sion and regulation , and a shift toward open - market funding by bor- rowers .
b PAR 20 accordingly , the committee has selected relatively low ranges for m3 over the past few years . looking forward , it is difficult to predict how much spending will be financed through depository inter- mediation , but it seems unlikely that the retrenchment of the early 1990s will be repeated .
b PAR 20 with this background , an increase in the range for m3 could be seen as a technical adjustment to take account of a return to more normal patterns of intermediation , with no sig- nificance for the thrust of monetary policy .
b PAR 20 although alternative b would cover the staff projection for m3 in 1995 under the monetary policy assumption in the greenbook baseline forecast , considerable risk would remain that it would run above even that range -- a probabil- ity that would increase if the committee followed the easier policy strategy .
b PAR 20 projections and ranges for 1996
b PAR 23 under alternative i
b PAR 23 , the committee would keep the cur- rent 1995 ranges for m2 and debt in 1996 but would raise the limits for m3 by 2 percentage points ( as in the alternative b ranges for 1995 ) .
b PAR 23 the committee might explain this action in terms of the evolving patterns of financial intermediation , noting that m3 growth within this higher range still would likely be consistent with con- taining inflation .
b PAR 23 under the greenbook baseline forecast , m2 would likely finish 1996 close to the upper end of its range , and m3 would be expected to be in the upper half of its range .
b PAR 23 under the easier policy strategy , m2 would probably run somewhat above this range .
b PAR 24 alternative
b PAR 24 ii involves increasing to 2 to 6 percent the range for m2 as well as that for m3 .
b PAR 24 the higher m2 range would more comfortably bracket the staff projection under the greenbook baseline policy assumptions .
b PAR 24 the alternative b ranges also would more likely accommodate the faster money growth that would accompany the easier monetary policy strategy than would the first alternative .
b PAR 24 a poten- tial disadvantage of alternative
b PAR 24 ii is that it may be perceived as a signal that the fomc was placing less emphasis on achieving its price stability objective ; in past monetary policy reports , the committee has noted that the 1-to-5 percent range for m2 provided a benchmark for longer - run growth that could be expected under conditions of reasonable price stability if that aggregate 's velocity resumes its historical pattern of no long - term trend .
b PAR 24 short - run policy alternatives 
b SENT -- under alternative b , the intended federal funds rate would be maintained at 6 percent .
b PAR 26 the decision to leave reserve market conditions
b PAR 26 un- changed , as under alternative b , might be favored if the staff economic forecast , which assumes a constant federal funds rate through early 1996 , were viewed as both a reasonable and desirable outcome .
b PAR 26 in that forecast , near - term weakness is limited -- about sufficient to bring the economy down to the level of its potential .
b PAR 26 an unemployment rate in the vicinity of its natural rate is restored by the third quarter , thereby nipping in the bud any tendency for inflationary momentum to build .
b PAR 26 the declines in real longer - term rates and the exchange rate that have already occurred , along with the rise in equity prices , stimulate final sales sufficiently to return growth close to the rate of its potential by late in 1995 , holding the un- employment rate about constant .
b PAR 26 however , monetary policy still is a little to the restrictive side in the greenbook forecast , leaving a small amount of slack in the economy over time .
b PAR 26 against this back- drop , and with very recent indicators suggesting a limit to near - term weakness , the committee may wish to see macroeconomic data accumulate that call the staff forecast into question before deciding to ease policy .
b PAR 27 over the past few days , markets have come to view policy action at this meeting as much less likely , and interest and exchange rates probably would change little with the choice of alternative b , though a further small backup in yields can not be ruled out with the disappointment of some residual expectations of prompt easing .
b PAR 27 mar- kets are likely to view data over the intermeeting period consistent with the staff forecast as mixed ; broad measures of production and employment would continue to the soft side , with the unemployment rate moving higher and inflation lower than in the first half , but in-
b PAR 27 dicators of sales should show some firming tendencies .
b PAR 27 in these cir- cumstances , market participants likely would continue to see inflation risks as more muted and an intermediate - term policy ease as still a possibility .
b SENT -- that is , the financial market conditions associated with the unchanged policy of alternative b , including the backup in long - term rates in the staff forecast , might be seen as unnecessarily risking weak spend- ing .



