a PAR 12 a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate ( alternative a   would seem to require a judgment that the upward pressure on prices is less than in the staff forecast at current interest rate levels .
a PAR 12 for example , the staff might have underesti- mated the extent to which forces such as job insecurity are pulling down the natural rate of unemployment .
a PAR 12 if so , lower short rates might be consistent with the same inflation outlook .
a PAR 12 essentially , policy easing would reflect the implied drop in the equilibrium natural real rate of interest and the narrower output gap and reduced price pressures associated with higher potential .
a PAR 12 in addition , the extraordinary slowing in consumer credit growth could be interpreted as indicating a developing problem in credit markets that will have greater implications for consumer spending than the staff has allowed , despite the recent uptrend in retail sales and favorable anecdotal reports on christmas spending .
a PAR 13 because the market is not expecting a change in policy , a 50 basis point funds rate reduction , as in alternative a , would show through completely to other short - term rates .
a PAR 13 the market would probably interpret the action as signaling that the committee saw inflation risks as considerably less pressing than previously thought .
a PAR 13 this view would have credence given the federal reserve 's current reputation for anticipating economic developments , and hence real and nominal interest rates likely would decline along the maturity spectrum , the exchange rate would drop , and the stock market would move higher , providing an impetus for spending over the inter- mediate run .
a PAR 13 the decline in nominal yields on longer - term instruments might be somewhat muted , or ultimately even reversed , were incoming data to turn out more consistent with the staff outlook .

b PAR 8 nonetheless , the need for an immediate policy tightening could be questioned .
b PAR 8 the estimated output gap and underlying inflation pressures in 1997 and 1998 in the staff forecast are fairly modest .
b PAR 8 moreover , the committee may be quite uncertain that there would be any deterioration in inflation , in light of the relatively good behavior of prices recently in the face of both a drop in the unemployment rate below most estimates of nairu and adverse supply side shocks in food and energy prices .
b PAR 8 moreover , levels of key financial variables going forward may seem especially uncertain , given the exceptional volatility in bond , stock , and foreign exchange mar- kets recently .
b PAR 8 such skittish market conditions may make responses to policy actions particularly hard to predict .
b PAR 8 in these circumstances , the committee may wish to keep policy unchanged ( alternative b ) , awaiting more information to assess how markets may evolve and how the other uncertainties may be resolved .
b PAR 9 with market participants almost universally expecting policy to be on hold for a time , the committee 's selection of alternative b would prompt little response in financial markets .
b PAR 9 expectations about the economy built into credit markets appear to be similar to those of the staff , and new information in agreement with that outlook over the intermeeting period should be associated with both interest rates and the exchange rate of the dollar averaging near recent levels .
b PAR 9 however , signs of significant progress in the political process in resolving budget and entitlement controversies probably would spark a rally in bond and stock markets .
b PAR 14 under alternative b and the staff forecast , both debt and money should expand at moderate rates in coming months , in line with projected nominal gdp .
b PAR 14 for the debt of nonfinancial sectors , the outlook implies a slight pickup in growth from the pace of recent months to a 4 - 3/4 percent rate from november to march .
b PAR 14 the contri- bution by governments at all levels should remain relatively modest , as state and local governments retire debt out of the proceeds of advanced refundings and the federal government continues to pare its budget .
b PAR 14 but somewhat stronger borrowing is expected by nonfinancial firms facing a widening financing gap , and household sector borrowing
b PAR 14 should bounce back somewhat , with debt growth more consistent with moderate increases in spending and income .

c PAR 10 a 50 basis point firming of the funds rate ( alternative c   might be favored if the committee wished to move promptly to stem the rise in underlying inflation in the staff forecast and increase the odds on making some headway on its longer - run objective of price stability .
c PAR 10 with persistent indications of tightness in labor markets , some firming in wages , and disappointing news on reported productivity , the committee may see significant risks of a resurgence of inflation that could elevate inflation expectations and ultimately prove costly to wring out of the economy .
c PAR 10 such concerns might be accentuated if the committee saw the run - up in share prices as likely to persist , boosting spending above that in the staff forecast , and as indicative of an accommodative monetary policy that would eventually show through to the prices of other assets and goods and services .
c PAR 11 the choice of alternative c would surprise market participants and perhaps lead them to reconsider their view on the federal reserve 's longer - term objectives .
c PAR 11 real interest rates would rise , but participants might see the federal reserve as more determined to reduce inflation , with beneficial effects on inflation expectations .
c PAR 11 given the events of the last several days , however , the market could interpret the move also as importantly motivated by efforts to cap or even drive share prices lower .
c PAR 11 the resulting drop in equity values would be an important channel for reducing the excessive aggregate demand that presumably would motivate policy tightening .

