
b PAR 8 nonetheless , the committee may well feel that it can afford to wait , as in alternative b , for additional data to accumulate to allow a more confident judgment concerning whether an underlying process of rising inflation seems to be taking hold .
b PAR 8 arguably , the upturn in the compensation trend is not firmly established in a statistical sense , leaving questions about the level of the nairu .
b PAR 8 and even if wages have begun to accelerate , the profit share may be sufficiently high to cushion the extent to which faster increases in labor compensation are passed through to prices for a time .
b PAR 8 even if the staff assessment of emerging price pressures is confirmed , with the economy still close to its potential , the pickup in inflation would be gradual .
b PAR 8 consequently , as long as a slowdown in real gdp growth of the dimension foreseen by the staff still appears to be in train , the case for an immediate policy tightening may not be seen as compelling .
b PAR 8 while keeping policy on hold for a time in these cir- cumstances might imply the need for a greater tightening later to reverse the pickup in inflation , so long as the action were not post- poned too long , a wrenching adjustment to output should be avoidable .

c PAR 10 the committee instead may wish to implement the 25 basis point increase in the intended federal funds rate involved in alternative c . especially in light of the recent low level of initial claims and the upside potential for inventory stocking , the committee may question the staff forecast that economic activity is likely to down- shift in the near term by enough to stabilize resource utilization .
c PAR 10 alternatively , even if the committee does expect growth in real ag- gregate demand soon to line up with that of potential output , it may be troubled by the strains on resource availability and the uptrend in core inflation embodied in the staff forecast .
c PAR 10 particularly with the upward pressure on prices from the minimum wage hike , a rise in the nominal funds rate would be necessary at some point just to keep the real rate from falling and thus the stance of policy from effectively easing , unless the economy is appreciably weaker or output - price tradeoffs considerably more favorable than the staff predicts .
c PAR 10 an immediate tightening of 1/4 percentage point would increase the like- lihood of holding the line against an upcreep in core inflation by better ensuring an eventual relief of pressures on resources .
c PAR 10 such a tightening might be viewed as a fairly typical policy reaction to the revision to the outlook since the committee last eased at the end of january .
c PAR 10 from the february monetary policy report to that in july , the members ' central tendencies for real gdp growth and cpi inflation for 1996 were revised up by 1/2 and 1/4 points , respectively .
c PAR 10 in light of these revisions and their implications for the longer - term outlook , an immediate 25 basis point tightening , or perhaps one of 50 basis points , would be even more warranted if the committee were seek- ing to move policy over time to a stance restrictive enough to put a downward tilt to the inflation rate in 1997 and beyond .
c PAR 11 given the recent adjustment to their expectations for monetary policy , market participants would be somewhat surprised by a committee decision to raise its intended federal funds rate by 25 basis points , as under alternative c . other short - term market rates would immediately adjust upward by a like amount .
c PAR 11 because the likely trajectory of short - term interest rates would be higher over the in- termediate run than previously expected by the market , some increases in longer - term interest rates and in the exchange value of the dollar would occur .
c PAR 11 the size of the upward adjustments would depend in part on whether the market saw the policy firming as an isolated event or the first of a series of policy tightenings .
c PAR 11 some market participants apparently sense that the committee may require extra evidence to change direction in monetary policy , and hence might assume that committee members now see the potential inflationary situation as having worsened appreciably and may be contemplating more than one small move .
c PAR 11 in that regard , the announcement accompanying the policy tightening presumably could provide some guidance to the market on these matters .

