
b PAR 10 despite these potential problems on the inflation front , the minimum wage has not yet been raised , measures of industrial prices and of strains on production capacity remain quiescent , and recent information on core ppi / cpi inflation provides little evidence of an incipient acceleration .
b PAR 10 moreover , the rise in intermediate- and long - term rates this year may have left these measures not far from levels consistent with the economy producing at its potential .
b PAR 10 in these circumstances , the committee may prefer to adopt alternative b , 3 .
b PAR 10 some supply shocks could also raise the nairu and reduce poten- tial output by more than they would damp aggregate demand , increasing the equilibrium real interest rate .
b PAR 10 while a minimum wage hike prob- ably falls into this category , an increase of the magnitude currently being debated would not have much impact on the equilibrium real rate . awaiting more concrete evidence that inflationary pressures are emerg-
b PAR 10 ing before adopting a tightening action .
b PAR 10 financial market partici- pants are anticipating that the fomc will leave its policy stance unchanged at this meeting , implying that selection of alternative b would have little market impact .
b PAR 10 although the greenbook is forecast- ing a strong second quarter , many market economists have a similar view , and hence release of economic data in conformity with the green- book forecast should not elicit much response in security prices or dollar exchange rates .
b PAR 12 the interest rates of alternative b and associated staff forecast for the economy are thought to be consistent with a slight moderation in the growth of money and credit over coming months relative to their pace of expansion so far in 1996 .
b PAR 12 ( projected growth for april to september and from the fourth quarter to september are shown in the table below . )
b PAR 12 the staff anticipates that the terms and conditions of bank lending will remain on the accommodative side , though perhaps continuing to firm a little for consumer credit .
b PAR 12 only partly as a consequence , growth of consumer credit is projected to continue its downtrend , accompanied by sustained moderate expansion of home mortgage debt .
b PAR 12 business borrowing may edge off as the recent rise in long - term yields continues to restrain bond issuance , while subdued inventory investment keeps the lid on bank loans and commer- cial paper .
b PAR 12 near - term borrowing by the federal government is now shaping up as rather weak in light of the build - up in the treasury 's cash balance stemming from outsized individual tax payments in april .
b PAR 12 as a result of the downward - revised forecast for federal debt growth , the expansion of total domestic nonfinancial sector debt from april to growth of money and debt ( percent at annual rates ) april 1995-q4 to to september september m2 3 - 3/4 4 - 3/4 m3 4 5 - 1/2 adjusted for sweeps 4 - 3/4 6 - 1/4 debt 4 - 1/2 4 - 3/4 nonfederal 4 - 1/2 5 federal 5 4 - 1/4 september is now projected at only a 4 - 1/2 percent pace , leaving its level in september somewhat below the 5 percent midpoint of its annual growth rate range .

c PAR 11 the case for a policy tightening at this fomc meeting presumably would rest on the view that the risks of higher inflation had become substantial .
c PAR 11 even without an assumed minimum wage
c PAR 11 crease , the committee may see the gradual upcreep in core cpi infla- tion projected by the staff as a likely and undesirable outcome .
c PAR 11 if the higher rate of overall inflation so far this year were feeding through in some part to inflation expectations , a rise in the nominal funds rate would be needed at some point to forestall an effective easing of the policy stance .
c PAR 11 the federal reserve is not expected by market participants to tighten for several months , and hence , investors would be caught off guard by the fomc 's choice of alternative c at this meeting .
c PAR 11 short - term interest rates would rise by 1/2 percentage point .
c PAR 11 a sense that the fomc would be assuming a more aggressive anti - inflationary posture than previously anticipated , at least over the near term , might limit increases in nominal intermediate- and long - term rates , but would lead to an appreciable increase in real interest rates on instruments of these maturities .
c PAR 11 the value of the dollar would probably ratchet higher on exchange markets .


