a PAR 20 the staff baseline forecasts for m2 and m3 are , respec- tively , above and near the upper bounds of the provisional ranges of alternative a. if the committee viewed the role of the ranges as one of communicating to the public the rates of money growth that it ex- pected would accompany its desired outcome for the economy and prices in 1996 , adoption of alternative a would seem most consistent with a deliberate disinflation policy ( tighter alternative   .
a PAR 20 in recent semi- annual monetary policy reports to the congress , however , the federal reserve has explained that these relatively low ranges were not cen- tered on the committee 's expectations for money growth , but rather were indicative of money expansion under conditions of price stability if velocity were to behave in line with its historical pattern .
a PAR 20 the committee has noted in these reports that actual growth could even run above the ranges in the transition to price stability .
a PAR 20 in this con- text , frequent alteration of the annual ranges would risk confusing observers about the committee 's ultimate policy intent .
a PAR 20 the remaining uncertainty about the behavioral properties of the broad measures going forward may reinforce committee reluctance to " fine - tune " its annual ranges , especially if the committee were concerned that such adjustments might be interpreted as implying that it was placing more weight on these indicators than it intended .
a PAR 25 justification for a quarter - point reduction in the federal funds rate under alternative a would seem to rest on a belief that the economy is weaker than in the staff outlook , as might be inferred from the tone of some anecdotal reports and recent data , or that the prospects for disinflation are brighter .
a PAR 25 in this regard , the effects of the recently firmer dollar on spending and prices might be seen as giving scope for some modest lowering of interest rates .
a PAR 25 an easing in the next few months , although not necessarily at this meet-
a PAR 25 ing , is consistent with expectations both of market participants , as embodied in the yield curve , and , as suggested by the blue chip sur- vey , of many outside forecasters whose inflation outlook on average nonetheless does not differ significantly from the staff 's .
a PAR 26 money market interest rates would fall by less than a quarter point under alternative a , given current expectations .
a PAR 26 such a decline in the federal funds rate could be achieved by adding nonbor- rowed reserves through open market operations , reducing the borrowing allowance by a small amount , or through a 25 basis point reduction in the discount rate to 5 percent.17 intermediate- and long - term interest rates could drop significantly should market participants view actions at two successive meetings as suggesting that the federal reserve had reason to believe that economy is weak and inflation risks 17 .
a PAR 26 judging from experience from september 1992 through january 1994 , putting the funds rate equal to the discount rate would present no special operational problems . are minimal .
a PAR 26 against this background
a PAR 26 , incoming economic data suggest- ing a more buoyant economy
a PAR 26 could cause a sharp reversal of the inter- est rate declines .

b PAR 23 the unchanged funds rate of alternative b is consistent with the staff greenbook forecast .
b PAR 23 in that forecast , with a steady nominal funds rate , the unemployment rate remains a touch below the staff 's estimate of the natural rate and core inflation
b PAR 23 edges higher , but only to about 3 percent in 1997 .
b PAR 23 not only might alternative b be seen as attractive if the committee concurred with this outlook and found the results acceptable , but it also might have appeal as a " wait and see " strategy because delays in data have curtailed the new infor- mation available to the committee since it eased policy in december .
b PAR 23 a similar point could be made about the fiscal situation , which might be clarified to some extent in the next few weeks given negotiations now underway between the president and congressional leaders .
b PAR 24 the staff outlook appears to be more buoyant than that of market participants , who evidently view the odds of a modest policy easing at the upcoming meeting to be about even and expect appreciable declines in the funds rate over coming months .
b PAR 24 thus , rates could edge higher under alternative b .16 however , the extent of any rise in such rates likely would be tempered in the near term by the perception that the committee had merely postponed easing pending the availabi- lity of more information .
b PAR 24 over time , an economy and monetary policy more consistent with the staff outlook than that of the market would put additional upward pressure on rates .
b PAR 24 the dollar would be expected to trade around recent higher levels on foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 24 markets are likely to continue to pay close attention to shifting 16 .
b PAR 24 reserve management may continue to be complicated to a degree for the next few weeks by the very low level of required reserve balances resulting from the ongoing introduction of deposit sweep arrangements interacting with seasonal lows in reserve balances .
b PAR 24 these developments may in turn be associated with greater volatility in the federal funds market .
b PAR 24 fiscal prospects , and if potential default on treasury debt still looms in late february , markets could become skittish , given that the treasury has indicated that its scope to maneuver to avoid default will be exhausted by the beginning of march .
b PAR 28 the table below shows money and credit growth under alternative b for the january - to - june period .
b PAR 28 relative to the ex- perience of recent months , we would expect some pickup in credit growth to accompany the staff gdp projection , partly as the federal government returns to more normal patterns of funding and cash balances given the assumed lifting of the debt ceiling .
b PAR 28 growth of total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to expand at a 6 percent rate from january to june , leaving this aggregate around the center of its tentative range for 1996 .
b PAR 28 the expansion in m2 is ex- pected to continue to be supported by last year 's declines in oppor- tunity costs and the relatively flat yield curve .
b PAR 28 the spread of sweeps will lead to further reductions in m1 and the reserve aggre- gates .
b PAR 28 by midyear m2 would be at or slightly above its 1-to-5 percent tentative 1996 range under all three alternatives .
b PAR 28 m3 at midyear would be just within its 2-to-6 percent range .
b PAR 28 growth of money and debt january to june 1996 ( percent at annual rates )
b PAR 28 m2 5 m3 5 - 1/2 m1 -2 - 3/4 adjusted for sweeps 3 - 3/4 debt 6 federal 8 nonfederal 5 - 1/4 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 28 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 28 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1995 growth ranges :
b PAR 28 1 to 5 2 to 6 1996 growth ranges : ( provisional ) 1 to 5 2 to 6 directive language 

c PAR 22 choice of this alternative would seem to rest on the view that the ranges should be mainly oriented toward providing congress and the public with an estimated growth interval for each aggregate over the relevant year that essentially balances the risks of an over- or undershoot if the economy performs as the committee expects .
c PAR 22 under such an approach , the committee would attempt to incorporate fully in advance intermediate - run effects , such as responsiveness to interest - rate movements or other factors , into the specified ranges .
c PAR 22 more willingness to adjust the current year 's ranges at mid - year also could be part of this approach .
c PAR 22 this approach would not necessarily imply that the committee would place more weight on the aggregates in the conduct of policy .
c PAR 22 indeed , the committee could continue to deemphasize the use of the ranges as intermediate policy targets .
c PAR 22 or , if the committee accepts the relationships embedded in the staff forecast , this alternative could seem attractive if the committee did not contemplate downward pressure on inflation this year through either a deliberate or opportunistic strategy .
c PAR 22 short - run policy alternatives 

