a PAR 10 given the staff 's assessment of the economy , the 1/2 percentage point easing in reserve market conditions offered under alternative a would boost the economy marginally further beyond its potential and tilt the inflation rate up a bit more noticeably .
a PAR 10 with the latter outcome apparently inconsistent with the committee 's strategy for achieving its long - run goals , adopting alternative a would seem to require that , relative to the staff , committee members expect somewhat weaker spending or better inflation .
a PAR 10 for example , policy relaxation might be seen as buying further insurance against the risk that the recent rise in bond yields would truncate the ap- parent strengthening in activity this year or as attaching weight to the possibility that the nairu is lower .
a PAR 11 in light of the uncertainty about the current economic situation and the widespread expectation that system policy is on hold , it is difficult to gauge how market participants would react to the 1/2 percentage point of policy ease envisioned under alternative a .
a PAR 11 it is safe to say that most of the decline in the federal funds rate would carry through to other shorter - term market rates .
a PAR 11 market participants might read the action , coming on the heels of 1/4 point moves at two successive meetings , as revealing the judgment of policy makers either that the economy could work with a thinner margin of unused capacity without higher inflation or that aggregate demand is weaker than most analysts are now expecting .
a PAR 11 with market participants particularly uncertain about the economy , they might give the commit- tee the benefit of the doubt , at least for a while , and infer from the policy action that the economic situation had changed .
a PAR 11 in that cir- cumstance , intermediate- and long - term rates could fall significantly .
a PAR 11 alternatively , this policy easing might be seen to reflect a misread- ing of the economic situation or evidence that the committee was will- ing to tolerate upside risks to inflation in the interest of stimulat-
a PAR 11 ing growth for a time .
a PAR 11 should this interpretation predominate , infla- tion expectations would rise ; although real interest rates probably would fall , the prices of debt instruments could come under downward pressure .
a PAR 11 under all these scenarios , the foreign exchange value of the dollar would weaken , and especially so if inflation expectations deteriorated .

b PAR 8 an unchanged policy stance , as in alternative b , would probably be preferred if the committee concurred with the staff 's as- sessment of the economy , viewed potential risks as about evenly balanced , and was willing to accept the possibility of a slight inten- sification of price pressures .
b PAR 8 of course , this alternative might be even more attractive if the committee saw smaller odds of rising in- flation , as it did in january judging from the cpi forecasts submitted by the members .
b PAR 8 moreover , in light of the unusual number of temporary disruptions and distortions to economic activity in the last few months and the difficulties in understanding the implications of the recent movements of stock and bond prices , a pause might be favored to allow sufficient time to establish a firmer bearing on the likely course of spending and inflation , even if the committee saw the risks to the outlook as possibly tilted to one side or the other .
b PAR 9 with market participants apparently expecting no policy action over the next few months , maintenance of current reserve condi- tions , as under alternative b , would elicit little reaction in credit markets .
b PAR 9 capital market prices could remain volatile as incoming information continues to be difficult to interpret in the wake of the winter 's economic disruptions .
b PAR 9 although the anticipated softening of many indicators in march , such as payroll employment and industrial production , might boost markets for a time , data consistent with the staff forecast would seem , on balance , to imply little net change in longer - term yields .
b PAR 9 market participants have largely discounted any chance of a multi - year budget agreement before the elections , so a renewal of meaningful negotiations on long - term deficit reduction has the potential to raise bond and stock prices .
b PAR 9 absent such a develop- ment or unanticipated changes in policy abroad , the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would remain around its current level .

c PAR 12 a 1/2 percentage point tightening in reserve conditions , as under alternative c , might be favored if the committee agreed with the staff forecast but viewed its outcome for inflation as undesir- able , particularly if the committee wanted to make some progress to- ward price stability .
c PAR 12 indeed , given that the economy is already operating at or beyond many estimates of its potential , the committee might see significant upside risks to the inflation forecast .
c PAR 12 in this regard , the recent behavior of asset prices and some financial ag- gregates could potentially be signalling inflationary pressures .
c PAR 12 part of the rise in bond yields might be associated with higher inflation expectations , and the gains in equity markets have the potential to provide excessive stimulus to spending .
c PAR 12 moreover , the broad monetary aggregates have been growing rapidly of late , suggesting ample li- quidity in household balance sheets and readily available funds for depositories .
c PAR 12 relative to the staff forecast , a 1/2 percentage point firming in reserve conditions would take a little pressure off re- source markets , raising the odds that the inflation rate would not tend to drift higher .
c PAR 13 the 50 basis point tightening of alternative c would catch market participants unawares and show through to instruments at the shortest maturities .
c PAR 13 the response further along the term struc- ture of interest rates could also be substantial , as the action would likely be interpreted as suggesting that the federal reserve saw con- siderable inflation risks .
c PAR 13 even so , the rise in longer - term rates likely would reflect a significant real component and the dollar would tend to increase on exchange markets and stock prices to weaken .

