
b PAR 8 the committee thus might view such an inflation outcome as unacceptable .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , there are reasons why the committee might choose the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b for the upcoming intermeeting period .
b PAR 8 although labor markets are tight and wages accelerating , the extent and timing of any feedthrough of this acceleration to overall compensation and ultimately prices remain uncertain .
b PAR 8 real interest rates are in the neighborhood of levels that over the past fifteen years have been associated on average with little change in inflation , and the growth of money and credit has been moderate , suggesting perhaps that if the stance of policy is stimulative , it may not be greatly so .
b PAR 8 indeed , the staff forecast has only a gradual pickup in core inflation , which in any event will start from a level in the third quarter that is probably lower than the committee had anticipated .
b PAR 8 in these circumstances , waiting to assess better the economic situation might not incur much risk of a signifi-
b PAR 8 ca nt deterioration in inflation expectations , provided the delay were not too long , because containing inflation will still be possible before it has risen appreciably above the general level of recent years .
b PAR 8 moreover , the soft cast to the recent trend of retail sales and continued surprisingly favorable readings on broad price indexes may lead the committee to consider the staff forecast as too pessimis- tic about likely inflation pressures .
b PAR 8 if so , inflation is more apt to be kept within acceptable bounds without policy adjustment .
b PAR 9 with market participants apparently placing greater than even odds on policy tightening at this meeting , interest rates would likely decline and the dollar weaken on foreign exchange markets if the unchanged policy of alternative b were adopted .
b PAR 9 even before the discount rate story earlier this week , markets had built in close to 50/50 odds of a slight policy tightening , and alternative b probably would trigger rate declines that not only reversed the increases associated with the story , but some of those registered earlier in the intermeeting period as well .
b PAR 9 many would likely view the committee as merely delaying policy action until the november meeting rather than changing its fundamental assessment of the potential inflation threat , and this reaction would tend to limit the decline in long - term rates .
b PAR 9 there is a risk that policy inaction would induce some in the market to question the committee 's commitment to holding down inflation , or its willingness to take forward - looking action to do so , which would tend to boost inflation expectations .
b PAR 9 given uncertainties about the outlook and the perceived lack of a policy consensus within the federal reserve , markets are likely to remain highly sensitive to new economic data and to indications of committee members ' inclinations .
b PAR 13 in view of slower - than - expected m2 and m3 growth in recent months , the staff has revised down projected growth for those aggregates in 1996 .
b PAR 13 m2 is now expected to increase at a 4 - 1/2 percent rate this year and m3 at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate under alternative b , somewhat below the upper ends of their growth ranges for the year .
b PAR 13 over the august - to - december period , the expansion of m2 is projected to pick up to about a 4 - 3/4 percent pace , broadly in line with gdp growth under alternative b . the pickup in m2 should show through to m3 , and growth in the latter is forecast to strengthen to a 6 percent rate over the final four months of this year , abetted by a strengthen- ing of the expansion of bank credit .
b PAR 13 continued large sweeps of other checkable deposits and demand deposits will distort measured m1 .
b PAR 13 deed , m1 is projected to run off at about a 5 percent annual rate over the august - to - december period , while expansion of sweep - adjusted m1 increases to a 6 - 1/2 percent rate .
b PAR 13 growth rates of money and debt ( percent , annual rates ) adjusted for sweeps debt august to 4 - 3/4 6 - 1/2 4 - 1/4 1995:q4 to 1996:04 4 - 1/2 5 - 3/4 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 13 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 13 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1 to 5 2 to 61996 target ranges : directive language 

c PAR 10 a tightening of policy at this committee meeting , whether by 50 basis points , as assumed in alternative c , or by only 25 basis points , would improve the chances that price pressures would be contained and inflation outcomes would be consistent with the commit- tee members ' expectations in july .
c PAR 10 in the alternative scenarios in the greenbook , an increase of one percentage point in the federal funds rate over the next year is sufficient to tilt core inflation down .
c PAR 10 a 25 or 50 basis point tightening at this meeting could be seen either as a first installment in moving more deliberately toward lower inflation , or as a more limited action aimed at holding the line .
c PAR 10 with labor markets tight and wage gains already strengthening , the committee may see it as only a matter of time before total compensa- tion puts sufficient pressure on profit margins to prompt businesses to raise their prices faster .
c PAR 10 especially if aggregate demand has more momentum than in the staff forecast , waiting for very long to tighten , given the lags in the effects of monetary policy , risks embedding some rise in inflation and inflation expectations into the economy and financial markets .
c PAR 10 that result would necessitate more aggressive and potentially disruptive policy action at a later date to return infla- tion to recent levels .


