a PAR 10 a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate , as under alternative a , might be favored if the committee viewed the recent softness of final sales as likely to persist .
a PAR 10 under those circumstances , inventories may turn out higher than firms desire , imparting an additional drag on production over the next couple of quarters .
a PAR 10 but even if the staff forecast of spending is accepted , the committee may view the recent favorable performance of wages and prices as suggesting that the natural rate of unemployment is still lower than that implicit in the staff 's inflation forecast .
a PAR 10 if so , the economy may not have overshot its potential , and price pressures may be weaker than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 11 while some talk has surfaced in the market that the next policy move might be toward ease , participants do not foresee a reduction in the intended federal funds rate at this meeting .
a PAR 11 a 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate , as under alternative a , would most likely be read as evidence that the committee has serious reservations about the prospects for spending .
a PAR 11 in this event , sizable reductions in nominal and real market yields would likely be induced across the term structure .
a PAR 11 however , the easing might also be taken by the market as revealing a greater willingness on the part of the committee to risk an uptick in inflation as it undertook to test the upside of potential output .
a PAR 11 if doubts about the committee 's resolve to contain inflation were to become prevalent in the market , which might be especially likely should incoming data indicate buoyant spending or increased inflation pressures , nominal intermediate- and longer - term yields could begin to reverse their initial declines .
a PAR 11 in any case , the dollar would most likely weaken on foreign exchange markets .

b PAR 6 if the committee views the staff forecast as both likely and acceptable , it presumably would favor standing pat -- alternative b . even if the committee found unacceptable the forecasted upcreep in core inflation ( abstracting from technical cpi adjustments   , it might want to wait for more evidence that such an outcome is in train before taking action .
b PAR 6 the overutilization of resources may be seen as staying modest in any event , and thus policy inaction at this meeting would not seem to risk allowing inflation to rise so much that jarring adjustments to employment and output would be required eventually .
b PAR 7 with market participants widely expecting policy to remain on hold for some time , the committee 's selection of alternative b should elicit little response in financial markets . assuming that developments over the intermeeting period play out in accord with the staff projection , which appears aligned with most market forecasts , there is no reason to anticipate that interest rates will break out of their recent range .
b PAR 7 similarly , the dollar should trade on foreign exchange markets around its recent levels .
b PAR 13 in coming months , offering rates on m2 accounts are not expected to change much under alternative b , maintaining opportunity costs at around their recent levels .
b PAR 13 m2 growth over the october - to- march period is expected to quicken to a 4 - 1/4 percent rate from the unexpectedly weak advance in september and october , reflecting the projected speedup in nominal spending in the staff
b PAR 13 forecast.4 this 4 .
b PAR 13 the introduction of new retail sweeps is expected to continue at a rapid pace in coming months .
b PAR 13 as a result , m1 is anticipated to decline at a 9 percent rate over the october - to - march period under alternative b ; adjusted for sweeps , m1 would increase at a 3 - 3/4 percent rate over that span .
b PAR 13 from october to march , the monetary base is projected to grow at a 1 - 1/2 percent annual rate , but abstracting from sweeps , the growth rate would be 4 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 13 strengthening in m2 does not show through to m3 , as banks lessen their net issuance of managed liabilities , and the broader aggregate is seen as expanding at a 6 - 1/4 percent pace over the next five months .
b PAR 13 the implied growth of m2 for 1996 as a whole is 4 percent , in the upper half of its range , compared with a 4 - 1/2 percent rate projected in the september bluebook .
b PAR 13 the growth of m3 for the year is projected at 6 percent , at the upper bound of its range and slightly higher than the 5 - 3/4 percent rate forecast for this aggregate in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 13 growth rates of money and debt ( percent , annual rates ) october 1995-q4 to to march1
b PAR 13 1996-q4 m2 4 - 1/4 4 m3
b PAR 13 6 - 1/4 6 m1
b PAR 13 -9 -5 - 1/2 adjusted for sweeps 3 - 3/4 5 debt 4 - 3/4 5 1 . september to march for domestic nonfinancial debt .
b PAR 13 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 13 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 13 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 07-nov
b PAR 13 03:12 pm 1996 target ranges :
b PAR 13 directive language 

c PAR 8 a policy tightening , such as the 50 basis point firming of the federal funds rate under alternative c , might be favored should the committee wish to move promptly to counter the updrift in underlying inflation embedded in the staff outlook .
c PAR 8 furthermore , the committee may be concerned about additional upside risks to the inflation outlook : for example , recent wage data may be misleading and the widely reported tightness of labor markets could be reflected soon in much more sizable increases in labor costs .
c PAR 8 or spending might snap back more forcefully than envisioned by the staff -- especially in light of the recent rallies in bond and stock markets -- and intensify pressures on resource utilization .
c PAR 9 the choice of alternative c would come as a surprise to market participants .
c PAR 9 most likely , they would infer that the committee sees considerably more risk of greater inflation pressures than is generally perceived .
c PAR 9 interest rates could rise markedly across the term structure -- perhaps almost as much at short - term maturities as the 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 9 higher real interest rates would be likely to boost the dollar on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 9 financial prices could be volatile for a time as market participants reappraised the economic outlook and the likely path for monetary policy , and appreciable declines in equity values can not be ruled out .

