a PAR 17 the table on page 11 presents two alternatives for money and credit ranges for 1996 and 1997 .
a PAR 17 the committee first selected the alternative a growth rate ranges for 1996 of 1 to 5 percent for m2 , 2 to 6 percent for m3 , and 3 to 7 percent for debt on a provisional basis at its meeting a year ago , and it reaffirmed these ranges at its meeting in late january of this year .
a PAR 17 the debt range was reason-
a PAR 17 ably well centered on the likely outcomes for growth in this measure under staff or committee members ' economic forecasts , and it remains 9 .
a PAR 17 appendix b shows the committee 's announced annual ranges for money and credit since 1979 .
a PAR 17 so unless policy tightens very substantially .
a PAR 17 when the committee chose its 1996 m2 and m3 ranges in july and january , however , it recognized that staff baseline projections of these aggregates were in the neighborhood of the upper ends of these ranges .
a PAR 17 the committee 's rationale was to provide a benchmark for secular growth of the broader monetary aggregates that , in the words of the federal reserve act , would be " commensurate with the economy 's long run potential to in- crease production so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates " under the assumption of historically typical velocity behavior .
a PAR 17 the monetary policy reports to the congress after those meetings indicated that growth of the broader aggregates might run near the upper ends of their ranges .
a PAR 17 a very similar situation confronts the committee at this meeting , with the baseline staff forecast for m2 and m3 for both this year and next at the 5 and 6 percent upper bounds of their respective alternative a ranges .
a PAR 17 the committee may wish to reaffirm the alternative a ranges for 1996 under this rationale of providing longer - run benchmarks , and extend them to 1997 . as another rationale for the alternative a ranges , the committee may foresee slower growth of m2 and m3 than the staff projects , moving these aggregates comfor- tably within their ranges : for example , a hike in short - term interest rates , to better ensure that inflation remains contained , such as in the tighter scenario , would tend to depress the growth of the broader aggregates , particularly next year given the usual lags .

b PAR 18 alternative
b PAR 18 ii raises the m2 and m3 ranges by 1 percent- age point to align them better with the money growth likely to prevail under the staff forecast and , judging by the central tendency of the members ' nominal gdp projections , the committee 's as well .
b PAR 18 even if the committee has no intention of placing greater weight on the aggregates , this alternative might be seen as closer to the spirit of the federal reserve act 's requirement to report the " objectives and plans " for money and credit for the current and , in july , the following calendar year , taking account of past and prospective developments in employment , prices , and other factors .
b PAR 18 one option might be to center the ranges around expected monetary growth .
b PAR 18 to be sure the alternative b ranges are not high enough to accomplish this , but the committee may find this feature acceptable if it intends to pursue an opportunistic strategy in approaching its long - run objective of price stability .
b PAR 18 in this case , monetary policy would respond aggressively to upside surprises to nominal gdp or inflation in order to hold the line against sustained increases in inflation , but would be more tentative in resisting downward shocks to spending .
b PAR 18 because increases in short - term interest rates or shortfalls in nominal gdp would therefore be more likely to be sizable than movements in the opposite direction , shortfalls of money growth from the staff forecast would tend to be larger than overshoots .
b PAR 18 short - run policy alternatives 
b SENT -- under alternative b , federal funds would continue to trade around 5 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 20 the unchanged reserves market conditions of alternative b are assumed in the staff economic forecast .
b PAR 20 in that fore- cast , growth in output and employment slows in the months ahead to a pace that is in line with the rate of increase in the economy 's poten- tial .
b PAR 20 however , because the staff sees the economy as operating in level terms a bit beyond its potential currently and over the forecast period , an upward drift in inflation develops .
b PAR 20 even so , the overshoot of output is quite small and the rise in inflation consequently mild and gradual , suggesting that major policy adjustments would not be necessary to keep inflation from rising .
b PAR 20 real bond yields have in- creased substantially in recent months and are now more in line with levels that in the past appeared to have been consistent with holding inflation in check .
b PAR 20 the yield curve at present embodies only small odds of a modest policy tightening over coming months , and further decreases in rates are likely to be quite minimal in the near term if the committee chose to keep policy unchanged at this meeting .
b PAR 20 in these circumstances , even if the committee wished to lean against the sorts of incipient inflation pressures inherent in the staff forecast , it might be able to afford to wait for more information to gauge whether those pressures were likely to develop and their extent .

c PAR 21 a 1/4 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate , as under alternative c , might be favored if the committee wished to impose greater restraint on spending to reduce the odds of a gradual increase of inflation pressures .
c PAR 21 prompt action would help to counter the possibility of an impression developing , should data come in on the strong side , that the federal reserve had become less will- ing to act anticipatively to forestall a buildup of inflationary pressures .
c PAR 21 a single 1/4 point tightening , however , would likely not be adequate to contain inflation pressures if aggregate demand were stronger than in the greenbook or if the recent favorable behavior of prices and costs were not to persist .
c PAR 21 even in the staff forecast , a single 1/4 point move probably is not sufficient to induce a downward tilt to inflation .
c PAR 21 for example , the tighter alternative in the greenbook , in which policy is sufficiently restrictive to make noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and beyond , assumes that a quarter point tightening at this meeting would be followed by considerable further firming later in the year .
c SENT -- money growth would be expected to slow somewhat more under alternative c , putting the broad aggregates on paths more likely to leave them below the upper ends of their longer - term ranges .

