
b PAR 6 the staff assessment of the pressures on resources implies that policy restraint is in order at some point to check an upcreep in inflation , but the committee may , nonetheless , prefer to hold the federal funds rate at its current level of 5 - 1/2 percent at this meeting , as in alternative b . over the past few quarters sustained high levels of resource utilization have been associated with flat or , by some measures , even declining inflation .
b PAR 6 the committee may read this experience as suggesting the possibility that economic activity can run on the high side of historical norms without putting much pressure on inflation .
b PAR 6 even in the staff forecast some of the moderate pickup in consumer prices owes to a smaller drag from import prices as , by assumption , the dollar stabilizes .
b PAR 6 additional impetus to inflation comes from a projected further decline in the unemployment rate .
b PAR 6 given these uncertainties attending the prospects for inflation , the committee might be willing to defer putting restraint in place so as to get more readings on the pace of stock - building , the strength of final sales , and the behavior of wages and prices .
b PAR 6 a willingness to await new information might be reinforced if the committee were of the view that any current misalignment of policy was modest at worst .
b PAR 6 some reassurance in this regard might be gotten from the likelihood that the real fed funds rate has ticked higher in recent months , as inflation expectations seem to have declined along with the drop in measured inflation , while the nominal funds rate has been held steady .
b PAR 6 with scant indications of pipeline pressures that normally presage a pickup in inflation , and with business profit margins perhaps ample enough to absorb a portion of any speed up in cost increases , the committee may well have time to act before an incipient increase in inflation becomes firmly embedded in inflation expectations .
b PAR 8 virtually no one in the market anticipates action at this meeting , so that yields across the term structure are not likely to budge much and the dollar should continue to trade around its current level on foreign exchange markets immediately following the adoption of the unchanged policy stance of alternative b . treasury bill rates have been depressed of late by low issuance , and the turnaround in bill sales in the fourth quarter prompted by the seasonal bulge in the federal deficit may roll back some of the decline in rates on those securities .
b PAR 8 over time , if economic developments unfold as in the staff forecast , market participants are in store for some disappointment : inflation will be a touch faster , providing a context in which expected strength in readings on economic activity are more likely to be taken as evidence that higher real rates are required to slow spending to contain price pressures , and corporate profits should decelerate . against this backdrop , nominal yields would likely edge higher , with both their real and inflation compensation components rising , and equity prices would likely decline .
b SENT -- ( 10 ) under the unchanged policy stance of alternative b , the growth of the monetary aggregates should slow significantly .

c PAR 7 if the committee were confident that the staff had correctly identified the threat that inflation would pick up , or wanted some greater assurance of further progress toward price stability , it would likely favor raising the federal funds rate promptly , perhaps at this meeting by the 25 basis points of alternative c .
c PAR 7 the need for prompt action might be seen as elevated because the vigor of final sales threatens to add to pressures on resources , and the longer the economy operates beyond its sustainable potential , the more disruptive may be the correction needed to contain inflation . despite relatively high short - term real rates , financial conditions remain quite supportive to spending : the stock market continues to generate impressive gains in wealth ; longer - term real interest rates seem to have held fairly steady or perhaps edged lower since spring ; and capital markets and depositories remain quite receptive to borrowers .
c PAR 7 the rapid growth of the monetary aggregates in the past few months may be seen as one more warning flag that financial conditions are supporting more spending than can be accommodated without an increase of inflation .
c PAR 7 while the committee might be more inclined than ever to view structural changes as permitting the economy to operate at a higher rate than in the past , the projected unemployment rate of 4 - 1/2 percent falls short of all but the rosiest estimates of the natural rate .
c PAR 7 moreover , a portion of the recent good performance of inflation has owed to temporary factors , such as the strength in the foreign exchange value of the dollar , which are not likely to be repeated over coming quarters .
c PAR 7 even worker insecurity may be expected to erode in a strong labor market marked by reduced layoffs .
c PAR 7 with those beneficial forces likely to wind down , the committee may fear that the effects of strains on resources may show through more forcefully to the prices of goods and services than in the staff forecast , perhaps more in line with traditional relationships .
c PAR 9 the committee 's choice of alternative c at this meeting would catch market participants completely unawares .
c PAR 9 money market rates would rise at least as much as the 25 basis point hike in the federal funds rate , and intermediate- and long - term rates could increase substantially as well .
c PAR 9 the extent of the increase , of course , would depend on market participants ' interpretation of the rationale for federal reserve action .
c PAR 9 the action might be viewed as simply a purchase of limited additional insurance against higher inflation in response to a spurt to final demand .
c PAR 9 alternatively , the tightening might be taken as evidence that the federal reserve had not become as optimistic as market participants have come to suspect it was about the economy 's ability to produce at unusually high rates without generating more inflation ; such a reassessment might even lead some investors to revise their own views about inflation as well as about future federal reserve behavior .
c PAR 9 in either case , the implied rise in real rates would buoy the exchange value of the dollar but depress equity values .
c PAR 9 stock prices might be doubly hit if confidence in the expected growth of earnings were shaken not only by the prospects for tighter policy but also by a less favorable view of the long - run path of potential output .
c PAR 9 in these circumstances , incoming data bearing on the strength of spending and inflation pressure would be especially scrutinized , and large swings in financial prices might become even more common .

