a PAR 13 the 25 basis point easing of alternative a might be favored if the committee were concerned that turmoil abroad might have an even greater impact on the u.s . economy than the staff has built into the forecast .
a PAR 13 given the favorable near - term inflation outlook for the united states , the committee might see insurance against such an outcome to be relatively inexpensive in that the easing likely could be reversed , if that proved necessary , before it boosted inflation and inflation expectations .
a PAR 13 indeed , such an easing , by lowering real dollar interest rates might contribute a little toward stabilizing foreign markets , helping to forestall some repercussions in the united states .
a PAR 13 moreover , the recent weakness in commodity prices and the shallow slope of the yield curve may support the view that real short - term rates are high relative to their equilibrium .

b PAR 9 while the economy continues to operate in the staff forecast at a level above estimates of its potential , inflation remains quiescent for some time with no change in the federal funds rate and stays relatively low over the forecast period .
b PAR 9 even if the committee is concerned about the pressures on labor resources and finds the eventual uptrend in underlying inflation unacceptable , it may be willing to keep the funds rate constant at this meeting , as under alternative b . in the staff forecast , the emergence of inflation has been pushed back enough to suggest that delaying possible firming to await further information about global and national economic developments runs minimal risk of embedding higher inflation and inflation expectations in economic decisionmaking .
b PAR 9 the situation in a number of foreign markets and economies remains quite unsettled , amplifying uncertainties about the extent of the global retrenchment and its implications for the u.s . financial markets and economy .
b PAR 9 the circumstances are sufficiently fluid that the committee might see some possibility of a major economic retrenchment , which could be exacerbated by a preemptive tightening of u.s .
b PAR 9 monetary policy at this time .
b PAR 9 under alternative b , the committee would be buying time to assess the extent to which developments abroad restrain aggregate demand , depress oil prices , and support the dollar , as well as the degree to which recent momentum in the economy might be sustained .
b PAR 9 more data might also be seen as especially useful in sorting out some of the questions about underlying pressures on labor compensation and the extent to which productivity behavior might damp the feed - through of higher compensation to profit margins and prices .
b PAR 10 the markets expect no policy action over the next few months and would react little , if at all , to the choice of alternative b . apart from year - end effects , interest rates-- especially treasury yields -- should fluctuate close to recent lows over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 10 any tendency for rates to edge higher if foreign markets settle down should be offset by the effects of more moderate economic growth , as in the staff forecast .
b PAR 10 stock prices , however , could drift down as economic reports begin to undermine the prospects for profits .
b PAR 10 in these circumstances , investors might reevaluate credit risk more generally , and spreads on bonds could widen a touch further .
b PAR 10 the market for treasury securities might , from time to time , be buffeted by the fallout from developments in asia .
b PAR 10 on occasion in recent weeks , the treasury market has weakened temporarily on the expectation of official and private sales of treasuries for purposes of addressing financial difficulties in asia , and such events could well recur over the weeks and months ahead .
b PAR 10 however , by themselves , such sales are unlikely to have much lasting effect on dollar yields because they do not change the fundamental outlook for prices and spending in the united states .
b PAR 10 moreover , they should be easily absorbed into markets benefiting from demands for safer assets and from reduced borrowing by asian financial institutions to the extent they repay dollar liabilities with the proceeds of their asset sales .
b PAR 15 growth of the broad money aggregates is expected to moderate from the recent rapid pace , as the expansion of nominal gdp slows in the first quarter .
b PAR 15 m2 growth is projected at around a 4 percent annual pace over the november - to - march period under alternative b , leaving this aggregate near the upper end of its provisional 1998 range .
b PAR 15 nonetheless , growth in m2 would again outpace that of nominal gdp in the first quarter of 1998 , and m2 velocity would edge lower .
b PAR 15 m3 should slow by more than m2 over the november - to - march period , as growth in bank credit ebbs and some of the shifting in the composition of bank managed liabilities diminishes .
b PAR 15 nonetheless , growth in m3 - -at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate -- is expected to run above the upper end of its provisional range for 1998 .

c PAR 11 the 25 basis point tightening of alternative c might be favored if the committee wanted to lean against the inflationary bias that may well be inherent in the current and prospective tautness of labor markets .
c PAR 11 the further tightening of labor markets this fall indicates that financial conditions prevailing over recent quarters have not been sufficiently restrictive to hold economic growth to a sustainable pace .
c PAR 11 with real bond rates no higher -- and perhaps even a bit lower -- than over the last few quarters , equity prices still high , and monetary growth above expectations , only the rise in the dollar gives any hint of the firmer financial conditions needed to damp strong aggregate demands . against this background , and with labor markets already extremely tight , the committee might perceive that counting on sufficient additional restraint coming from asian developments runs an unacceptable risk of a rebound in inflation in 1998 that would be disruptive to reverse .


