
b PAR 10 the continuing string of data suggesting stronger real activity and softer inflation than expected has provided evidence that , at least in some respects , economic behavior is deviating from historical patterns .
b PAR 10 in those circumstances , knowing at what point resource pressures will induce cost and price acceleration -- and hence when preemptive policy actions would become warranted -- is difficult , making a " wait - and - see " posture more attractive .
b PAR 10 despite the recent strength in aggregate demand , the current policy stance still could turn out to be consistent with sustainable economic expansion and subdued inflation .
b PAR 10 indeed , inflation expectations probably have receded even further of late ; certainly that would be consistent with the narrowing spread between yields on the treasury 's nominal and inflation - protected securities .
b PAR 10 by itself , this development should restrain the wage- and price - setting process .
b PAR 10 moreover , the fall in inflation expectations has further raised real short - term interest rates , which should work to restrain spending over time , other things equal .
b PAR 12 the staff anticipates that , under alternative b , m2 and m3 will grow at annual rates of 4 - 1/2 and 6 - 1/4 percent , respectively , over the five months from october to march of next year .
b PAR 12 over the fourth and first quarters , quarterly average growth rates for the two aggregates of 5 - 1/4 and 7 - 1/4 percent are anticipated , compared with a greenbook forecast of 5 - 1/4 percent on average for nominal gdp .
b PAR 12 the standard measure of the opportunity costs of holding monetary assets is effectively unchanged over the next two quarters as the policy tightening assumed by the staff starts toward the end of that interval .
b PAR 12 the updrift in m2 velocity observed in the last few years should be muted in the period ahead , because some investors will likely choose the safety of m2 assets over increased exposures in equity markets .
b PAR 12 the sizable downtrend in m3 velocity is expected to persist .
b PAR 12 bank credit is expected to expand at around a 6 percent rate over the five months , supported in part by strong business lending to help finance continued investment in plant and equipment , so m3 growth likely again will be bolstered relative to that of m2 by still - rapid issuance of large time deposits as well as by inflows into institution - only money funds .
b PAR 12 for this year as a whole , m2 is seen as growing at the 5 percent upper end of its range , while m3 is expected to expand 2 percentage points faster than the 6 percent upper bound of its range .

c PAR 9 if the committee shares the staffs assessment that the u.s . economy has overshot its sustainable productive potential , it may be disposed to tighten its policy stance , as in the 25 basis point rise in the funds rate in alternative c . with markets still somewhat unsettled , the extent of their reactions to a policy tightening is especially difficult to gauge , and the odds that those reactions , both in the united states and abroad , could be outsized are probably higher than usual .
c PAR 9 under these circumstances , if the committee were inclined to tighten , it might consider waiting until it had greater assurance that domestic and foreign financial markets have quieted further .
c PAR 9 the committee would be led to raise rates if it judged the threat of an inflationary uptrend to be serious enough to justify a preemptive policy initiative , even in the absence of any evidence in hand of actual acceleration in prices .
c PAR 9 in light of the persistent strength of final demand to date , the likely effects of recent financial market events on the u.s .
c PAR 9 inflation outlook could well be seen as too minor to assuage committee concerns about intensifying inflationary forces .
c PAR 9 the committee may judge that the impacts of weaker economies and currencies in asia on u.s .
c PAR 9 export volume and import prices will be relatively limited .
c PAR 9 also , given the small net size of the stock market decline , the cost of equity capital may be seen as remaining low enough , when combined with the still accommodative credit conditions for businesses in securities markets and at financial intermediaries , to undergird continued heavy investment spending .
c PAR 9 similarly , household financial wealth may be regarded as remaining elevated enough , when considered together with likely persisting employment gains and still high consumer confidence , to keep consumption spending on a strong path .
c PAR 9 a policy tightening -- even if delayed until markets stabilize -- likely would induce further sizable downward adjustments to stock prices , and bond prices as well , and bolster the exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 9 however , these market responses could be viewed as a necessary aspect of the transmission of monetary policy restraint .
c PAR 9 for example , in the staff forecast , a decline of around 20 percent in stock prices over the next year or so is a key element in limiting the rise in inflation .

