
b PAR 7 nonetheless , a number of considerations regarding the outlook might induce the committee to forgo tightening at the march meeting , as under alternative b . the fact that resource utilization rates have been close to current levels for several quarters , with no sign that the underlying trend of price inflation is moving higher , might suggest that the economy may not in fact have overshot its long - run potential .
b PAR 7 in light of this possibility , the committee may want to wait to see more definite indications that price pressures are likely to intensify before tightening -- for example , additional increases in resource utilization or in wage inflation .
b PAR 7 moreover , even if a tightening is needed , the committee may perceive no urgency , especially in light of the projected decline in total cpi inflation this year , which , in turn , would help restrain inflation expectations .
b PAR 7 were the committee to wait to see if the unemployment rate declines , or if temporary factors damping compensation growth like health care savings or worker insecurity diminish , sufficient lead time may still be available to prevent tight labor markets from being translated into a materially higher rate of general price inflation .
b PAR 7 even should the upturn in wage inflation already observed be sustained or become steeper , it still could be largely absorbed for a time in reduced profit margins or matched by faster productivity growth , rather than passed through quickly to prices .
b PAR 7 finally , the enthusiasm of international investors for the dollar may prove more lasting than anticipated by the staff , restraining inflation pressures in 1998 and beyond relative to the staff forecast .
b PAR 8 with market participants apparently placing high odds on a 25 basis point tightening in the federal funds rate at the march meeting , interest rates probably would fall somewhat if the unchanged policy of alternative b were adopted .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , many observers would likely continue to view tightening as inevitable , unless economic growth slows to an unexpected degree , and these expectations would limit the decline in long - term rates and any softening in the dollar .
b PAR 8 indeed , if data in the weeks ahead come in as the staff projects -- strong real gdp growth and the unemployment rate declining -- both short- and long - term interest rates would back up , with long - term rates possibly more than reversing any initial rally .
b PAR 12 under alternative b and the staff forecast , debt is expected to continue to grow around its recent pace in the months ahead , while money growth tends to moderate as the expansion of nominal gdp slows .
b PAR 12 the debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow at a 5 percent rate from february to june , paced by the business and household sectors .
b PAR 12 business borrowing picks up somewhat , as capital spending remains strong , while flows of internal funds level out .
b PAR 12 for households , although credit is likely to become somewhat harder to obtain for marginal borrowers , overall consumer debt should remain on its recent moderate growth path .
b PAR 13 m2 growth from february to june under alternative b is projected to slow to a 4 - 1/2 percent rate , reflecting the deceleration in nominal gdp .
b PAR 13 by midyear , this aggregate will likely be near the upper edge of its 1-to-5 percent annual range .
b PAR 13 expansion of m3 should ease relative to its unusually rapid pace of earlier this year , as the torrid growth in money funds slows to a more sustainable rate and depositories resume a more typical balance of financing between deposits and non - deposit funding sources .
b PAR 13 from february to june , m3 is projected to increase at a 6 percent rate , leaving it well above the upper end of its annual range .
b PAR 13 growth rates of money and debt ( percent , annual rates ) february 1996:q4 to to june june
b PAR 13 m2 4 - 1/2 5 m3 6 7 - 1/4 m1
b PAR 13 -3 - 1/2 adjusted for sweeps 4 - 1/2 5 - 1/2 debt 5 4 - 3/4 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 13 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 13 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 2.0 to 6.01997 annual ranges : directive language 

c PAR 9 the committee might choose to increase the federal funds rate , perhaps by the 50 basis points of alternative c , in order to lean against the likely buildup of inflation pressures .
c PAR 9 recent strength in aggregate demand suggests that interest rates are not high enough to restrain economic growth over the near term to the likely rate of increase in potential , so resource use probably will be moving more decidedly above sustainable levels .
c PAR 9 the alternative simulations in the greenbook imply that substantial tightening is needed over the balance of the year to forestall a lasting increase in the rate of inflation .
c PAR 9 because of lags in the effects of policy , delaying the tightening process for long in these circumstances would increase the amount that the real funds rate eventually would have to be raised to reverse the impetus imparted to the inflation process , amplifying the associated swing in real gdp .
c PAR 9 even if the committee is not as pessimistic as the staff on the inflation outlook , some firming may still be warranted to improve the balance of risks facing the economy .
c PAR 9 robust final demand and lean inventories would suggest that the likelihood of significant economic weakness is small at present and that the economy should retain significant forward momentum even after a tightening .
c PAR 9 with demand strong , only unusual , persistent increases in productivity or in labor force participation would avert added cost and price pressures at some point in the future if the current funds rate is maintained .
c PAR 9 given these current risks , a tightening action might seem especially appropriate if the committee sought to improve the prospects for progress over the next few years toward its long - run price stability objective .

