
b PAR 8 despite the staffs perception that underlying inflation pressures will be building , the committee may find reasons to leave its policy stance unchanged , at least for the time being , as incorporated in alternative b , which keeps the intended federal funds rate at 5 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 8 in the greenbook forecast , the expansion of real gdp abruptly slows by enough to keep resource utilization from increasing further .
b PAR 8 the committee may feel that there is a reasonable chance that the rates of resource use in the forecast could be associated with more subdued inflation than the staff expects .
b PAR 8 data becoming available since the last meeting indicate a continuing damped response of prices and costs to unemployment rates that were once regarded as well below sustainable levels , underscoring the heightened uncertainties of recent years about the relationship between resource use and inflation .
b PAR 8 even if labor costs do accelerate as the staff projects , the higher profit share of late could provide an even greater buffer against the effects on prices than the staff has assumed , damping inflation rates for some time to come .
b PAR 8 the argument for standing pat would be stronger still if one gave appreciable weight to the notion that real short - term interest rates already had moved to relatively high levels , providing some insulation against the risk that overly rapid economic growth would resume .
b PAR 9 many analysts continue to predict that the committee will tighten policy at this meeting .
b PAR 9 however , in recent weeks , markets appear to have removed all but modest odds of any action , and the choice of alternative b should trigger a relatively minor decline in rates .
b PAR 9 as the intermeeting period progresses , incoming evidence confirming the staff forecast of markedly slower second - quarter growth in real gdp and still - quiescent inflation readings could further erode expectations of policy firming , fueling additional price gains in fixed- income markets .
b PAR 9 as an exception , the recent decline in the three - month bill rate should begin to unwind significantly with the approach of renewed net bill issuance in july .
b PAR 9 the exchange value of the dollar probably would fluctuate around its recent lower levels or even drift lower .
b PAR 14 the runoff of the tax - related deposit surge of april should be completed in may , after which the monthly growth of m2 and m3 under alternative b is expected to stabilize at annual rates of 4 - 1/2 and 6 percent , respectively , through september -- somewhat below the pace of the first five months of the year .
b PAR 14 quarterly average growth of m2 in the second and third quarters would be a touch below the staffs projected average pace for nominal gdp of 4 - 1/4 percent over the two quarters , reflecting the lagged effects of higher opportunity costs stemming from the policy firming in march .
b PAR 14 m3 growth is expected to ease slightly , though still remain strong .
b PAR 14 rapid money fund growth and some further shifting toward large time deposits and away from overseas funding of bank assets will continue to sustain growth in this aggregate , even in the face of a substantial slowing in bank credit growth .
b PAR 14 as shown in the charts , the staff anticipates that m2 will have grown at a 4 - 3/4 percent rate from the fourth quarter of 1996 through september , just below the 5 percent upper end of its annual range , while m3 will have expanded at a 6 - 3/4 percent rate over the same period , well above the 6 percent upper bound of its annual range .
b PAR 14 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 14 c levels in billions apr-97 may-97 jun-97 jul-97 aug-97 sep-97 monthly growth rates jan-97 feb-97 mar-97 apr-97 may-97 jun-97 jul-97 aug-97 sep-97 quarterly averages 97 q1 97 q2 97 q3 97 q4 growth rate from apr-97 may-97 96 q4 96 q4 96 q4 95
b PAR 14 q4 sep-97 sep-97 apr-97 may-97 sep-97 96 q4 1997
b PAR 14 annual ranges :
b PAR 14 chart 2 actual and projected m2 billions of dollars - actual level
b PAR 14 - - -- projected level ./ - 4000 short - run alternatives s
b PAR 14 s3900 iiiiiiiii ii 3650 oct dec
b PAR 14 apr jun aug oct dec feb chart 3 actual and projected m3 billions of dollars - actual level -- projected level short - run alternatives * - 5200 b6c
b PAR 14 4700 oct dec
b PAR 14 apr jun aug oct dec feb chart 4 actual and projected debt billions of dollars -- actual level - - - - estimated level projected level -i 15400
b PAR 14 dec jun aug feb directive language 

c PAR 11 the 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate under alternative c would come as a major surprise to financial market participants and likely would spark a considerable rise in interest rates and the exchange value of the dollar .
c PAR 11 future expected real short rates could shift up appreciably over a relatively long time horizon as the market saw the action as reflecting an fomc view , which the market may find persuasive , that inflation pressures over the near term were likely to be stronger than the market had previously anticipated and an intention to contain those pressures through further aggressive policy tightenings .
c PAR 11 the higher real interest rates for discounting future business profits , along with possibly greater downside risks to those profits , could take a considerable toll on equity prices as well .
c PAR 11 it is possible , though , that the market would see such a prompt substantial firming as enough to hold inflation in check , or even reduce price pressures , without the need for any future tightenings .
c PAR 11 in these circumstances , upward revisions to expected future interest rates would be appreciably smaller , and the selloff at the longer end of the maturity spectrum considerably more limited .


