
b SENT -- under alternative b , the intended federal funds rate would be kept at its current level of 5 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 7 despite the updrift in inflation projected by the staff , the committee may elect to maintain the current stance of monetary policy for the time being by choosing alternative b . regardless of any longer - term risks , any likelihood of losing substantial ground against inflation in the period just ahead appears to be remote : inflation expectations seem to have declined in recent months , which should help to moderate for a time any turnaround in actual price increases ; and , at this stage of the investment cycle and with consumers already having responded to their increased wealth , the odds on a marked upside surprise in final demand would seem to be lower than they might have appeared earlier .
b PAR 7 moreover , the real federal funds rate has been rising this year from an already high level , owing to the committee 's firming of policy in march and the apparent decline in inflation expectations since then , providing some assurance that policy is not substantially too accommodative .
b PAR 7 financial aggregates could be read in the same light , with both m2 and debt , the two aggregates most closely related to nominal gdp , expanding moderately.3 in the staff forecast , the rise in inflation is gradual , so that once the potential for an upswing in inflation became more clearly evident , the committee should have time to act before the economy 's long - run health were seriously threatened .
b PAR 7 indeed , whether the structure of the economy has changed in ways that make it somewhat less inflation - prone , at least for a time , than allowed for by the staff projection remains an open question .
b PAR 8 market participants uniformly do not expect a near - term policy move by the federal reserve , and selection of alternative b by the committee should elicit little imme- diate market reaction .
b PAR 8 thus , short - term interest rates generally would remain close to current levels , as would the foreign exchange value of the dollar , though treasury bill rates could continue to edge up as supply constraints ease further with the seasonal widening of the 3 the relatively brisk advance of m3 seems to be driven primarily by the funding choices of depositories and well as shifts in business cash management practices favoring money funds , both of which bear little relationship to cyclical pressures .
b PAR 8 federal deficit .
b PAR 8 in longer - term markets , prices are likely to remain more volatile than over the spring and early summer as participants assess incoming data for clues about whether the recent exceptional confluence of strong growth , high levels of resource utilization , and low inflation can persist .
b PAR 8 however , data over the intermeeting period consistent with the staff forecast would likely prove somewhat reassuring in this regard , because they would show the economy growing at a moderate pace and inflation remaining damped .
b PAR 8 in these circum- stances , long - term yields could move lower over the weeks ahead .
b PAR 11 under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b , m2 is projected to grow at a moderate 4 - 1/2 percent rate on average over the remaining months of the year , around the expected rate of expansion of nominal gdp , leaving this aggregate a little below the upper limit of its 1 to 5 percent growth range for the year .
b PAR 11 the increase in m3 is likely to slow somewhat , as factors that have temporarily been boosting managed liabilities in that aggregate dissipate , but m3 growth will probably continue to be fueled by a shift in institu- tional cash management toward money market funds .
b PAR 11 this aggregate is expected to finish the year more than a percentage point higher than its 2 to 6 percent annual range , somewhat above the staffs projection in the july bluebook .
b PAR 11 although the federal government will shift to being a net borrower in credit markets over the balance of the year , the growth of its debt will be restrained by the narrow deficit .
b PAR 11 at the same time , the level and pattern of borrowing by private sectors is not anticipated to change significantly , producing moderate growth in the debt of all nonfinancial sectors -- near the middle of its 3 to 7 percent range and in line with nominal gdp .
b PAR 11 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates alt .
b PAR 11 c levels in billions
b PAR 11 jun-97 jul-97 aug-97 sep-97 oct-97 nov-97 dec-97
b PAR 11 monthly growth rates
b PAR 11 jul-97 aug-97 sep-97 oct-97 nov-97 dec-97 quarterly averages 97 q1 97 q2 97 q3 97 q4 growth rate from to jul-97 dec-97 96 q4 jul-97 96 q4 dec-97 95 q4 96 q4 96 q4 97 q4
b PAR 11 chart 2 actual and projected m2 billions of dollars - actual level short - run alternatives jun aug
b PAR 11 i chart 3 actual and projected m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 11 actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 11 jun aug dec chart 4 actual and projected debt billions of dollars - actual level projected level jun augdec directive language 

c PAR 9 moderating growth in output will still leave utilization in the labor market substantially above levels that in the past have been associated with accelerating prices .
c PAR 9 if the committee wants more insurance against the possibility that inflation will begin to pick up , and especially if it wishes to tilt the odds a little in the direction of further progress toward price stability over coming years , it may wish to raise the intended federal funds rate at this meeting , perhaps by the 25 basis points of alternative c . with strong demand over the past year and a half propelling the economy beyond the level of its estimated potential , real short - term rates might be seen as having been below their equilibriums .
c PAR 9 one reason for this situation may be that , despite a high real federal funds rate relative to its historical average , financial market conditions evidently have been supportive of spending -- spreads faced by private borrowers are quite narrow and equity prices remain at a high level .
c PAR 9 although inflation performance has been surprisingly good of late , the effects of a stronger dollar have played an important role that is not likely to be repeated in the next few years , and signs of resurgent labor militancy may indicate reduced worker insecurity .
c PAR 9 although inflation expectations have fallen , the recent volatility in financial markets suggests that in those markets such expectations may not be firmly anchored , and could turn around reason-
c PAR 9 ably quickly once inflation begins to pick up .
c PAR 9 in those circumstances , delaying policy action ultimately could turn out to be costly in terms of economic performance .
c PAR 10 with no near - term tightening expected , the market response to implementation of alternative c could be sharp .
c PAR 10 short - term market rates would jump by the full 25 basis point increase in the funds rate ; the prime rate likely would be lifted by an equivalent amount .
c PAR 10 bond markets would sell off as well .
c PAR 10 investors would have difficulty interpreting such an action in light of developments over the intermeeting period , and their response might be shaped in part by the federal reserve 's announcement .
c PAR 10 participants might well think that the action represented a one - time adjustment to rebalance risks , in which case the response would tend to be muted .
c PAR 10 but more pronounced decreases in bond prices can not be ruled out because investors might interpret the action as signifying that the federal reserve had reassessed its fundamental outlook and now saw a more serious and sustained inflation threat that would call for further tightening actions .
c PAR 10 if so , the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets probably would strengthen considerably .
c PAR 10 in either case , equity prices almost certainly would fall , as real interest rates rose , and the decline could be considerable if capital losses spurred investors to reexamine their assumptions regarding the risks of equity investments .

