a PAR 28 as in the past couple of years , the committee may wish to retain the alternative a ranges , even though staff projections are around their upper ends , on the grounds that sufficient uncertainty persists regarding m2 and m3 velocity relationships to suggest that the best use for the ranges still is as benchmarks for noninflationary monetary growth.12 13 although the more predictable behavior of m2 demand has continued over the first half of the year , the committee may view the re - established relationships as not adequately tested under a variety of circumstances to be confident in their persistence .
a PAR 28 for example , greater variation in interest rates and nominal income could provoke substantial shifting between m2 assets 12 if the committee retains this rationale , it might want to consider whether it should lower the range for debt .
a PAR 28 this aggregate , like m2 , has tended to grow over time at about the same pace as nominal gdp , suggesting that a 1 to 5 percent range for debt would be more consistent with the benchmark money growth ranges .
a PAR 28 13 note also that the current range for m2 appears most consistent with steady state nominal gdp growth of around 3 percent .
a PAR 28 this would seem to imply that the committee was seeking true price stability -- assuming trend real growth of 2 percent or so and around 3/4 per- centage point of measurement bias in the deflator .
a PAR 28 if the committee thought that output growth might be greater going forward because of more favorable productivity trends or was concerned that nominal rigidities argued for inflation a bit above true price stability , these ranges might need to be higher to reflect the committee 's long - run expectations .
a PAR 28 i 1 to 5 2 to 6 3 to 7 alt .
a PAR 28 ii 2 to 6 4 to 8 3 to 7 and mutual funds , since the latter are now much more readily available than in the 1970s and 1980s .
a PAR 28 moreover , even if money demand remains reasonably predictable , the committee may value the ranges primarily as a means of signifying long - term goals , a role that they began to take on in the second half of the 1980s .
a PAR 28 although the committee used m2 growth as one of its indicators at that time , the emphasis was more on longer - term trends than on recent behavior relative to the range , in part because the interest elasticity of m2 meant that its velocity varied appreciably over the shorter - run , albeit fairly predictably , with changes in the stance of policy .
a PAR 30 if the committee decided to align the ranges more closely with expected or desired outcomes , it still might wish to retain the specifications of alternative a , particularly for 1998 . these relatively low ranges would be consistent with an intent to counter a tendency for inflation to drift higher , as under the staff forecast .
a PAR 30 indeed , the rise in interest rates envisioned in the intermediate strategy to hold inflation constant in the previous section of the bluebook would likely produce m2 growth rates of 4 - 1/4 percent in 1997 and 3 percent in 1998 , and m3 growth that dropped well within a 2 to 6 percent range in 1998 .
a PAR 30 even if the committee believed there were greater prospects for favorable supply - side outcomes than does the staff -- and thus better prospects for either more output growth or less inflation-- alternative a might still be favored if the committee wished to signal its intent to implement a relatively tight policy stance and thereby ensure that any such shock would be translated , at least in part , into lower inflation .

b SENT -- i is the same as the ranges adopted last february for 1997.11 alternative b would raise
b SENT -- ( 31 ) the staff projections for m2 and m3 growth would be encompassed by alternative b ranges in both years .
b SENT -- under alternative b , the intended federal funds rate would be maintained at its current 5 - 1/2 percent level .
b PAR 34 the committee may favor the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b if it thinks that chances are that the staff has not gone far enough to incorporate a more favorable tradeoff between resource use and inflation into the outlook .
b PAR 34 but even if the staffs current forecast were to prove about right , the deterioration in inflation performance would unfold gradually enough that the committee may judge that it can afford to wait for clearer evidence on the situation .
b PAR 34 certainly , the hard evidence in hand does not point to an imminent step up in inflation , despite the low rate to which unemployment has fallen .
b PAR 34 and the odds that recent inflation performance reflects , at least to some degree , a more lasting structural change , as opposed to a confluence of temporary factors , surely go up the longer inflation remains subdued .
b PAR 34 no change in the stance of monetary policy at this fomc meeting is built into the structure of market interest rates , so financial market prices would react little to the committee 's choice of alternative b . over the upcoming intermeeting period , some firming in treasury bill rates should accompany the return to positive net issuance of bills , while early signs of a pickup in economic growth after a pause in the second quarter could well induce some upward pressures on bond yields .
b PAR 34 in the context of evidence of a widening trade deficit , these interest rate increases are not expected to contribute to upward pressure on the dollar .
b SENT -- ( 37 ) the staffs projections of money and debt growth this year , assuming main- tenance of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b , were described in the previous section .

c SENT -- under alternative c , it would be raised 1/4 percentage point to 5 - 3/4 percent .
c PAR 36 the 25 basis point firming in alternative c would catch market participants off guard , inducing an immediate selloff in securities markets and an appreciation of the dollar in exchange markets , with short - term interest rates jumping by virtually the same amount as the intended funds rate .
c PAR 36 market participants would likely interpret the tightening as another preemptive action that would underscore their sense of the federal reserve 's anti - inflationary resolve .
c PAR 36 to the extent that , as seems likely , market participants continued to perceive that any potential inflationary threat was rather muted , they would probably extrapolate further firming moves only to a limited extent , thereby restraining the reaction in financial market prices .
c PAR 36 a 50 basis point firming would , of course , represent an even greater surprise to market participants and would induce a still sharper backup in interest rates and drop in equity prices .


