a PAR 18 under the baseline projection , m2 and m3 would finish 1997 a little below and just above the upper ends of their respective provisional annual ranges given as alternative a in paragraph ( 14   , while domestic nonfinancial sector debt would be in the middle of its provisional range .
a PAR 18 given these point estimates and the significant uncertainties in forecasting money demand relationships , either or both monetary aggregates could run significantly above their ranges under the interest rates and income growth of the baseline greenbook projection . nonetheless , as in recent years when faced with similar circumstances , the committee might wish to retain the provisional ranges , rather than increase them .
a PAR 18 the committee 's rationale has been that , in the context of uncertainty about money demand relationships , it has preferred not to highlight its expectations for money growth in the upcoming period but rather to maintain ranges that , if velocity behavior were normal , would be consistent over time with the committee 's goal of sustained non - inflationary growth.13 the expectations for the year ahead relative to those ranges could again be made clear in the humphrey - hawkins report and testimony .
a PAR 18 if the committee were not ready to place any heightened emphasis on m2 because it still saw considerable risk that policy could be misled by money growth , it might be concerned that any change in the annual ranges after four years could be misinterpreted by the public as a signal of an upgrading of the aggregates , despite committee explanations to the contrary .
a PAR 18 as an additional reason for preferring alternative a , the committee might not see as large a risk of overshooting the provisional ranges of alternative a as under the staff forecast if it thought that monetary policy would need to tighten during 1997 to further its objectives .
a PAR 18 for example , the staff estimates that the higher interest rates and slightly slower nominal gdp growth of the " stable inflation strategy " in the previous section would be associated with m2 growth on the order of 3 - 3/4 percent over this year .
a PAR 18 13 under this rationale , however , the committee might consider reducing the range for domestic nonfinancial sector debt , as the existing 3 to 7 percent range is unlikely to squarely encompass the rate of debt growth consistent with price stability .

b PAR 19 if , on the other hand , the committee did not see interest rates as likely to rise much over the course of 1997 and saw nominal income as coming in close to the greenbook projection , and it wanted the ranges to encompass more comfortably the associated rates of money growth , it probably would prefer alternative b , which would raise the ranges for both m2 and m3 by 1 percentage point.14 ( alternative b would retain the provisional range for debt .
b PAR 19 although money growth is forecast to be in the upper halves of the alternative b ranges rather than in the middle , the committee might find this to be an attractive feature , consistent with an opportunistic approach to disinflation and the committee 's current asymmetric directive .
b PAR 19 both imply the committee has a stronger predilection to tighten aggressively in response to overshoots in nominal spending than to ease in response to unexpected undershoots .
b PAR 19 hence , money growth is more likely to be well below than well above the staff projection , consistent with the staff forecast lying in the upper halves of the alternative b ranges .
b PAR 19 furthermore , the higher upper limits of the ranges in this alternative as compared with those of the provisional ranges imply greater scope for the possibility of strong money growth associated with money demand shifts that are not related to disturbances to spending , which would automatically be accommodated under current operating procedures , and appropriately so .
b PAR 19 14 the central tendency of committee members ' nominal gdp projections encompasses the greenbook projection .
b PAR 19 short - run policy alternatives 
b SENT -- under alternative b , the federal funds rate would kept at 5 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 22 financial markets currently are not anticipating a change in policy at the february meeting , and thus the choice of alternative b should initially have little impact on interest rates or the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
b PAR 22 over the course of the intermeeting period , the downshifting of growth in early 1997 in the staff forecast probably is greater than expected by market participants and the news on inflation is a little better , and rates could edge lower .
b PAR 22 moreover , signs of a political deal to balance the budget , which the staff assumes will be struck at some point , could put some additional downward pressure on long- term rates , especially if it involved entitlements and hence trimmed deficits beyond 2002 .
b PAR 22 the course of equity prices is particularly uncertain in view of their lofty valuations .
b PAR 22 while a correction can not be ruled out , earnings reports , especially those still coming in for the strong fourth quarter , should remain favorable in the period just ahead , and with little change in interest rates , equity prices could well hold around recent levels .
b PAR 25 growth of the broad monetary aggregates is expected to slow under alternative b from the very rapid pace of late 1996 .
b PAR 25 still , both m2 and m3 are projected to outpace nominal income in the first few months of the year and to remain above the upper ends of their provisional ranges for 1997 through march .
b PAR 25 m1 , by contrast , is projected to run off in the current quarter , owing to heavy sweep activity , but to expand moderately after adjusting for sweeps .
b PAR 25 growth of debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to run a little faster in early 1997 than in late 1996 , reflecting in part stronger business borrowing .
b PAR 25 still , by march this aggregate would be around the middle of its provisional range .
b PAR 25 alternative levels and growth rates for key monetary aggregates
b PAR 25 m2 m3 m1 alt .
b PAR 25 c levels in billions monthly growth rates quarterly averages o growth rate from to 1.0 to 5.0 2.0 to 6.01996 target ranges : directive language 

c PAR 23 although the real federal funds rate is not low by historic standards ,
c PAR 23 the run - up in share prices along with the generous provision of credit to most borrowers are seen as contributing to unsustainably accommodative financial conditions in the staff forecast .
c PAR 23 while inflation does not deteriorate appreciably in the near term , given the lags in the effect of policy , the sooner the committee begins to tighten -- as under alternative c -- the lower the odds that higher inflation will become embedded in price and wage setting .
c PAR 23 the discussion in the long - run strategies section suggested that a rise in the funds rate of 125 basis points by late 1998 would be needed to keep inflation from moving permanently higher .
c PAR 24 the tightening of policy under alternative c would surprise market participants , and short - term interest rates , including the prime rate , would rise by the half - point hike in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 24 in view of the shift in policy direction represented by such an action , intermediate- and long - term rates could rise appreciably , especially if market participants thought the federal reserve now saw significantly greater inflation risks than they had inferred from recent statements by fomc members .
c PAR 24 in this case , participants are more likely to extrapolate some further tightening measures .
c PAR 24 stock prices likely would come under selling pressure , as monetary tightenings frequently have been associated with bear markets .
c PAR 24 nonetheless , even a significant backup in bond yields is unlikely to push them substantially above the trading range of late spring and summer , which in turn has seemed to be compatible with healthy economic growth .
c PAR 24 moreover , the extraordinary rise in equity prices over the last several months probably would not be wholly erased given recent strong earnings news .
c PAR 24 the extent of the backup in nominal coupon yields might be contained were the tightening to affect inflation expectations favorably by underscoring the federal reserve 's determination to forestall a pickup in inflation .
c PAR 24 the dollar would tend to rise on foreign exchange markets from its elevated level of late , as the contrast between the cyclical positions of the united states and many of its major trading partners was sharpened even further .
c PAR 24 of course , such declines in bond and stock prices and rise in the dollar would be important channels through which the committee would achieve its desired restraint on aggregate demand growth .

