a PAR 20 finally , the committee might prefer to use the current ranges , alternative a , as the provisional ranges for 1999 as well as to reaffirm them for 1998 .
a PAR 20 such a decision would not preclude paying more attention to the money and credit aggregates as policy indicators during the year .
a PAR 20 nonetheless , the committee may still feel too uncertain about prospective monetary developments , even with somewhat more predictable behavior of velocity in the last few years , to specify in advance the rates at which money growth would become worrisome .
a PAR 20 as for debt , the slowdown projected by the staff for 1999 would not necessarily suggest lowering the range below its current specification because that setting still readily encompasses the staff projection .
a PAR 20 indeed , with the committee projecting faster nominal gdp growth than the staff , more rapid debt growth would be probable as well , which would undercut even further any need to alter the current range for the debt aggregate .
a PAR 20 short - run policy alternatives 

b SENT -- i is the current set of ranges ( unchanged since july of 1995 ) ; alternative b raises the money ranges to make them more consistent with the staff projections , particularly for 1999 , and trims the debt range to reflect the projected slowdown in this aggregate ;
b PAR 18 because m2 has some desirable indicator properties and because its velocity has been no more unpredictable in the past few years than over the 1960 - 90 period , the committee might want to return to announcing a range based on its projection for this monetary aggregate .
b PAR 18 such a range also could be selected for m3 in order to establish a consistent interpretation for all three ranges .
b PAR 18 if the committee shifted to projection - based ranges for m2 and m3 for 1998 , substantial adjustments to the ranges that were set in february would be needed to encompass the projected growth of those aggregates , particularly if a cushion between projected growth and the upper bound were thought desirable .
b PAR 18 more modest upward adjustments would be needed if the committee shifted to a projection basis for the provisional monetary ranges only for next year , given the staff projection of a deceleration in these aggregates .
b PAR 18 the alternative b ranges were constructed to be consistent with the staff forecast for 1999 .
b PAR 18 the apparently stronger nominal gdp forecasts of committee members might imply somewhat faster money and debt growth , assuming the committee members ' preliminary forecasts are based on approximately the same paths for interest rates and stock prices as in the staff forecast .
b PAR 18 those more rapid growth rates next year would still be below the staff projections for 1998 .
b PAR 18 selection of projection - based ranges need not signal that the monetary aggregates are again being given greater consideration in policymaking .
b PAR 18 the committee could explain that , even though it believed that velocity behavior had become somewhat more predictable , it nevertheless was simply setting ranges for money and debt consistent with its economic outlook and was not intending to adjust the stance of policy in response to deviations of the aggregates from their ranges .
b PAR 18 alternatively , the committee may in fact wish to signal added emphasis on the money and debt aggregates at this time of heightened uncertainties regarding the nairu and other nonmonetary leading indicators of inflation , for such emphasis may help it communicate its concerns about inflation pressures when policy needs to be tightened , particularly if the tightenings have a preemptive quality .
b PAR 18 careful explanation could make clear that the added emphasis does not go so far as to imply a presumption that deviations from ranges would trigger policy responses , only that money is one of the many indicators the committee is using .
b PAR 22 the choice of the unchanged policy stance of alternative b would seem to follow if the committee found the greenbook forecast both probable and -- despite the projected upcreep in underlying inflation -- acceptable .
b PAR 22 the committee might be especially willing to live with an outlook in which the most likely outcome was a modest increase in inflation if it saw the risks around that outcome as unbalanced , with the odds of a considerably larger and persistent rise in inflation less than those of a substantial weakening in activity .
b PAR 22 even if underlying inflation tendencies turn out to be a little more intense than anticipated , weakness in commodity and import prices and damped inflation expectations should restrain price increases for a time .
b PAR 22 thus , the committee should be able to react sufficiently promptly to any emerging cost pressures in labor markets to limit any incipient increase in inflation and inflation expectations .
b PAR 22 on the demand side , an important vulnerability of the staff forecast revolves around developments overseas .
b PAR 22 that forecast embodies more stable foreign financial markets and a recovery in the japanese economy starting in the second half of the year .
b PAR 22 however , so long as conditions in asian economies and emerging market economies elsewhere stay unsettled and the eventual implementation of effective measures to deal with those conditions remains uncertain , the committee may see a distinct possibility of substantially greater drag on the u.s . economy from the external sector than is in the staff forecast .
b PAR 22 moreover , developments abroad may not be wholly immune to monetary policy actions within the united states , and the committee might be willing to delay action for a time , at the risk of a possible pickup in inflation , to avoid further complicating the already unsteady situation in asia and several non - asian emerging market economies .
b PAR 23 financial market prices appear to embody the anticipation that monetary policy is on hold for some time , so the choice of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b should elicit little response in money , capital , or foreign exchange markets . if the economic data reveal , as under the staff projection , a considerable slowing in spending and muted inflation , intermediate- and longer - term yields could edge lower , while equity prices could falter as corporate profits again prove disappointing .
b PAR 23 this downward pressure on yields , however , may be offset somewhat to the extent that the situation in emerging markets does show signs of stabilizing as in the forecast , perhaps unwinding some of the flight - to - quality effects that treasury yields now reflect .

c SENT -- 3 alternative c maintains the current money ranges but lowers the debt range further , making it more consistent with the expected growth of debt under conditions of price stability and no trend in debt velocity .
c SENT -- this shift would require lowering the debt range , as in alternative c .
c SENT -- inflation , abstracting from measurement error , in order to avoid potential risks to policy associated with the zero bound on the nominal funds rate , ranges somewhat above those in alternative c would be appropriate .
c PAR 24 the committee might favor the quarter - point tightening of alternative c if it viewed the updrift in underlying inflation in the staff forecast as unacceptable .
c PAR 24 indeed , the committee may view the recent upside surprises in core consumer price inflation , coupled with the persistently low level of the unemployment rate , as implying that inflation may advance to even higher rates than the staff has built into its forecast .
c PAR 24 that risk would be exacerbated if the staff has overestimated the extent of the coming slowdown in spending growth , considering still - accommodative conditions in financial markets , as well as the ability of the economy to expand without intensifying pressures on prices .
c PAR 24 in that environment , putting off policy action in deference to uncertain conditions in foreign markets may pose too great a risk to the continued good performance of the u.s . economy , and the longer - term health of the global economy itself , particularly as a quick resolution to the problems abroad is probably not in the cards .
c PAR 24 given the current high levels of resource utilization , the committee might believe that delay would only raise the odds that greater , probably more wrenching , policy tightening will be required later .
c PAR 25 tighter policy at this meeting , perhaps involving a move in the federal funds rate to 5 - 3/4 percent as under alternative c , would catch domestic and international markets unawares .
c PAR 25 money market yields would rise at least as much as the federal funds rate , if not more .
c PAR 25 intermediate- and
c PAR 25 longer - term yields could rise substantially as well , particularly if market participants viewed the federal reserve 's willingness to tighten in the face of ongoing turmoil in asian and other emerging markets as evidence that u.s .
c PAR 25 domestic macroeconomic imbalances were seen to be large and that further restraint might well be in store .
c PAR 25 by contrast , if the market viewed the tightening as a limited mid - course correction -- perhaps guided by the wording of the press release announcing the action -- the sell - off in capital markets might be modest .
c PAR 25 in any event , equity prices would fall , as investors reconciled themselves to both a higher rate on competing assets and a slower expansion of profits in the future .
c PAR 25 similarly , the dollar would tend to appreciate .
c PAR 25 if the action were not viewed as presaging additional tightening in the united states and other industrial countries , the rise in the dollar and pressure on foreign interest rates would be limited .
c PAR 25 with the exchange market remaining skittish , large gains in the dollar against some currencies and further deterioration in the financial markets of emerging market economies could not be ruled out .
c SENT -- maintenance of the slightly higher short - term interest rates of alternative c would lower these growth rates only slightly over this year and still leave both m2 and m3 above their annual ranges .

