a PAR 10 if the committee saw substantial risks of a significantly weaker economy than in the staff forecast , it might want to move promptly to ease policy , perhaps by lowering the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point , as in alternative a . such a risk to aggregate demand might arise not only from greater asian effects than currently anticipated , but also from weaker domestic demand .
a PAR 10 some of the recent robust expansion in the latter may be temporary , owing importantly to the net decline in oil prices since last fall and to the drop in intermediate- and long - term interest rates prompted by expectations of impending weakness from asia .
a PAR 10 the rate declines and robust economy , in turn , have bolstered business and consumer confidence and the stock market .
a PAR 10 as restraint from the external sector is felt more fully , especially if it appears to be more severe or prolonged than the public now expects , the unwinding of buoyant psychology and the drop in equity prices could cause a more pronounced damping of domestic demand than the staff anticipates .
a PAR 10 the committee may see the current relatively low inflation rate as justifying a more forceful and prompter reaction to this possibility than might have been appropriate at higher inflation rates , especially in light of the tendency to overpredict inflation over the past few years .
a PAR 10 inflation has declined by more than the committee or the staff had expected , raising the prospect that , should those disinflationary forces persist and be overlaid by an unexpected shortfall in aggregate demand , inflation could fall farther than the committee would find desirable .
a PAR 11 the 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate under alternative a would translate to nearly comparable reductions in other short - term rates .
a PAR 11 in the market for intermediate- and long - term securities , rates could decline appreciably if the easing were viewed as confirmation that the federal reserve saw a pronounced slowdown resulting from the asian crises , making further reductions more likely .
a PAR 11 the dollar could fall on foreign exchange markets , and lower interest rates would help the stock market hold close to its recent record level .

b PAR 8 the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b might be favored if the committee saw the staff forecast as a likely outcome and one that appropriately balanced the goals of restraining inflation and sustaining expansion over the next few years , or , at a minimum , if it viewed the risks of substantially different and less desirable outcomes on either side of the staff forecast as about equal at the current federal funds rate .
b PAR 8 even if the committee suspected that the odds were tilted a bit either toward a stronger economy and greater price pressures or toward a weaker economy and more disinflation than desired , awaiting additional evidence to indicate better the direction of the economy might not be too costly in current circumstances .
b PAR 8 for example , if underlying pressures in labor markets intensify , the effects of lower import prices should damp inflation and inflation expectations for a time , permitting the committee to tighten before significantly higher inflation becomes embedded in wage and price decisions .
b PAR 8 conversely , in the event of greater drag from asia than anticipated in the staff forecast , the underlying strength of domestic demand appears to be strong enough to sustain economic expansion for a while until an easier policy is adopted and has time to take hold .
b PAR 9 because financial markets are placing very low odds on a change in policy in the near term , the choice of alternative b would likely have little immediate impact on domestic financial markets or the exchange value of the dollar .
b PAR 9 however , were incoming data on the economy to confirm that growth is moderating appreciably while inflation remains subdued , as in the staff forecast , market participants might again build in greater odds on a policy easing , perhaps on the view that the high real funds rate does indicate a restrictive policy stance .
b PAR 9 if so , intermediate- and long - term rates , along with the dollar , could edge lower .
b PAR 9 in the stock market , prices could come under some downward pressure even if interest rates drift down , as generally bad news on earnings come to be seen not as a one - time hit from the higher dollar or a temporary drop in demand from asia , but rather as the precursor of narrowing profit margins in a less robust economy .
b PAR 9 the softer earnings picture could also prompt a little more caution on the part of creditors and some widening of quality spreads .
b PAR 9 the implementation of policy may be complicated for a time after the mid - april tax date by high , though uncertain , treasury deposits at the federal reserve , which might require outsized reserve injections and extraordinary amounts of collateral to be pledged to the federal reserve by primary dealers .
b PAR 9 but any added volatility in the funds rate would be temporary and should have little , if any , effect on interest rates further out the yield curve .
b PAR 14 under the conditions of alternative b , the moderating pace of spending in the staff forecast should be accompanied by considerably slower growth in debt and money .
b PAR 14 the bulk of the slowdown in nonfederal debt growth will likely be accounted for by the business sector ; the financing gap is not projected to increase any further in coming quarters , and borrowing in recent months has been well above staff assessments of needs to cover mergers and acquisitions and the shortfall of internal funds from capital outlays .
b PAR 14 while some new caution by lenders is likely to surface as economic growth slows and profits soften , this shift in attitudes is expected to have only a marginal restraining influence on business credit growth .
b PAR 14 in the household sector , growth of debt is projected to continue to be well maintained -- outpacing that of disposable personal income - led by brisk mortgage borrowing as housing markets remain strong and as refinancing is associated with some further equity extraction .
b PAR 14 by september , debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to have grown at a 5 - 1/2 percent rate from its fourth quarter 1997 base , above the midpoint of its 3 to 7 percent annual range .
b PAR 15 the moderation in the growth of the broad monetary aggregates under alternative b owes in part to a slowdown in gdp and bank credit as business lending and acquisitions of securities slacken and
b PAR 15 banks become less aggressive in seeking funding .
b PAR 15 nonetheless , m3 is projected to grow at a 6 - 1/4 percent annual rate over the march - to- september period as depository credit growth still stays fairly brisk .
b PAR 15 as a consequence , m3 would stand 9 - 1/2 percent above its fourth - quarter base in june and 8 - 1/2 percent above that base in september .
b PAR 15 growth in m2 is projected to slow to a 3 - 1/2 percent annual rate over the march - to - september period .
b PAR 15 we are projecting that , in the absence of changes in opportunity costs , m2 growth in an underlying sense will return to a pace close to that of gdp in the period ahead .
b PAR 15 nevertheless , v2 is expected to decrease in the second quarter because of the effects on liquid balances of the current heavy pace of mortgage refinancing , as well as the high levels of tax refunds and anticipated april tax payments ; in the third quarter , however , v2 is likely to rise somewhat , as those refinancing and tax effects on deposit levels are removed .
b PAR 15 the deceleration in m2 brings growth from the fourth quarter of 1997 to june to a 6 - 1/2 percent pace , still above the 1 to 5 percent annual range for m2 , and to a 5 - 1/4 percent pace by september .
b PAR 15 directive language 

c PAR 12 data becoming available since the last meeting have suggested considerable economic strength and a tighter labor market .
c PAR 12 the attractive conditions in financing markets , the exceptionally high level of stock valuations , and rapid growth in money and debt may be viewed as corroborating the strong financial thrust in the economy , which would support domestic demand going forward .
c PAR 12 these factors have led the staff to revise up its own inflation forecast .
c PAR 12 while committee members may have anticipated some of this strength in demand over the intermeeting period , enough may have been a surprise so as to elevate or validate concerns about the prospects for a pickup in inflation .
c PAR 12 with the unemployment rate already likely below its sustainable level , this additional demand could lead to a steeper upward track for underlying inflation that would require more substantial and disruptive restraint the longer it is delayed .
c PAR 13 short - term rates would rise by the full amount of the 25 basis point tightening of policy under alternative c , which is unanticipated in the market .
c PAR 13 intermediate- and longer-
c PAR 13 term real interest rates would also rise substantially as markets reassessed their view of the federal reserve 's forecast and , perhaps , intentions , and the dollar could come under upward pressure .
c PAR 13 stock prices could well decline , especially if investors saw the tightening as worsening the outlook for corporate earnings as well as raising the rate of discount applied to future earnings , and such a decrease would be one element of the necessary restraint on aggregate demand .
c PAR 13 the generally healthy state of financial institutions in the united states would seem to suggest that the domestic financial system would be resilient to any fall in asset values that were to accompany such a policy tightening .
c PAR 13 most likely , financial markets in troubled emerging economies would not be greatly affected if the action were seen as limited and not portending a more generalized upward movement in rates in industrial economies .

