a PAR 23 the committee may see sufficient chances of a shortfall in activity from the staff forecast to suggest a small easing at this time -- as in the 25 basis point decline in the federal funds rate under alternative a .
a PAR 23 the committee has held the nominal federal funds rate constant since march , even as inflation and inflation expectations have fallen , raising the real funds rate to a high level .
a PAR 23 the rise in the real funds rate may have been viewed as a beneficial development when risks in the economic outlook seemed tilted toward strong economic growth and a rising output gap .
a PAR 23 however , given forecasts that now see appreciably slower growth and lower inflation than was earlier foreseen , the committee may now interpret the recent increase in the short - term real rate as risking tighter financial conditions than would be consistent with satisfactory economic performance .
a PAR 23 indeed , the very damped behavior of the cpi over the first half of this year in the staff forecast may portend a further reduction in inflation expectations and an additional rise in real short - term rates over coming months if the nominal funds rate were left unchanged .
a PAR 23 to date , the steady nominal funds rate does not seem to have appreciably impeded the drop in nominal , and possibly real , long - term rates as the market took out expected tightening and built in a small ease .
a PAR 23 but at some point , failure to ratify current expectations might put upward pressure on rates , nominal and real , and more certainly would inhibit the pricing in of further easing .
a PAR 23 this suggests that an easing of policy could have an unusually pronounced effect on long - term rates over time because it would facilitate building in further easing , as well as reduce short - term rates by nearly the full 25 basis point decline in the funds rate .
a PAR 23 the drop in yields would tend to boost equity prices and depress the dollar .

b PAR 19 the current provisional range for m3 is consistent with the behavior of that aggregate under price stability if it grows nearly one percentage point faster than gdp , as it did on average over the three decades prior to the 1990s.8 nonetheless , the staff forecast places m3 growth well above this provisional range , as relatively rapid credit growth , a healthy depository share of that growth , and continued structural shifts toward using m3 money funds for cash management result in a further steep decline in m3 velocity this year that is not likely to persist in the long run .
b PAR 19 a question for the committee is whether to move the range to encompass likely growth ( alternative b ) or to leave it at the provisional , price stability , range .
b PAR 21 the staff is projecting reasonably steady measured cpi inflation at around 2 percent over the second half of 1998 and in 1999 , after increases of only about half that size over the first half of this year .
b PAR 21 in this forecast , upward pressure on inflation associated with a tight labor market is offset by downward pressures emanating importantly from the rise in the dollar and decline in oil prices in 1997 and early 1998 and from declining capacity utilization .
b PAR 21 the staff forecast is built on an unchanged federal funds rate , and if the committee agrees that this is both a reasonable and desirable outcome under those conditions , retaining the current stance of policy under alternative b would be appropriate .
b PAR 21 even if the committee suspects that the staff forecast has misjudged the likely economic situation , in the current circumstances waiting for additional information might be seen as unlikely to have significantly destabilizing effects on the economy .
b PAR 21 if , for example , the damping effects of the asian crisis turn out to be greater than is built into the forecast , since the economy still would be operating beyond its sustainable potential for a while , the committee should have enough time to take appropriate countervailing action before the resulting economic weakness and disinflation proceeds further or faster than the committee would find desirable .
b PAR 21 on the other hand , even if inflation pressures turn out to be more intense than the staff expects -- perhaps because persistent tightness in labor markets continues to boost the growth of compensation increasingly beyond that of productivity -- downward price pressures already in the pipeline will still keep inflation quite low for a time .
b PAR 21 in these circumstances , the committee should be able to head off a potential upturn in inflation before higher actual inflation gets built into wage and price decisions .

c PAR 20 the provisional debt range readily encompasses the staff projection for 1998 , but it is not likely to be consistent with the behavior of debt under conditions of price stability .
c PAR 20 in the steady state , the stock of business capital and consumer durables -- and the debt used to finance them -- probably would be growing at close to the rate of gdp .
c PAR 20 to be sure , there are a number of influences that might cause the velocity of debt to trend one way or another for a considerable period -- for example , changes in tax laws or tastes that shifted the debt / equity mix , or financial innovation that promoted greater intermediation and a concomitant increase in both financial assets and liabilities on balance sheets .
c PAR 20 on average beginning in 1960 , debt growth has exceeded that of nominal gdp somewhat .
c PAR 20 but that overage is entirely accounted for by the 1980s , when firms and households greatly increased their leverage , and innovation and deregulation encouraged the expansion of financial intermediation .
c PAR 20 hence , going forward , absent evidence of ongoing disturbances to the 8 .
c PAR 20 however , there is considerable uncertainty about longer - term trends in m3 velocity .
c PAR 20 on the one hand , m3 growth over the past three years has been on the order of 1 - 3/4 percentage points faster than that of nominal gdp .
c PAR 20 on the other hand , it is hard to envision why nominal magnitudes would grow at differing rates in the very long run , implying that all the monetary and credit aggregates should be centered around the expected 3 percent growth rate of nominal gdp .
c PAR 20 relationship between debt and spending , the best estimate of steady - state debt growth would seem to be equal to the growth rate of nominal gdp .
c PAR 20 if the committee wanted to adopt the same price - stability rationale for the debt aggregate that it has in the past for m2 and m3 , a significant reduction of the range would seem to be called for , perhaps to 1 to 5 percent or , as a halfway house , 2 to 6 percent , as in alternative c , matching the ranges for debt and m3 .
c PAR 20 however , even this alternative would leave the midpoint of the range well below the staffs projection for debt this year .
c PAR 20 short - run policy alternatives 
c PAR 24 domestic spending continues to be supported by very favorable conditions in debt and equity markets .
c PAR 24 the decline in long - term rates should spur spending , in part as borrowers free cash flow by refinancing higher cost debt .
c PAR 24 in this environment , counting on asian developments to defuse enough of the momentum in the economy may be viewed as too risky , especially as the rebound in asian stock markets and in commodity prices may suggest that limits to asian turmoil may be in sight .
c PAR 24 in response to the tightening , short - term rates would rise by at least the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 24 intermediate- and long - term yields would also rise , although market participants are unlikely to build in much further tightening in light of the situation in asia , thereby constraining the extent of the increase .
c PAR 24 stocks would come under some selling pressure , accentuated perhaps by the uncertainty precipitated by such a surprise in policy .
c PAR 24 the dollar would tend to rise on foreign exchange markets .


