a PAR 8 the committee may find such a pattern to be relatively attractive if it believes that the economy is operating beyond a sustainable level , but wishes to reduce the pressures on resources only gradually ; inflation still stays fairly quiescent , and financial markets strike a better balance between the frothy conditions of recent years and the extreme risk aversion evident in recent months .
a PAR 8 a slight additional easing at this meeting , as in the 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate of alternative a , could be considered broadly in line with the policy assumption underlying the staff forecast.2 the case for an immediate easing would be strengthened if the committee thought that the risks to the staffs economic outlook were distinctly skewed to the downside , perhaps owing to the possibility of more adverse developments in latin america .
a PAR 8 in addition , a prompt policy easing would be more likely than would standing pat to lessen the odds on a reemergence of anything like the earlier extreme reluctance to take on risk that had caused rates on private securities to back up and had threatened to retard economic activity .
a PAR 8 indeed , such an easing action might be expected to foster continued normalization of financial conditions here and abroad .
a PAR 8 an easing also might reduce the chances , or at least lessen the effects , of possible funding problems at some financial institutions , particularly around year end , that could interfere with credit intermediation .
a PAR 8 finally , an easing would help to offset some of the effects of both the tightening in lending terms and standards at commercial banks that has been under way and the softness in global economic activity that has been exacerbated by further weakness in japan .
a PAR 9 the 25 basis point easing of policy under alternative a would tend to boost most financial markets , given that the federal funds futures market evidently now has built in only about even odds of such an action at this meeting .
a PAR 9 consequently , rates on short - term private market instruments , such as commercial paper , likely would move a little lower following implementation of alternative a . with the easing perhaps fostering additional attenuation of concerns about private credit risks , the unusual recent safe - harbor demands for treasuries would 2 alternative a could be implemented either through a 1/4 percentage point reduction in the discount rate to 4 - 1/2 percent , or through a slightly more generous provision of nonborrowed reserves , with no discount rate change , that eliminates the spread between the two rates .
a PAR 9 abate further , and treasury bill yields probably would fall less than those on private instruments .
a PAR 9 similarly , in longer - term markets , private rates also likely would decline , as would those on older , less - liquid treasury notes and bonds , while yields for on - the - run treasuries might be little changed as more of the recent flight - to - liquidity is unwound .
a PAR 9 falling rates and improving liquidity in markets for private securities probably would augment the recent tendency for some rebound in trading volumes , and the better market conditions could help spur issuance , including some deals previously postponed because of market turbulence .
a PAR 9 the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets likely would decline somewhat , and financial strains in foreign markets probably would moderate further .

b PAR 10 if the committee finds the greenbook forecast plausible and acceptable , with the risks of upside and downside surprises reasonably balanced , it may wish to defer consideration of an easing action to later in the year ( the point at which the staff forecast assumes such an action will occur   to allow more time to assess the effects on financial markets and the real economy of the easing that it has already put in place .
b PAR 10 leaving policy unchanged at this meeting , as under alternative b , would seem even more advisable if the committee were skeptical that aggregate demand will slow to the extent forecast by the staff .
b PAR 10 there is some reason to be cautious in predicting much adverse effect on spending from financial developments .
b PAR 10 as noted , a number of indicators of market performance suggest that , at a minimum , the decline in asset prices and worsening of trading conditions have ceased and , in many markets , notably including that for equities , a partial reversal has occurred .
b PAR 10 indeed , the committee could well be concerned that further monetary easing would add fuel to the rebound in stock valuations , which arguably has already gone beyond fundamentals .
b PAR 10 changes to date in private financing rates may not have imposed strong restraint on planned investment spending and , although the increased cost of raising funds in private securities markets has shifted borrowing toward commercial banks , the growth of aggregate debt in nonfederal sectors appears to have been well maintained .
b PAR 11 with many market participants likely to be disappointed by policy inaction , yields on private securities could well back up some under alternative b . the increase in rates on treasury securities
b PAR 11 likely would be somewhat less , and spreads on private securities over treasuries probably would widen .
b PAR 11 although the initial effects of this alternative on financial markets could be somewhat negative , they would be muted and short - lived to the extent that the public believes the federal reserve is staying especially watchful of financial market strains and has not closed the door on further policy easing .
b PAR 11 while some risk of unusual year - end pressures can not be ruled out , chances are that any curtailment of liquidity and trading volumes across a variety of markets would prove limited and essentially temporary .
b PAR 11 equity prices likely would decline somewhat .
b PAR 11 the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets should firm , and credit spreads for emerging market securities might rise .
b PAR 13 m2 and m3 are predicted to continue to grow rapidly through the end of the year , reflecting strong demands for liquidity in the aftermath of the volatile market climate , as well as in response to the recent policy easings and the expectation in markets of more to come , which have reduced the opportunity cost of holding monetary assets.3 over 1998 as a whole , m2 and m3 are projected to expand 9 and 10 - 3/4 percent , respectively , far overshooting their annual ranges .
b PAR 13 in early 1999 , however , m2 growth is projected to slow considerably as unusual demands for liquid assets abate and households redeploy liquid assets previously parked in money market mutual funds awaiting longer - term investment opportunities .
b PAR 13 m2 growth , however , is expected to exceed that of nominal gdp .
b PAR 13 m3 is forecast to outpace m2 as banks seek funding through instruments included in the broader aggregate to finance bank credit 3 the projections of money growth under alternative b assume , consistent with the greenbook forecast , that the stance of policy is left unchanged at the november meeting and eased 25 basis points at the december meeting .
b PAR 13 expansion and as institution - only money market funds remain attractive investments for corporate cash managers .
b PAR 13 under alternative b , m2 and m3 are projected to expand over the october - to - march period at annual rates of 8 and 9 - 1/2 percent , respectively , leaving both aggregates by march well above the ranges established provisionally for 1999 .
b PAR 13 alternative growth rates for key money and credit aggregates debt alt .
b PAR 13 b all alternatives monthly growth rates jul-98
b PAR 13 aug-98 sep-98 oct-98 nov-98 dec-98 jan-99 feb-99 mar-99
b PAR 13 quarterly averages 1998 q1 1998 q2 1998 q3 1998
b PAR 13 q1 growth rate from to oct-98 dec-98
b PAR 13 oct-98 mar-99 oct-98 dec-98 mar-99 1996 q4 1997 q4 1998
b PAR 13 chart 3 actual and projected m2 billions of dollars
b PAR 13 actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 13 nov jan mar
b PAR 13 may jul sep nov jan mar chart 4 actual and projected m3 billions of dollars actual level s short - run alternatives 6 % - 5700 nov jan mar
b PAR 13 may jul sep nov jan mar chart 5 actual and projected debt billions of dollars actual level projected level jan mar
b PAR 13 may jul sep nov jan mar nov directive language 


