a PAR 7 to begin addressing the weaker outlook for the u.s . economy , the committee may wish to reduce the funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative a . now that the stock market has fallen and credit terms have tightened , the real federal funds rate probably can be reduced from its unusually high level without adding to inflation pressures .
a PAR 7 indeed , with 3 as of the july humphrey hawkins report , the central tendencies of the governors ' and presidents ' projections for 1999 were 2 to 2 - 1/2 percent for real gdp growth , 2 to 2 - 1/2 percent for cpi inflation , and 4 - 1/2 to 4 - 3/4 percent for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of inflation expectations possibly falling further in recent months -- as suggested by a much larger decline in the spread of nominal over indexed treasury yields than can be accounted for by the relative liquidity of these instruments - the real federal funds rate may even have edged higher .
a PAR 7 even if the committee 's outlook for spending is stronger than that of the staff , if it has been revised down substantially , a policy ease might still be called for .
a PAR 7 moreover , financial markets are fragile and , in the absence of signs of economic recovery and progress on key policy reforms in japan and other countries , the possibilities for disappointing outcomes abroad precipitating further contagion and restraint on spending in the united states may be seen as unacceptably high .
a PAR 7 a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate at this point could be viewed as providing a modicum of insurance against the risk of such very adverse outcomes .
a PAR 7 in addition to boosting domestic demand , a lower federal funds rate could be of some limited help in relieving pressures on emerging market countries , especially those tied to the dollar or finding themselves in need of defending the exchange value of their currencies through tight monetary policies .
a PAR 7 indeed , in recent days as an easing by the federal reserve has come to be seen as more likely , emerging market countries have witnessed some narrowing in spreads on their dollar - denominated debt and some improvement in their stock markets .
a PAR 7 if foreign outcomes proved not so disappointing or the domestic economy surprisingly resilient , the policy move could be reversed before long without raising questions about the federal reserve 's anti - inflation resolve .
a PAR 7 even if the committee suspected that more easing might eventually be needed , it might want to move by only 25 basis points at this time because of the residual inflation risks inherent in the unusually low unemployment rate along with the strength to date in the economic expansion .
a PAR 9 if the committee believed that , as in the staff forecast , a larger policy move were needed to have an adequate effect in forestalling oncoming weakness in economic activity or if it wanted to take more forceful action to address the risks facing financial markets here and abroad , it might choose to reduce the funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting ( alternative a '   .
a PAR 9 depending on the wording of the announcement associated with such a move , the market might see the fomc as being on hold for a longer duration , eliminating for a little while market uncertainty about whether additional easings were in the offing .
a PAR 9 moves of 50 basis points have been somewhat unusual in recent years , and , in volatile financial markets with largely unanchored expectations , reactions are difficult to gauge .
a PAR 9 most likely , equity markets would rally and risk premiums on private debt would fall , as the fomc was seen as taking a more active stance in cushioning the effects of tighter financing conditions and weaker foreign demand on economic activity .
a PAR 9 but there is some chance that market participants could interpret the larger move as indicating that the federal reserve viewed the current economic situation as especially serious , perhaps owing to fragility in the financial sector .
a PAR 9 if so , the rebound in equities could be tempered while treasury bond prices could be strengthened further .
a PAR 9 in any event , the value of the dollar against major currencies would likely drop somewhat under this alternative.4 the prime rate would likely be reduced by 1/2 percentage point .
a PAR 13 in the staff forecast , m2 growth would be supported by declines in opportunity costs associated with the policy easings .
a PAR 13 5 within the aggregate , growth should be strong in liquid deposits , whose rates adjust relatively sluggishly to declines in market rates , while small time deposits should run off , as offering rates on these deposits tend to adjust faster .
a PAR 13 currency demand should remain strong , supported by ongoing turbulence abroad .
a PAR 13 money market mutual funds should be buoyed by the declines in market rates and continue to benefit somewhat from 5 the greenbook projection could be considered to be consistent with a 25 basis point easing at this meeting and a similar move toward the end of 1998 .
a PAR 13 those assumptions are used for the projections of money growth under alternative a . the reduced attractiveness of stock mutual funds , but to a lesser degree than over the past couple months ; the projected declines in stock prices are not as steep as those that already have occurred , and some of the money fund inflows at the onset of the bear market were likely only parked temporarily while in transit to alternative longer - term investments .
a PAR 13 on balance , m2 is projected to grow at a 6 - 1/2 percent rate over the next six months , implying further substantial declines in velocity .
a PAR 13 with economic growth softening and bank lending moderating , m3 is projected to decelerate to a 7 - 1/2 percent pace over september to march .
a PAR 13 the broad monetary aggregates will almost surely far exceed their growth ranges in 1998 ; m2 is projected to grow 8 percent this year and m3 to grow 10 percent.6 however , a good part of the recent and projected strength in the aggregates apparently reflects shifts in money demand rather than strong spending growth ; m2 has been boosted by heightened demands for liquidity and shifts away from stock market investments , while the elevated growth of m3 has in part reflected a substitution of bank funding sources for market financing by lower - rated business firms .
a PAR 13 6 the ranges for 1998 and the preliminary ranges for 1999 are 1 to 5 percent for m2 and 2 to 6 percent for m3 .
a PAR 13 directive language 

b PAR 10 although the staff projection embodies a substantial weakening in aggregate demand , data to date suggest that the economy is growing near its potential rate .
b PAR 10 with labor markets still quite tight and forecasts in recent years often underpredicting economic activity , the committee may wish to have more evidence in hand that growth of aggregate demand is slowing considerably before easing policy .
b PAR 10 if so , the committee would find the unchanged stance of policy under alternative b appropriate .
b PAR 10 the recent tightening of credit supply conditions and drop in equity prices toward a more realistic alignment with earnings prospects may be viewed as necessary and overdue corrections that will help to prevent speculative and inflationary imbalances from developing .
b PAR 10 an easing at this time might risk inhibiting those adjustments and be viewed as an attempt to support overly optimistic investor and lender behavior .
b PAR 10 indeed , if corporate bond and equity prices rallied substantially , such a move could potentially court another sharp correction at a later date .
b PAR 11 with markets betting heavily on an easing at this fomc meeting , holding rates unchanged as in alternative b would leave investors confused about federal reserve intentions and likely engender added volatility .
b PAR 11 short - term treasury and private rates would back up sharply , and longer - term rates also would rise , though perhaps not by much if , as seems likely , market participants believed that the easing had merely been postponed .
b PAR 11 increases in treasury yields might be less than in private rates , if adverse reactions in financial markets strengthened 4 the reactions in financial and foreign exchange markets might be even larger if the discount rate were also reduced by 50 basis points , as such joint action might be seen as suggesting that the federal reserve is convinced that interest rates will remain low for a considerable period of time .
b PAR 11 flight - to - safety motives .
b PAR 11 a part of the recent improvement in foreign financial markets , which has been built on growing expectations of an easing in u.s .
b PAR 11 monetary policy , could be reversed , particularly in some especially vulnerable countries .
b PAR 11 the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely rise , although this effect could be mitigated somewhat if the adverse effects on latin american markets were particularly severe .



