
b PAR 8 if the committee views the greenbook forecast as both likely and acceptable , it might be inclined to maintain its current 5 - 1/2 percent intended federal funds rate , as under alternative b . although that forecast has an underlying upward tilt to inflation in 1999 as labor markets remain quite tight , that tilt is gradual and starts from a lower inflation rate in 1998 than the committee had anticipated only a few months ago , judging from the central tendencies of members ' cpi projections in february.2 even if the committee were troubled by the underlying uptrend of inflation in the staff forecast , it might still be willing to adopt the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b . the vulnerable state of many financial markets in asia , which could react adversely to an increase in u.s .
b PAR 8 interest rates , might weigh against action at this time .
b PAR 8 when the committee 's directive tilt was disclosed prematurely in late april , interest rates in those markets rose along with dollar interest rates , indeed by somewhat more than those here .
b PAR 8 in addition , the committee may feel that a small uptick in underlying inflation , should it unfold as in the staff forecast , would generate only minimal costs in potential resource distortions and could be readily countered in the future .
b PAR 8 if so , the committee may be willing to accept the significant probability of such an uptick through 1999 because recent experience has led it to place greater weight on the possibility that the economy will prove able to sustain the high operating rate built into the staff forecast without a rise in underlying inflation .
b PAR 13 under the stable money market conditions of alternative b , the staffs projected 2 - 1/2 percentage point moderation in the pace of nominal gdp from the first to the third quarter of this year should be associated with a noticeable slowdown in the expansion of the debt and monetary aggregates .
b PAR 13 household borrowing should slow along with spending on consumer durables and houses , and business demand for credit should subside as inventory investment downshifts substantially .
b PAR 13 still , the debt of both sectors is expected to exceed the expansion of income , with the upturn in debt - servicing burdens held down by recent and continuing refinancing of outstanding higher - cost obligations .
b PAR 13 while slower economic growth and narrower profit margins may make lenders a little more cautious , a significant restriction in credit availability does not appear likely , given the healthy financial condition of both borrowers and lenders .
b PAR 13 in the federal sector , outstanding debt should run off , even on a seasonally adjusted basis , reflecting the government 's widening budget surplus .
b PAR 13 from april to september , the growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is foreseen as slowing to a 4 - 1/2 percent annual rate , bringing its average advance from the fourth quarter to 5 - 1/2 percent , somewhat above the midpoint of its annual range .
b PAR 14 under alternative b , m2 growth is expected to slow significantly to a 3 percent average rate over the april - to - september period , with a little more than 1 percentage point of the slowdown from the first four months of 1998 representing the projected unwinding of the previous artificial boost related to special tax and mortgage - refinancing factors .
b PAR 14 even so , over the second and third quarters , m2 growth averaging 5 percent on a quarterly average basis is projected to exceed the 4 percent average rate of nominal gdp expansion , implying a further 1 percent rate of decline in m2 's velocity .
b PAR 14 from the fourth quarter through september , implied m2 growth would be at a 5 - 3/4 percent rate .
b PAR 14 looking a little further out , the staff now envisions growth of this aggregate for the year at a 5 - 1/2 percent rate , putting it above the 1 to 5 percent annual range judged by the fomc to be consistent with conditions of price stability and stable velocity behavior ; this projection embodies a 1 percent decline in velocity in 1998 .
b PAR 15 projected m3 growth under alternative b would dip to a 5 - 1/2 percent rate from april through september , reflecting some expected reduction in the growth of depository funding needs associated with the anticipated marked slowing in depository credit expansion over that interval .
b PAR 15 the rapid rate of securities acquisitions of late 1997 and earlier this year , which appeared to be related to some large banks ' efforts to increase leverage , is expected to slow .
b PAR 15 the pace of lending , too , is likely to remain below that of the first four months of the year as credit demands moderate .
b PAR 15 from the fourth quarter through september , m3 is seen as advancing at an 8 - 1/2 percent annual rate , and for the year as a whole at 8 - 1/4 percent , well above the upper bound of its 2 to 6 percent annual range .
b PAR 15 directive language 



