a PAR 10 in view of recent developments in global financial markets , the committee might be inclined to consider a 25 basis point easing of monetary policy , as in alternative a . aggregate demand in the united states apparently has already decelerated appreciably , and committee members may believe that the staff forecast does not give enough weight to ongoing deflationary forces coming from developments abroad .
a PAR 10 moreover , the staff forecast may be viewed as underplaying the restrictive effects of recent changes in u.s .
a PAR 10 financial markets , despite declines in some nominal yields : the dollar has strengthened on net against a broad basket of currencies ; u.s .
a PAR 10 equity prices have fallen significantly ; and declines in inflation expectations may have largely accounted for the decline in nominal interest rates , leaving real rates little changed .
a PAR 10 even in the context of the staff view of the economic outlook , with domestic inflation currently at low levels , the committee may be willing to risk a slightly less satisfactory outcome in terms of u.s .
a PAR 10 inflation performance to help foster a recovery in foreign economies , which would be in the long - run interest of the united states .
a PAR 10 lower interest rates would help ensure that domestic demand in the united states remains reasonably vigorous . and lower rates , along with somewhat less strength in the dollar , would benefit a number of foreign economies , even those with currencies not tied to the dollar ; for those in the latter group , credit - risk spreads would tend to decline as concerns about foreign debt repayment abated a bit , and the tendency for their currencies to appreciate would give them room to adopt a somewhat less restrictive monetary policy .

b PAR 6 if the committee found the staff forecast , with inflation and unemployment both staying relatively low , to be both a reasonable expectation and a desirable outcome , it presumably would maintain the current 51/2 percent federal funds rate , as under alternative b . the committee could still favor alternative b even if it saw higher inflation eventually , but was rather uncertain about its expectation of the eventual pickup in inflation , given the surprisingly favorable price performance of recent years .
b PAR 6 the odds on a significant price acceleration within a year or so may be seen as low ; in such circumstances , delay would not materially jeopardize the committee 's goal of containing inflation and would buy some time to accumulate information on the evolving dynamics of inflation and hence the need for tightening .
b PAR 6 moreover , the committee may want to weigh any concerns about higher inflation against the increasingly precarious conditions in global financial markets .
b PAR 6 the greater fragility of these markets evident over the intermeeting period may suggest that the potential for adverse effects of a tightening of u.s .
b PAR 6 monetary policy on other economies has risen further .
b PAR 7 with inflation low , aggregate demand apparently decelerating , and the outlook for asia quite uncertain , market participants anticipate no policy action at this meeting , and market interest rates are likely to be little affected by selection of alternative b . under the greenbook forecast , information about prospective corporate earnings is likely to disappoint investors , keeping equity prices from rebounding and possibly precipitating a further decline .
b PAR 7 absent such a decline , which could weaken the exchange value of the dollar as investments in the united states looked less desirable , the dollar should edge higher in coming months , most notably against the yen : the japanese economy is likely to remain weak and skeptical market participants probably will require substantial , concrete actions to deal with the financial system and the economy before confidence can begin to recover .
b PAR 7 should troubles in foreign markets intensify and spread further , the dollar would tend to strengthen more noticeably , equity prices would encounter additional downward pressures amid heightened worries about profits , and interest rates in the united states would continue to decline across the yield curve , reflecting both a more pronounced flight to quality and developing expectations of monetary policy easing .
b PAR 12 m2 and m3 are forecast to expand at 5 and 7 - 3/4 percent annual rates , respectively , from july to december under alternative b .
b PAR 12 the moderation in money reflects the expectation of slightly slower growth in nominal gdp over the second half of the year .
b PAR 12 in addition , the staff expects a less - rapid decline in m2 velocity in the second half , in part because the expansion of mortgage refinancing activity , which had boosted m2 growth over the first half of the year , comes to a halt .
b PAR 12 bank credit is projected to rise less rapidly in the second half of the year than in the first , reflecting a slowing pace of securities acquisitions as well as some moderation in loan growth , damping banks ' needs for funding through m3-type instruments .
b PAR 12 despite the slowing in m2 and m3 growth during the second half , both aggregates are expected to overshoot their annual ranges for the year as a whole.3 3 according to elasticities based on staff econometric models , a rise in the federal funds rate on the order of 1 - 1/2 percentage points at this meeting would be necessary to restrain m2 to its annual range by the end of this year .
b PAR 12 of course , this calculation does not capture any unusual reactions that might arise in current circumstances from a tightening of this magnitude .
b PAR 12 alternative growth rates for key money and credit aggregates alt .
b PAR 12 c debt all alternatives monthly growth rates
b PAR 12 jul-98 aug-98 sep-98 oct-98 nov-98 dec-98
b PAR 12 quarterly averages 1998 q1 1998 q2 1998 q3 1998
b PAR 12 growth rat from jul-98 dec-98 jul-98 dec-98 sep-98 1996 q4 1997 q4 1998 q4 1998
b PAR 12 annual ranges :
b PAR 12 chart 2 actual and projected m2 billions of dollars
b PAR 12 s4350 actual level short - run alternatives
b PAR 12 * a sb - 4300 s .. - ' - 3950
b PAR 12 3900 oct dec
b PAR 12 feb apr jun aug oct dec feb chart 3 actual and projected m3 billions of dollars
b PAR 12 actual level short - run alternatives c - 5800
b PAR 12 5200 oct dec
b PAR 12 apr jun aug oct dec feb chart 4 actual and projected debt billions of dollars actual level - projected level
b PAR 12 16200 oct dec
b PAR 12 apr jun aug oct dec
b PAR 12 feb directive language 

c PAR 8 although the staff forecast envisions a relatively benign domestic macroeconomic outcome under current money market conditions , the committee might be concerned either that in the staff forecast progress toward price stability was stalling or that in its own view inflation was more likely to escalate noticeably .
c PAR 8 in either case , it may prefer to apply additional monetary restraint at this meeting , as in the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative c . a prediction of worsening inflation pressures might be based in part on unambiguously tight labor market conditions and the uptrend already evident in wages and compensation .
c PAR 8 the odds on much softening of labor markets might be seen as low in light of the surprising momentum of domestic demand , which has been sustaining growth of employment and income .
c PAR 8 and while the committee recently decided not to tighten , in part because of unsettled conditions abroad , a continued absence of action would not be desirable if the committee were reasonably confident that the domestic economic situation was pointing to higher inflation rates before very long .
c PAR 8 in such a situation , delay would only increase the degree of tightening that would ultimately be necessary .
c PAR 8 delayed but greater tightening could be even more disruptive to financial markets , since economies abroad may not be sufficiently improved and markets sufficiently settled to absorb the heavier blow .
c PAR 9 markets would be somewhat unsettled by the 25 basis point firming action of alternative c at this meeting , which would come as a surprise .
c PAR 9 short - term market interest rates probably would back up by at least the rise in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 9 investors would project lower earnings and use higher discount factors , and equity prices almost certainly would fall significantly further .
c PAR 9 boosted nonetheless by higher interest rates , the foreign exchange value of the dollar likely would firm as well , with particularly large increases against the yen , and asian countries with currencies tied to the dollar would confront considerable pressures to adjust their pegs .
c PAR 9 longer - term dollar interest rates would probably jump initially in response to the rise in short - term rates , but might reverse course before long if market participants began to question the likely duration of the tightening move in view of the added strength in the dollar and lower equity prices ; still , real long - term rates are likely to remain at higher levels for a while .
c PAR 9 risk spreads on domestic private debt , as well as on the obligations of a number of foreign governments and firms , likely would widen noticeably .

