
b PAR 7 given the circumstances of the looming century date change , the economic outlook might not weigh as significantly in the committee 's consideration of its action at this meeting as is usual .
b PAR 7 the committee might see the heightened potential for financial dislocation at this time as sufficient reason to keep policy on hold at this meeting , choosing alternative b . although financial markets have been much more liquid in recent weeks than many participants had anticipated earlier in the year , various indicators still suggest that trading is likely to be thin and investors unusually risk averse around year - end .
b PAR 7 market participants have apparently interpreted federal reserve actions to deal with potential liquidity problems around the century date change , along with the adoption of a symmetric directive at the last meeting , as virtually ensuring that the intended federal funds rate would be left unchanged this month .
b PAR 7 with this prevailing expectation , a monetary tightening would prompt substantial adjustments in portfolios .
b PAR 7 the extent of the resulting drop in market prices could well be exacerbated by the thinness of markets and by the urgency that market participants are likely to feel to complete their adjustments quickly before market liquidity erodes further .
b PAR 7 under the circumstances , the committee may not want to incur even the small risk of a potentially costly market disruption that might follow a policy tightening , especially when any increase in inflation pressures resulting from a short delay would be quite limited .
b PAR 7 overall consumer price inflation is expected to moderate a little , which should help damp inflation expectations , and most of the restraining effects of a near - term policy firming are already built into financial market prices .
b PAR 12 assuming the selection of alternative b and no significantly untoward developments over year - end , some further abatement of the unusual risk aversion and demand for liquidity currently evident in markets should be apparent over the first few weeks of 2000 .
b PAR 12 risks spreads could narrow somewhat , but they should remain wider , and other credit terms tighter , than in the period before the market disruptions in the summer and fall of 1998 .
b PAR 12 measured from october to march , domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to expand at a 5 - 1/2 percent pace , roughly in line with nominal income , placing this aggregate in march in the upper half of its 3 to 7 percent provisional range .
b PAR 13 after its y2k - related runup late in the year , expansion of the monetary aggregates is expected to moderate substantially over the first few months of the new year .
b PAR 13 currency growth should slow sharply .
b PAR 13 similarly , the recent surge in large time deposits should substantially unwind , as bank credit growth settles down from its y2k - related bulge and depository institutions return to more typical funding patterns .
b PAR 13 m2 also should continue to respond to the earlier tightenings in the stance of monetary policy and the associated widening in the opportunity cost of holding retail monetary assets .
b PAR 13 from december to march , m2 and m3 are projected to grow at 4 and 3 - 3/4 percent annual rates , respectively under alternative b . measured over the october - to - march period to abstract from most y2k influences , m2 is forecast to expand at a 5 - 1/2 percent rate under that alternative .
b PAR 13 this growth would leave this aggregate in march at the upper end of its provisional 1 to 5 percent annual range .
b PAR 13 m3 is projected to expand at an 8 - 1/2 percent pace over the same period , placing it in march somewhat above its provisional 2 to 6 percent annual range .
b PAR 13 directive language 



