
b PAR 9 even if the committee , like the staff , sees forces at work tending to raise core inflation over time , it may be sufficiently uncertain about that outcome that it still would wish to leave the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting at 5 - 1/4 percent , as under alternative b , and to retain the tilt toward firming to convey a sense of the risks .
b PAR 9 most incoming data on prices and labor costs , including gdp prices , the eci , average hourly earnings , and unit labor costs , have once again proven to be surprisingly benign despite increasingly taut labor markets .
b PAR 9 this string of favorable readings underscores questions about the reliability of the traditional relationships that lie behind predictions that inflation will pick up should resource utilization remain around its current level .
b PAR 9 indeed , the revised output data could be read as leaving open the possibility that productivity is continuing to accelerate , perhaps substantially .
b PAR 9 while the associated increase in the marginal return on capital projects would require higher real short - term interest rates at some point , the economy could be able to produce beyond its long - run potential for a while longer without an intensification of inflation so long as gains in real wages do not outstrip rising labor productivity .
b PAR 9 in this circumstance , further policy tightening would be unnecessary for some time .
b PAR 9 in light of the possibility that supply - side relationships continue to be unusually favorable , the committee might see considerable benefit from waiting for more solid evidence that an inflationary upswing was in train .
b PAR 9 even if productivity gains do not materialize , the possible cost of delaying a firming in policy until early next year may not be considered especially large since longer - term inflation expectations appear to be well anchored .
b PAR 15 under alternative b , the staff expects that m2 will grow 6 percent this year and m3 7 - 1/4 percent , compared with the 5 and 6 percent upper bounds of their respective annual ranges .
b PAR 15 built into these projections is a pickup in growth over the last two months of the year to a 8 - 1/4 percent pace for m2 and an 11 - 1/4 percent pace for m3 .
b PAR 15 the staff estimates that approximately 2 and 3 percentage points of these respective growth rates will be attributable to the impact of y2k concerns in temporarily boosting demands for monetary assets that are regarded as safe and liquid .
b PAR 15 these effects are reversed by the end of february . smoothing through y2k effects , the staff forecasts m2 and m3 to expand from october to march at rates of 6 - 1/2 and 7 - 1/4 percent , respectively .
b PAR 15 directive language 

c PAR 11 the committee instead may favor a 25 basis point increase in its intended federal funds rate , as under alternative c . although the staff has adopted the view that structural productivity is growing along a higher and steeper trajectory over the forecast period than previously thought , it still predicts an increase in core inflation over the next two years that the committee may find both likely and unacceptable .
c PAR 11 the committee may view the current tautness in labor markets as pointing so strongly toward a pickup in inflation that the need to firm policy would be unlikely to be called into question by new information arriving over the next few months .
c PAR 11 even if the committee questioned whether current labor market conditions were so problematic , it may still see a substantial risk that resource utilization is in the process of tightening further , which in turn would induce rising inflation .
c PAR 11 the growth of aggregate demand has continued to outstrip that of aggregate supply , and only limited data are in hand to indicate that demand will be slowing enough to bring the two into balance .
c PAR 11 indeed , one risk to that balancing is that policy inaction would provide additional fuel to investor optimism , pushing equity prices higher and providing a spur to spending .
c PAR 11 another risk may emanate from the external sector : recent news on foreign economies has been upbeat and has contributed to better conditions in their capital markets , which may provide more impetus to spending than projected by the staff .
c PAR 11 the inflationary impulse from the external sector would be intensified if improving foreign growth prospects and mounting u.s .
c PAR 11 net foreign indebtedness were to diminish the appetite of global investors for dollar assets , placing substantial downward pressure on the dollar , which would directly feed through to prices as well as demand for u.s . output .
c PAR 11 to offset these external forces , firmer financial conditions in the united states would be necessary to damp domestic demand so as to prevent an intensification of pressures on resources .
c PAR 12 the choice of the 1/4 percentage point rise in the funds rate under alternative c may incline the committee to return to a symmetric directive .
c PAR 12 an unbiased directive could convey a sense that policy makers thought they might have put sufficient cumulative restraint in place to check inflation or , at least , to buy some time to assess whether additional firming was needed .
c PAR 12 alternatively , the committee may decide to retain an asymmetric directive in order to transmit its impression that , despite the higher 5 - 1/2 percent funds rate , the risks over a longer time period would still be tilted in the direction of heightened inflation pressures .
c PAR 12 if the committee wanted to be sure that market uncertainties about near - term policy action did not unduly contribute to strains in the runup to year end , the announcement could convey a disinclination to act in december .
c PAR 13 while financial markets are somewhat illiquid , confidence about y2k preparedness and procedures to contain systemic problems has been growing , suggesting that the 1/4 percentage point firming at this meeting under alternative c -- although a bit of a surprise -- would be unlikely to create undue strains .
c PAR 13 the response of key financial prices would depend importantly on the type of tilt and the wording of the announcement .
c PAR 13 an asymmetric directive and words emphasizing continuing inflation risks over a longer time period would impart to market participants the impression that further tightening moves could well be in store beginning fairly early next year .
c PAR 13 in that case , an appreciable backup in bond yields , sell - off of stocks , and strengthening of the exchange value of the dollar could be anticipated .
c PAR 13 in contrast , a symmetric directive and an announcement suggesting that the committee could well stay its hand for some time could lead market participants to mark down their expectations for cumulative monetary policy tightening and reduce their uncertainty about near - term actions .
c PAR 13 in such a case , bond and stock prices could dip only slightly .

