
b PAR 17 the table below displays two sets of ranges for money and debt for 1999 and 2000 , along with staff projections .
b PAR 17 given the continued uncertainty regarding appropriate rates of money growth and relatively small errors in forecasting debt growth in recent years , the alternatives are constructed under the presumption that the committee will continue with its current approach to the ranges -- that is , ranges for money keyed to the federal reserve 's price stability objective and the range for debt aligned with its expected growth .
b PAR 17 staff projections and alternative money and debt ranges ( q4 to q4 , percent )
b PAR 17 staff projections alternative
b PAR 17 i alternative b ( current ) m2 6 5 1 to 5 1 to 5 2 to 6 2 to 6 m3
b PAR 17 6 - 1/4 6 2 to 6 2 to 6 3 to 7 3 to 7 debt 5 - 1/2 4 - 1/4 3 to 7 2 to 6 3 to 7 2 to 6 
b PAR 20 the committee has not employed a price - stability rationale in choosing ranges for the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors but instead has based ranges on forecasts of actual growth .
b PAR 20 the current 3 to 7 percent range remains consistent with this approach for 1999 .
b PAR 20 however , centering the range for 2000 approximately on the staff forecast would imply selecting a range of 2 to 6 percent . as it happens , a range of 2 to 6 the committee might also adjust the monetary ranges upward , as in alternative b , if it wished to shift away from its current , long - run price - stability rationale and toward ranges based on forecasts in 2000 , perhaps because it believed that the period of especially large disturbances to velocity was coming to an end .
b PAR 20 staff forecasts suggest that an upward adjust- ment probably would be necessary to center the ranges on expected monetary growth .
b PAR 20 percent would also be centered on the 4 percent expected rate of growth of debt under assumptions of increased productivity growth , price stability , and the flat trend of velocity that has prevailed over most of the postwar period .
b PAR 20 short - run policy alternatives 
b PAR 22 the committee might nonetheless favor the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b if it did not view the prospects for a rise in inflation as having increased since the last meeting , when it saw the risks as tilted , but not enough to tighten .
b PAR 22 the staff sees the growth of gdp slowing in the second and third quarters to about the pace of its potential .
b PAR 22 this slowing presumably does not owe in any appreciable way to the firming of financial conditions over may and june and could reflect more fundamental tendencies of aggregate demand .
b PAR 22 if so , a partial reversal of that financial market firming , which would occur under this alternative , would not lead to tauter labor markets , especially if continued rapid growth in productivity were viewed as a reasonable prospect .
b PAR 22 furthermore , cpi data that have become available since the last committee meeting have extended the downward trend in the twelve - month change in core prices , underlining uncertainties about the supply side of the economy .
b PAR 22 in these circumstances , before tightening policy , the committee may want to see more concrete evidence that the economy was growing faster than its potential or that upward pressures in costs and prices were emerging .

c PAR 25 although a 25 basis - point firming is built into prices , financial markets might still react to a tightening move of this magnitude .
c PAR 25 the fluctuations in yields of the past few weeks have demonstrated that financial markets are especially sensitive to perceptions of federal reserve intentions , and the near - term reaction to alternative c will depend on the market 's interpretation of the announcement together with the choice of the tilt of the directive .
c PAR 25 if the wording of the announcement suggested that the committee was less concerned about inflationary pressures than market participants have come to believe -- and therefore that the extent of policy firming in coming quarters might be less than now anticipated -- intermediate- and longer - term interest rates could decline some , perhaps reversing a significant portion of the run - up over the past week .
c PAR 25 in this case , the dollar could weaken some and equity markets could turn up .
c PAR 25 if , instead , the announcement suggested serious concern about inflation risks , market participants could expect a more rapid or protracted subsequent series of moves .
c PAR 25 in this case , interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could rise a good bit , and stocks and emerging market debt could come under selling pressure .
c PAR 25 while market talk that the committee might tighten by 50 basis points at this meeting has recently surfaced , such an action would nonetheless come as a considerable surprise .
c PAR 25 price movements would likely be outsized , though a clear indication that the committee would be on hold for some time could limit the response .
c PAR 25 directive language 


