
b PAR 7 despite the likelihood that overall inflation will rise , the committee might choose the unchanged policy stance of alternative b at this meeting .
b PAR 7 a good part of that rise will owe to the recent increase in oil prices ; most measures of wage and price inflation have ticked lower of 2 .
b PAR 7 the central tendency of the committee members ' forecasts compiled for the last meeting was for real gdp growth to be a touch slower over 1999 and the unemployment rate to end the year a bit higher than in the current greenbook .
b PAR 7 the committee members ' central tendency for total cpi inflation was about in line with the greenbook .
b PAR 7 late , which should help to contain inflation expectations ; and the projected rebound in core inflation is gradual .
b PAR 7 these considerations suggest that deferring action in the near term would not unduly worsen underlying inflation trends .
b PAR 7 the committee might see important benefits from that delay if it thought that only a modest policy adjustment was necessary and wanted to use the time to build a case for such action with the public , thereby fostering a more measured reaction in financial markets than would ensue with unanticipated action .
b PAR 7 inaction would be particularly attractive to the committee
b PAR 7 if it suspected that the price outlook in the greenbook was more likely to be subject to further favorable surprises than to adverse ones , implying that firmer evidence of an impending acceleration in prices would be desirable before tightening policy .
b PAR 7 indeed , the committee may be of the opinion that the staff has built in too large an uptick to inflation , perhaps by placing too little emphasis on the disinflationary force of ample industrial capacity and the market discipline now exerted on the ability of firms to pass along price increases , or by giving too much credence to the power of oil producers to enforce their recent curbs on supply .
b PAR 8 continuing the current stance of policy , as envisioned in alternative b , would match the expectations currently embodied in financial market prices . as a result , the immediate market reaction to no adjustment in the federal funds rate should be little movement in other interest rates or in the exchange value of the dollar .
b PAR 8 over time , if output were to decelerate and underlying inflation to remain contained , as in the staff forecast , long - term interest rates should fluctuate around their current levels , although , as congress and the administration address budget issues , markets might become more sensitive to developments regarding the burgeoning federal budget surplus .
b PAR 8 with the economic environment remaining benign and concerns about near - term monetary policy tightening mostly quiescent , major equity price indexes are likely to be little changed on net , despite pressure on corporate profit margins .

c PAR 9 if the committee were concerned that inflation was likely to be on an upward path , as in the staff forecast , it might favor the 1/4 percentage point tightening in the intended federal funds rate of alternative c . with aggregate demand remaining strong , credit conditions improving further , and many emerging market economies showing signs of stabilizing , the committee might believe that the current meeting is an appropriate time to roll back the policy easing of last november , initiating the policy action needed to contain inflation over time .
c PAR 9 many on the committee had viewed the last easing action as an insurance policy taken out as a precaution against further financial turmoil and a significant broadening of the crises in emerging markets .
c PAR 9 while this action may have helped to forestall these eventualities , in current circumstances they would be unlikely to surface if that action were reversed .
c PAR 9 the desirability of immediate tightening would be enhanced to the extent that the committee read recent data on spending as indicating that the growth of aggregate demand would not slow as in the staff projection but rather would remain unsustainably strong absent a tightening of financial conditions .
c PAR 9 with the unemployment rate already low and perhaps headed lower , real interest rates would seem to be falling short of levels required to contain inflationary pressures .
c PAR 9 moreover , while domestic price increases in the past few years have run at a much slower pace than might have been expected in light of labor market conditions , recently some of the forces that may have been responsible for this result -- declines in oil prices and inflation expectations-- show signs of reversing .
c PAR 10 while financial market participants apparently believe that the committee 's next move will be toward restraint , no measurable weight is placed on action at this meeting .
c PAR 10 as a result , the 25 basis point hike in the intended federal funds rate of alternative c could spark a substantial reaction in financial markets .
c PAR 10 short - term interest rates would rise at least as much as the policy rate , the prices of long - term debt instruments and equities could come under considerable downward pressure , and the value of the dollar would probably rise sharply on foreign exchange markets .
c PAR 10 if the committee viewed inflation risks to be substantial , such a market reaction might be desired as it would speed up the necessary adjustment of aggregate demand .
c PAR 10 but if a more modest realignment of market prices were sought , the committee could attempt to shape market expectations through the wording of the announcement .
c PAR 10 in particular , stressing that some of last fall 's easing was no longer needed might limit the tendency of market participants to extrapolate policy tightening into the future .

