
b PAR 8 despite the pickup in underlying inflation in the staff forecast , the committee may nonetheless prefer to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting , as under alternative b . the projected pickup in inflation , if realized , would be gradual and not likely for some time to foster an appreciable increase in inflation expectations that could destabilize financial markets or materially increase the ultimate cost to economic activity of containing price pressures .
b PAR 8 accordingly , policy makers would be afforded more time to judge whether the rise in inflation in fact is likely to materialize .
b PAR 8 such additional time might be viewed as especially desirable if the committee were to put less weight than the staff on the possibility that underlying inflation trends are adverse .
b PAR 8 recent data may suggest that spending is on a lower trajectory than in the staff forecast -- particularly because domestic demand likely has not yet felt much of the effects of the run - up in interest rates and financial markets would be rolled back should the committee fail to validate prevailing expectations of policy tightening , financial conditions on net could well remain more restrictive than those that generally have prevailed this year .
b PAR 8 and the committee may see the wage and cost data as sufficiently ambiguous to reserve judgment on whether the current level of tautness in labor markets will produce accelerating prices , especially since trends in core consumer inflation and longer - run inflation expectations remain flat .
b PAR 8 moreover , recent developments may indicate that global financial markets are fragile , with the potential for further deterioration as year - end approaches even absent a firming in policy .
b PAR 9 news that the committee was standing pat , as under alternative b , would come as a considerable surprise in the market , triggering a rally in capital markets and putting further downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
b PAR 9 that reaction would be tempered if the committee chose and announced a directive tilted toward restraint , thus preserving expectations of a higher funds rate in the near term .
b PAR 9 this approach might be favored if the committee believed tightening was probably needed fairly promptly but wanted to be more assured that an acceleration of costs and prices was in train .
b PAR 9 in these circumstances , however , financial markets could remain volatile as market participants awaited policy action , with possible adverse effects on spreads .
b PAR 9 if , instead , the committee thought that the sense in financial markets that policy tightening is almost inevitable were inconsistent with its own assessment of the situation , this market misconception could be countered by announcing that a neutral bias was being retained , though the announcement would need to convey a more balanced sense of risks than the market now sees as implied by the " asymmetrical symmetry " of the june directive and related announcement .
b PAR 9 the expected path of short - term rates would be revised down , but a traditional symmetry might elevate market participants ' uncertainty about the federal reserve 's assessment of inflation risks and policy intentions in light of the inflationary concerns expressed in the chairman 's testimony .

c PAR 10 the staff forecast suggests that there are substantial risks that price pressures will be intensifying and by enough to require an appreciable tightening of policy ultimately to stabilize inflation .
c PAR 10 if the committee shares these concerns , it might see little to be gained from delaying policy action and choose the 1/4 percentage point firming of alternative c as an appropriate down payment .
c PAR 10 even a sense that inflation risks were less pronounced than in the staff forecast might lead the committee to the view that a modest near - term policy firming was warranted .
c PAR 10 as noted , failing to validate current market expectations of policy action would tend to erode prevailing financial restraint , which may be seen as risking unsustainable economic growth and greater strains in already - tight labor markets , thus heightening the odds of accelerating prices .
c PAR 10 given apparently mounting worries about the secular imbalance in the u.s . trade position , the committee especially might want to avoid fostering doubts among global investors about the federal reserve 's commitment to contain inflation .
c PAR 10 elevated market stresses apparently owe importantly both to uncertainty surrounding the outlook for system action and some aversion on the part of traders and investors to participate in the market in the fourth quarter .
c PAR 10 the former could be alleviated by immediate action combined with an announcement suggesting little likelihood of subsequent policy moves , while the latter might suggest that -- because the committee may feel increasingly uncomfortable in tightening as the year wears on -- action delayed now may wind up being delayed for some time to come .
c PAR 11 given the high odds market participants put on action at this meeting , the announcement that the committee was raising the intended federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point , as under alternative c , should produce little response in key financial prices if no surprises are in store from the wording of the press release .
c PAR 11 the market consensus has settled on a quarter - point move and the retention of a symmetric directive .
c PAR 11 if the announcement of such a directive suggested to market participants that further action was unlikely for some time , financial markets might rally to some extent , as investors removed the modest odds on additional tightening that now seem built into the structure of interest rates for the fourth quarter .
c PAR 11 if , instead , action on tuesday were accompanied by a directive tilted toward tightening , market participants could take it as a signal that additional firming is in the cards this year -- and more so even than is currently built into financial prices . as a result , the term structure of interest rates would likely shift up and the dollar would probably strengthen on exchange markets . because additional tightening would be taken as fairly imminent , market spreads would likely remain wide as issuers rushed to lock in longer - term financing in advance of the committee 's next action .
c PAR 11 indeed , if the committee thought that it likely would need to tighten again before year - end because it wanted to forestall an upward trend to inflation like that in the staff forecast , century - date- change considerations might strengthen the argument for a 50 basis point firming with a symmetric directive at this meeting instead of a 25 basis point move with an asymmetric directive .
c PAR 11 such a move , by restoring the federal funds rate to its level of last august and by getting ahead of market expectations , would have a very good chance of being seen as the last action for the year .
c PAR 11 while interest rates and the dollar 's exchange rate would rise appreciably and equity prices likely would fall , helping to damp demand more than in the staff forecast , the elements of volatility and uncertainty in the market associated with possible near - term policy action would be greatly diminished .
c PAR 11 after the initial adjustment , market conditions should settle down , providing a better environment for financial market participants to plan their balance sheet management over the year - end .
c SENT -- the firming in policy under alternative c occurs late enough this year to impart only slight restraint on the aggregates in 1999 .

