a PAR 21 the 25 basis point easing contemplated in alternative a might be seen as appropriate if the committee remained concerned about the possibility that economic and financial weakness abroad might prove deeper and more widespread than now expected .
a PAR 21 the situation in brazil is continuing to deteriorate , but the staff forecast builds in only limited contagion to other emerging market economies .
a PAR 21 in japan , the risks still may be seen as tilted to the downside in view of the relatively high level of the yen , the backup in bond yields , and the proximity of the nominal short - term interest rate to zero .
a PAR 21 in europe , an ecb intent on building its inflation - fighting credibility may be reluctant to counter a weakening economy by the easing of monetary policy that is assumed in the staff forecast .
a PAR 21 given these uncertainties , it is not surprising that investors in international and domestic financial markets still appear to be quite cautious about credit risk , suggesting the possibility of additional widening of spreads and restraint on credit supply in response to unexpected adverse economic developments from abroad .
a PAR 21 in these circumstances , a slight easing of the stance of monetary policy might be viewed as a prudent measure to provide additional assurance that the expansion of domestic economic activity will not weaken unduly should such events occur .
a PAR 21 in light of the slack conditions in global economic activity , such an action would be unlikely to prompt a significant increase in inflationary pressures for some time to come , even if the downside risks did not materialize .
a PAR 24 in view of the strength of recent economic activity , investors might be puzzled by implementation of alternative a , but they likely would conclude that the shift represented another small , and perhaps final , adjustment of policy to turbulence abroad designed to ensure that u.s . economic growth remained robust .
a PAR 24 short - term market rates would decline noticeably , but bond yields and spreads would probably fall only a bit .
a PAR 24 the foreign exchange value of the dollar likely would weaken , and equity prices could ascend further .

b PAR 19 even if the committee agreed with the greenbook analysis that inflation could well move higher , it might choose to keep the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting , as in alternative b . the situation in global financial markets remains somewhat unsettled , and the committee may see that as posing a continued risk of further global contagion that ultimately could jeopardize the u.s . expansion .
b PAR 19 furthermore , with inflation quite low by many measures and inflation expectations likely to be well contained , any price acceleration should be relatively gradual .
b PAR 19 in these circumstances , refraining from tightening at this meeting still should leave the committee sufficient time to halt any uptrend in inflation before it gained substantial momentum .
b PAR 19 moreover , delay might buy time for the market to realize that a tightening of policy will be necessary , reducing the odds on an outsized market reaction .
b PAR 19 finally , the ongoing string of favorable wage and price reports might suggest that , despite tight labor markets , inflation risks are somewhat less than embodied in the staff forecast .
b PAR 22 investors place high odds on monetary policy being left unchanged at this meeting .
b PAR 22 thus , if the intended funds rate were left at 4 - 3/4 percent , as under alternative b , short- and long - term interest rates should hold near their current levels , as would the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 22 over the intermeeting period , however , if data on the economy and prices come in along the lines of the staff forecast , intermediate- and long - term rates could back up some as investors continue to unwind their expectations of any further easing of federal reserve policy later in the year .
b PAR 22 under the anticipated conditions of solid economic growth , concerns about credit quality should abate further , and bond market spreads should edge down a little from their current high levels .
b PAR 25 in line with the staffs projections of annual growth of the monetary aggregates that were discussed in the previous section , m2 and m3 are expected to slow somewhat over the first several months of this year as the growth of nominal gdp moderates and the effects of previous declines in interest rates abate .
b PAR 25 under the unchanged funds rate of alternative b and the economic conditions foreseen in the greenbook , m2 is projected to expand at a 5 - 1/2 percent pace and m3 at a 7 - 1/2 percent rate over the january - to - june period .
b PAR 25 domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to decelerate as well , growing at a 5 - 1/4 percent pace from december to june and remaining near the middle of its provisional 3-to-7 percent annual range .
b PAR 25 directive language 

c PAR 20 if , by contrast , the committee saw increasing inflation as the primary threat to sustained economic expansion , it might choose the 25 basis point hike in the funds rate of alternative c at this meeting .
c PAR 20 the committee might read the persistence of surprisingly strong growth in aggregate demand , exceptionally high levels of resource utilization , and soaring equity prices as evidence that real short - term interest rates are sufficiently below their equilibrium values to justify prompt action .
c PAR 20 although inflation picks up only gradually in the staff forecast , deferring action could allow inflation pressures to build and necessitate a more pronounced policy firming at a later date that would impose greater restraint on the real economy .
c PAR 20 markets have weathered both the year - end and , to date , the brazilian crisis , suggesting that conditions may be resilient enough to withstand a slight firming of u.s . policy .
c PAR 20 indeed , to the extent that a portion of the cumulative 3/4 percentage point ease last fall reflected the committee 's desire to cushion the economy against potential financial market disruptions that have not materialized , it might now be appropriate to take back some of that easing .
c PAR 20 the committee might even be concerned that inflation could accelerate more sharply than envisioned in the staff forecast , perhaps because faster - than - projected economic growth would put greater pressure on labor markets or because the staff had earlier underestimated the role of temporary factors in damping inflation , so that when these factors turn around the underlying tautness of labor markets will show through forcefully to wages and prices .
c PAR 23 in light of prevailing expectations about monetary policy , financial markets would react sharply to the tightening of alternative c . unless the policy announcement hinted strongly that the fomc saw the move as a limited action , say intended to reverse some of the extra " insurance " against adverse financial developments that was put in place with the last easing , the backup in interest rates could be particularly large .
c PAR 23 market participants might be concerned that the move signaled that inflation risks were more serious than previously thought and could well be followed by additional tightening .
c PAR 23 the prospects for rising debt - service burdens might lead to some increase in risk premiums .
c PAR 23 the advance in yields on private securities could provoke a substantial correction in equity prices , as investors trimmed expectations of profits and discounted expected earnings at higher rates .
c PAR 23 the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets could rise appreciably .

