
b PAR 9 the response of financial markets to the continuation of an unchanged policy stance , as under alternative b , would depend importantly on whether the committee announces a change in the tilt of the directive .
b PAR 9 especially after the publication today of a surprisingly large rise in the cpi in april , market participants reportedly see a good chance that the committee will announce a directive tilted toward tightening .
b PAR 9 against that backdrop , debt and equity markets could rally some if there were no announcement regarding the symmetry of the directive ; market participants would conclude that the committee chose a symmetric directive and probably would see a reduced likelihood of future action .
b PAR 9 over time , longer - term yields would fluctuate near these lower levels as incoming output and price data in line with the greenbook forecast suggest a slowing economy and damped inflation but still the possibility of eventual tightening .
b PAR 9 under these conditions , the average value of the dollar should not move far from its recent range .
b PAR 9 if , on the other hand , the committee decided to adopt and announce a tilt in its directive toward tightening , market participants probably would place slightly higher odds on a policy tightening sometime over the next few meetings , pushing up interest and exchange rates modestly further .
b PAR 9 also , with the committee seen as more inclined to act , markets could well become more sensitive to information bearing on the price outlook .
b PAR 13 abstracting from the estimated effects of refunds and nonwithheld tax payments in recent months , m2 growth has slowed considerably , even relative to the projected deceleration in nominal spending for the second quarter .
b PAR 13 some of the fall - off in m2 growth has likely been temporary , reflecting the recovery of financial markets and the unwinding of the general buildup of liquidity that occurred in the last several months of 1998 .
b PAR 13 after softening substantially in may owing to the clearing of tax checks , m2 growth is projected to pick up in the months ahead under alternative b , extending the trend decline in velocity evident since mid-1997 , and leaving growth of this aggregate for the year at about 6 percent , somewhat above its annual range of 1 to 5 percent .
b PAR 13 the recent sluggish behavior of bank credit also appears to reflect an unwinding of the developments of last fall ; as bank credit growth steps up in the months ahead , banks should again need to turn to managed liabilities for financing , and m3 growth should rebound as well .
b PAR 13 for 1999 as a whole , m3 is projected to post a 6 - 1/2 percent growth rate , placing it a little above its annual range of 2 to 6 percent .
b PAR 13 directive language 

c PAR 10 if the committee saw a pickup in underlying inflation as likely , it might favor the 25 basis point firming of alternative c . even with what would seem to be a generous allowance for expected productivity growth and with relatively restrained pressures on nominal and real wages at projected labor resource utilization rates , the staff still foresees a gradual uptrend in core inflation .
c PAR 10 the forecast implies that financial conditions must tighten appreciably to contain inflation .
c PAR 10 moreover , the april cpi may be a sign that the tendency for higher inflation is stronger than contemplated in the greenbook forecast .
c PAR 10 although most bond yields have backed up since late last fall , in other respects financial market conditions have eased since the committee 's last reduction in the federal funds rate , and economic activity both here and abroad has proven more buoyant than anticipated .
c PAR 10 the renewed appetite for risk in financial markets and apparently relentless upward march of the stock market in recent months may suggest the possibility that financial conditions will be more accommodative than in the staff outlook .
c PAR 10 in this context , the committee may believe that tightening policy now would be prudent in light of the significant risk that substantial economic imbalances would build if the committee postponed action until higher inflation became more evident in the data .
c PAR 11 financial market prices embody little expectation of a policy firming at this meeting .
c PAR 11 as a consequence , the immediate 25 basis point increase in the funds rate of alternative c would trigger a similar rise in short - term interest rates .
c PAR 11 the extent of the response of other u.s .
c PAR 11 financial markets would depend on the outlook for further policy firming , which would be importantly affected by the wording of the announcement .
c PAR 11 term rates should go up significantly less than short rates , as some later rise in short - term nominal rates already has been built into market prices , and investors might be more confident of the outlook for subdued inflation with such a preemptive move by the federal reserve .
c PAR 11 however , if market participants were to decide that several additional tightening moves were likely , long rates would increase more substantially , as they often have in the past when policy has turned in a firming direction .
c PAR 11 some adverse reaction would be expected in foreign financial markets , but absent a steep sell - off in domestic markets , the fallout should be limited , given the recovery in overseas markets and their modest response to the recent increases in u.s . interest rates .

