
b PAR 8 an unchanged intended federal funds rate , as under alternative b , along with retention of a symmetric directive , would foster the sense that the committee probably will not act over the remainder of this year , especially given y2k - related uncertainties.5 with market prices now incorporating some odds on a tightening in the fourth quarter , this 5 under the committee 's current disclosure policy , the combination of no policy action and the retention of a symmetric directive would not be accompanied by an explicit announcement .
b PAR 8 even so , the markets would immediately infer from the absence of an announcement that the committee had adopted a directive that called for no change in policy and no tilt looking forward .
b PAR 8 committee decision could spark a modest rally in financial markets .
b PAR 8 the choice of alternative b with a tilt toward tightening , which would be announced immediately , would tend to increase the perceived chances of a near - term firming , causing interest rates to back up slightly and markets to become more sensitive to incoming data and to statements by policymakers .
b PAR 8 in any event , banks and other lenders are likely to remain cautious suppliers of funds to private borrowers as the year - end approaches , especially short - term credit whose repayment could be viewed as potentially impaired for a little while by disruptions in markets or the particular problems of individual counterparties .
b PAR 8 year - end premiums in money markets typically jump early in the fourth quarter , but in some years they have declined subsequently as borrowers satisfied their needs .
b PAR 8 spread movements , of course , are subject to greater uncertainty with the century date change .
b PAR 8 this year borrowers seem to be securing financing somewhat earlier than the norm , which may help to relieve some pressures , though not by enough to prevent spreads from remaining quite elevated .

c PAR 9 the committee instead could favor a 1/4 percentage point firming in the intended federal funds rate to 5 - 1/2 percent , as in alternative c .
c PAR 9 a rationale for this policy tightening would be that the inflation uptrend embodied in the staff forecast is both likely and unacceptable and warrants a faster and more aggressive policy response than is assumed in that forecast .
c PAR 9 indeed , the persistent strength of domestic final demand in the face of elevated long - term rates and flat stock prices since the spring , the currently low inventory- sales ratios , and the strengthening of activity abroad might be seen as pointing to risks that are skewed toward an unemployment rate appreciably below 4 percent in the near future and a greater intensification of inflation pressures .
c PAR 9 although the markets are not fully prepared for such an action and an outsized price reaction can not be ruled out , the committee might be willing to accept even a sharp reduction in bond and stock prices as an aspect of the process of containing inflation .
c PAR 9 the committee might see action at this meeting as especially desirable if it views potential financial disruptions as increasingly militating against tightening policy between now and early next year and if it also sees that interval as a period of time when firmer policy is going to be needed to prevent inflation pressures from cumulating .


