a PAR 12 if the committee believes that economic growth likely will remain below that of its potential at the current funds rate , along the lines of the staff forecast , but thinks that the existing level of resource use may be sustainable
a PAR 12 , then it might choose the 25 basis point easing of alternative a in order to forestall an unnecessary rise in the unemployment rate .
a PAR 12 the argument for this policy choice would be stronger if the committee put significant weight on the possibility that aggregate demand would prove weaker than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 12 such an eventuality could occur if softer economic performance leads to further deterioration of financial conditions and more cautious spending behavior by households and businesses .
a PAR 13 while money market futures embed the expectation of policy easing at some point , market participants do not anticipate such action at this meeting , in part because after its previous meeting the committee stated that it continued to view the risks as weighted toward higher inflation .
a PAR 13 adoption of alternative a , therefore , would trigger a rally in bond and stock markets , though the extent would depend on the accompanying statement of the balance of risks .
a PAR 13 if the committee announced that it believes the risks to be in balance , investors could well interpret the easing as mostly bringing forward in time policy actions they had already anticipated , attenuating price gains .
a PAR 13 if the committee instead announced a view that risks are weighted toward economic weakness , the rally in the treasury market would be more vigorous as investors came to expect a larger cumulative policy easing .
a PAR 13 the federal reserve 's evident concerns about a slowing economy and deteriorating financial conditions might lead investors to become more worried about repayment prospects , causing risk spreads to widen some .
a PAR 13 however , the committee 's willingness to act would likely reassure market participants that downside risks would be limited .

b PAR 7 aggregate demand now has slowed more convincingly to a pace below that of its potential , and , in the staff view , the unemployment rate seems more likely to rise than to fall over coming quarters .
b PAR 7 if the committee shares that assessment , it may see financial conditions as probably already tight enough , at least for a time , to limit any further step - up in core inflation and may select alternative b , which keeps the federal funds rate unchanged .
b PAR 7 indeed , if the committee views the data on unit costs and prices of the last few years as indicating that the sustainable rate of unemployment is below that in the staff forecast , it might judge the present stance of policy as adequate to cap underlying inflation at the current rate , not just to limit the rise .
b PAR 7 in addition , the committee might be concerned that the deterioration in financial markets witnessed over the past few months might be more likely to continue than to be reversed , suggesting greater downside than upside risks to aggregate demand .
b PAR 7 to be sure , oil prices , whose rise seems to explain a recent boost in near - term inflation expectations , could remain high and pose an inflationary threat .
b PAR 7 but long - term inflation expectations have been stable , and the staff and the futures markets expect a good deal of the runup in energy prices to be reversed .
b PAR 9 markets expect no adjustment in the funds rate at this meeting , but participants appear to have somewhat diverse views about the committee 's choice of the balance of risks .
b PAR 9 thus , their reaction to the choice of alternative b will depend largely on that balance assessment .
b PAR 9 anecdotal reports suggest that most investors still anticipate a statement of continued imbalance toward inflation risks , but a growing number do not and market prices have built in a policy easing by early next year .
b PAR 9 in these circumstances , the retention of an imbalance toward inflation risks at this meeting would induce market participants to push back the timing of policy easings , causing bond and stock prices to decline modestly .
b PAR 9 but prices would likely be bid up somewhat if balanced risks were chosen because participants would see this choice as raising the possibility of a near - term reduction in the target funds rate .

c PAR 10 if the committee judges that core inflation probably will trend higher , as in the staff forecast , and finds the likely degree of economic weakness to be less of a concern , then it might want to act promptly to resist the acceleration in prices by tightening policy 25 basis points , as in alternative c .
c PAR 10 the need for action might seem particularly pressing if core inflation were viewed as having already moved above the range consistent with effective price stability in the long run .
c PAR 10 moreover , the committee may see a good chance that the trajectory of prices may be steeper than in the staff forecast .
c PAR 10 in that forecast , underlying inflation rises as productivity growth levels out and labor compensation continues to accelerate , reflecting in part the catch - up of real wages to previous increases in productivity .
c PAR 10 with the labor market quite taut and real wages having been held down recently by the effects of higher energy prices on overall inflation , the pressures for faster nominal wage increases might intensify more than the staff envisions .
c PAR 10 any increase in inflation expectations would accelerate that process .
c PAR 10 in that regard , the recent rise in near - term inflation expectations underscores the risk that longer - term inflation expectations may not remain anchored should oil prices fail to retreat .


