
b PAR 18 if the committee is not sure that inflation pressures will intensify going forward , then it might want to consider leaving the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this meeting , as under alternative b . economic growth in the second quarter appears to have slowed to a rate roughly consistent with its potential even though the full effects of the earlier rise in interest rates and flattening of equity prices have not yet worked their way through the pipeline .
b PAR 18 moreover , as noted , market participants have interpreted the incoming data as suggesting that very little further tightening might be necessary to contain inflation .
b PAR 18 in these circumstances , the committee might wish to wait for more evidence on the likely extent of the slowdown in aggregate demand before taking further action .
b PAR 18 in addition , the committee may be less convinced than the staff that the economy is producing beyond the level of its potential .
b PAR 18 recent data are giving conflicting signals about the acceleration of labor compensation , and , in any case , the growth of structural productivity has picked up .
b PAR 18 in view of the resulting uncertainty regarding unit labor costs , the committee may have significant doubts that an upswing of inflation is in train .
b PAR 18 judging by survey evidence , longer - term inflation expectations have not been particularly sensitive to short - run fluctuations in measured inflation .
b PAR 18 as a result , the committee might anticipate that those expectations will not rise much in the near term , even if the incoming data tend to confirm the staffs forecast , and might view the costs of waiting for additional information as rather low .

c PAR 20 if the committee is instead concerned that the odds of rising inflation are still elevated , as in the staff forecast , a further firming of policy of 25 basis points at this meeting could be warranted , as under alternative c . indications of slower expansion are still tentative , the level of resource utilization remains quite high , and some of the earlier financial restraint has been unwound by the recent rally in bond and equity markets .
c PAR 20 in this environment , the committee may want more assurance that growth in aggregate demand will not rebound than is provided by the likely additional effects of previous tightening actions .
c PAR 20 the argument for tightening would be even more compelling if the committee believed that the growth of aggregate demand has to be restrained to substantially below the pace of potential output for a while to lessen the intensity of resource use .
c PAR 20 accelerating productivity has held down the growth in unit labor costs , and thereby has helped to restrain inflation for some time .
c PAR 20 however , its depressing effect on inflation may be running its course , as intense competitive pressures in labor markets allow real compensation to catch up to the higher level of productivity .
c PAR 20 if so , the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation would be rising , even if productivity is continuing to accelerate .
c PAR 21 market participants would be surprised by the 25 basis point tightening of alternative c . short - term interest rates would rise immediately by almost 1/4 percentage point .
c PAR 21 especially if the committee were to retain its existing statement about the balance of risks , some increase in intermediate- and long - term yields also could be anticipated .
c PAR 21 the dollar probably would firm some on foreign exchange markets , while stock prices likely would decline .
c PAR 21 an announcement of balanced risks , by contrast , could well be taken by the public as a signal that the committee believes it may be finished tightening .
c PAR 21 although the rate hike would move forward in time the tightening that markets have essentially priced in , a statement of balanced risks could prompt a rally in capital markets as market participants mark down the odds they place on aggressive further tightening .

