
b PAR 7 while the committee may find the pickup in core inflation in the staff forecast to be worrisome , it may still favor keeping the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this meeting , as under alternative b . the uptrend to core inflation in that outlook is gradual and far from certain to come to pass .
b PAR 7 based on incoming data , the committee might now be even more confident that aggregate demand growth has slowed significantly , likely to below the growth of potential supply .
b PAR 7 moreover , with the slippage in equity prices over the intermeeting period , the prospects have improved that pressures on resources will not intensify and could even begin to ebb .
b PAR 7 higher energy prices would pose a threat to longer- term price performance if they became embedded in inflation expectations or in wage demands , as workers attempt to preserve purchasing power .
b PAR 7 however , oil prices have fallen from their peaks , and , to date , longer - term inflation expectations have not shown a tendency to move higher .
b PAR 7 moreover , the risks stemming from oil market developments are not all in one direction .
b PAR 7 in particular , higher oil prices could restrain aggregate demand beyond the effects of transferring income to foreign oil producers if they induced an erosion of consumer confidence or a substantial selloff in equities in light of the reduced economic efficiency of the existing stock of capital .
b PAR 7 market participants , taking into account oil prices along with other incoming information since the last fomc meeting , have marked down the expected path of the federal funds rate for the next few years .
b PAR 7 in these circumstances , the committee may see little to be lost by waiting to obtain more information on trends in output and inflation .
b PAR 8 market prices incorporate the expectation that the target federal funds rate and the balance - of - risks sentence will be left unchanged at this meeting .
b PAR 8 consequently , implementation of alternative b , along with the retention of the statement that the committee regarded the balance of risks as weighted toward increased inflationary pressures , should have little effect on financial markets .
b PAR 8 the committee might well see the revised outlook for oil prices , coming at a time when it was already concerned about potential price pressures from the unusually low unemployment rate , as reinforcing a judgment that the balance of risks is weighted toward higher inflation .
b PAR 8 however , the committee may now believe that growth of aggregate demand is not likely to exceed that of potential output , that current levels of resource utilization are sustainable , and that oil prices probably will not leave a lasting imprint on inflation .
b PAR 8 if so , it could consider issuing a statement that indicated balanced risks to achieving its goals for price stability and sustainable economic growth .
b PAR 8 in this case , bond and equity markets would likely rally , as investors marked up the odds on an easing trend in monetary policy over coming months , and the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would probably edge lower .

c PAR 9 the fomc instead might choose the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative c . core inflation has risen and may already be above rates that committee members find acceptable over the long run .
c PAR 9 moreover , although underlying trends in aggregate demand apparently have slowed , the current and projected levels of resource utilization may imply , based on historical experience , a likelihood that core inflation will continue to increase , as in the staff forecast .
c PAR 9 furthermore , the committee may see upside risks to inflation even relative to that forecast .
c PAR 9 while the staff has trimmed the amount of fiscal restraint in the outlook , recent news might be read as suggesting a distinct possibility of even greater erosion in federal budget surpluses .
c PAR 9 in addition , if oil prices do not fall as in the staff forecast and futures market quotes , short - term inflation expectations may deteriorate further , which , absent monetary policy firming , would reduce the real federal funds rate .
c PAR 9 in simulations of staff econometric models , such as that shown in the international section of part i of the greenbook , holding the nominal funds rate along the baseline path in the face of an upward shock to oil prices sets in motion a process of ever- rising core inflation relative to the baseline outcome as lower real interest rates boost output relative to potential .
c PAR 10 the market reaction to implementation of alternative c would likely be sharp .
c PAR 10 with investors expecting no change in the stance of monetary policy at this meeting and apparently anticipating that the next move will be toward easing ,
c PAR 10 short - term interest rates would probably jump by at least the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate .
c PAR 10 especially if the announcement indicated that the committee continued to see the balance of risks as weighted toward higher inflation , capital markets could sell off significantly , as market participants adjusted prices to incorporate expectations of a higher path for short- term interest rates .
c PAR 10 any decline in inflation expectations would probably offset only part of the effect on nominal bond yields of the higher real rates brought about by the tightening .
c PAR 10 the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would firm against most currencies .
c PAR 10 an announcement of balanced risks would likely be seen by market participants as a signal that the committee believed that this phase of policy tightening had been completed .
c PAR 10 in this case , the response to a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting would be muted .


