
b PAR 7 recent data on spending , productivity , and labor costs could well be seen by the committee as on balance supporting a decision to leave the federal funds rate target unchanged at 6 - 1/2 percent , as in alternative b . signs of an appreciable moderation in aggregate demand growth no longer seem to be just " tentative and preliminary , " and unit labor costs point toward little near - term pressure on inflation .
b PAR 7 indeed , the growth of aggregate demand may have already slowed enough to keep the unemployment rate from falling , even before the effects on the economy of previous policy firmings and the flattening in equity prices have fully played out .
b PAR 7 the conviction that aggregate demand is now growing in line with the expansion of potential output would be strengthened if the committee found plausible the staff 's upward revision to the rate of increase in productivity .
b PAR 7 however , even if the current level of resource utilization holds for a time , whether that level will ultimately prove sustainable remains an open question .
b PAR 7 in the meantime , with costs contained and long - term inflation expectations stable or even drifting a bit lower , the committee might expect to incur little economic cost by awaiting more information to help answer that question .
b PAR 8 although the odds that pressures on resources will not intensify may seem better balanced now than they did eight weeks ago , the committee may still see the risks as tilted toward an unacceptable inflation outcome , given the persisting strength in elements of aggregate demand , the low unemployment rate , and the somewhat elevated current rate of core inflation .
b PAR 8 the choice of alternative b , accompanied by a sentence conveying a balance of risks weighted in an inflationary direction , would accord with the expectations of market participants .
b PAR 8 no significant immediate response would be forthcoming in financial markets .
b PAR 8 under the staff forecast , economic data over the intermeeting period are likely to continue to indicate moderate demand growth and contained inflation and thus should have little net effect on market prices .

c PAR 9 the 25 basis point increase in the targeted funds rate of alternative c would seem appropriate if the inflation forecasted by the staff were seen as likely and unacceptable .
c PAR 9 it might be viewed as unacceptable in part because the already prevailing core cpi inflation rate of 2 - 1/2 percent in the greenbook may be judged to be inconsistent with the federal reserve 's longer - run objective of effective price stability .
c PAR 9 even if the committee were willing to tolerate such a rate of price increase for a while , inflation is headed higher in the staff forecast in that the economy already has overshot the levels of output and employment that are sustainable in the longer run .
c PAR 9 in such circumstances , delaying needed policy firming could allow inflationary pressures to build , eventually requiring a more disruptive policy tightening and economic slowdown to achieve the same long - run inflation outcome .
c PAR 9 aside from the current level of resource utilization , the committee may see significant upside risks to inflation .
c PAR 9 oil prices have remained stubbornly high , and the decline projected by the staff may not materialize , eliminating a source of prospective price restraint and perhaps inducing a ratcheting - up of inflation expectations .
c PAR 9 in addition , the restraint on aggregate demand put in place by the committee 's prior tightenings
c PAR 9 has been offset to some extent by the recent rally in capital markets , and prospective increases in productivity growth may boost wealth and expected earnings even more than they have already , especially if real interest rates lie below the higher marginal product of capital .
c PAR 10 the choice of alternative c would surprise market participants , raising questions about the path for monetary policy going forward .
c PAR 10 market participants might wonder whether the committee has read incoming data as more worrisome than they themselves have or whether the committee was intent on attaining a lower inflation objective than investors previously perceived .
c PAR 10 the resulting upward adjustment to participants ' impression of the degree of future monetary policy restraint that is likely to be implemented would be especially pronounced if the committee retained a balance - of - risks sentence emphasizing inflationary concerns .
c PAR 10 bond rates , particularly in real terms , could be expected to rise along with short - term yields , the dollar would probably appreciate further , and stock prices would adjust downward .
c PAR 10 conversely , a switch to a sentence conveying a balanced set of risks would foster a much greater sense of certainty in markets that the peak in short - term rates had been reached .
c PAR 10 in this case , the immediate price response in financial markets would be tempered , apart from an upward adjustment of short - term rates of around 1/4 percentage point .

