
b PAR 7 the committee may agree that the risks to the inflation outlook are on the upside , but still wish to stand pat on policy for the time being , as in alternative b . such a choice could allow it to better judge whether more near - term tightening is needed or whether the restraining effects on aggregate demand of previous tightening actions will prove to be sufficient to bring growth in aggregate demand into reasonable balance with that of potential supply .
b PAR 7 indeed , the amount of slowing required in the growth of output may not be large if more of the extraordinary growth of productivity over the last few quarters persists than has been allowed for in the staff forecast -- the very rapid growth of activity since mid - year produced only small declines in the unemployment rate and in the pool of available labor .
b PAR 7 even if the growth of aggregate demand fails to come into balance with that of potential supply quickly enough to avoid some intensification of strains on resources , the costs of waiting in terms of faster price increases still might be minimal if structural productivity continues to accelerate over the next couple of years .
b PAR 7 the acceleration of structural productivity would hold down unit labor costs and , with profits running high , competition would continue to contain business " pricing power .
b PAR 7 thus , inflation would remain damped for some time even with a constant nominal federal funds rate , although , to be sure , a higher real funds rate would ultimately be required to align market interest rates with improved returns on capital investments and greater wealth - induced consumption .
b PAR 7 in effect , the committee would be allowing the economy to realize the gains from the extra productivity growth mainly in temporarily higher output rather than lower inflation .
b PAR 12 the monetary aggregates are projected to accelerate a little from their growth rates early this year , when they were depressed by the unwinding of y2k effects .
b PAR 12 nonetheless , expansion of the aggregates , particularly m2 , should be restrained by the influence of earlier policy tightenings , even under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b . growth rates of m2 in coming months are likely to be erratic , owing to the effects of the shifting timing of tax refunds and the likely surge in payments , but on average this aggregate is projected to expand at a rate of 6 - 1/4 percent over the february - to - june period under alternative b . with nominal gdp expanding faster than m2 , m2 velocity would increase at a 1 - 3/4 percent pace in both the first and the second quarters .
b PAR 12 by june , m2 would be 5 - 1/2 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter 1999 base , somewhat above the upper end of its annual range .
b PAR 12 buoyed by rapid bank credit growth , expansion of m3 is projected at an 8 percent rate over the february - to - june period , keeping this aggregate well above the upper end of its annual range .
b PAR 12 indeed , by june , m3 would be 8 percent at an annual rate above its fourth - quarter base , compared with the 6 percent upper end of its range .

c PAR 9 any unwinding of the current degree of restraint in financial markets , which incorporates 25 basis points of tightening at this meeting , might be viewed by the committee as exacerbating the risk of economic overheating .
c PAR 9 with little evidence in hand that spending is moderating appreciably , aggregate demand still seems to be expanding more rapidly than even optimistic estimates of the growth of potential aggregate supply .
c PAR 9 in these circumstances , the committee 's assessment of the inflation risks may be such that it favors an immediate tightening of policy , perhaps by raising the federal funds rate another 1/4 percentage point as in alternative c .
c PAR 9 the committee might believe it especially important to provide continuing evidence of its vigilance as the effect on inflation of the recent surge in oil prices plays out in coming months .
c PAR 9 even if the committee anticipates that considerably more policy firming will be needed eventually to contain inflation pressures , it may still favor the gradual approach embodied in alternative c in light of the considerable uncertainty about aggregate supply and about the effect of the substantial run - up in short- and long - term interest rates in recent quarters on aggregate demand .
c PAR 9 such gradualism also may hold appeal because financial markets have been edgy and are potentially vulnerable to an unexpectedly large policy move .
c PAR 10 if the committee were to choose alternative c , it presumably would also want to convey to market participants that the balance of risks remains tilted toward inflation .
c PAR 10 such a combination , because it is widely expected , would tend to have little effect on fixed- income yields and the exchange value of the dollar . very broad measures of equity prices over the intermeeting period would be expected to fluctuate near recent levels .
c PAR 10 preannouncements and announcements of corporate earnings will pick up steam in the weeks ahead , likely keeping volatility in equity markets elevated , which could possibly feed back on interest rates in a manner similar to recent experience .

