a PAR 11 if the committee thinks that output growth is likely to slow appreciably more than envisioned in the staff forecast , then it might choose the 25 basis point easing of alternative a . such an assessment of growth prospects might reflect concern that the reduced pace of economic expansion , additional financial difficulties , and weaker earnings growth could be in the process of eroding consumer and business sentiment and tightening financial conditions more than in the greenbook .
a PAR 11 in this circumstance , a prompt easing of policy , by bolstering asset values and confidence , might help short - circuit this interactive process .
a PAR 11 easier policy also might be in order if the committee believes output growth along the lines of the staff forecast is likely , but reads the evidence as suggesting a considerably higher sustainable level of output , and hence a correspondingly lower nairu , than estimated by the staff .
a PAR 11 under these circumstances , even if the committee thinks that some reduction in the level of demand on productive resources is appropriate , it might want to ease policy slightly now given both the lags with which changes in policy influence the economy and the substantial rise in the unemployment rate projected by the staff .
a PAR 12 with no policy move expected at this meeting , adoption of alternative a would presumably trigger a rally in bond and stock markets and a decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 12 the size of the resulting moves in asset markets would depend on the accompanying statement of the balance of risks .
a PAR 12 if the committee announced that it believed risks to be in balance , investors could well interpret the easing as the committee " buying insurance " against a possible further weakening of growth .
a PAR 12 such an action would probably be viewed as mostly bringing forward in time policy actions that market participants already anticipate , but the effects in financial markets still would be substantial .
a PAR 12 an even larger effect could be expected if the committee instead announced that risks appeared to be weighted toward economic weakness , as investors came to expect a greater cumulative easing of policy .

b PAR 8 if the committee shares the staffs assessment of the economic fundamentals and views a period of subpar economic growth as not only likely but also necessary to stabilize core inflation , it might prefer the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b . in addition , recent substantial revisions to the near - term outlook may suggest that the economic situation is quite fluid and that the degree of conviction about any particular outcome is relatively low .
b PAR 8 leaving policy unchanged would provide time for more evidence to accumulate that could potentially clarify the outlook for spending and productivity growth .
b PAR 8 of course , this benefit must be weighed against the potential costs of inaction .
b PAR 8 in the current circumstances , the committee may view economic conditions as implying that the potential costs of inaction at this meeting would be lower than usual if economic outcomes turn out differently than now anticipated .
b PAR 8 on the one hand , in the event of somewhat slower- than - expected economic growth going forward , the quicker dissipation of labor market pressures resulting from a short delay in easing policy might not be unwelcome , given that labor markets are very tight and inflation is probably at the high end of the range that might be considered acceptable in the long run .
b PAR 8 if , on the other hand , pressures on prices intensify because economic growth rebounds more promptly than expected or unit labor costs accelerate , then the committee should have sufficient time to react before higher inflation becomes entrenched because long- term inflation expectations appear to be firmly anchored .
b PAR 10 while financial market participants expect policy to be eased early in 2001 , they do not expect such an action at this meeting .
b PAR 10 they do anticipate that the committee will move to a statement of balanced risks , which would be seen as opening up the possibility of a shift in the stance of policy in the near term .
b PAR 10 given these expectations , the choice of alternative b with a statement of balanced risks should have little effect on financial markets .
b PAR 10 if the committee instead reiterated that the risks are weighted toward increased inflation pressures , investors likely would push back the timing and reduce the odds and likely extent of easier policy next year .
b PAR 10 in that case , interest rates and the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would move higher , and equity prices would decline .
b PAR 10 by contrast , if the committee announced that risks were weighted toward economic weakness , investors likely would increase the amount and move forward the timing of expected easing going forward .
b PAR 10 bond and equity markets would rally , and the value of the dollar likely would decline .
b PAR 10 with the federal reserve seen as alert for signs of economic weakness , the response of markets to incoming data that pointed in that direction might be accentuated .

c PAR 13 if the committee judges that core inflation already has moved above the range consistent with effective price stability , and that the prospects for a reversal given the current stance of policy are small , then it might be inclined to tighten policy 25 basis points , as in alternative c . such a move might appear more attractive if output growth were seen as unlikely to slow by as much as in the staff forecast , perhaps because the committee believes that equity investors have already taken reduced earnings prospects into account , and so views equity prices as more likely to resume at least a gradual uptrend than to be flat as in the staff forecast .
c PAR 13 moreover , the committee may be concerned about the upside risks to labor costs that could result from workers either attempting to reverse the hit to real wages that has resulted from higher energy prices or to catch up with previous increases in productivity at a time when the acceleration in productivity may have ended .

