a PAR 25 the ranges for money and debt in 2000 that the committee selected on a provisional basis last july are presented below , along with an alternative that adjusts the money ranges for faster growth of potential gdp .
a PAR 25 as in other recent years , the committee chose provisional ranges for the monetary aggregates in 2000 that it saw as benchmarks for money growth under conditions of long - term price stability and historically typical velocity trends , while the range for domestic nonfinancial debt was better aligned with projected growth of that aggregate in 2000 .
a PAR 25 the provisional range for debt , at 3 to 7 percent , is centered not far from the staff 's projection for debt growth in 2000 , and therefore no alternative setting for that range is offered for consideration .
a PAR 25 16 the provisional ranges , listed as alternative a , are the same set that has been in place since the middle of 1995 .
a PAR 25 the committee may wish once again to retain these ranges as an implicit indication to the public of the low weight it places on the monetary and debt aggregates in formulating monetary policy .
a PAR 25 the existing ranges might also be chosen if the increases in productivity observed in recent years were seen as likely to be transitory .
a PAR 25 alternative ranges for money and debt in 2000 ( percent ) memo :
a PAR 25 i projected provisional alt .
a PAR 25 ii growth m2 1 to 5 2 to 6 4 - 3/4 m3
a PAR 25 2 to 6 3 to 7 6 - 1/4 debt 3 to 7 3 to 7 5 - 1/4 16 .
a PAR 25 if the committee chose to reinterpret the range for debt as a price stability range , parallel with the treatment for the monetary ranges , it would have several choices , depending on how it interpreted history .
a PAR 25 it could set a range for debt that was about a percentage point faster than its expected growth of nominal gdp at price stability , reflecting the decline in debt velocity on balance since 1959 .
a PAR 25 however , debt velocity has been rather flat outside of the 1980s ,
a PAR 25 so a price stability range for the debt aggregate could alternatively be centered on the expected steady state growth of nominal gdp , as is the case for m2 .

b PAR 26 if , however , the faster productivity growth of recent years is expected to persist or even pick up further , the ranges in use since the mid-1990s would no longer be centered around money growth expected when prices were stable .
b PAR 26 in alternative b , the ranges for m2 and m3 are adjusted upward to allow for faster growth of potential output .
b PAR 26 when the committee shifted to using price stability ranges in the mid-1990s , the staffs estimate of potential output growth was about 2 - 1/4 percent and there was thought to be perhaps a percentage point of upward bias in the implicit gdp deflator .
b PAR 26 over the last four years , however , the staff estimates that potential gdp growth has averaged about 3 - 1/2 percent , while the bias in the implicit deflator is now about 1/2 percentage point .
b PAR 26 potential gdp growth is deduced from estimates of structural productivity growth averaging 2 - 1/2 percent , plus about 1 percent growth in labor
b PAR 26 inputs.17,18 the midpoints of the ranges in alternative
b PAR 26 ii are consistent with these estimates of recent potential output growth and residual bias in the implicit gdp deflator , assuming historically typical velocity behavior .
b PAR 26 with stable velocity , m2 would be expected to grow at the implied 4 percent pace of 17 . while actual nonfarm business productivity has grown at an average 2 - 3/4 percent rate over the last four years , about 1/4 percentage point has been cyclical , according to staff estimates .
b PAR 26 differences in the growth rates of output and hours in the nonfarm business sector versus the overall economy require a downward adjustment of 0.1 percentage point in arriving at potential gdp growth .
b PAR 26 18 . similar estimates for potential gdp expansion over the last four years can be derived using okun 's law : actual gdp has grown an average 4 - 1/4 percent and the unemployment rate has fallen 0.4 percentage point per annum on balance since 1996 .
b PAR 26 estimates of okun 's law over recent decades imply that the difference between actual and potential output growth is twice the rate of decline in the unemployment rate , or 3/4 percentage point , implying potential output growth of 3 - 1/2 percent over the period .
b PAR 26 nominal gdp .
b PAR 26 the range for m3 would be a percentage point higher than that for m2 , reflecting the faster average growth of the broader aggregate over history .
b PAR 27 for a variety of reasons , however , desired steady state growth of the monetary aggregates might be faster than the midpoints of the ranges in alternative b .
b PAR 27 the staff estimates that , owing to accelerating productivity , the growth of potential gdp will be yet more elevated going forward--4 percent over this year and next .
b PAR 27 moreover , the committee may believe that a small positive true inflation rate is desirable in the long run because of possible nominal rigidities in the economy or because of potential risks to the ability of policy to react forcefully to economic weakness if the nominal federal funds rate were close to the lower bound of zero.20 the committee may view a small positive true inflation rate as still consistent with effective price stability in that such a rate may be sufficiently low as to have no influence on the decision - making of households and businesses .
b PAR 27 if the committee did decide to adjust the monetary ranges up by a percentage point or more , the humphrey hawkins report and testimony could clarify that no greater weight was intended to be placed on the aggregates in the formulation of policy .
b PAR 27 the july 1999 humphrey
b PAR 27 hawkins report noted that such an adjustment might be needed if faster productivity growth persisted .
b PAR 27 the velocity of m3 has been rather unstable and its long - run trend difficult to assess ( chart 7 ) .
b PAR 27 m3 has grown faster than m2 on average since 1959 ; this divergence has been evident in recent years as well and is projected to continue over the forecast period .
b PAR 27 however , it is unclear why nominal magnitudes would grow at divergent rates over the very long run , and the price stability range for m3 might ultimately have to be aligned to that for m2 .
b PAR 27 this latter concern may have become less of a risk of late because of apparent increases in the equilibrium real funds rate , likely associated with faster productivity growth .
b PAR 27 short - run policy alternatives 
b PAR 30 despite the significant inflation risk embodied in the staff forecast and identified in the federal reserve 's announcement following the december meeting , the committee might not yet be convinced that policy action is necessary and hence might be inclined to choose alternative b . even though labor markets have remained tight for some time , readings on core prices generally have been well behaved , excepting the pickup in various nipa inflation measures for the fourth quarter reported today .
b PAR 30 while these reports may be disquieting , the four - quarter changes in these measures remain moderate .
b PAR 30 taken together with other price reports , the recent behavior of core inflation may still be consistent with trend productivity growth that is strong enough , or a natural rate of unemployment that is low enough , to restrain inflation for considerably longer than in the staff forecast .
b PAR 30 in light of this possibility , the committee may wish to wait awhile in order better to assess the extent of inflationary pressures .
b PAR 30 if the committee were to keep the stance of policy unchanged , however , it presumably would want to accompany announcement of that choice with a statement , under its new policy , that " the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future , " given the high rate of labor utilization and the continued strength in demand that could push that rate even higher .
b PAR 31 in view of the macroeconomic situation and recent federal reserve statements , market participants uniformly seem to expect a tightening of monetary policy at this meeting , with considerable weight currently being placed on a 25 basis point move and some probability on a 50 basis point increase .
b PAR 31 in these circumstances , implementation of the unchanged money market conditions of alternative b , even if accompanied by a statement that the balance of risks remains tilted to the upside , would confuse investors . nonetheless , financial markets , especially for equities , would rally if investors trimmed their expectations of the extent of cumulative monetary tightening .
b PAR 31 short - term market interest rates would drop nearly 1/4 percentage point , and the dollar would weaken on foreign exchange markets .
b PAR 36 under the unchanged money market conditions of alternative b , m2 growth is projected to pick up a bit , to a 6 percent annual rate over the december to june period , from the 5 - 1/2 percent rate from september to december , despite a small drag from the unwinding of y2k effects .
b PAR 36 m2 would be somewhat above its provisional 1 to 5 percent annual range in june .
b PAR 36 m3 is expected to decelerate sharply , to a 5 - 1/4 percent rate over the december to june period from the 14 percent pace of september to december .
b PAR 36 adjusted for y2k influences , m3 growth is expected to be about the same in the two periods .
b PAR 36 m3 also would be above its provisional 2 to 6 percent annual range in june .
b PAR 36 growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to slow , dropping to a 5 - 1/4 percent rate over the december to june interval from the 6 percent pace between september and december , leaving this aggregate a bit above the middle of its provisional 3 to 7 percent annual range in june .
b PAR 36 directive and balance of risks language 

c PAR 32 the announcement following the december meeting indicated that the fomc was concerned that a continuation of rapid demand growth could lead to an escalation of inflation pressures .
c PAR 32 if anything , the upside risks to the economy and inflation seem to have intensified over the intermeeting period , perhaps inclining the committee toward the 25 basis point firming of policy of alternative c .
c PAR 32 indeed , those risks would mount should financial markets rally as a result of policy inaction .
c PAR 32 and although productivity may still be accelerating , the momentum of spending risks outstripping the expansion in available labor , exacerbating strains in already - taut labor markets .
c PAR 32 the staffs assessment is that considerable policy firming will be necessary to contain inflation .
c PAR 32 even if the committee finds this assessment plausible , it still may want to proceed incrementally , as it typically has done , because of uncertainty about the response of financial markets to its actions , about the sensitivity of spending to financial market conditions , and about the reaction of inflation to labor market conditions .
c PAR 32 moreover , long - term inflation expectations remain damped , suggesting that a rapid shift in the stance of policy is not essential at this point .
c PAR 32 still , the committee may wish to express the view that , even after the 100 basis points of cumulative tightening since mid-1999 , the risks remain tilted toward increased inflation pressures .

d PAR 34 if the committee sees recent data as tending to confirm that substantial monetary restraint will need to be applied over the next year or so to keep inflation in check , as implied by the staff forecast , it might choose the 50 basis point tightening of policy contemplated in alternative d . in this circumstance , the committee might see advantages to moving well along in the process relatively quickly , to minimize the odds that inflation expectations begin to rise and to reduce the probability that a protracted period of tightening will be required .
d PAR 34 and , it might also want to adopt a statement that it saw the risks as still being tilted toward higher inflation , which would convey a sense that further policy tightening might well be needed .
d PAR 34 on the other hand , if the committee thought that a prompt 50 basis point adjustment had a reasonable chance of being sufficient to contain inflation to a satisfactory level , at least for some time , it presumably would indicate , under the formula laid out in its new disclosure policy , that " the committee believes that the risks are balanced with respect to prospects for " " its long - run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth .
d PAR 35 the 50 basis point tightening at this meeting contemplated under alternative d is not fully incorporated in market prices , and thus implementation of this alternative would probably result in nearly a quarter - point rise in money market yields .
d PAR 35 the effects on longer - term yields and on equity prices would probably be conditioned importantly by the fomc 's statement regarding the balance of risks .
d PAR 35 with a statement of symmetric risks " for the foreseeable future , " any drop in bond prices might be damped as the effects of the tighter - than - expected stance of policy over the near term are partly offset by some flattening of investors ' expectations of policy tightening after march .
d PAR 35 if the fomc instead chose to link its tightening action with wording indicating that it saw the balance of risks as still tilted toward inflation , market participants would likely revise upward their expected path of federal reserve tightening .
d PAR 35 hence , bond and stock markets would probably sell off , and the dollar would appreciate on foreign exchange markets .

