a PAR 14 if the committee found the staff assessment o f the outlook to   be both reasonable and acceptable , it might opt for alternative a , which would lower the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5¾ percent .
a PAR 14 in the context of this forecast , such an easing leans against softness in aggregate demand while resisting an eventual pickup of inflation in circumstances of continued pressures on labor resources .
a PAR 14 in light of the considerable uncertainty about the prospects for spending , such a measured step could be seen   as striking a balance between two possible scenarios for aggregate demand discussed earlier – a recession and a growth pause .
a PAR 14 to be sure , the market has a more substantial easing at this meeting built into interest rates , but this expectation was shaped in part by the committee ’s unexpectedly aggressive action earlier this month .   over a som ewhat longer horizon , the structure of interest rates incorporates a drop in the funds rate to 4¾ percent by year - end – more than
a PAR 14 the committee may see as likely to be necessary to restore acceptable growth .
a PAR 14 if so , it may view disappointing markets a little as possibly fostering more sustainable and stabilizing financial conditions .
a PAR 14 indeed , the committee may be concerned that another 50 basis point action hard on the heels of the january 3 move risks leading investors to expect even more ease at future meetings than currently .
a PAR 14 such a reaction would heighten the possibility that the stimulus emanating from financial markets would give additional impetus to a rebound in   spending that might soon be underway in any event .
a PAR 14 given the lags in the effects of monetary policy , any resulting price pressures could be difficult to contain even with a relatively quick turnaround in po licy .

b PAR 18 the committee may choose the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative b if it is dissatisfied with recent rates of core inflation   and wants to establish a downward trajectory for inflation , as in the price stability scenario in the second section of this bluebook .
b PAR 18 the rationale for this policy choice would be strengthened if the committee saw the recent slowdown in the   growth of aggregate demand as likely to be more temporary than does the staff and thus the recent policy easing as probably sufficient to counter the sluggishness in the econom y that emerged recently .
b PAR 18 regard less of the balance of risks statement , leaving the funds rate unchanged would come as a considerable surprise to market participants and would spark a sell - off in asset markets as participants reassessed the economic outlook and the committee ’s posture .
b PAR 18 the backup in interest rates and drop in equity prices would prompt still more caution on the part of loan officers and investors .


