a PAR 14 with this view , the committee might wish to issue a statement structured like that shown in alternative a .
a PAR 14 the committee could convey a sense of its concerns through a somewhat less sanguine assessment of the labor market in the rationale paragraph .
a PAR 14 the third sentence could drop the reference to other indicators pointing to improvement in labor markets and state simply that “
a PAR 14 new hiring has been disappointing . ” adding a clause to this sentence suggesting that “ . . .and
a PAR 14 resource utilization generally appears likely to remain somewhat below levels consistent with the economy operating at its productive potential for some time ” would underscore the committee ’s concern about economic slack .
a PAR 14 the committee ’s assessment could be amplified still more by modest revisions to its characterizations of the balance of risks .
a PAR 14 for example , the committee might note that “ the probability , though minor , of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months but likely exceeds that of a rise in inflation . ”   interest rates would probably move a bit lower following an announcement of this sort .
a PAR 14 equity prices might be buoyed somewhat if the statement was read primarily as reaffirming the fomc ’s resolve to foster sustainable output growth at a pace sufficient to eliminate economic slack .
a PAR 14 the rise in stock prices could be damped or even reversed , however , if investors took the statement as implying higher odds that the vigor of economic growth could wane over coming quarters .
a PAR 14 money and debt forecast 

b PAR 8 at its last meeting , the committee instructed the staff to include a more complete analysis in the bluebook of possible wording choices for the policy announcement ( see box entitled “ some general issues concerning statement language ”   .
b PAR 8 given current economic circumstances and the committee ’s january policy announcement , the staff viewed a change in the federal funds rate at this some general issues concerning statement language as is evident in the chart below , the words of the fomc ’s statements are important :   the overall tone and content of fomc statements can elicit significant immediate market reactions and sometimes may color the way market participants respond to subsequent incoming news and events .
b PAR 8 but while “ words matter ” in fomc communications , statement language should not be viewed as an independent instrument of monetary policy .
b PAR 8 presumably , the statement influences markets because participants believe that it conveys information that bears directly or indirectly on potential future policy actions .
b PAR 8 thus , at least over the longer run , the importance of statement language depends on its connection with observed policy actions .
b PAR 8 the likely market reaction to an fomc statement is hard to judge .
b PAR 8 when the policy rate is changed , one can forecast the market reaction by using surveys and interest rate futures to measure ex - ante market expectations .
b PAR 8 when only the wording of the announcement is changed , predicting the market reaction is much more problematic .
b PAR 8 there is no simple way to map alternative wording in fomc statements into basis - point equivalents to arrive at the analogue of a policy rate change .
b PAR 8 and even if this were possible , one would still need to know the language that the market expects .
b PAR 8 these caveats notwithstanding , the discussion in this bluebook does hazard speculations about likely market reactions to alternative fomc statements ; these represent the staff ’s best guesses of the likely market reactions , but the confidence intervals are quite wide .
b PAR 8 as economic circumstances change over time , the alternatives presented in future bluebooks will generally include analyses of potential changes in the stance of policy as well as in the proposed wording of the associated statements .
b PAR 8 meeting as sufficiently unlikely that this bluebook presents three draft fomc statements associated with an unchanged funds rate .
b PAR 8 these alternatives
b PAR 8 a , b , and c in table 1–are differentiated solely by their characterizations of the economy in the rationale paragraph and in the balance - of - risks assessment.3 alternative b 
b SENT -- shown in alternative b .

c PAR 12 given this assessment , the committee might wish to issue a statement structured like that in alternative c .
c PAR 12 the committee could convey some sense of increased wariness about inflation pressures in the final sentence of the rationale paragraph by noting simply that “ to date , increases in core consumer prices have been muted and inflation expectations remain contained , ” eliminating the forward - looking phrase “ and are expected to remain low ” that appeared in the january statement .
c PAR 12 this tone could be reinforced by modest revisions in the balance - of - risks assessment .
c PAR 12 for example , the committee could indicate a slight change in its inflation outlook by stating that “ the probability of a rise in inflation about equals that of an unwelcome decline in inflation . ”   lastly , while the committee may not be prepared at this meeting to dispense with references to “ patience , ” it might wish to add a sentence that hints that its patience is not unlimited .
c PAR 12 this could be accomplished with an insertion so that the revised passage read , “ the committee recognizes that the stance of monetary policy has been quite accommodative for some time .
c PAR 12 nonetheless , with inflation low and resource use slack , the committee believes that it can still be patient in removing its policy accommodation . ”
c PAR 12 market participants would be quick to notice these revisions and , in all likelihood , would interpret the changes as further steps aimed at clearing the way for an eventual return of the target federal funds rate to a more neutral setting .
c PAR 12 interest rates likely would move up on that reading , resulting in a concomitant dip in stock prices , but the retention of some reference to patience would likely diminish the odds of an outsized market reaction .
c PAR 12 alternative

