a SENT -- under alternative a , the existing federal funds rate target would be maintained at this meeting .
a PAR 11 while the committee may be convinced that a sustainable economic expansion is in place , it may be concerned that the pace of output growth will not be sufficiently vigorous to make satisfactory progress in reducing economic slack .
a PAR 11 in the greenbook forecast , for instance , resource slack persists for much of the next two years and core inflation drifts lower .
a PAR 11 if the committee finds this to be undesirable , it may consider leaving the funds rate target unchanged at this meeting , as in alternative a .   the resulting easing of financial conditions would presumably better ensure satisfactory growth in aggregate demand .   a relatively slow pace of firming may be warranted by concerns that aggregate demand growth could be restrained in coming quarters by a number of factors , including efforts on the part of households to raise their saving rates and the drag of the widening trade deficit , and especially so if such factors develop more quickly or forcefully than in the greenbook outlook .
a PAR 11 in addition , in the staff forecast , persisting slack and lower energy and import prices impart a slight downtrend to core inflation that could bring it to levels that the committee might find uncomfortably low , given the limits to conventional policy maneuvering posed by the zero bound to nominal interest rates .
a PAR 11 the “ measured pace ” language would not seem to be an obstacle to pausing the process of firming , in that futures rates indicate that financial market participants already anticipate inaction at one of the next three meetings—
a PAR 11 although apparently not this one .
a PAR 11 indeed , a pause at this time might be seen as having the benefit of ensuring that market participants do not come inappropriately to view the “ measured pace ” language as a promise to firm policy at every meeting .

b PAR 8 the committee , like the staff , may have read incoming data , on balance , as on the soft side , but it still may believe that the economic expansion will remain on track under current financial conditions , which incorporate market expectations of gradual policy firming .
b PAR 8 in such circumstances , the committee might find it appropriate to validate those expectations by tightening 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative b .   even with the two tightening steps that the committee has taken to date , the real federal funds rate is still close to zero and near the bottom of the range of equilibrium values estimated by the staff ( chart 5 ) .
b PAR 8 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 1 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 8 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 1 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 8 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 1 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 8 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 1 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 8 rationale 2 .
b PAR 8 the committee believes that , even after this action , the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative and , coupled with robust underlying growth in productivity , is providing ongoing support to economic activity .
b PAR 8 the committee believes that the accommodative stance of monetary policy , coupled with robust underlying growth in productivity , is providing ongoing support to economic activity .
b PAR 8 [ unchanged ] [ unchanged ] 3 . in recent months , output growth has moderated and the pace of improvement in labor market conditions has slowed .
b PAR 8 this softness likely owes importantly to the substantial rise in energy prices .
b PAR 8 the economy nevertheless appears poised to resume a stronger pace of expansion going forward .
b PAR 8 even though output appears to have regained some traction after moderating earlier this year , the pace of improvement in labor market conditions remains modest .
b PAR 8 after moderating earlier this year partly in response to the substantial rise in energy prices , output appears to have regained some traction .
b PAR 8 the pace of improvement in labor market conditions , however , remains modest .
b PAR 8 output appears to be regaining traction , and labor market conditions have improved modestly .
b PAR 8 inflation has been somewhat elevated this year , though a portion of the rise in prices seems to reflect transitory factors .
b PAR 8 despite the rise in energy prices , inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months .
b PAR 8 despite the rise in energy prices , inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months .
b PAR 8 inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months , but elevated energy prices continue to put upward pressure on costs and prices .
b PAR 8 assessment risk 5 .
b PAR 8 the committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few quarters are roughly equal .
b PAR 8 [ unchanged ] [ unchanged ] [ unchanged ] 6 . with underlying inflation still expected to be relatively low , the committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , the committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability .
b PAR 8 with underlying inflation still expected to be relatively low , the committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured .
b PAR 8 nonetheless , the committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth .
b PAR 8 [ unchanged ] [ none ] chart 5 actual real federal funds rate and range of estimated equilibrium real rates percent note : the shaded range represents the maximum and the minimum values each quarter of four estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate based on a statistical filter and the frb / us model .
b PAR 8 real federal funds rates employ the log difference of the core pce price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for inflation expectations , with the staff projection used for 2004q3 .
b PAR 8 quarterly actual real funds rate tips - based estimate historical average : 2.72 ( 1964q1 - 2004q2 ) ● 25 b.p . tightening current rate equilibrium real funds rate estimates ( percent ) 2002
b PAR 8 2004h1     2004q3                   august bluebook
b PAR 8 august bluebook
b PAR 8 august bluebook
b PAR 8 august bluebook
b PAR 8 statistical filter - two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data frb / us
b PAR 8 model - two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data treasury inflation - protected securities also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters .
b PAR 8 also employs the staff projection for the current quarter .
b PAR 8 adjusts the five - year forward , five - year real rate by an assumed term premium of 75 basis points .
b PAR 8 federal funds rate may be viewed as appropriate in the exceptional circumstances of last year but no longer warranted today .
b PAR 8 a modest further reduction in accommodation would also be consistent with a number of monetary policy rules included in chart 6 .
b PAR 8 at the same time , though , some forces evidently are still weighing on current and prospective economic performance in a manner that may incline the committee to be cautious about the extent and speed with which it removes policy accommodation .
b PAR 8 in particular , crude oil prices , while falling back somewhat in recent weeks , remain high and could continue to limit growth in aggregate demand .
b PAR 8 looking forward , fiscal policy is poised to shift from stimulus to restraint at the end of this year as the investment expensing provision expires .
b PAR 8 and recent news on spending for high - tech equipment has been less upbeat .
b PAR 9 with regard to the announcement of alternative b , the committee could again repeat the themes that the stance of policy remains accommodative even after the policy move and that this stance , combined with strong trend productivity growth , is supporting economic activity .
b PAR 9 however , the committee presumably will wish to modify the next few sentences of the announcement to reflect the tenor of recent data .
b PAR 9 one way of updating the key points in the discussion of real - side developments would be to hold that :
b PAR 9 “ after moderating earlier this year partly in response to the substantial rise in energy prices , output appears to have regained some traction .
b PAR 9 the pace of improvement in labor market conditions , however , remains modest . ”   in view of the recent string of relatively benign inflation reports , the committee might also wish to indicate that “ despite the rise in energy prices , inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months . ”   incoming data chart 6 actual and assumed federal funds rate and range of values from policy rules and futures markets percent percent shaded region is the range of values from rules
b PAR 9 1a , 2a , 4 , 5 , and 6 , below actual federal funds rate and greenbook assumption market expectations estimated from futures quotes values of the federal funds rate from policy rules and futures markets
b PAR 9 q2 rules with imposed coefficients rules with estimated coefficients memo computed using average tips and nominal treasury yields to date note : rule prescriptions for 2004q3 through 2005q2 are calculated using greenbook projections for inflation and the output gap ( or unemployment gap ) , except for 2004q3 of line 6 , which uses fomc projections .
b PAR 9 for rules that contain the lagged funds rate , the rule ’s previous prescription for the funds rate is used for 2005q1 and 2005q2 .
b PAR 9 it is assumed that there is no feedback from the rule prescriptions to the greenbook projections through 2005q2 .
b PAR 9 rules chart : explanatory notes in all of the rules below , it denotes the federal funds rate , bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four- quarter core pce inflation ,
b PAR 9 ( yt - yt * ) the staff estimate ( at date t ) of the output gap , b * policymakers ’ long - run objective for inflation , it-1 the lagged federal funds rate , gt-1
b PAR 9 the residual from the rule ’s prescription the previous quarter , ( yt+3|t
b PAR 9 -yt+3|t * )
b PAR 9 the staff ’s three - quarter - ahead forecast of the output gap , ( ) yt+3|t- )
b PAR 9 the staff ’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead , bt+3|t a three - quarter - ahead forecast of inflation , and ( ut+3|t
b PAR 9 -ut+3|t * ) a three - quarter - ahead forecast of the unemployment gap .
b PAR 9 data are quarterly averages taken from the greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter , unless otherwise noted .
b PAR 9 rule specification
b PAR 9 root - mean- square error 1988:1-
b PAR 9 2004:2 2001:1- 2004:2 rules with imposed coefficients 1 .
b PAR 9 baseline taylor rule it
b PAR 9 + 0.5(yt - yt
b PAR 9 aggressive taylor rule it
b PAR 9 + ( yt - yt
b PAR 9 first - difference rule it =
b PAR 9 ( ) yt+3|t- )
b PAR 9 + 0.5(bt+3|t - b * ) rules with estimated coefficients 4 .
b PAR 9 estimated outcome - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
b PAR 9 + 0.47 [ 1.07 + 0.97(yt-
b PAR 9 + 1.51bt]+ 0.48gt-1
b PAR 9 .24 .26 5 .
b PAR 9 estimated greenbook forecast - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
b PAR 9 + 0.28 [ 0.41
b PAR 9 + 1.08(yt+3|t - yt+3|t * )
b PAR 9 + 1.67bt+3|t ]
b PAR 9 estimated fomc forecast - based rule unemployment and inflation forecasts are from semiannual “ central tendency ” of fomc forecasts , interpolated if necessary to yield 3-qtr - ahead values ; ut * forecast is from staff memoranda .
b PAR 9 inflation forecasts are adjusted to core pce deflator basis .
b PAR 9 rule is estimated at semiannual frequency , and projected forward using greenbook forecasts .
b PAR 9 it = 0.49it-2
b PAR 9 2.10(ut+3|t-
b PAR 9 + 1.60bt+3|t ]
b PAR 9 .66 7 .   estimated tips - based rule bcomp5|t denotes the time - t difference between 5-yr nominal treasury yields and tips .
b PAR 9 sample begins in 1999 due to tips volatility in 1997 - 8 .
b PAR 9 it = 0.97it-1
b PAR 9 [ -1.18 + 0.63bcomp5|t ]
b PAR 9 # rmse calculated for 1999:1 - 2004:2 . would seem to support a renewed assessment that the risks to both sustainable economic growth and price stability are roughly balanced .
b PAR 9 and , as suggested above , the newly available evidence would also seem consistent with a judgment that policy accommodation can be removed at a measured pace .
b PAR 10 investors appear to have viewed incoming data over the intermeeting period as pointing to continued moderate economic expansion and limited pressures on inflation .
b PAR 10 this interpretation of the data , together with statements by the committee and individual policymakers , has suggested to market participants that the fomc almost certainly will firm another 25 basis points at this meeting , will again announce that the risks to sustainable growth and price stability are balanced , and will reiterate the view that policy can be tightened at a measured pace .
b PAR 10 accordingly , an action and an announcement along the lines of that proposed in alternative b should have little immediate effect in financial markets .
b PAR 10 the conditional nature of the statement makes it likely that investors will remain quite sensitive to key economic readings , such as reports on payroll employment and consumer prices , in the weeks that follow .
b PAR 10 should these data come in consistent with the staff forecast , interest rates may well edge lower on the building expectation that less cumulative policy tightening will be needed over the next few years than was previously anticipated .
b SENT -- as part of the rationale for leaving rates unchanged , the committee could employ the language for describing inflation developments that is proposed for alternative b , that is , “ despite the rise in energy prices , inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months . ”   even if the committee found good reason to pause in its process of firming policy , it might still perceive the risks to both growth and inflation as balanced .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the funds rate would similarly be raised 25 basis points , but the language of the statement would be consistent with the possibility of more rapid firming than is currently built into financial prices .
c PAR 14 the committee may be concerned that greater - than - usual uncertainty surrounds the outlook for the economy as spending moves out of its recent soft patch .
c PAR 14 if the committee put much weight on the possibility that growth will rebound sharply , it may believe that the scope of its future action is constrained on the upside by the “ measured pace ” language and may prefer to drop the last two sentences from the statement , as is considered in alternative c .
c PAR 14 monetary policy has been highly accommodative for an extended period , and as noted , the real federal funds rate is currently about zero and may well be considerably below its equilibrium level .
c PAR 14 indeed , given the decline in longer - term yields and increases in equity prices , financial conditions likely eased further over the intermeeting period .
c PAR 14 policymakers may be concerned that this monetary stimulus could be stoking a buildup of overall inflationary pressures or fostering misalignments of asset prices .
c PAR 14 as to the former , if the prospects for aggregate supply were described not by the greenbook baseline but by the “ less room to grow ” alternative simulation ( in which the nairu is higher and the labor force participation rate does not rise any further to augment labor inputs ) , then the committee might envision more forceful action sometime soon .
c PAR 14 as to the latter concern about asset prices , some could view the rapid rise in home values , which presumably is being fed in part by the low level of real interest rates , as a possible manifestation of misallocation of resources and a potential threat to financial stability ( see box ) .
c PAR 14 removing the “ measured pace ” language would capture market attention and result in a tightening of financial market conditions that would provide some restraint on asset prices and inflation .
c PAR 14 housing prices and monetary policy over the last several years , real home prices in the united states have increased sharply ( left panel ) .
c PAR 14 moreover , house prices have risen well above gains in rents , indicating either an expectation of future significant increases in rents , a lowered risk premium , or a decline in the risk - free rate of discount .
c PAR 14 in any case , and as shown in the right panel , the price - rent ratio has moved well above its typical range , potentially raising some of the same challenges for monetary policy posed by the stock market boom in the late 1990s .
c PAR 14 with the value of homes accounting for about a quarter of household assets , changes in their prices could well have an appreciable effect on spending .
c PAR 14 in addition , a significant misalignment of housing prices could prompt resource misallocations .
c PAR 14 housing prices , however , are much less volatile than equity prices , suggesting that these developments would tend to unfold slowly , if at all .
c PAR 14 such concerns have led some observers to argue that the fomc take more explicit account of perceived deviations of house prices from fundamentals in formulating monetary policy .
c PAR 14 in particular , advocates of such an approach generally argue that it may be desirable to tighten more aggressively at present than would otherwise be the case so as to contain or even reverse the perceived asset price misalignment and thereby avoid an especially sharp and painful asset price correction at some future date .
c PAR 14 an alternative view is that monetary policy should respond to perceived asset price misalignments only to the extent that they contain information about the outlook for inflation and output .
c PAR 14 moreover , the available empirical evidence demonstrates only that asset ( house ) prices are high compared with predicted values from models based on historical behavior .
c PAR 14 models , however , are imperfect , and consequently it remains a judgment call whether this deviation really represents a departure from fundamentals or is a manifestation of changed fundamentals not fully accounted for by the model .
c PAR 14 even if house prices were known with certainty to be overvalued , the appropriate policy response is not obvious .
c PAR 14 more aggressive policy tightening might reduce the demand for real estate and gradually bring home prices in line with fundamentals , although the appropriate degree of tightening would be difficult to calibrate .
c PAR 14 if the misalignment , however , were viewed as likely to correct itself in short order , it might well be appropriate to ease policy ( or tighten less aggressively ) to cushion the expected fall in demand .
c PAR 14 given such uncertainties , the standard prescription is that monetary policy should be driven primarily by economic fundamentals–
c PAR 14 the outlook for output and inflation
c PAR 14 even when home prices or other asset prices may not be .
c PAR 16 adoption of alternative c would surprise market participants and , given the precedent of the marked reaction when the “ considerable period ” sentence was modified in january , could prompt significant swings in financial prices .
c PAR 16 the path expected for the funds rate would rotate up , and market participants probably would become somewhat more chary about risk - taking .
c PAR 16 equity prices , in all likelihood , 3   this forecast implies that the debt ceiling will be reached in the middle of october 2004 .
c PAR 16 there are enough tricks in the bag of already - relied - upon accounting devices to suggest that the government ’s finances can continue uninterrupted until after the election .
c PAR 16 those accounting devices , however , would likely prove insufficient to the task by the end of november .
c PAR 16 would decline .
c PAR 16 interest rates would jump , although the rise in bond yields could be damped should equity prices fall steeply .
c PAR 16 money and debt forecasts 


