a SENT -- under alternative a , the existing stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting .
a SENT -- some slowing in the pace of improvement in labor market conditions , ” as in alternative a . 
a PAR 12 if the committee is concerned by the slow pace of progress in reducing resource slack projected in the greenbook or is worried that the forecasted rebound in growth could fail to materialize , it may prefer the unchanged policy stance of alternative a .   the sluggish consumption spending of late and the still - limited pickup in capital investment — even ahead of the expiration of the partial - expensing tax provisions at year - end — might be read by policymakers as suggesting that aggregate demand could remain soft for some time .
a PAR 12 such concerns about prospects for economic activity could intensify if the labor market report for july turns out to be surprisingly weak .
a PAR 12 the possibility that business and consumer confidence could be impaired by heightened terrorist threats might also be seen as posing some downside risk to spending and output .
a PAR 12 with inflation apparently moving down somewhat from its elevated levels of earlier this year and
a PAR 12 inflation expectations apparently contained , a brief hiatus in the process of firming policy might involve little risk of higher inflation and would permit the accumulation of additional data that could be helpful in assessing whether spending is rebounding in line with projections .
a SENT -- ”   consistent with its motivation for selecting alternative a , the committee might also wish to note that policy will be adjusted as appropriate to promote “ sustainable growth ” as well as price stability in the last sentence of the risk assessment section .

b PAR 9 although the recent pace of economic growth has been less vigorous than projected in the june greenbook , the committee may still judge that the economy is poised for significant expansion going forward , as in the current staff forecast .
b PAR 9 under this view , a gradual tightening of monetary policy should be consistent with a pace of growth sufficient to make some headway in reducing economic slack while keeping inflation well contained .
b PAR 9 if the committee subscribes to such an outlook , it may find it appropriate to continue paring the degree of monetary policy accommodation and thus be attracted to the 25-basis - point firming at this meeting of alternative b .   policy likely will need to be firmed considerably over time :   the real federal funds rate , measured as the difference between the nominal funds rate and lagged four - quarter core pce inflation , remains negative and below the estimates of its equilibrium value implied by selected staff models ( chart 5 ) .
b PAR 9 and given recent inflation trends , as well as the continued climb in crude oil prices in recent weeks , a further tightening of policy might be viewed as desirable to reduce the odds of an upturn in inflation expectations and more generally to help ensure that chart 5 actual real federal funds rate and range of estimated equilibrium real rates percent note : the shaded range represents the maximum and the minimum values each quarter of four estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate based on a statistical filter and the frb / us model .
b PAR 9 real federal funds rates employ a four - quarter moving average of core pce inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations , with the staff projection used for 2004q3 .
b PAR 9 quarterly actual real funds rate tips - based estimate historical average : 2.62 ( 1964q1 - 2004q2 ) alt .
b PAR 9 a equilibrium real funds rate estimates ( percent ) 2002
b PAR 9 2003     2004h1
b PAR 9 2004q3                   june bluebook june bluebook june bluebook june bluebook june bluebook
b PAR 9 statistical filter - two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data frb / us
b PAR 9 model - two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data treasury inflation - protected securities also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters .
b PAR 9 also employs the staff projection for the current quarter .
b PAR 9 core inflation does not rise above acceptable levels .
b PAR 9 at the same time , the committee may believe that a gradual pace of policy adjustment will likely be sufficient to foster achievement of its goals , particularly given the apparent persistence of economic slack , which should help restrain inflation .
b PAR 9 also , the recent data may be read as hinting that the sluggishness in spending of the past few months might prove more protracted than forecast in the greenbook , arguing for only a modest firming step at this meeting .
b PAR 9 estimated policy rules generally suggest that a such a tightening at this meeting would be consistent with the committee ’s past policy conduct ( chart 6 ) .
b PAR 10 in announcing implementation of alternative b , the committee would presumably want to modify its previous statement that “ output is continuing to expand at a solid pace ” to acknowledge both the softness in economic activity in the past few months and the potential effects on economic prospects of energy price developments .
b PAR 10 one way to accomplish this would be to note that “ although output growth has moderated in recent months , the economy appears poised to expand at a solid pace going forward absent significant further increases in energy prices . ”   with regard to recent price developments , core consumer inflation was subdued on a monthly basis in june although the twelve - month inflation rate was higher than a year earlier .
b PAR 10 the committee may wish to retain the sense of its previous announcement regarding inflation while not putting excessive weight on the latest monthly data by saying “ recent inflation data have been somewhat elevated , though a portion of the rise in prices evidently reflects transitory factors . ”   if the committee finds the staff projection of aggregate demand and supply conditions plausible , it could reiterate its previous assessment that the risks to the attainment of sustainable growth and price stability are balanced for the next few quarters .
b PAR 10 the committee might again wish to communicate a view of the likely pace of policy adjustment by stating that , “ with underlying inflation still expected to be relatively low . . .
b PAR 10 policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured , ” while also retaining the indication that it would tighten at a faster pace if necessary to maintain price stability .
b SENT -- the inflation sentence could well be similar to that under alternative b .   if fomc members are especially concerned that the recent weakness in spending might prove persistent , they might consider an assessment that risks to sustainable growth are weighted to the downside .

c PAR 15 if the committee sees the recent slower growth of aggregate demand as likely to be transitory but suspects that the pickup in core inflation could well be more durable than the staff anticipates , it might choose to raise the funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .
c PAR 15 fomc members may consider inflation already to be close to the top of an acceptable range and see several reasons to question the decline in inflation in the staff forecast .
c PAR 15 with inflation expectations remaining in a 2 to 3 percent range , well above the greenbook forecast , the committee may believe that underlying inflation has considerable momentum .
c PAR 15 also , 5 see “ a potential change in the wording of the risk assessment , ” memorandum to the federal open market committee from vincent reinhart , august 5 , 2004 .
c PAR 15 high energy prices may prove to be longer lasting than anticipated by the staff forecast and the markets , providing less downward pressure on overall inflation .
c PAR 15 policymakers may see less slack in prospect than in the greenbook projection , because they may perceive the economy as already close to its potential or the growth rate of potential output as lower than estimated by the staff .
c PAR 15 finally , committee members might be uneasy about inflation prospects if they place less weight on the most recent spending indicators and foresee more robust growth in aggregate demand than in the staff forecast , perhaps along the lines of the “ spending rebound ” scenario in the greenbook .
c PAR 15 in light of these considerations , the fomc may judge a 25-basis - point move at this meeting — which would leave the real funds rate in negative territory — as insufficient , whereas a 50-basis - point move would at least bring the real rate to around zero .
c PAR 16 with market participants interpreting a “ measured pace ” as implying at most 25-basis - point moves , policymakers probably would want to alter that phrase significantly or drop it from an announcement of alternative c .   while some policymakers might prefer not to provide guidance about the likely pace of policy change , they may be comfortable giving an indirect indication of its probable direction .
c PAR 16 if so , the last sentence of the announcement might read :
c PAR 16 “ in current circumstances , the committee believes that the existing degree of policy accommodation , if sustained over the next few quarters , could foster economic growth that is more likely to be above than below its long - run sustainable pace .
c PAR 16 similarly , with respect to the committee ’s goal of price stability , such an unchanged policy stance implies greater risks to the upside than the downside .
c PAR 16 given the explicit conditioning on the stance of policy in this assessment , a reference to the role of monetary accommodation in the first sentence of the rationale paragraph would be redundant .
c PAR 16 that paragraph might instead begin : “ the committee continues to believe that robust underlying growth in productivity is providing ongoing support to economic activity . ”   if the committee thinks that the “ soft patch ” in the economy is probably behind us and that conditions are in place for a robust snap - back , it might also want to state that output growth “ appears poised to resume a stronger pace going forward . ”   to underscore its concerns about the effect of energy price increases on the inflation outlook , the committee might want to say : “ although a portion of the rise in inflation this year appears to have been due to transitory factors , continuing and substantial increases in energy prices are putting persistent upward pressure on costs and overall prices .
c PAR 17 unless the employment report for july turns out to be exceptionally strong , market participants would be quite surprised by the combination of a 50-basis- point move and the announcement proposed under alternative c .   the assessment of upside risks to growth and inflation and the deletion of the “ measured pace ”   language would reinforce the sense that the trajectory of policy would be steeper than previously anticipated .
c PAR 17 market interest rates would likely increase sharply , while stock prices would drop and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would rise .
c SENT -- if that language were dropped on tuesday , the market reaction to the announcement of conditional upside risks could be fairly sharp , approaching that expected under alternative c , as market participants would probably conclude that the fomc no longer believed that policy tightening was likely to be gradual .

