a PAR 13 while the committee might find some encouragement in the stronger tone of recent economic data , it may not yet be convinced that the expansion has become self - sustaining and may still expect inflation to remain low .
a PAR 13 in early 2002 , for instance , the expansion appeared to be gaining traction for a time and market expectations about the onset of tightening were building , but the expansion subsequently faltered .
a PAR 13 if the committee believed that the case for tighter policy would likely require at least several more months of evidence , it might choose a statement fairly close to the one released following the march meeting , as in alternative a .   with investment spending still reported to be primarily for replacement rather than for expansion and with only one month of reasonably strong employment data in hand , the committee may not yet be confident that business gloom has really lifted all that much .
a PAR 13 indeed , with the impetus to both household and business spending from expansionary fiscal policy expected to wane over coming quarters and financial conditions having tightened considerably of late , some members may be concerned that growth could fall back more than in the staff projection .
a PAR 13 the recent uptick in inflation might be seen as primarily the result of temporary factors and , therefore , leaving open the possibility that the underlying trend in inflation could edge lower ( much as is discussed in the “ inflation reversal ” simulation in the greenbook ) .
a PAR 13 moreover , some committee members might see the level of inflation over the past year as at the low end of its desirable range over the longer term and so may not be averse to a modest step - up .   against this backdrop , the committee may continue to view downside surprises to inflation as more costly than upside surprises , implying that a cautious approach to monetary policy tightening remains appropriate .
a PAR 14 if the committee finds sufficient merit in the selection of alternative a , it could issue a statement like that shown in the corresponding column of table 1 . while the recent increase in inflation should be noted , the statement could indicate that the rise is likely to be transitory : “ although incoming inflation data have moved somewhat higher , core inflation is expected to remain low . ”   even in this view , the risks to the attainment of price stability related in the assessment of risks paragraph would presumably be balanced .
a PAR 14 however , with the vigor of the expansion seen as less certain and the upside risks to inflation less pressing , the committee might choose to retain with only minor adjustment the sentence indicating its belief that it can be “ patient in removing its policy accommodation . ”
a PAR 14 market participants think that the committee is likely to modify or drop the reference to patience in the statement at this meeting , and its retention would probably lead them to push back somewhat the expected timing of policy tightening .
a PAR 14 the resulting decline in market interest rates would likely spark a modest rally in stock markets but weigh on the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 14 money and debt forecasts 

b PAR 10 the committee has multiple opportunities in its statement to indicate that the odds of policy firming in the near future are higher than at the march meeting , as shown in the column labeled alternative b in table 1 .
b PAR 10 at the same time , it might also offer a reason in the rationale paragraph why it does not see the need to tighten immediately by noting that “ longer - term inflation expectations appear to have remained well - anchored . ”   with the risks to the outlook balanced and the economy potentially picking up steam as the gloom that weighed on business investment and hiring disperses , committee members may feel that it is now appropriate to drop the sentence referring to patience in removing policy accommodation .
b PAR 10 such a change may be seen as particularly desirable if the committee believes that investors ’ confidence that interest rates will remain low has been encouraging the development of financial market imbalances that could have adverse macroeconomic effects as they unwind .
b PAR 10 however , members may be concerned that eliminating any characterization of the committee ’s future action might lead market participants to build in outsized expectations about the speed with which policy accommodation will be removed , thereby augmenting the considerable tightening in financial conditions of the past few weeks .
b PAR 10 the committee could convey the sense that its current outlook was consistent with a gradual return to a neutral policy stance by providing assurance at the end of the assessment of risks paragraph that , “ at this juncture , with inflation low and resource use slack , the committee believes that policy accommodation can likely be removed at a measured pace .
b PAR 10 ” even with the inclusion of such a sentence , however , a statement along these lines would likely lead market participants to bring a bit closer in time the expected date of the commencement of monetary policy tightening .
b PAR 10 in response , interest rates would rise , stock prices likely would decline , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would tend to appreciate .

c PAR 11 if committee members were sufficiently confident that the expansion was now self - sustaining or saw the recent increase in core inflation as signaling an upturn in underlying inflation , then they might find an increase of ¼ percentage point in the federal funds rate at this meeting , as in alternative c , to be appropriate .
c PAR 11 the committee may view the advances in investment outlays , coupled with the more recent evidence that hiring is picking up , as suggesting that the tentativeness that had earlier marked business behavior has lifted .
c PAR 11 indeed , as increased hiring buoys incomes and consumer confidence , the resulting growth in spending may support faster gains in investment spending and employment than expected by the staff , implying a swifter erosion of resource slack .
c PAR 11 members may also be less confident than the staff that aggregate supply will continue to expand at a rapid pace and that the recent increases in energy and non - oil import prices will leave only a small imprint on inflation expectations .
c PAR 11 if so , the committee , like financial market participants , may see a significant risk that inflation could move higher , suggesting that the time has come to adjust policy .
c PAR 11 indeed , if the committee believes that expected inflation may rise , then it might see an increase in the target funds rate as necessary just to avoid a reduction in the real federal funds rate and a consequent easing of policy relative to measures of the equilibrium funds rate ( chart 5 ) .
c PAR 11 the argument for tighter policy would be strengthened to the extent that the committee wants to keep inflation near its recent lows over the longer term , rather than allowing some increase .
c PAR 11 while policy tightening might put some strains on financial markets for a time , committee members might not be convinced that the elevated uncertainty and financial market turbulence of 1994 - 95 is as relevant a precedent as some observers assert , in part because investors seem to expect that significant tightening will commence soon ( see box on “ lessons from the 1994 - 95 tightening cycle ” ) .
c PAR 11 chart 5 actual real federal funds rate and range of estimated equilibrium real rates percent note :
c PAR 11 the shaded range represents the maximum and the minimum values each quarter of four estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate based on a statistical filter and the frb / us model .
c PAR 11 real federal funds rates employ a four - quarter moving average of core pce inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations , with the staff projection used for 2004q1 and 2004q2 .
c PAR 11 quarterly actual real funds rate tiis - based estimate historical average : 2.61 ( 1961q4 - 2003q4 )
c PAR 11 ● current rate equilibrium real funds rate estimates ( percent ) 2002      2003
c PAR 11 2004q1     2004q2                   march bluebook march bluebook march bluebook march bluebook march bluebook statistical filter -
c PAR 11 two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data frb / us
c PAR 11 model - two - sided : based on historical data and the staff forecast - one - sided : based on historical data treasury inflation - indexed securities also employs the staff projection for the first and second quarters of 2004 .
c PAR 11 because the nipa data for the first quarter were not available until after the greenbook was published , this value could not be computed without employing an additional quarter of projected data .
c PAR 11 lessons from the 1994 - 95 tightening cycle the current policy environment is similar in some respects to that prevailing before the policy tightening in 1994 - 95 .
c PAR 11 in both cases , an initially sluggish expansion in employment was accompanied by a real federal funds rate that fell to near zero for a time .
c PAR 11 the nominal federal funds rate target , shown in the left panel on the next page , is currently 2 percentage points lower than at the start of 1994 , reflecting in part the net decline in inflation over the intervening ten years .
c PAR 11 the policy tightening that began in february 1994 sparked a period of financial market turbulence that caused serious difficulties for some financial institutions .
c PAR 11 this adverse outcome has raised concerns about whether similar volatility could follow a move to tighter policy this year .
c PAR 11 the seemingly outsized market reaction to the 1994 - 95 tightening reflected several factors .
c PAR 11 first , many market participants had not fully expected a policy tightening at that time and so were poorly positioned .
c PAR 11 second , investors considerably underestimated the ultimate extent of tightening , though part of that forecast error reflected the surprising strength of the economy after the tightening process had begun .
c PAR 11 ( the staff was surprised as well , and the greenbook forecast of the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 1994 fell about ¾ percentage point over the course of that year . )
c PAR 11 third , uncertainty about the timing and magnitude of future policy actions was high , particularly early in the tightening cycle .
c PAR 11 investors reacted to the changed economic and policy outlook by selling long - term securities to limit capital losses and hedge the lengthening durations of mortgage portfolios that resulted from higher interest rates .
c PAR 11 these portfolio adjustments at times took place over short periods of time , leading to volatile moves in long - term rates .
c PAR 11 as shown in the right panel , long - term yields increased almost as much as short - term rates early in the tightening cycle .
c PAR 11 to be sure , the historical record does suggest that changes in the direction of the policy rate tend to elicit a stronger market response than actions extending the existing trend in the policy rate .
c PAR 11 and the turbulence in financial markets last summer and fall may suggest that hedging flows will magnify the amplitude of any swings in longer - term interest rates .
c PAR 11 as a result , some firms with large interest rate exposures could face substantial losses when interest rates rise .
c PAR 11 that said , there are some signs that financial firms and markets may be able to handle policy tightening better than they did in 1994 .
c PAR 11 although the expected policy path is not as steep now as the actual tightening that took place ten years ago , it is nonetheless considerably steeper than that foreseen immediately before the first tightening in 1994 .
c PAR 11 even if interest rates do respond strongly to a move toward tighter policy , financial institutions appear better positioned to withstand the impact owing to improved risk - management practices .
c PAR 11 and , although the size of the mortgage market is now much larger , the recent run - up in interest rates has reduced prepayment rates enough to moderate the extent to which any further increase in rates will induce hedging flows .
c PAR 11 lessons from the 1994 - 95 tightening cycle ( continued ) 

