a SENT -- the announcement accompanying alternative a would indicate that policy accommodation had been substantially reduced and would hint at less tightening going forward .
a PAR 16 the committee may believe that the 2¼-percentage - point cumulative tightening over the past year implied by a 25-basis - point move at this meeting would amount to a substantial reduction in the degree of monetary policy accommodation and that , after thursday , the real federal funds rate may be within a notch or two of its sustainable level .
a PAR 16 as can be seen in chart 7 , a 25-basis - point step next week plus one more such action would bring the real funds rate close to the lower edge of the range of model - based estimates of the equilibrium real funds rate .
a PAR 16 particularly if the committee is averse to quick reversals in the direction of policy adjustment , it may be inclined to move relatively slowly after this meeting in order to allow more time to gauge the effects of recent policy actions and to avoid overshooting with its policy instrument .
a PAR 16 in this case , the fomc may be attracted to alternative a ’s combination of a 25-basis - point hike in the funds rate at this meeting and statement wording that hints that the committee could soon pause , at least for a time , in its process of policy firming .
a PAR 16 members might view such an indication as allowing for a smoother transition toward a reasonably sustainable policy stance .
a PAR 16 and with economic growth having slowed somewhat in the second quarter and
a PAR 16 investors ’ concerns about inflation apparently having diminished significantly in recent weeks , the committee may see little risk that such a signal would compromise its credibility regarding the pursuit of its price stability objective .
a PAR 16 if the committee saw a 2 percent inflation class
a PAR 16 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 21 of 42 target as appropriate , then , as shown in chart 5 of the previous section of the bluebook , monetary tightening going forward can be considerably more gradual than it has been over the past year .
a PAR 16 winding down the process of tightening , at least for now , would also presumably be favored to the extent that members read the net reduction in , and low level of , long - term yields as a signal that market participants harbored doubts about the continued robustness of economic expansion .
a PAR 17 the draft statement associated with alternative a could be explicit that “ the committee believes that the degree of monetary policy accommodation has been substantially reduced .
a PAR 17 ”   presuming that the fomc would again wish to indicate that robust underlying productivity growth was supporting the economic expansion , the announcement could follow that indication with “ nonetheless , growth in spending slowed somewhat in the spring ” while again acknowledging that labor market conditions apparently continue to improve gradually .
a PAR 17 with regard to prices , the statement could accentuate the positive by indicating that “ readings on inflation have been subdued in recent months , and longer - term inflation expectations have declined . ”   finally , the fomc could indicate that remaining policy accommodation can likely be removed at a measured pace .
a PAR 18 market participants continue to expect that the path of the intended federal funds rate will flatten out somewhat in the second half of the year , but market commentary and survey evidence suggest that investors do not anticipate that the fomc will overtly signal any such development next week .
a PAR 18 accordingly , a statement employing the draft wording shown in alternative a would likely produce a noticeable downward shift in money market futures quotes , a rally in bond and equity markets , and some depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 18 the extent of the rally , however , would likely be limited by the clear implication that some further tightening was still likely in prospect .
a PAR 18 policy uncertainty arguably could class i
a PAR 18 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 22 of 42 increase a little , as market participants might become a little less sure as to the timing and magnitude of remaining policy actions .

b SENT -- apart from updating the description of the current economic situation , the announcement associated with alternative b is little changed from that issued after the may meeting .
b SENT -- ( 13 ) the committee may see little reason to diverge at this point from its established precedent of measured policy firming and thus be attracted to alternative b .
b PAR 14 the announcement associated with alternative b would update the wording of the may statement in view of incoming data on spending , output , and employment but would leave the rest of the statement unchanged .   as shown in table 1 , the statement would indicate that “ growth in spending slowed somewhat in the spring , and energy prices have risen further .
b PAR 14 nonetheless , recent data suggest that the expansion remains solid and that labor market conditions continue to improve gradually . ”   regarding inflation , it would modify slightly the wording used in may to say that “ pressures on inflation have stayed elevated”—an indirect reference to even higher energy prices and slightly reduced economic slack — and delete the mention of pricing power , a phenomenon that appears to have received less attention of late .
b PAR 14 the recent evidence on long - term inflation expectations has been good , with readings from tips down appreciably over the intermeeting period and survey - based measures ticking down after rising a bit earlier in the spring .
b PAR 14 these circumstances might be seen as consistent with a reiteration of the view that “ longer - term inflation expectations remain well contained . ”   with events thus far unfolding broadly in line with
b PAR 14 the committee ’s expectations , it might again indicate that “ . . .
b PAR 14 with appropriate monetary policy action , the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal . ”   on the same logic , the committee might again be comfortable expressing an expectation that the removal of policy accommodation could likely proceed at a measured pace .
b PAR 14 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 20 of 42 

c SENT -- under alternative c , the committee would raise the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting , eliminate all forward - looking language , and make other significant changes to the announcement .
c PAR 19 if the committee , by contrast , has become more concerned about the potential for an upcreep in inflation in response to developments over the intermeeting period , then it may favor
c PAR 19 the 50-basis - point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative c .   the staff forecast for inflation has been revised up since the april greenbook in response to data pointing to a narrower output gap , higher labor costs , a narrower price markup , and — most importantly — substantial further increases in crude oil prices .
c PAR 19 indeed , far - futures oil prices , having risen even more steeply than spot prices in recent months , currently suggest that significant relief from elevated energy prices is unlikely .
c PAR 19 the committee may now see greater inflation risks than does the staff or find the inflation outcome in the greenbook to be unsatisfactory .
c PAR 19 if so , somewhat tighter money market conditions than assumed by the staff would seem to be in order .
c PAR 19 indeed , the policy rules presented in chart 8 , especially those based on an inflation target of 1½ percent , recommend substantial further tightening in coming
c PAR 19 months.8   and , as indicated in charts 5 and 6 , the projection - based optimal control exercises presented in the previous section suggest that , should the fomc wish to pursue an inflation rate of 1 percent , or to make more rapid progress in achieving a 1½ percent goal in the face of sluggishly adjusting expectations , the federal funds rate would need to be boosted considerably by the middle of next year .
c PAR 19 given the resilience that spending and output have shown to date in the face of higher energy prices , the committee might wish to pick up the pace of tightening , especially if it believes that the low level of long - term interest rates represents financial accommodation that has to be offset .
c PAR 19 the committee may also see an advantage in 8 the results of the policy rules for the third quarter of 2005 and beyond have generally been revised up since the april bluebook by ¼ to ½ percentage point , reflecting a narrower output gap and higher inflation rate — either estimated , actual , or projected , depending on the specification of the particular rule .
c PAR 19 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 23 of 42 chart 8 actual and assumed federal funds rate and range of values from policy rules and futures markets percent shaded region is the range of values from rules
c PAR 19 1a , 2a , 4 , 5 , and 6 below actual federal funds rate and greenbook assumption market expectations estimated from futures quotes values of the federal funds rate from policy rules and futures markets
c PAR 19 q1 rules with imposed coefficients rules with estimated coefficients
c PAR 19 memo note : rule prescriptions for 2005q2 through 2006q1 are calculated using current greenbook projections for inflation and the output gap ( or unemployment gap ) .   for rules that contain the lagged funds rate , the rule ’s previous prescription for the funds rate is used to compute prescriptions for 2005q4 and 2006q1 .
c PAR 19 it is assumed that there is no feedback from the rule prescriptions to the greenbook projections through 2006q1 .
c PAR 19 the tips - based rule is computed using average tips and nominal treasury yields to date .
c PAR 19 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 24 of 42 policy rules chart : explanatory notes in all of the rules below , it denotes the federal funds rate , πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four- quarter core pce inflation , ( yt - yt
c PAR 19 the staff estimate ( at date t ) of the output gap ,
c PAR 19 π * policymakers ’ long- run objective for inflation , it-1 the lagged federal funds rate , gt-1   the residual from the rule ’s prescription the previous quarter , ( yt+3|t
c PAR 19 -yt+3|t * )
c PAR 19 the staff ’s three - quarter - ahead forecast of the output gap , (
c PAR 19 ∆ yt+3|t- ∆yt+3|t * )
c PAR 19 the staff ’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead , πt+3|t a three - quarter - ahead forecast of inflation , and ( ut+3|t
c PAR 19 -ut+3|t * ) a three - quarter - ahead forecast of the unemployment gap .
c PAR 19 data are quarterly averages taken from the greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter , unless otherwise noted .
c PAR 19 root - mean- square error rule specification 1988:1-
c PAR 19 2005:1 2001:1- 2005:1 rules with imposed coefficients 1 .
c PAR 19 baseline taylor rule it
c PAR 19 0.5(πt - π
c PAR 19 .97 a 1.08a 2 .
c PAR 19 aggressive taylor rule it
c PAR 19 + ( yt - yt
c PAR 19 0.5(πt - π * )
c PAR 19 first - difference rule it =
c PAR 19 yt+3|t-∆ yt+3|t
c PAR 19 + 0.5(πt+3|t - π * ) .97a
c PAR 19 rules with estimated coefficients 4 .
c PAR 19 estimated outcome - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
c PAR 19 + 0.48 [ 1.23
c PAR 19 0.96(yt - yt * ) + 1.47πt]+ 0.51gt-1 5 .
c PAR 19 estimated greenbook forecast - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
c PAR 19 + 0.29 [ 0.66 + 1.05(yt+3|t
c PAR 19 -yt+3|t * )
c PAR 19 + 1.61πt+3|t ]
c PAR 19 estimated fomc forecast - based rule unemployment and inflation forecasts are from semiannual “ central tendency ” of fomc forecasts , interpolated if necessary to yield 3- qtr - ahead values ; ut * forecast is from staff memoranda .
c PAR 19 inflation forecasts are adjusted to core pce deflator basis .
c PAR 19 rule is estimated at semiannual frequency , and projected forward using greenbook forecasts .
c PAR 19 it = 0.47it-2 + 0.53 [ 0.40 !
c PAR 19 2.05(ut+3|t - ut+3|t * )
c PAR 19 1.57πt+3|t ] 7 .   estimated tips - based rule
c PAR 19 πcomp5|t denotes the time - t difference between 5-yr nominal treasury yields and tips .
c PAR 19 sample begins in 1999 due to tips volatility in 1997 - 8 .
c PAR 19 = 0.97it-1 + [ -1.23 + 0.68πcomp5|t ] .41b
c PAR 19 a rmse for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π*=1.5 .
c PAR 19 b rmse for tips - based rule is calculated for 1999:1 - 2005:1 .
c PAR 19 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 25 of 42 tightening policy in a relatively large , ½-percentage - point increment at this meeting if it is worried that the measured tightening of policy to date , and especially the fomc ’s repeated indications that measured tightening can likely continue , may be fostering a degree of complacency among investors about risks — including the risks of investing in housing .
c PAR 20 a number of modifications to the committee
c PAR 20 ’s statement would be required to accommodate the selection of alternative c .   for instance , the fomc might wish to delete the reference to “ robust underlying growth in productivity , ” given that actual productivity growth appears to have dropped sharply in the second quarter .
c PAR 20 although the staff believes that trend productivity continues to expand briskly , the committee might be sufficiently uncertain about that assessment to be uncomfortable continuing to assert strength in underlying productivity .
c PAR 20 as for aggregate demand , the committee could summarize recent developments by saying that “ recent data suggest that the underlying pace of spending growth remains solid despite elevated energy prices”—striking the prior reference to the slowing of growth in the spring — and could go on to mention that “ labor market conditions continue to improve , ” eliminating both “ apparently ” and “ gradually . ”
c PAR 20 the fomc could implicitly acknowledge the further run - up in energy prices and reduction in labor market slack by noting that “ pressures on inflation have picked up further in recent months , although measures of longer - term inflation expectations remain well contained . ”   as discussed in the april bluebook , the committee might also take this opportunity to eliminate the forward - looking language from the statement , dropping both the risk assessment and the reference to the measured pace of tightening .
c PAR 21 with nary a hint heretofore of an upshift in the pace of policy tightening , market participants would be shocked by the combination of a 50-basis - point increase in the funds rate at this meeting and the announcement suggested for alternative c . the statement would likely lead investors to conclude that the fomc expected to class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr   26 of 42 continue to tighten policy for some time
c PAR 21 —and , with the elimination of the measured pace language , to anticipate that at least some future policy moves could come in additional 50-basis - point increments .
c PAR 21 such a revision to policy expectations would likely trigger a sharp sell - off in fixed - income and equity markets and a rise in the foreign - exchange value of the dollar , although the increase in long - term yields could be limited should investors foresee that policy tightening might well lead to weakness in the economy and subdued inflationary pressures .
c PAR 21 the pairing of the language of alternative c with a 25-basis - point move would also catch investors unawares , probably leading them to ratchet up their expectations of policy firming considerably and prompting a sell - off in fixed - income markets .
c PAR 21 money and debt forecasts 

