a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would leave its target for the federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this meeting ; the statement would emphasize hurricane - related uncertainties and suggest that this was just a pause in the tightening process .
a SENT -- in contrast , paragraph 16 suggests wording changes to alternative a that would be consistent with an expectation of a more prolonged pause in firming .
a SENT -- lastly , the box at the end of this section entitled “ opening up the statement ” examines fundamental changes to the risk assessment that could be made to either alternative a or b.
a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would keep the target federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this meeting and use the statement to explain that it was merely deferring firming in light of the elevated uncertainties , and likely not ending the tightening cycle .
a PAR 16 another possible reason for holding the funds rate unchanged is that a longer pause in policy firming could be appropriate .
a PAR 16 committee members may be concerned that the widespread and severe damage to private property and infrastructure in the gulf region , the extended displacement of a large population , the sharp increase in consumer energy prices , and a potential significant drop in consumer confidence could well exert a more substantial drag on aggregate economic activity than in the staff forecast .
a PAR 16 such a possibility is illustrated in the greenbook ’s “ sentiment slump ” scenario and the scenario based on a pessimistic view of the effects of katrina .
a PAR 16 moreover , while the stance of policy may still be accommodative
a PAR 16 , class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 22 of 38 the extent of that accommodation has been reduced significantly by the committee ’s actions through august .
a PAR 16 thus , the committee may feel comfortable awaiting further opening up the statement the “ measured pace ” language , which has been included in the committee ’s statements for the past eleven meetings , has served to signal to market participants that the federal funds rate will be marched up steadily as long as policy accommodation remains in place .
a PAR 16 the committee may believe that this language has now outlived its usefulness for several reasons , independent of this meeting ’s outcome on the stance of policy .
a PAR 16 first , the 2½-percentage - point increase in the nominal federal funds rate since mid-2004 has placed the real federal funds rate near some model - based estimates of its equilibrium ( as shown in chart 5 ) .
a PAR 16 by that arithmetic , some members might be of the view that policy accommodation has been substantially removed and that the committee should halt the process of firming sometime soon .
a PAR 16 second , the devastation in the gulf region probably implies that more uncertainty attends the outlook , and this uncertainty is unlikely to be resolved soon , perhaps increasing the attractiveness of being more gradual in removing policy accommodation .
a PAR 16 third , the possibilities that elevated energy prices , on the one hand , could sap consumer confidence or , on the other , unanchor inflation expectations may require more nimble adjustments to the stance of policy than consistent with the “ measured pace ” language .
a PAR 16 in prior discussions of statement language , some have expressed a preference for providing signals about the future direction of policy only in unusual situations , if at all .
a PAR 16 in that view , guidance about interest rates , which seemed useful when significant disinflation was a risk and at the outset of policy tightening , is no longer useful when the committee is unsure about its actions at the next few meetings .
a PAR 16 the simple expedient , then , would be to drop rows 5 and 6 and any mention of the extent of policy accommodation in table 1 .
a PAR 16 others have argued , however , that providing information about the future direction of the federal funds rate helps the public make better - informed decisions , enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy .
a PAR 16 moreover , simply stating that the committee was not certain whether the next move in rates would be up or down would , on this view , be useful information to market participants .
a PAR 16 ( continued on next page ) class
a PAR 16 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 23 of 38 information on the effects of hurricane katrina , as well as of the cumulative tightening of policy to date , before resuming policy firming
a PAR 16 —even if that wait could be extended .
a PAR 16 such a view could be conveyed to the public by striking sentence 2 from the draft statement for alternative a .
a PAR 16 the statement could also drop the word “ action ” that now appears in row 5 in order to suggest that appropriate monetary opening up the statement ( cont . )
a PAR 16 one way of regaining flexibility about the range of future action while still providing such information would be to eliminate the “ measured pace ” language from the statement and move from the current practice of basing the risk assessment on appropriate policy to assuming explicitly that the current stance of policy will be kept unchanged for several quarters .
a PAR 16 under such an assumption , the assessments of the probabilities of lower or higher economic growth than is sustainable and of lower or higher inflation , along with an overall risk assessment if needed , can provide guidance about the future direction of policy .
a PAR 16 rows 5 and 6 of table 1 in both columns a and b could be replaced with the following formula : the committee ’s economic outlook is such that , if the federal funds rate were maintained at its current level for the next several quarters , output growth is [ less / as / more ] likely to be above [ as / than ] below its sustainable pace .
a PAR 16 inflation over the same period is [ less / as / more ] likely to increase [ as to / than ] decrease .
a PAR 16 as a result , the committee views the near - term risks to its dual objectives as [ tilted to the downside / balanced / tilted to the upside]. in any event , the committee is prepared to take the steps necessary to maintain price stability and sustainable economic growth .
a PAR 16 if the committee desires to convey the sense that the current stance of policy is unsustainably easy , it could set both toggle switches to their “ more ” setting .
a PAR 16 that is , it would tell the public that , if maintained for the next few quarters , a nominal funds rate of 3½ percent ( under a ) or 3¾ percent ( under b ) would likely foster a pickup in resource utilization and inflation .
a PAR 16 as both measurements would point in the same direction , the overall risk balance sentence could be omitted in this case with no harm to clarity .
a PAR 16 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 24 of 38 policy going forward would not necessarily involve near - term tightening , and refer to “ remaining ” policy accommodation in the first sentence in row 6 . money and debt forecasts 

b SENT -- under alternative b , the committee would boost the target 25 basis points to 3¾ percent ; the statement would note that the longer - term macroeconomic effects of the hurricane are likely to be limited .
b SENT -- ( 10 ) if the committee remains particularly concerned about heightened inflation pressures and sees little chance that hurricane katrina will have lasting and sizable adverse effects on aggregate spending and production , it may wish to tighten policy 25 basis points at this meeting , as under alternative b .
b PAR 11 as shown in table 1 , the proposed announcement associated with alternative b would indicate that “ output appeared poised to continue growing at a good pace before the tragic toll of hurricane katrina . ”
b PAR 11 it would go on to state that , while the hurricane will have adverse short - run economic consequences , including heightened uncertainty and market volatility , the longer - run prospects for the economy are not diminished .
b PAR 11 the statement would note that “ higher energy and other costs have the potential to add to inflation pressures , ” but would also indicate that “ . . .
b PAR 11 core inflation has been relatively low in recent months and longer - term inflation expectations remain well contained . ”
b PAR 11 it would assert that “ remaining monetary policy accommodation ” and robust underlying growth in productivity continued to support economic activity .
b PAR 11 the rest of the statement would repeat the measured pace language and the assessment that , with appropriate monetary policy action , the risks to growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal .
b PAR 13 at the august meeting , several participants noted that core pce inflation was running at the upper end of the range they considered to be consistent with price stability .
b PAR 13 since then , the staff has marked up its forecast of core inflation for next year about ¼ percentage point , to 2¼ percent .
b PAR 13 moreover , the edging lower of inflation thereafter in the projection owes importantly to the assumed gradual decline in energy prices .
b PAR 13 if the committee saw this inflation outcome as unacceptable or believed that such an expectation was likely to prove optimistic , then it might view the words of alternative b as too timid about the prospects for additional policy tightening .
b PAR 13 such a concern might well be intensified if significant odds were put on the possibility that inflation expectations could become unanchored in response to surging energy prices , perhaps in the manner discussed in the alternative simulation in the greenbook .
b PAR 13 the likelihood of more tightening than currently built into financial market prices could be conveyed to the public by shortening the wording for alternative b that appears in table 1 .
b PAR 13 in particular , the committee could give less weight to the disruptions from hurricane katrina by striking the second and third sentences and dropping the word “ remaining ” in row 3.8 
b SENT -- as in alternative b , the committee could note the adverse near - term effects of the hurricane on spending , production , and employment , but not include the sentence suggesting that the effects will be temporary .



