
b PAR 10 the committee might believe that a 25 basis point firming of policy at this meeting is appropriate for a number of reasons .
b PAR 10 in the staff forecast , output remains near potential , and core inflation , though boosted for a time by the indirect effects of higher energy prices , ends the projection period near 1¾ percent — a level that many members may see as compatible with their price stability objective .
b PAR 10 if the committee believes the greenbook forecast is plausible and acceptable , then it would probably find the 25 basis point policy firming at this meeting assumed in that projection to be attractive .
b PAR 10 put a bit differently , the committee may see the current constellation of class
b PAR 10 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 14 of 42 asset prices and interest rates in financial markets as likely to be consistent with output running near potential and inflation
b PAR 10 remaining contained .
b PAR 10 if so , then it might want to ratify market expectations of a further 25 basis point tightening at this meeting .
b PAR 10 of course , should the committee ’s outlook have changed significantly since the november meeting , it might wish to select a different setting for its policy instrument than assumed in the alternatives discussed below .
b PAR 11 the committee may favor the statement language of alternative b if it thinks that somewhat higher federal funds rates are likely to prove necessary to limit pressures on resources and promote price stability but also believes that this tightening phase could be ending fairly soon .
b PAR 11 the resilience of the economy in the face of hurricane - related disruptions , already limited margins of slack in resource markets , and the pressures on inflation from elevated energy prices may incline the committee to believe that additional firming will probably be necessary even after a 25 basis point move at this meeting .
b PAR 11 but the committee may be of the view that , with policy accommodation now significantly reduced ,
b PAR 11 the appropriate timing and extent of additional policy firming are becoming more uncertain .
b PAR 11 declines in energy prices and inflation expectations from their recent peaks may have eased members ’ concerns about the inflation outlook .
b PAR 11 and the real federal funds rate ( as measured using lagged inflation to proxy for inflation expectations ) is now within the range of staff estimates of its equilibrium value ( chart 5 ) .
b PAR 11 moreover , with a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting , the federal funds rate would be above the range of prescriptions from policy rules based on a target for inflation of 1½ percent ( chart 6 ) , and one more tightening would bring the rate to the top of the range that the rules would call for even in the second half of next year .
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 15 of 42 chart 5 equilibrium real federal funds rate percent 25 b.p .
b PAR 11 tightening current rate notes : the actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the quarterly average of the observed nominal funds rate and the log difference of the core pce price index over the previous four quarters .
b PAR 11 for the current quarter , the nominal funds rate used is the target federal funds rate as of the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 11 confidence intervals and bands reflect uncertainties about model specification , coefficients , and the level of potential output .
b PAR 11 the final column indicates the values for the current quarter based on the estimation for the previous bluebook , except that the tips - consistent measure and the actual real funds rate are the values published in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 11 improvements have been made to the frb / us procedures for projecting foreign economic conditions and domestic energy production in real time ; these procedures have also been applied to the estimate shown in the " previous bluebook " column ( revised up about 1/2 percentage point ) .
b PAR 11 short - run estimates with confidence bands short - run and medium - run measures actual real federal funds rate range of model - based estimates 70 percent confidence band 90 percent confidence band greenbook - consistent measure
b PAR 11 current estimate
b PAR 11 previous bluebook short - run measures large model ( frb / us )
b PAR 11 3.5 * 2.8 confidence intervals for three model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 1.1 - 4.2 ( 90 percent confidence interval ( 0.1 - 5.1 ( medium - run measures confidence intervals for two model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 1.4 - 3.2 ( 90 percent confidence interval ( 0.7 - 3.8 ( memo class
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 16 of 42 equilibrium real rate chart :
b PAR 11 explanatory notes the equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that , if maintained , would be projected to return output to its potential level over time .
b PAR 11 for the first three measures listed below , the short - run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model ’s projection of the economy .
b PAR 11 for the first two measures , the medium - run concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keep them equal thereafter .
b PAR 11 the tips - based factor model measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead .
b PAR 11 the actual real federal funds rate shown in the chart employs the log difference of the core pce price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for expected inflation , with the staff projection used for the current quarter .
b PAR 11 measure description single - equation model
b PAR 11 the measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single - equation model is based on an estimated aggregate - demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate .
b PAR 11 in light of this model ’s simple structure , the short - run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only on the recent position of output relative to potential , and the medium - run measure is virtually constant .
b PAR 11 small structural model the small - scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables : the output gap , the equity premium , the federal budget surplus , the trend growth rate of output , and the real bond yield .
b PAR 11 unlike the estimates from the single - equation model , values of the equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth , fiscal policy , and capital markets .
b PAR 11 large model ( frb / us ) estimates of the equilibrium real rate using
b PAR 11 frb / us—
b PAR 11 the staff ’s
b PAR 11 large - scale econometric model of the u.s . economy — depend on a very broad array of economic factors , some of which take the form of projected values of the model ’s exogenous variables .
b PAR 11 these projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the three - year horizon relevant for the short - run concept but are less sensible over longer horizons .
b PAR 11 thus , we report only the short - run measure for the frb / us model .
b PAR 11 greenbook- consistent measures of the equilibrium real rate can not be directly obtained from the greenbook forecast , because the greenbook is not based on a formal model .
b PAR 11 rather , we use the frb / us model in conjunction with an extended version of the greenbook forecast to derive a greenbook - consistent measure .
b PAR 11 frb / us is first add - factored so that its simulation matches the extended greenbook forecast ,
b PAR 11 and then a second simulation is run off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap .
b PAR 11 the medium - run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it requires a relatively long extension of the greenbook forecast .
b PAR 11 tips - based factor model yields on tips ( treasury inflation - protected securities ) reflect investors ’ expectations of the future path of real interest rates , but also include term and liquidity premiums .
b PAR 11 the tips - based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven - year - ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from tips yields as of the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 11 this forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three - factor arbitrage - free term - structure model applied to tips yields , nominal yields , and inflation .
b PAR 11 because tips indexation is based on the total cpi , this measure is also adjusted for the medium - term difference — projected at 40 basis points
b PAR 11 —between total cpi inflation and core pce inflation .
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 17 of 42 chart 6 actual and assumed
b PAR 11 federal funds rate and range of values from policy rules and futures markets percent shaded region is the range of values from rules
b PAR 11 1a , 2a , 4 , 5 , and 6 below actual federal funds rate and greenbook assumption market expectations estimated from futures quotes values of the federal funds rate from policy rules and futures markets q3 q4
b PAR 11 q3 rules with imposed coefficients rules with estimated coefficients memo note : rule prescriptions for 2005q4 through 2006q3 are calculated using current greenbook projections for inflation and the output gap ( or unemployment gap ) .   for rules that contain the lagged funds rate , the rule ’s previous prescription for the funds rate is used to compute prescriptions for 2006q2 and 2006q3 .
b PAR 11 it is assumed that there is no feedback from the rule prescriptions to the greenbook projections through 2006q3 .
b PAR 11 the tips - based rule is computed using average tips and nominal treasury yields to date .
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 18 of 42 policy rules chart : explanatory notes in all of the rules below
b PAR 11 , it denotes the federal funds rate , πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four- quarter core pce inflation , ( yt – yt
b PAR 11 the staff estimate ( at date t ) of the output gap , π * policymakers ’ long - run objective for inflation , it-1
b PAR 11 the lagged federal funds rate , gt-1   the residual from the rule ’s prescription the previous quarter , ( yt+3|t – yt+3|t
b PAR 11 the staff ’s three - quarter - ahead forecast of the output gap , ( δ
b PAR 11 yt+3|t – δyt+3|t * )
b PAR 11 the staff ’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead ,
b PAR 11 a three - quarter - ahead forecast of inflation , and
b PAR 11 ( ut+3|t – ut+3|t * ) a three - quarter - ahead forecast of the unemployment gap .
b PAR 11 data are quarterly averages taken from the greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter , unless otherwise noted .
b PAR 11 root - mean- square error rule specification
b PAR 11 1988:1- 2005:3 2001:1- 2005:3 rules with imposed coefficients 1 .
b PAR 11 baseline taylor rule it
b PAR 11 a 1.04a 2 .
b PAR 11 aggressive taylor rule it
b PAR 11 + ( yt – yt * )
b PAR 11 first - difference rule it = it-1 +
b PAR 11 0.5(δ yt+3|t
b PAR 11 – δ yt+3|t
b PAR 11 + 0.5(πt+3|t – π * )
b PAR 11 rules with estimated coefficients 4 .
b PAR 11 estimated outcome - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
b PAR 11 it = .51it-1
b PAR 11 + 0.49 [ 1.29 + 0.95(yt – yt
b PAR 11 + 1.45πt]+ 0.53gt-1 5 .
b PAR 11 estimated greenbook forecast - based rule rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial correlation in residual .
b PAR 11 + 0.29 [ 0.75 + 1.03(yt+3|t
b PAR 11 + 1.59πt+3|t ]
b PAR 11 + 0.38gt-1 6 .   estimated fomc forecast - based rule unemployment and inflation forecasts are from semiannual “ central tendency ” of fomc forecasts , interpolated if necessary to yield 3- qtr - ahead values ; ut * forecast is from staff memoranda .
b PAR 11 inflation forecasts are adjusted to core pce deflator basis .
b PAR 11 rule is estimated at semiannual frequency , and projected forward using greenbook forecasts .
b PAR 11 it = 0.48it-2
b PAR 11 + 0.52 [ 0.43 – 2.09(ut+3|t
b PAR 11 – ut+3|t * )
b PAR 11 1.56πt+3|t ] 7 .   estimated tips - based rule
b PAR 11 πcomp5|t denotes the time - t difference between 5-yr nominal treasury yields and tips .
b PAR 11 sample begins in 1999 due to tips volatility in 1997 - 8 .
b PAR 11 it = 0.97it-1 + [ –1.27 + 0.70πcomp5|t ]
b PAR 11 .40 b .41 a rmse for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π * = 1.5 .
b PAR 11 b rmse for tips - based rule is calculated for 1999:1 - 2005:3 .
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 19 of 42 
b PAR 12 the rationale portion of the statement for alternative b notes that the expansion in economic activity appears solid despite elevated energy prices and disruptions related to the hurricanes .
b PAR 12 the reference to policy accommodation has been dropped :   if the federal funds rate is seen as nearing its equilibrium value , the committee may no longer wish to suggest that policy accommodation is boosting growth .
b PAR 12 members may also want to take this opportunity to remove the reference to the support to economic activity provided by robust underlying growth in productivity .
b PAR 12 in assessing inflation , the committee may want to acknowledge the relatively benign core inflation readings in recent months and again indicate that longer - term inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 12 however , given the apparent underlying strength of aggregate demand , members may want to note that “ possible increases in resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the potential to add to inflation pressures .
b PAR 13 the assessment of risks portion of the statement for alternative b resolves some of the complications and tensions that have arisen in the current language .
b PAR 13 it starts by removing the arguably tautological statement that “ appropriate policy ” should keep the risks to sustainable growth and price stability balanced , and it also drops the indication that “ policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured . ”
b PAR 13 instead , the assessment notes that “ some further measured policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to both price stability and sustainable economic growth roughly in balance . ”
b PAR 13 the committee may find this formulation attractive because it simplifies the existing wording considerably but does not greatly change its message regarding the likely near - term path for policy .
b PAR 13 if the committee continues to expect that policy will be adjusted gradually , almost surely in increments of 25 basis points , then the retention of the word “ measured ” would seem appropriate .
b PAR 13 and the use of the word “
b PAR 13 some ” would suggest that the committee expects that the necessary amount of additional tightening is not large .
b PAR 13 given the class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 20 of 42 considerable uncertainty about the level of the equilibrium federal funds rate , members may no longer be confident that policy is accommodative , and so welcome the deletion of the reference to the removal of policy accommodation here as well as in the rationale section .
b PAR 13 this deletion might seem even more appropriate if members see a possibility that the federal funds rate will need to be raised above its equilibrium value in order to keep inflation contained .
b PAR 13 as in recent announcements , the committee might want to emphasize that policy actions will depend on evolving economic conditions .
b PAR 13 along these lines , the last sentence in the statement notes that “ the committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to maintain price stability and foster sustainable economic growth .
b SENT -- given the extent of the changes proposed for alternative b , it is difficult to be confident of how the new statement will be interpreted by investors .
b PAR 16 if the committee takes this view , then it might be inclined to retain some of the statement language used at its last meeting .
b PAR 16 such a statement could start by indicating that the economic expansion remains vigorous .
b PAR 16 given the strength seen in underlying aggregate demand and the possible upward pressures on inflation , the statement might continue to characterize the stance of policy as accommodative .
b PAR 16 the inflation discussion could note that “ relatively high levels of resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the potential to add to inflation pressures . ”   the reference to the relatively high levels of resource utilization , in contrast to the concerns about possible increases in resource utilization expressed in alternative b , would indicate greater concern about pressures on inflation arising from this source and might suggest that monetary policy now would be oriented particularly toward slowing growth in aggregate demand to a pace at or below that of potential output .
b PAR 16 the assessment of risks portion of the statement could again indicate that , with “ appropriate policy , ” the risks to both of the committee ’s dual objectives should be kept roughly balanced and that policy accommodation can be removed at a measured pace .

c SENT -- by contrast , alternative c retains much of the form as well as important elements of the content of the november fomc statement , including the characterization of policy as accommodative and the “ measured pace ” language .
c PAR 15 should the committee be particularly concerned about the inflation outlook and still see the stance of policy as accommodative , it may prefer alternative c .
c PAR 15 while energy prices have eased this fall , they remain much higher than a year ago , and other commodity prices have increased as well .
c PAR 15 and although labor costs have generally been well - behaved of late , the committee may believe that labor market slack has been essentially eliminated .
c PAR 15 aggregate demand has proven quite resilient in the face of higher interest rates and hurricane - related disruptions , and it will be boosted further in coming quarters by rebuilding in the gulf region .
c PAR 15 given this apparent momentum to economic activity , members may be concerned about the risk that the short - term equilibrium real federal funds rate could be considerably higher than most of the staff estimates and aggregate demand could significantly overshoot the economy ’s potential .
c PAR 15 moreover , in current circumstances the committee may be concerned that it will need to boost the federal funds rate to a level above its equilibrium if the temporary boost to inflation caused by the run - up in energy and other commodity prices begins to be built into expected inflation along the lines of the “ deteriorating inflation expectations ” alternative greenbook scenario .
c PAR 15 as a result , the committee may believe that it is premature to give a signal that the end of this policy tightening phase is in sight .
c PAR 15 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 22 of 42 
c PAR 17 release of the statement for alternative c would lead market participants to boost noticeably their expectations for policy tightening .
c PAR 17 as noted previously , investors appear to have put some odds on the committee dropping or modifying the “ accommodation ” and “ measured pace ” phrases at this meeting as a prelude to winding up this tightening phase .
c PAR 17 moreover , the concerns expressed about the “ relatively high levels of resource utilization ” would come as a surprise to investors .
c PAR 17 regarding near - term expectations , the retention of the “ measured pace ” language could lead investors not only to conclude that a quarter - point move in january was virtually certain but also to mark up appreciably the odds on a policy tightening in march .
c PAR 17 and , beyond that point , the anticipated path for policy would probably class
c PAR 17 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 23 of 42 steepen as well .
c PAR 17 reflecting the change in policy expectations , short- and intermediate- term interest rates would rise , stock prices decline , and the dollar appreciate .
c PAR 17 money and debt forecasts 

