a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting and indicate that it would likely stay its hand for at least one more meeting before deciding whether further tightening was necessary .
a PAR 20 if , in contrast , the committee is particularly concerned by the soft tone to the incoming data on spending , it might feel that the best course of action at this class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr   page 22 of 41 meeting would be to leave the stance of policy unchanged , as in alternative a .   with news on spending and prices pointing in different directions , the committee could combine such a policy move with statement language implying that policy would likely be on hold in the near term to await additional information , although policy firming was likely at some point down the road .   leaving policy unchanged at the current meeting would be consistent with the prescriptions from a number of simple and estimated policy rules ( charts 9 and 10   .
a PAR 20 indeed , most of those rules call for an easier policy than currently priced into financial markets , suggesting that the level of the federal funds rate may have already been brought up enough to prevent an unsustainable spurt in economic growth .
a PAR 20 staff estimates of equilibrium real interest rates indicate that cumulative tightening to date has effectively removed policy accommodation .
a PAR 20 given the lags in policy , the easing of pressures on resources expected to result from this prior tightening , together with the anticipated flattening out of energy prices , may be seen as likely to be sufficient to point inflation down toward an acceptable range .
a PAR 20 moreover , the committee may see significant downside risk to the outlook if it views the recent marked declines of indicators of housing activity as possible harbingers of a prolonged and sizable reduction in housing construction and household spending along the lines of the “ housing slump ” greenbook scenario .

b SENT -- under alternative b , the committee would tighten 25 basis points and signal that an additional tightening in august was possible .
b PAR 14 if the committee finds the staff forecast both probable and as desirable as can be achieved in current circumstances , it may choose to tighten policy 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative b .   a 25 basis point firming would raise the real federal funds rate somewhat above most of the staff
b PAR 14 ’s estimates of the equilibrium federal funds rate ( chart 8) , a moderately restraining stance of policy that might be viewed as appropriate given the worsening of the inflation outlook .
b PAR 14 such a firming might also be seen as necessary to contain the risk that the near - term bulge in inflation could become entrenched in expectations .
b PAR 14 in that regard , members might be heartened by the fact that the building market expectation of additional policy firming in recent weeks was associated with some apparent decline in inflation
b PAR 14 expectations— progress that they might be loathe to surrender by surprising investors with an easier- than - anticipated policy action .
b PAR 14 the current configuration of asset prices , however , might be judged as embedding too great a likelihood of policy tightening at the august meeting .
b PAR 14 if so , the committee would presumably seek to craft its statement to convey an assessment that an additional move in august was possible but perhaps not as likely as currently anticipated in financial markets .
b SENT -- ( 15 ) under alternative b , the rationale paragraph could indicate that economic growth appears to be moderating .
b PAR 16 market participants are somewhat more confident that the committee will tighten at its august meeting than the wording of alternative b suggests .
b PAR 16 as a result , investors would trim back their near - term policy expectations , and short - term interest rates would probably decline slightly .
b PAR 16 the policy surprise might add to expected volatility , as market participants became a little less sure of the predictability of the committee ’s behavior .
b PAR 16 the downward revision to expectations would tend to lower longer - term yields , but some of that decline might be offset by a backup in term premiums .
b PAR 16 stock prices would likely rally some , and downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar could emerge .

c PAR 17 the committee might instead desire a more forceful policy response to the deterioration in the inflation outlook and find some appeal in the 50 basis point tightening of alternative c .
c PAR 17 although measures of inflation expectations have edged lower on balance in recent weeks , they have risen since earlier this year , potentially adding momentum to actual inflation .
c PAR 17 moreover , resource utilization appears to be relatively high , and some policymakers have noted that inflation is already above a range they see as consistent with price stability .
c PAR 17 in these circumstances , the committee might be concerned by the risk that the recently higher readings on inflation could get embedded in inflation expectations along the lines of the “ rising inflation expectations ” alternative simulation in the greenbook .
c PAR 17 the committee may class i
c PAR 17 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 21 of 41 also favor a more sizable move now so as to make more rapid progress toward moving inflation lower .
c PAR 17 in the alternative policy simulation presented earlier , the pursuit of a 1½ percent inflation target requires additional tightening in the near term , especially so if inflation deviations receive a higher relative weight in the fomc ’s objective function .
c PAR 17 if policymakers believed that additional firming , beyond a 50 basis point policy move at this meeting , probably would be necessary , they may find it appropriate to indicate a fairly high likelihood that further tightening was in train .
c PAR 17 such an indication may be particularly appealing if firmer financial conditions were judged to be desirable to make satisfactory progress toward the committee ’s objectives .
c PAR 18 the rationale paragraph under alternative c could place more emphasis on the recent unwelcome pickup in inflation while noting that productivity gains and contained inflation expectations are restraining inflation .
c PAR 18 to signal that further tightening is likely , the risk assessment could indicate that additional policy action may be needed to reduce core inflation to a more desirable level .
c PAR 18 so that the committee would not become locked into additional tightening even if there were additional elevated monthly readings on core inflation , the assessment could specify that the reduction in core inflation was sought in the medium term and repeat that the extent and timing of firming would depend on the evolution of the economic outlook .
c PAR 19 the announcement of alternative c would lead market participants to revise upward their outlook for the path for policy , and short- and intermediate - term interest rates would rise as a result .
c PAR 19 longer - term interest rates could also rise , especially if investors concluded that the fomc was much more worried about underlying inflation than previously thought .
c PAR 19 stock prices would fall substantially , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would increase .


