a SENT -- the statements under all three alternatives would continue to emphasize that future policy action will depend on incoming economic data , although the wording of alternative a makes that more explicit .
a PAR 16 the nominal federal funds rate already lies at the top end of the range of recommendations from policy rules provided in charts 6 and 7 , and given the substantial cumulative tightening of monetary policy to date and the long lags in the effects of policy on the economy , members may be inclined to signal that the firming cycle has likely drawn to a close , as in alternative a .
a PAR 16 committee members may prefer this alternative if they see the current level of core inflation as roughly consistent with price stability or believe that the staff has overestimated the nairu or understated the degree to which inflation expectations are anchored , as discussed in alternative simulations in the greenbook .
a PAR 16 this alternative may also be favored if members are concerned about downside risks to the economy coming from , for example , a more pronounced cooling in the housing market than anticipated by the staff .
a PAR 16 in that regard , the market ’s expectation for the funds rate to decline modestly in 2007 might be interpreted as evidence of investor concern that the committee may tighten too much .

b PAR 10 if the committee agrees with the staff forecast and views the outcomes in this projection to be acceptable , then it may wish to raise the target rate a quarter point at this meeting and signal the possibility of some subsequent tightening , as in alternative b .
b PAR 10 the committee may believe that it has already brought the real federal funds rate near its equilibrium level , a perception consistent with the range of staff estimates shown in chart 5 .
b PAR 10 but the committee may also believe that inflation is running in the upper end of the range consistent with price stability , thereby making a higher real funds rate desirable .
b PAR 10 if the committee shared the staff assessment that resource slack had been about eliminated , then it might want to be especially vigilant concerning the risks to inflation from upside surprises in aggregate demand .
b PAR 10 more generally , if members view the current configuration of market expectations for policy and its consequences for asset prices as appropriate given the economic outlook , then they may wish to confirm these expectations by choosing this alternative .
b PAR 11 the rationale paragraph of alternative b begins by observing that the economy appears to have bounced back from the deceleration in the fourth quarter of class
b PAR 11 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4½ percent .
b PAR 11 the federal open market committee decided today to keep raise its target for the federal funds rate unchanged by 25 basis points to at 4½ percent .
b PAR 11 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4¾4½ percent .
b PAR 11 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4¾4½ percent .
b PAR 11 although recent economic data have been uneven , the expansion in economic activity appears solid .
b PAR 11 the slowing of the growth of real gdp in the fourth quarter of 2005 seems largely to have reflected temporary or special factors .
b PAR 11 economic growth has rebounded in the current quarter , and the underlying pace of expansion appears to be solid .
b PAR 11 resource utilization has risen further this year .
b PAR 11 some recent data and anecdotal information suggest that the housing market is moderating , which the committee believes will contribute to a slowing in economic growth to a more sustainable pace .
b PAR 11 the slowing of the growth of real gdp in the fourth quarter of 2005 seems largely to have reflected temporary or special factors .
b PAR 11 economic growth has rebounded in the current quarter , and the underlying pace of expansion appears to be solid .
b PAR 11 economic growth has rebounded in the current quarter , and the underlying pace of expansion appears to be solid .
b PAR 11 rationale 3 .
b PAR 11 core inflation has stayed relatively low in recent months and longer - term inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 11 nevertheless , possible increases in resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the potential to add to inflation pressures .
b PAR 11 in addition to increases in resource utilization , the elevated prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to add to inflation pressures going forward .
b PAR 11 as yet , however , the run - up in those prices has had only a modest effect on core inflation , ongoing productivity gains have held the growth of unit labor costs in check , and inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 11 as yet , the run - up in the prices of energy and other commodities has had only a modest effect on core inflation , ongoing productivity gains have held the growth of unit labor costs in check , and inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 11 still , increases in resource utilization , in combination with the elevated prices of energy and other commodities , have the potential to add to inflation pressures going forward .
b PAR 11 in addition to increases in resource utilization , the elevated prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to add to inflation pressures going forward .
b PAR 11 as yet , however , inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 11 the committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance .
b PAR 11 the committee judges that maintaining the federal funds rate at its current level will likely keep some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance .
b PAR 11 [ unchanged ] the committee judges that some further policy firming may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance .
b PAR 11 assessment of risk 5 .
b PAR 11 in any event , the committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives .
b PAR 11 nevertheless , future policy action will be determined by the evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 11 [ unchanged ] [ unchanged ] class
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 12 of 37 chart 5 equilibrium real federal funds rate percent 25 b.p . tightening current rate notes :
b PAR 11 confidence intervals reflect uncertainties about model specification , coefficients , and the level of potential output .
b PAR 11 the final column indicates the values for the current quarter based on the estimation for the previous bluebook , except that the tips - consistent measure and the actual real funds rate are the values published in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 11 short - run estimates with confidence intervals short - run and medium - run measures actual real federal funds rate range of model - based estimates
b PAR 11 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval greenbook - consistent measure current estimate previous bluebook short - run measures confidence intervals for three model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 0.9 - 3.9 ( 90 percent confidence interval -0.1 - 4.8 ( medium - run measures confidence intervals for two model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 1.4 - 3.2 ( 90 percent confidence interval ( 0.7 - 3.7 ( memo class
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 13 of 37 equilibrium real rate chart :
b PAR 11 explanatory notes the equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that , if maintained , would be projected to return output to its potential level over time .
b PAR 11 for the first three measures listed below , the short - run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model ’s projection of the economy .
b PAR 11 for the first two measures , the medium - run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter .
b PAR 11 the tips - based factor model measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead .
b PAR 11 the actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation , where the nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate , and realized inflation is given by the log difference between the staff ’s estimate of the core pce price index and its lagged value four quarters earlier .
b PAR 11 for the current quarter , the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 11 measure description single - equation model
b PAR 11 the measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single - equation model is based on an estimated aggregate - demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate .
b PAR 11 in light of this model ’s simple structure , the short - run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only on the recent position of output relative to potential , and the medium - run measure is virtually constant .
b PAR 11 small structural model the small - scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables : the output gap , the equity premium , the federal budget surplus , the trend growth rate of output , and the real bond yield .
b PAR 11 unlike the estimates from the single - equation model , values of the equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth , fiscal policy , and capital markets .
b PAR 11 large model ( frb / us ) estimates of the equilibrium real rate using
b PAR 11 frb / us—
b PAR 11 the staff ’s
b PAR 11 large - scale econometric model of the u.s . economy — depend on a very broad array of economic factors , some of which take the form of projected values of the model ’s exogenous variables .
b PAR 11 these projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the three - year horizon relevant for the short - run concept but are less sensible over longer horizons .
b PAR 11 thus , we report only the short - run measure for the frb / us model .
b PAR 11 greenbook- consistent measures of the equilibrium real rate can not be directly obtained from the greenbook forecast , because the greenbook is not based on a formal model .
b PAR 11 rather , we use the frb / us model in conjunction with an extended version of the greenbook forecast to derive a greenbook - consistent measure .
b PAR 11 frb / us is first add - factored so that its simulation matches the extended greenbook forecast ,
b PAR 11 and then a second simulation is run off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap .
b PAR 11 the medium - run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it requires a relatively long extension of the greenbook forecast .
b PAR 11 tips - based factor model yields on tips ( treasury inflation - protected securities ) reflect investors ’ expectations of the future path of real interest rates , but also include term and liquidity premiums .
b PAR 11 the tips - based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven - year - ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from tips yields as of the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 11 this forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three - factor arbitrage - free term - structure model applied to tips yields , nominal yields , and inflation .
b PAR 11 because tips indexation is based on the total cpi , this measure is also adjusted for the medium - term difference — projected at 40 basis points
b PAR 11 —between total cpi inflation and core pce inflation .
b PAR 11 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 14 of 37 last year .
b PAR 11 the discussion of inflation risks in alternative b is similar to that employed in the last statement , but goes into a little more detail .
b PAR 11 it is cautiously optimistic in its assessment of inflation pressures :
b PAR 11 inflation expectations remain contained , the pass- through of cost pressures has been limited , and productivity gains have kept unit labor costs in check .
b PAR 11 the statement nonetheless acknowledges that elevated prices of energy and other commodities and increases in resource utilization have the potential to add to inflationary pressures in the future .
b PAR 11 the reference to “ possible increases ” in resource utilization employed in the last two announcements is changed to “ increases ” in resource utilization , in response to the robust spending and labor market data received over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 11 the retention from the january statement of the indication that “ some further policy firming may be needed ” to keep the risks to the committee
b PAR 11 ’s objectives balanced provides the committee with considerable flexibility regarding subsequent policy decisions .
b PAR 11 however , if members wanted to signal that the end of the tightening cycle was likely very close , then they might prefer to state instead that “
b PAR 11 some modest additional policy firming may be needed .
b SENT -- the discussion of inflation risks does not reference the limited pass - through of cost pressures or ongoing productivity gains , as in alternative b , and instead simply concludes that “ as yet , however , inflation expectations remain contained . ”

c PAR 15 with its more hawkish rationale paragraph and balance of risks language
c PAR 15 , the adoption of alternative c would cause short - term interest rates to firm .
c PAR 15 longer- term interest rates might increase , especially if investors were to interpret the class
c PAR 15 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 16 of 37 announcement as signaling that inflation is a greater threat than they had previously believed .
c PAR 15 it seems likely that equity markets would sell off , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would appreciate .

