a PAR 15 if the committee judges that the risks to the attainment of its objectives are now roughly in balance , it may be attracted to the policy choice and wording of alternative a .
a PAR 15 the committee may see greater downside risks to economic growth than it did in june .
a PAR 15 among other developments , the incoming information on the housing sector may be viewed as suggesting the possibility of a more prolonged and sizable reduction in residential construction and spending than is currently anticipated by the staff , along the lines of the “ housing slump ” alternative greenbook scenario .
a PAR 15 the incoming data pointing to a slowing in economic growth may also have increased the committee ’s confidence that the recent elevated inflation readings are unlikely to class i
a PAR 15 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 21 of 39 be sustained .
a PAR 15 keeping the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent for some time would be roughly consistent with an optimal policy path suggested by a simulation of the frb / us model with a long - run inflation objective of 2 percent ( chart 7 ) .
a SENT -- in the risk assessment sentence of the announcement , the committee could merely point to the dependence of future policy adjustments on incoming information , as in the assessment proposed for alternative a .

b PAR 12 although recent rates of inflation , if sustained , would presumably be judged inconsistent with the maintenance of price stability , the committee might see the current stance of policy as likely to be sufficient to put core inflation on a downward track .
b PAR 12 if so , it might be inclined to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at 5¼ percent at this meeting while indicating in the statement that some additional firming might prove necessary , as in alternative b .
b PAR 12 the committee may agree with the staff assessment that core inflation is likely to decline gradually in coming quarters as the forces that have temporarily boosted inflation begin to unwind and the moderation in economic growth fosters an easing of resource pressures .
b PAR 12 maintaining 3 the central tendency for core pce inflation was 2¼ to 2½ percent for 2006 and 2 to 2¼ percent for 2007 .
b PAR 12 for real gdp growth
b PAR 12 it was 3¼ to 3½ percent for 2006 and 3 to 3¼ percent for 2007 , while for the rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter it was 4¾ to 5 percent for both years .
b PAR 12 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 12 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 12 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5½ percent .
b PAR 12 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5½ percent .
b PAR 12 economic growth has moderated from its quite strong pace earlier this year , partly reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing market and the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices .
b PAR 12 [ same as a ] [ same as a ] [ same as a ] rationale 3 .
b PAR 12 readings on core inflation have been elevated in recent months , owing in part to pass - through of increased energy and other commodity prices .
b PAR 12 however , inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , reflecting the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand , ongoing productivity gains , and contained inflation expectations .
b PAR 12 readings on core inflation have been elevated in recent months , owing in part to the pass - through of increased energy and other commodity prices .
b PAR 12 however , inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , reflecting contained inflation expectations and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand .
b PAR 12 readings on core inflation have been elevated in recent months , and the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 12 however , inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , reflecting contained inflation expectations and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand .
b PAR 12 readings on core inflation have been elevated in recent months .
b PAR 12 the moderation in the growth of aggregate demand and anchored inflation expectations should help to contain inflation in coming quarters .
b PAR 12 however , the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 12 in these circumstances , future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 12 although the committee expects inflation pressures to diminish gradually , it judges that some inflation risks remain .
b PAR 12 the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 12 [ same as a ] the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to foster a moderation in inflation pressures will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 12 assessment of risk 5 .
b PAR 12 [ none ] [ none ]
b PAR 12 [ none ] [ none ] class
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 12 of 39 june
b PAR 12 fomc statement 1 .
b PAR 12 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 12 recent indicators suggest that economic growth is moderating from its quite strong pace earlier this year , partly reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing market and the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices .
b PAR 12 readings on core inflation have been elevated in recent months .
b PAR 12 ongoing productivity gains have held down the rise in unit labor costs , and inflation expectations remain contained .
b PAR 12 however , the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 12 although the moderation in the growth of aggregate demand should help to limit inflation pressures over time , the committee judges that some inflation risks remain .
b PAR 12 the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 12 in any event , the committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives .
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 13 of 39
b PAR 12 the current policy stance would be consistent with prescriptions from the estimated forecast - based policy rule ( chart 5 ) as well as the first - difference rule with a long - run inflation objective of 2 percent ( chart 6 ) .
b PAR 12 ( see the box “ intercept shifts in empirical taylor rules . ” )   a pause at this meeting , after seventeen consecutive actions , might be seen as desirable in order to limit the risk of over - tightening and the adverse consequences for employment and growth .
b PAR 12 with the real federal funds rate in the range of model - based estimates of its equilibrium value ( chart 8) , the risk that deferring action for a brief time might significantly worsen underlying inflationary trends would seem to be modest .
b PAR 12 nonetheless , the committee may feel that elevated energy   and commodity prices , possible further increases in these prices , and high levels of resource utilization imply that the upside risks to inflation remain substantial and perceive only limited downside risks to the economic expansion , and so see intercept shifts in empirical policy rules
b PAR 12 chart 5 shows the projections of two empirical policy rules — specified in terms of either outcomes or forecasts of the output gap and core inflation — that have been estimated using quarterly data from 1988q1 to 2005q4 .
b PAR 12 in previous bluebooks , both of these rules involved a time - invariant intercept , essentially implying that the medium - run equilibrium real rate ( r * ) and the implicit inflation objective ( π * ) remained constant throughout the sample period .
b PAR 12 however , recent staff analysis indicates that a significant upward shift in the intercept of each empirical rule occurred in the late 1990s .
b PAR 12 such a shift could arise from either a 75 basis point rise in r * , a 1 percentage point decline in π * , or some combination of the two .
b PAR 12 the funds rate projections and confidence intervals shown in chart 5 incorporate these intercept shifts .
b PAR 12 the projections generated by the forecast - based rule are broadly similar to the expectations of market participants , while the outcome - based rule points to some additional firming .
b PAR 12 reflecting the possibility of an upward shift in the value of r
b PAR 12 * , this bluebook introduces an additional simple policy rule in chart 6 .
b PAR 12 for each specified value of π
b PAR 12 ( either 1½ or 2 percent ) , the new rule follows taylor ( 1999 ) with respect to the policy coefficients — which determine the responsiveness of the funds rate to movements in the output gap and core inflation — but specifies the value of r at 2.75 percent instead of 2 percent .
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 14 of 39 chart 5 information from estimated policy rules and
b PAR 12 financial markets percent actual and greenbook assumption outcome - based rule 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval forecast - based rule estimated policy rules percent actual and greenbook assumption market - based expectations 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval market expectations
b PAR 12 q4 estimated policy rules 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval market expectations 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval memo class
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 15 of 39 chart 6 policy implications of simple rules percent actual and greenbook assumption taylor ( 1993 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule with higher r first - difference rule 1½ percent inflation objective percent actual and greenbook assumption taylor ( 1993 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule with higher r first - difference rule 2 percent inflation objective
b PAR 12 simple policy rules taylor ( 1993 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule taylor ( 1999 ) rule with higher r first - difference rule memo class
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 16 of 39 chart 7 optimal policy paths under two inflation objectives 1½ percent inflation objective
b PAR 12 2 percent inflation objective percent federal funds rate percent equal weights less weight on unemployment objective federal funds rate percent
b PAR 12 five - year real interest rate percent five - year real interest rate percent civilian unemployment rate percent civilian unemployment rate four - quarter average percent core pce inflation four - quarter average percent core pce inflation class
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 17 of 39 policy rule charts : explanatory notes for the rules described below
b PAR 12 , it denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t , while the explanatory variables include the staff ’s estimate of trailing four - quarter core pce inflation ( πt ) , its forecasts of inflation two and three quarters ahead
b PAR 12 ( πt+2|t and πt+3|t ) , its assessment of the current output gap ( * t ty y− ) , its one - quarter - ahead forecast of the output gap (
b PAR 12 * 1| 1|t t t ty y+
b PAR 12 + − ) , its three - quarter - ahead forecast of annual average gdp growth relative to potential ( 4 4
b PAR 12 * 3| 3|t t t ty y+ + δ − δ ) , and the assumed value of policymakers ’ long - run inflation objective
b PAR 12 rule prescriptions are computed using dynamic simulations of the frb / us model , implemented as though the rule is followed starting at this fomc meeting .
b PAR 12 this quarter
b PAR 12 ’s prescription is a weighted average of the actual value of the federal funds rate thus far this quarter and the value obtained from the frb / us model simulations using the timing of this meeting within the quarter to determine the weights . except for backward - looking rules , it should be noted that prescriptions near the end of the greenbook horizon also depend on extended baselines .
b PAR 12 estimated rules :
b PAR 12 estimation is performed using real - time data over the sample 1988:1 - 2005:4 , and the specifications are chosen according to the bayesian information criterion .
b PAR 12 each rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in the intercept , specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments that occurred during the first three quarters of 1998 .
b PAR 12 confidence intervals , shown only for the outcome - based rule , are based on stochastic simulations of the frb / us model .
b PAR 12 the following table indicates the specification of each rule used for dynamic simulations and its root mean squared error over the sample
b PAR 12 1993:1 - 2005:4 .
b PAR 12 outcome - based rule
b PAR 12 1.17it-1 – 0.37it-2 + 0.20 [ 1.04 + 1.77 πt
b PAR 12 + 3.32 ( * t ty y− )
b PAR 12 ( * 1 1 t ty y− −− ) ]
b PAR 12 forecast - based rule
b PAR 12 1.16it-1 – 0.36it-2 + 0.20
b PAR 12 [ 0.89 + 1.75
b PAR 12 1|t t t ty y+ + −
b PAR 12 )   – 1.40 (
b PAR 12 * 1 1 t ty y− −− ) ]
b PAR 12 market expectations :   the expected funds rate path is based on quotes from fed funds and eurodollar futures , and the confidence intervals are obtained from options on those futures .
b PAR 12 simple rules :   the following table indicates the specification of each rule .
b PAR 12 taylor ( 1993 ) rule it
b PAR 12 = 2 + πt +
b PAR 12 ( * t ty y− ) taylor ( 1999 ) rule it
b PAR 12 = 2 + πt +
b PAR 12 + ( * t ty y− ) taylor ( 1999 ) rule with a higher r it = 2.75 +
b PAR 12 ( * t ty y− )
b PAR 12 first - difference rule it =
b PAR 12 it-1 + 0.5(πt+3|t
b PAR 12 + 0.5 ( 4 4
b PAR 12 * 3| 3|t t t ty y+ + δ − δ ) optimal - control policies :
b PAR 12 policymakers are assumed to minimize the weighted sum of squared deviations in inflation from the long - run objective , squared deviations in the unemployment from its natural rate , and squared changes in the federal funds rate .
b PAR 12 financial market participants are assumed to understand fully the model of the economy , the baseline economic projection , and the policy formulation process , implying model - consistent asset - price responses to policymaker actions .
b PAR 12 in contrast , households and firms are assumed to form their expectations using more limited information .
b PAR 12 for further information , see the memo to the committee , “ optimal - control monetary policies ” by michael kiley , thomas laubach , and robert tetlow , june 20 , 2006 .
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 18 of 39 chart 8 equilibrium real federal funds rate percent 25 b.p . tightening current rate notes :
b PAR 12 confidence intervals reflect uncertainties about model specification , coefficients , and the level of potential output .
b PAR 12 the final column indicates the values for the current quarter based on the estimation for the previous bluebook , except that the actual real funds rate is the value published in the previous bluebook .
b PAR 12 this bluebook introduces methodological changes in the computation of the tips - based estimate , and these changes account for a 10 basis point difference in the final column relative to the corresponding measure published in the last bluebook .
b PAR 12 short - run estimates with confidence intervals short - run and medium - run measures actual real federal funds rate range of model - based estimates
b PAR 12 70 percent confidence interval 90 percent confidence interval greenbook - consistent measure current estimate previous bluebook short - run measures confidence intervals for three model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 1.0 - 4.1 ( 90 percent confidence interval ( 0.1 - 4.9 ( medium - run measures confidence intervals for two model - based estimates 70 percent confidence interval ( 1.3 - 3.1 ( 90 percent confidence interval ( 0.7 - 3.7 ( memo class
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 19 of 39 equilibrium real rate chart :
b PAR 12 explanatory notes the equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that , if maintained , would be projected to return output to its potential level over time .
b PAR 12 for the first three measures listed below , the short - run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model ’s projection of the economy .
b PAR 12 for the first two measures , the medium - run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter .
b PAR 12 the tips - based factor model measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead .
b PAR 12 the actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation , where the nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate , and realized inflation is given by the log difference between the staff ’s estimate of the core pce price index and its lagged value four quarters earlier .
b PAR 12 for the current quarter , the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 12 measure description single - equation model
b PAR 12 the measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single - equation model is based on an estimated aggregate - demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate .
b PAR 12 in light of this model ’s simple structure , the short - run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only on the recent position of output relative to potential , and the medium - run measure is virtually constant .
b PAR 12 small structural model the small - scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables : the output gap , the equity premium , the federal budget surplus , the trend growth rate of output , and the real bond yield .
b PAR 12 unlike the estimates from the single - equation model , values of the equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth , fiscal policy , and capital markets .
b PAR 12 large model ( frb / us ) estimates of the equilibrium real rate using
b PAR 12 frb / us—
b PAR 12 the staff ’s
b PAR 12 large - scale econometric model of the u.s . economy — depend on a very broad array of economic factors , some of which take the form of projected values of the model ’s exogenous variables .
b PAR 12 these projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the three - year horizon relevant for the short - run concept but are less sensible over longer horizons .
b PAR 12 thus , we report only the short - run measure for the frb / us model .
b PAR 12 greenbook- consistent measures of the equilibrium real rate can not be directly obtained from the greenbook forecast , because the greenbook is not based on a formal model .
b PAR 12 rather , we use the frb / us model in conjunction with an extended version of the greenbook forecast to derive a greenbook - consistent measure .
b PAR 12 frb / us is first add - factored so that its simulation matches the extended greenbook forecast ,
b PAR 12 and then a second simulation is run off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap .
b PAR 12 the medium - run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it requires a relatively long extension of the greenbook forecast .
b PAR 12 tips - based factor model yields on tips ( treasury inflation - protected securities ) reflect investors ’ expectations of the future path of real interest rates , but also include term and liquidity premiums .
b PAR 12 the tips - based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven - year - ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from tips yields as of the bluebook publication date .
b PAR 12 this forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three - factor arbitrage - free term - structure model applied to tips yields , nominal yields , and inflation .
b PAR 12 because tips indexation is based on the total cpi , this measure is also adjusted for the medium - term difference — projected at 40 basis points
b PAR 12 —between total cpi inflation and core pce inflation .
b PAR 12 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 20 of 39 additional firming as more likely than easing in coming months .
b PAR 12 the committee may find communicating this posture particularly important if it were concerned that inaction at this meeting might lead investors to question its vigilance against inflation .
b PAR 13 under alternative b , the rationale paragraph in the statement would indicate that economic growth has moderated , noting the role of the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices and of the continuing cooling of the housing market .
b PAR 13 while acknowledging the elevated readings on core inflation , it would also cite the reasons to expect inflation to decline in coming quarters : contained inflation expectations , the cumulative effects of past policy firmings , and other factors restraining aggregate demand .
b PAR 13 in its assessment of risks , the committee would reiterate its judgment that some upside inflation risks remain and point to the possibility of additional firming
b PAR 13 should incoming information warrant such action .
b PAR 14 investors see about a one - third chance of a policy firming at this meeting and appear to anticipate a statement similar to that under alternative b .   as a result , the market reaction to implementation of this alternative would likely be fairly small .
b PAR 14 while short - term interest rates would decline somewhat , intermediate- and long - term rates , stock prices , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would change little .

c PAR 18 the committee may judge instead that an additional 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting , as in alternative c , is needed to bring the risks to the outlook for inflation and economic growth into better balance .
c PAR 18 a firming at this meeting might be appropriate if the staff ’s inflation forecast were seen as likely and generally acceptable but the committee wished to have slightly greater assurance that inflation would diminish in coming quarters .
c PAR 18 members might worry that inflation pressures could turn out to be a little greater than projected in the greenbook .
c PAR 18 the economy has proved quite resilient in the face of higher oil prices and tighter monetary policy over the past two years , and members may see economic growth as most likely to rebound from its sharply slower pace in the second quarter .
c PAR 18 in light of the recent upside surprises in price data , raising the federal funds rate at this meeting class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 22 of 39 might also seem desirable as a signal of the committee ’s resolve to foster a decline in inflation .
c PAR 18 even with the firming action under this alternative , the committee may judge that significant upside risks to inflation remain .
c PAR 18 however , some members may see the slowing in the expansion of aggregate demand of late as suggesting that the downside risks to growth have increased since the last meeting .
c PAR 18 the committee might see alternative c as bringing the risks to the attainment of its growth and price stability objectives roughly in balance and believe that , after implementation of such a policy choice , an easing and a tightening of policy are about equally probable .
c PAR 20 with market participants placing less than fifty - fifty odds on a policy move at this meeting , short - term interest rates would likely jump in response to implementation of alternative c .   however , the effect on intermediate - term interest rates would be considerably more muted , and long - term rates could even decline a little should the announcement persuade investors that inflation pressures were less intense than they had appreciated or that the committee was seeking a slightly lower long - term rate of inflation than they had previously perceived .   despite the rise in short - term interest rates , with policy tightening evidently having drawn to a close , class
c PAR 20 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 23 of 39 equity prices might rally .
c PAR 20 the foreign exchange value of the dollar might be little affected .

