a PAR 14 if the data released over the intermeeting period have caused members to revise their assessment of the distribution of possible outcomes for inflation and economic growth such that the risks are now thought to be more balanced , the committee may prefer the policy choice and wording of alternative a .
a PAR 14 the sharper adjustment in residential investment implied by the incoming data , combined with the continuing high level of inventories in the auto sector and the softer tone of recent spending and production indicators more generally , might be seen as increasing the downside risks to economic growth .
a PAR 14 members may also see some possibility that the recent easing of financial conditions , and the associated stimulus to economic growth , could be short lived , as illustrated in the “ tighter financial conditions ” scenario presented in the greenbook .
a PAR 14 moreover , the staff ’s projection of relatively sluggish near - term expansion might cause the committee to worry that such downside risks , if they materialized , could lead to a disproportionate slowdown in growth .
a PAR 14 at the same time , the committee ’s confidence that core inflation will decline may have been boosted by the improvement in some measures of core inflation , the downward revisions to data on increases in hourly compensation and unit labor costs earlier this year , and the absence so far of substantial renewed upward pressure on oil prices .
a PAR 14 the committee may also place some weight on the possibility that inflation could slow more quickly than in the staff forecast , either because the general persistence of inflation may have declined over the past decade or because the recent pickup in core inflation was associated importantly with increases in shelter costs , which might fall back relatively sharply if the ongoing adjustment of the housing market leads to a marked increase in the supply of rental accommodation .
a PAR 14 finally , as noted earlier , maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent over the next few quarters would be class
a PAR 14 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 18 of 40 broadly consistent with the committee ’s past behavior as captured in the estimated policy rules .
a PAR 15 to acknowledge the downside risks to growth , the statement accompanying alternative a would note that the ongoing adjustment of the housing market could have a “ more pronounced effect on growth in coming quarters than anticipated .
a PAR 15 ” the committee may also wish to recognize the slight decline in some measures of core inflation in recent months by noting that “ readings on core inflation have improved modestly since the spring . ”
a PAR 15 even so , the statement would stress that readings on core inflation “ remain elevated .
a PAR 15 ”   given the competing risks to inflation and growth , the risk assessment would simply note that “ in these circumstances , future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .

b SENT -- a would imply that the risks to economic growth and inflation were now judged to be broadly balanced , whereas alternative b would again indicate that the risks to inflation remained of greatest concern .
b PAR 12 in light of the recent data and the revision to the staff ’s projection for near- term growth , the committee may wish to make two changes to the discussion of economic growth in the policy statement accompanying alternative b .   first , the extent of the decline in housing activity in recent quarters means that it may now be more appropriate to refer to the cooling of the housing market as “ substantial .
b PAR 12 second , the statement could acknowledge that “ the recent pace of growth appears to have been somewhat more subdued than anticipated … ”   even so , the committee could note that “ the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace on balance over coming quarters . ”   the inclusion of the phrase “ on balance ” allows for the possibility that measured gdp growth in the current and subsequent quarter may be notably below trend before rebounding thereafter .
b PAR 12 with the prospects for inflation largely unchanged , there appears to be little reason to alter the inflation paragraph from that in the october statement .
b PAR 12 likewise , the statement could conclude by repeating the risk assessment from the previous statement .
b PAR 13 an announcement along the lines of alternative b is unlikely to prompt a significant market reaction .
b PAR 13 money market futures and options indicate that investors assign essentially no probability to a change in the target rate at the december meeting .
b PAR 13 and the desk ’s survey indicates that the majority of primary dealers expect that the accompanying statement will not differ significantly from the october announcement apart from some modest updating of the paragraph characterizing economic growth , though a minority anticipate language that points to some class
b PAR 13 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 17 of 40 downside risks to the growth outlook while still citing upside risks to inflation .
b PAR 13 although the statement proposed for alternative b does not explicitly recognize risks to growth , it seems consistent with the broad thrust of these expectations .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the committee would increase the target rate 25 basis points at this meeting and continue to emphasize the presence of upside risks to inflation .
c PAR 17 in contrast , the committee may now see it as unlikely that inflation will decline at an acceptable pace should the current stance of policy be maintained and hence judge it necessary to take further policy action , as in the 25 basis point firming of alternative c .   in particular , members may believe that the tightness in labor markets means that inflation may fail to decline , and could even rise , as illustrated in the “ greater wage acceleration ” scenario presented in the greenbook .
c PAR 17 in addition , class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 19 of 40
c PAR 17 the recent easing of financial conditions could impart significant stimulus to aggregate demand , augmenting pressure on resources .
c PAR 17 also , some members may judge that long - term inflation expectations are higher than would be consistent with an appreciable decline in inflation from recent rates and that monetary policy needs to tighten to help foster a reduction in these expectations .
c PAR 17 even if members think that the staff ’s forecast for core inflation to edge gradually lower is reasonable , they may consider the extent and pace of that expected decline , in which core pce inflation is projected to remain above 2 percent through 2008 , to be unacceptable , and hence see further policy firming as necessary .
c PAR 17 in the medium - term strategies presented earlier , the optimal policy path associated with an inflation objective of 1½ percent involves raising the federal funds rate to about 6 percent over the next year .
c PAR 19 the firming of the stance of policy envisaged under alternative c and the accompanying statement would come as a considerable surprise to the markets .
c PAR 19 investors would likely revise up sharply their expectations for the path of policy over class
c PAR 19 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 20 of 40 the next year or so .
c PAR 19 short- and intermediate - term nominal and real yields would rise markedly .
c PAR 19 longer - term nominal yields would likely rise by less or could even fall if investors concluded that the fomc had a lower objective for inflation than they had previously thought .
c PAR 19 with real rates higher , the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely rise , and equity prices would decline .
c PAR 19 money and debt forecasts 

