a PAR 21 in contrast , the committee might now be more concerned about the downside risks to growth , perhaps in part as a result of the sharp slowing estimated for the third quarter .
a PAR 21 if so , alternative a might find some support .
a PAR 21 in this alternative , the stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting , and the statement would indicate that the outlook was such that the committee did not have a clear view as to the likely future direction of policy .
a PAR 21 the committee might judge that there is a material probability that growth could prove weaker than in the staff forecast , perhaps reflecting a more pronounced housing market adjustment with more extensive effects on the rest of the economy , along the lines of the “ housing correction with spillovers ” scenario described in the greenbook .
a PAR 21 moreover , if the committee , like the staff , saw only sluggish near - term growth in activity and employment , it might be concerned that any additional adverse shocks to demand could have a disproportionate impact on the economy .
a PAR 21 maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent for some time would be broadly consistent with the committee ’s past behavior as captured in the estimated policy rules presented earlier .
a PAR 21 further , as noted in the medium - term policy strategies , the optimal policy path associated with pursuit of a 2 percent inflation objective has the federal funds rate remaining near current levels for the next year or so , before moving gradually lower thereafter .
a PAR 22 in order to point out the downside risks to growth , the statement accompanying alternative a could note that “ there is a risk that the slowdown in economic growth may become more pronounced . ”   to simplify the statement , the committee might want to remove from the discussion of inflation the reference to the high levels “ of the prices of energy and other commodities . ”
a PAR 22 indeed , the committee might see some merit in this simplification for the other alternatives as well .
a PAR 22 given the competing risks to inflation and growth , the risk assessment might simply state that “ in these circumstances , future policy adjustments will depend on class
a PAR 22 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 23 of 42 the evolution of the outlook for inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .

b PAR 17 if the committee judges that the news since its decision to hold the funds target unchanged in september has not significantly altered the outlook for inflation and activity , it might be attracted to alternative b .   a combination of below - trend growth and an edging lower in core inflation , as in the staff forecast , may be viewed as the best attainable outcome .
b PAR 17 with the real federal funds rate around the upper end of the range of model - based estimates of its equilibrium value as noted earlier , the committee might judge the current stance of policy as broadly consistent with achieving this result .
b PAR 17 moreover , from a risk - management perspective , modest policy restraint may be viewed as appropriately weighing the competing risks to inflation and economic growth .
b PAR 17 the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to drift higher and the tightness of the labor market , as evidenced by data on labor compensation and reports of difficulties in filing certain positions , may both be viewed as pointing to upside risks to costs and prices in the greenbook projection .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5½ percent .
b PAR 17 the moderation in economic growth appears to be continuing , partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market .
b PAR 17 economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third quarter , partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market .
b PAR 17 although there is a risk that the slowdown in economic growth may become more pronounced , the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace .
b PAR 17 economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third quarter , partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market .
b PAR 17 going forward , the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace .
b PAR 17 economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third quarter , partly reflecting a cooling of the housing market .
b PAR 17 going forward , the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace .
b PAR 17 rationale 3 .
b PAR 17 readings on core inflation have been elevated , and the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 17 however , inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , reflecting reduced impetus from energy prices , contained inflation expectations , and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand .
b PAR 17 readings on core inflation have been elevated , and the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 17 however , inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , reflecting reduced impetus from energy prices , contained inflation expectations , and the cumulative effects of monetary policy actions and other factors restraining aggregate demand .
b PAR 17 [ unchanged ] readings on core inflation have been elevated and the high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain inflation pressures .
b PAR 17 inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , but the extent and speed of that moderation is uncertain .
b PAR 17 in these circumstances , the committee believed that an additional firming of policy was appropriate to bolster progress towards achieving price stability .
b PAR 17 assessment of risk 4 .
b PAR 17 nonetheless , the committee judges that some inflation risks remain .
b PAR 17 the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 17 in these circumstances , future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 17 [ unchanged ] although the committee both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in inflation , it continues to view the risks to that outcome as remaining to the upside .
b PAR 17 the extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
b PAR 17 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 21 of 42 that the housing market could continue to deteriorate .
b PAR 17 holding the federal funds rate unchanged would permit additional information bearing on the prospects for growth and inflation to accumulate before making a move in either direction .
b PAR 19 money market futures and options indicate that investors remain confident that the committee will maintain the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent at this meeting .
b PAR 19 moreover , the desk ’s survey of primary dealers indicates that the accompanying statement is expected to replicate broadly the september announcement .
b PAR 19 the release of a statement along the lines of alternative b , therefore , would not prove a surprise , and the market reaction would likely be limited .

c PAR 24 if the committee expected higher inflation than the staff , or if it thought the greenbook forecast was broadly plausible but viewed inflation as remaining unacceptably high , it might wish to raise the target federal funds rate to 5½ percent at this meeting , as in alternative c .
c PAR 24 this alternative might be favored if the factors underlying the increase in core inflation in the first half of this year were viewed as likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff ’s projection , perhaps reflecting an increase in inflation expectations as illustrated in the “ higher expected inflation ” simulation presented in the greenbook .
c PAR 24 in that regard , the committee may be concerned that the current level of inflation expectations is already somewhat higher than the objectives cited by a number of policymakers .
c PAR 24 ( the box on the following page discusses various measures of inflation expectations . )
c PAR 24 even if the committee shares the staff ’s view that inflation is likely to decline gradually over the forecast , it may view the pace of that decline , in which core pce inflation is projected to remain class
c PAR 24 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 24 of 42 fall estimates of inflation expectations
c PAR 24 the level of inflation expectations is a key factor affecting monetary policy .
c PAR 24 estimates of such expectations can potentially be gleaned from surveys and financial asset prices .
c PAR 24 but given various technical and measurement issues , these indicators do not typically provide a clean read of investors ’ expectations of core inflation .
c PAR 24 the difference between yields on nominal treasury securities and those on tips contains information about investors ’ inflation expectations .
c PAR 24 however , a number of adjustments are necessary to translate the raw spread between nominal and real yields into an estimate of core pce inflation expectations : •
c PAR 24 first , the raw spread includes a liquidity premium .
c PAR 24 although the liquidity premium in tips is estimated to have declined notably over time , and by some recent calculations now stands very close to zero , this issue somewhat complicates any reading of inflation expectations .
c PAR 24 second , tips compensate investors for inflation with a two - and - a - half month lag , and hence raw prices partially reflect inflation that has already occurred .
c PAR 24 adjustments for these “ carry effects ” are straightforward but imprecise .
c PAR 24 third , tips payments are based on the non - seasonally - adjusted headline cpi , not the core pce .
c PAR 24 ’s forecasts of these two series can be used to translate between price indexes under the assumption that financial markets have a similar assessment .
c PAR 24 fourth , the raw spread includes an inflation risk premium .
c PAR 24 to separate inflation risk premiums from expected inflation , board staff employs a number of methods based on affine term structure models that are necessarily model dependent .
c PAR 24 after considering these adjustments and based on the most recently observed differences between yields on nominal treasury securities and tips , the staff ’s point estimates of expected core pce inflation from the very near term to ten years ahead vary between about 2.0 and 2.4 percent .
c PAR 24 however , the caveats associated with these adjustments suggest substantial confidence intervals around these point estimates .
c PAR 24 the desk ’s recent survey includes primary dealers ’ forecasts of quarterly core pce price inflation from the current quarter through the first quarter of 2008 , and the average projection across that horizon also ranged from about 2.0 percent to 2.4 percent .
c PAR 24 the monthly michigan survey does not refer to a specific price index , but regressions can be used to infer anticipated core pce inflation from the survey responses .
c PAR 24 the most recent reading of 2.9 percent over the next twelve months implies expected core pce inflation of approximately 2.6 percent over the same period .
c PAR 24 unfortunately , limited data preclude a similar mapping for longer - run expectations .
c PAR 24 finally , assuming the staff ’s presumed discrepancy between headline cpi and core pce , inflation expectations for 2007 and over the next ten years from the august survey of professional forecasters are about 2.4 and 2.1 percent , respectively .
c PAR 24 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 25 of 42 above 2 percent beyond 2008 , as unacceptably slow .
c PAR 24 in the medium - term strategies presented earlier , for example , bringing inflation below 2 percent in the next few years involves raising the federal funds rate to about 6 percent over the next several quarters .
c PAR 26 the tightening of policy envisaged under alternative c would catch market participants unawares .
c PAR 26 investors would revise up sharply their expectations for the path of policy over the next year or so .
c PAR 26 short- and medium - term nominal and real rates would rise markedly .
c PAR 26 nominal long - term yields would probably decline if market participants concluded that the fomc was seeking a steeper decline in inflation or had a lower objective for inflation than they previously thought .
c PAR 26 with real rates higher , the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely rise , and equity prices would probably decline , perhaps sharply .
c PAR 26 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 26 of 42 money and debt forecasts 

