a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee lowers the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent .
a PAR 23 against the backdrop of the recent sharp rise in interest rates and an already weak housing market and following a number of benign inflation readings , members may feel that the risk of unacceptably sluggish economic growth is now greater than the upside risk to inflation .
a PAR 23 if so , the committee might wish to lower the target federal funds rate by 25 basis points as in alternative a .
a PAR 23 the committee might view the recent backup in long - term yields as owing mainly to an exogenous rebound in term premiums from an abnormally low level .
a PAR 23 a rising term premium could dampen consumer and business spending and further weaken the housing market , a possibility explored in the greenbook alternative simulation “ tighter financial conditions . ”   in light of this possibility , the committee may believe that a lower federal funds rate is required to maintain the desired strength of aggregate demand .
a PAR 23 furthermore , with low unemployment not clearly boosting labor costs , the committee might think that the nairu could well be lower than currently estimated by the staff — as in the “ lower nairu ” greenbook alternative scenario .
a PAR 23 in this case , it may judge that a slightly more accommodative stance of monetary policy would run little risk of stoking inflationary pressures , especially since the real funds rate is now above the range of model - based estimates of its equilibrium .
a PAR 24 the statement in alternative a would continue to note that the economy seems most likely to expand at a moderate pace .
a PAR 24 but the committee may perceive the downside risk to that forecast emanating from the housing sector as being greater class
a PAR 24 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 25 of 42 than it was in may , owing to the backup in mortgage interest rates .
a PAR 24 accordingly , the draft language highlights this risk by placing it in a separate sentence at the end of the second paragraph and by pointing explicitly to “ ongoing weakness ” in the housing sector rather than “ ongoing adjustment . ”
a PAR 24 in the inflation paragraph , the reference to core inflation being elevated would be deleted and replaced by the assessment that core inflation has edged lower and is likely to remain moderate , implicitly placing considerable weight on the recent inflation news .
a PAR 24 the statement could conclude by noting that even after the 25 basis point easing , the downside risk to the committee
a PAR 24 ’s growth objective is roughly offset by the upside risk to its inflation objective , and that future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth .

b PAR 17 if the committee continues to view the current policy stance as likely to foster a return of output to potential and sustain the recent moderation of inflation , as in the staff forecast , then it may wish to choose alternative b , under which the federal funds rate is maintained at 5¼ percent .
b PAR 17 in the staff analysis underlying the greenbook forecast , the real federal funds rate is seen as near its equilibrium value ( chart 6 ) , suggesting that the current stance of policy is likely to reduce pressures on resources over time .
b PAR 17 additionally , the current target for the funds rate is very close to prescriptions for near - term policy obtained from optimal policy simulations with a 2 percent inflation goal ( chart 5 ) and some of the policy rules shown in chart 7 . while financial conditions tightened substantially over the intermeeting period , committee members may view this development as merely bringing forward an adjustment they had anticipated would occur before long , suggesting that no policy offset is necessary .
b PAR 17 the committee might also judge that maintaining its current policy stance for the time being would provide a reasonable weighting of the risks that weakness in housing could eventually have a more pronounced effect on overall economic activity and that the recent moderation in inflation could prove temporary .
b PAR 18 the draft statement accompanying alternative b reiterates the view that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters .
b PAR 18 following benign inflation readings , the draft language drops both the characterization of the level of core inflation as “ somewhat elevated ” and the prediction that inflation seems class
b PAR 18 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 22 of 42 likely to moderate from its current level .
b PAR 18 instead , the statement acknowledges the recent favorable information while expressing the view that the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain price pressures .
b PAR 18 this language would be intended to indicate that incoming data point to a slowing in core inflation but , given that monthly inflation readings are noisy , to suggest that the committee is awaiting more data before being satisfied that the moderation in inflation will be sustained .
b PAR 18 the statement would conclude by indicating that the committee ’s predominant policy concern remains the upside risk to inflation , with the language modified for consistency with the inflation paragraph .
b PAR 19 market participants do not expect a change in the funds rate at this meeting and judging from the desk ’s survey of primary dealers , most expect only minor modifications to the text of the accompanying statement .
b PAR 19 the revisions to the inflation paragraph under alternative b would likely garner considerable attention .
b PAR 19 investors would not overlook the deletion of the “ somewhat elevated ” language and would probably infer that the committee believes that its prior expectation for moderating core inflation is on track .
b PAR 19 particularly in light of the revisions to the risk assessment , markets might also interpret the overall statement as signaling that the committee finds 2 percent to be an acceptable level of core inflation .
b PAR 19 market participants would most likely mark down their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate .
b PAR 19 equities would rally , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would depreciate .
b PAR 19 long - term bond yields might edge lower , but that fall could be tempered , or even reversed , if the statement led investors to mark up their long - run inflation expectations .

c PAR 20 the large rise in real yields and the resilience of equity markets over the intermeeting period could be interpreted as an indication that investors have marked up their growth expectations , anticipate greater pressures on resources , and correspondingly expect a more restrictive stance of policy .
c PAR 20 indeed , judging from class
c PAR 20 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 23 of 42 options on eurodollar futures , investors now place about one - third odds on monetary policy tightening within the next year .
c PAR 20 under this interpretation , there is a risk that if investors come to perceive resource markets as taut and do not see the committee adopting a more restrictive policy , then inflation expectations could continue to rise .
c PAR 20 if the committee is especially concerned by this risk , it might prefer to tighten 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .   raising the funds rate at this meeting might be seen as the best way to mitigate the risk of an updrift in inflation expectations and reassure markets that the committee will indeed tighten as necessary to keep inflation contained .
c PAR 20 members may also be concerned about the possibility that increases in energy and commodity prices could lead to greater price pressures than currently foreseen by the staff .
c PAR 20 moreover , the optimal policy path shown in chart 5 indicates that policy would need to be tightened about 1 percentage point over the next year should the committee wish to bring inflation down to 1½ percent .
c PAR 21 the statement accompanying alternative c could reiterate the assessment that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace while reordering the clauses in order to underscore the view that the adjustment in the housing sector appears unlikely to derail the economic expansion .
c PAR 21 the inflation paragraph would de- emphasize the recent monthly price data and retain the explicit acknowledgement that the level of core inflation remains somewhat elevated , which many investors would read as a signal that the committee prefers a core inflation rate of around 1½ percent .
c PAR 21 the committee ’s concern about the inflation outlook could be stressed by noting that “ considerable uncertainty ” surrounds the assessment that inflation is likely to moderate and also by expanding the set of factors that could sustain inflation pressures to include the pass - through from higher prices of energy and other commodities .
c PAR 21 the statement could conclude by noting that , even after the increase in the funds rate , the committee ’s predominant policy concern remains the upside risk to inflation .
c PAR 21 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 24 of 42 

