a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee lowers the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent .
a PAR 16 even if the committee views the staff ’s central outlook as broadly plausible and desirable , members may judge that the risk of persistently weaker economic growth is unacceptably large .
a PAR 16 if so , the committee might wish to reduce the chance of a more pronounced economic slowdown by easing policy 25 basis points as in alternative a .   the recent disappointing data on home sales and inventories of new homes for sale may heighten concern that the extent of the ongoing adjustment in the housing market and associated spillovers to household and business spending could be greater than currently anticipated .
a PAR 16 moreover , members might worry that the economic fundamentals supporting the expansion going forward could be less robust than envisaged by the staff .
a PAR 16 in particular , the recent weakness in business spending may indicate that firms have grown less optimistic about future returns , which could continue to weigh on investment plans in coming quarters .
a PAR 16 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 18 of 36 relative pessimism could also conceivably color firms ’ hiring decisions
a PAR 16 —especially if the recent strength of employment is a lagging phenomenon reflecting labor hoarding — and so damp prospects for households ’ income and consumption .
a PAR 16 and financial conditions might turn less favorable ; in particular , long rates may move significantly higher if monetary policy is not eased as expected , and equity prices could fall short of the greenbook projection if corporate earnings slow as anticipated by the staff .
a PAR 16 the possibility that the fundamentals supporting the economic expansion might prove to be weaker than expected is explored in the greenbook alternative simulation “ business caution with financial spillovers .
a PAR 17 the rationale for alternative a would note that , although the economy seems most likely to expand at a moderate pace , the weakness in housing and capital spending implies a significant risk that economic activity might grow more slowly than anticipated .
a PAR 17 given the moderation in inflation in march , the committee might wish to switch the ordering of the clauses in the second sentence of the inflation paragraph to suggest a slightly more benign outlook for inflation .
a PAR 17 even so , with opposing risks to activity and inflation , the statement would indicate that the committee has no clear predilection concerning the likely future direction of policy and that policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook .

b PAR 13 in march , members apparently judged that maintaining the current target federal funds rate provided the best chance of fostering moderate economic growth and a gradual ebbing in core inflation .
b PAR 13 the incoming data over the intermeeting period have not altered significantly the staff ’s assessment of the prospects for growth and inflation .
b PAR 13 if the committee similarly has not substantially changed its assessment of the economic outlook , it may be attracted to alternative b , under which the federal funds rate is maintained at 5¼ percent and the statement continues to highlight concern about inflation .
b PAR 13 indeed , members may believe that both the upside and downside risks associated with maintaining the current target rate have diminished somewhat , given that the turmoil in the subprime market does not appear to have spread to the rest of the mortgage market or to have led to a more general retrenchment in financial markets and that readings on core inflation in march were more favorable .
b PAR 13 in the staff ’s analysis , the real federal funds rate is close to the greenbook - consistent measure of its equilibrium value , suggesting that the current stance of policy , if maintained , is likely to return output to a more sustainable level over time .
b PAR 13 while members may harbor concerns about the glacial pace of the projected moderation in core inflation , they may nevertheless prefer a patient class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 17 of 36 approach rather than incur the risks associated with fostering a more rapid disinflation in an environment of soft economic growth .
b PAR 13 in such circumstances , the committee might wish to be particularly clear that its patience does not represent a down- weighting of its long - run inflation objective .
b PAR 14 the statement accompanying alternative b could acknowledge that economic growth slowed in the first part of the year , but indicate that the economy still seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters .
b PAR 14 the statement would reiterate the risks to inflation posed by the high level of resource utilization and conclude , as in march , that the committee ’s predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected .
b PAR 15 investors see virtually no chance of a policy change at this meeting .
b PAR 15 likewise , given the revisions to the language in the statement in march , the desk ’s survey suggests that most primary dealers do not expect substantive changes to the statement .
b PAR 15 thus , implementing alternative b is likely to provoke little market reaction .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the committee tightens by 25 basis points , bringing the target rate to 5½ percent .
c PAR 19 in contrast , members might be concerned that inflation will not moderate as the staff expects , and that the costs of inflation persisting at elevated levels for a prolonged period could be substantial .
c PAR 19 if so , the committee might prefer to foster a more decisive slowing in inflation by tightening 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .
c PAR 19 price pressures might not yet be viewed as convincingly on a downward trend , and the softening in the dollar and increases in energy and other commodity prices since the march meeting may have heightened the committee ’s concerns about the inflation outlook .
c PAR 19 moreover , with the staff forecast suggesting that the pace of moderation in core inflation might be even slower than previously anticipated , members may perceive an increasing risk that long - run inflation expectations might drift up , as illustrated by the greenbook alternative scenario “ unanchored inflation expectations .
c PAR 20 the statement accompanying alternative c could reiterate the committee
c PAR 20 ’s judgment that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace .
c PAR 20 the committee ’s concern about the prospects for inflation could be stressed by noting that “ considerable uncertainty ” surrounds the judgment that inflation is likely to moderate .
c PAR 20 the sources of upside risk to inflation could be broadened to include reference to the recent increases in energy and other commodity prices .
c PAR 20 the statement could conclude by noting that , even after the policy tightening , the committee ’s predominant concern remains the upside risks to inflation .

