a PAR 24 while strains in financial markets have eased in recent weeks , functioning in some markets remains impaired .
a PAR 24 moreover , banks appear to have responded to the problems in funding markets , concerns about balance sheet capacity , and worries about the economic outlook by tightening terms and standards across a broad range of credit products .
a PAR 24 the committee might see these developments as reducing its modal outlook for aggregate demand relative to its expectations after its september action .
a PAR 24 alternatively , members might see the failure of credit market conditions to improve more significantly and incoming evidence of a steepening contraction in the housing sector as indicating that the downside risks to overall economic performance remain unacceptably large ; the potential implications of such factors are illustrated in the “ greater fallout from financial stress ” alternative scenario in the greenbook .
a PAR 24 either view might incline the committee to choose alternative a , which lowers the target federal funds rate 25 basis points .
a PAR 24 the committee might see easing policy another notch as an appropriate risk - management tactic , given the potential for particularly adverse outcomes , especially since a 25 basis point cut in the target federal funds rate would still be consistent with several policy rules ( chart 7 ) .
a PAR 24 given that inflation data have continued to be favorable , the committee may also believe that a policy easing would be consistent with its price stability objectives , especially if class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 27 of 44 members believe that , if necessary , they could act quickly in the future to reverse some or all of the easing implemented since september .
a PAR 26 investors currently see a 25 basis point policy easing at this meeting as the most likely outcome .
a PAR 26 thus , very short - term interest rates would likely change little in response to an announcement along the lines of that proposed under alternative a . however , because market participants expect more than 25 basis points of easing over the next few quarters , the balanced risk assessment , which would likely be seen as suggesting that further policy easing may not be forthcoming , could prompt a modest increase in intermediate- and longer - term interest rates .
a PAR 26 if participants interpreted the statement as suggesting reasonably good odds of sustainable growth given the easier stance of policy , the equity market might rally modestly and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could firm a bit .
a PAR 26 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 28 of 44 money and debt forecasts 

b SENT -- fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 22 of 44 inflation , while alternative b identifies the downside risks to growth as the greatest policy concern .
b PAR 20 given that the economy likely expanded at a pace noticeably above that of potential in the third quarter , the draft statement for alternative b describes recent growth as “ solid . ”   it also takes note of the fact that strains in financial markets have eased somewhat on balance .   while recognizing that the ongoing housing deterioration will likely weigh substantially on economic performance over the next few quarters , the statement points out that other sectors of the economy have proven resilient so far and that the global economy remains strong .
b PAR 20 the assessment of risk paragraph would note that downside risks to growth are a greater policy concern to the committee than inflation risks and then repeats the second sentence of the risk assessment from the september statement .
b SENT -- the paragraph regarding inflation is unchanged from september , as in alternative b .   if the committee believes that , after this move , the risks to growth would still be tilted somewhat to the downside while some upside inflation risks would remain , it could characterize the risks as balanced and continue by stating its intent to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects as in alternative b .

c SENT -- in contrast , alternative c states that the high level of resource utilization and recent increases in energy prices may put renewed upward pressures on both overall and core inflation .
c PAR 22 if the committee has a modal outlook similar to the greenbook projection that growth will return to potential in a few quarters and sees the risks around that forecast as relatively balanced , it might be inclined to choose alternative c .   under this alternative , there would be no change in the target federal funds rate , and the statement would indicate that downside risks to growth are balanced by upside risks to inflation .
c PAR 22 members might view the partial easing of the strains in financial markets since mid - summer as substantially reducing the likelihood that instability in the financial system will undermine economic performance , especially since there do not appear to have been significant spillovers to consumer and business spending as yet .
c PAR 22 indeed , the committee may see the improved financial market conditions and the outlook for growth near potential in 2008 and 2009 as close to the situation it envisioned after the september policy easing .
c PAR 22 even if the committee believes that ongoing financial strains pose downside risks to growth , it may also believe that those risks are partly offset by other factors .
c PAR 22 for example , committee members might be more optimistic than the staff regarding the persistence of the recent robust growth in business fixed investment and household consumption , along the lines of the “ greater momentum in aggregate demand ” alternative scenario in the greenbook .
c PAR 22 on the inflation side , the committee may have become more worried about the potential for renewed price pressures .
c PAR 22 while inflation readings have remained relatively benign , the committee might view the increase in energy prices over the past few weeks as likely to push up overall inflation in the near term , with potential adverse effects on inflation expectations .
c PAR 22 indeed , the committee may be concerned class
c PAR 22 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 25 of 44 by the increase since earlier this year of around 25 basis points in forward inflation compensation implied by tips securities .
c PAR 22 the weakening of the dollar may also be seen as posing a greater inflationary threat than foreseen by the staff .
c PAR 22 some members may also be worried that current levels of resource utilization are not sustainable and pose an upside risk to inflation .
c PAR 22 others may see particularly high costs to an increase in inflation from its recent readings and , partly for that reason , may have little expectation that a near - term easing of policy would be warranted .
c PAR 22 under these circumstances , the committee might judge that the current stance of policy is appropriate and believe that the downside risks to growth are balanced by upside risks to inflation .
c PAR 23 the proposed statement for alternative c indicates that economic growth was solid in the third quarter despite the ongoing housing correction .
c PAR 23 it then notes the easing in financial market strains and associates that development with a reduction in the downside risks to growth .
c PAR 23 the statement proceeds to affirm the expectation that the pace of economic expansion will slow in the near term but also that the substantial easing of monetary policy in september should help promote moderate growth over time .
c PAR 23 the statement makes no explicit mention of potential risks induced by tighter credit conditions .
c PAR 23 the wording on inflation begins by noting the improvement in inflation readings this year , as in the september fomc statement , but then cites the risk that the high level of resource utilization and recent increases in energy prices may put renewed upward pressures on overall and core inflation .
c PAR 23 the committee would indicate that the downside risks to growth are balanced by the upside risks to inflation and would reintroduce the indication that future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic growth .
c PAR 23 market participants would be quite surprised by the combination of no policy action at this meeting and the statement proposed for alternative c .
c PAR 23 they would likely conclude that the committee has no inclination to lower rates in the near term .
c PAR 23 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 26 of 44 given that high odds are placed on policy easing at this and coming meetings , both short- and long - term interest rates would likely increase considerably following the announcement .
c PAR 23 in response to the jump in interest rates , the foreign exchange value of the dollar might appreciate somewhat .
c PAR 23 although investors ’ views about economic prospects might be buoyed to some extent by an inference that the federal reserve anticipated sustainable growth at the current level of the federal funds rate , it seems more likely that market participants would mark down their expectations for economic growth .
c PAR 23 consequently , concerns about credit risk could increase , and equity prices could decline significantly .


