a PAR 18 in light of the improvement in the outlook for inflation during the intermeeting period and the persistence of downside risks arising from the substantial cooling of the housing market , the committee may now judge that the risks to the attainment of its dual objectives are roughly balanced , as in alternative a .   removing the bias toward further tightening would leave the committee better positioned to respond to the adverse effects of a possible further deterioration in residential construction or spillovers to consumer spending , along the lines of the “ more class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr   page 20 of 38 extensive housing correction ” alternative greenbook scenario .
a PAR 18 even absent such concerns , the expected path for inflation is somewhat lower than in december , implying that the real federal funds rate is poised to edge higher — a development that the committee may view as reducing the likelihood of policy tightening in the near term .
a PAR 18 furthermore , the committee might see core inflation as declining faster than in the staff forecast because , for instance , it perceives less tightness in labor markets than the staff ( a possibility suggested by the “ lower nairu ” alternative greenbook scenario ) , or because it is more optimistic about the disinflationary impetus from lower energy and other commodity prices and the stronger foreign exchange value of the dollar .
a PAR 19 the rationale portion of alternative a reflects the improved readings on economic growth but notes that the substantial cooling of the housing market remains a drag on the expansion .
a PAR 19 the paragraph on inflation observes that “ inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time , partly reflecting the recent decline in energy prices .
a PAR 19 to indicate the committee ’s overall assessment of balanced risks , the statement then simply points to the dependence of future policy adjustments on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .
a PAR 20 shorter - term interest rates would likely fall in response to an announcement along the lines of alternative a , and longer - term yields might follow suit .
a PAR 20 however , if investors read the statement as suggesting that the committee was willing to tolerate somewhat higher rates of inflation over the long haul , longer - term yields could be pushed higher and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely weaken .

b SENT -- if so , the committee may be attracted to alternative b , under which the federal funds rate would remain unchanged at 5¼ percent and the statement would continue to highlight concern about inflation .
b PAR 16 in light of the flurry of stronger - than - expected economic data over the intermeeting period , the rationale paragraph in the statement under alternative b could indicate that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace .
b PAR 16 it could drop the reference to “ a substantial cooling of the housing market ” and note , instead , that “ although some tentative signs of stabilization have appeared in the housing market , weakness in residential construction remains a drag on economic growth .
b PAR 16 with regard to inflation , the statement could acknowledge that readings on core inflation “ have improved modestly in recent months , ” but reiterate the committee ’s concern that inflation pressures remain .
b PAR 16 in its assessment of risks , the committee could essentially repeat the language from its statement in december .
b PAR 17 investors see virtually no chance of a policy change at this meeting , and the desk ’s survey suggests that primary dealers unanimously expect that the accompanying statement will note that the committee continues to see inflation as the dominant risk .
b PAR 17 consequently , implementation of alternative b is unlikely to elicit significant market reaction .

c PAR 21 in contrast , the surprisingly strong economic performance in the fourth quarter and continued tightness in labor markets might heighten the concern of some members that the current stance of policy is likely to produce insufficient progress on inflation .
c PAR 21 if so , the committee might judge that an additional 25 basis point increase class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 21 of 38 in the federal funds rate at this meeting , as in alternative c , is warranted .
c PAR 21 both the optimal policy path simulations of the frb / us model ( chart 6 ) and the first- difference rule ( chart 7 ) suggest that additional firming of policy should be undertaken if the committee wishes to achieve a long - term inflation objective of 1½ percent .
c PAR 21 with signs indicating that the housing market is stabilizing , the major downside risk to the outlook appears to be less pressing .
c PAR 21 in light of the economy
c PAR 21 ’s resilience over the past several quarters , the committee may also be concerned that the recent rebound in personal consumption expenditures may prove more persistent than in the staff projection ( as in the “ buoyant consumer spending ” alternative greenbook scenario ) , suggesting that the current stance of policy may not prevent the economy from stretching its resource use tighter .
c PAR 21 in these circumstances , and with core inflation uncomfortably high , a slight policy firming at this meeting may be seen as both appropriate to ensure that the modest improvement in core inflation in recent months is not reversed and as desirable to signal the committee ’s resolve to foster a further decline .
c PAR 22 under alternative c , the paragraph on economic activity in the rationale section notes the improvement in economic growth and observes that the housing market may be stabilizing .
c PAR 22 the announcement also points out that , despite modest improvements , readings on core inflation remain elevated and that the extent and speed of further moderation in inflation remains uncertain .
c PAR 22 in its assessment of risks , the committee would once again indicate that inflation risks are the predominant concern , but could omit the clause referring to “ the extent and timing of any additional firming ” in the last sentence .
c PAR 22 instead , the statement would note that “ in the near term policy firming is more likely than policy easing , ” which may better reflect the committee ’s views regarding the range of likely outcomes about the direction of policy , especially following a firming at this meeting and the change in other forward - looking language .
c PAR 22 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 22 of 38 
c PAR 23 the choice of alternative c would stun market participants , leading to an upward revision of their short - term outlook for the path of policy and a significant rise in short- and intermediate - term interest rates .
c PAR 23 longer - term rates would likely step up , especially if market participants became concerned that the inflation outlook is less benign than they had thought .
c PAR 23 that said , by reaffirming the committee ’s determination to reduce inflation , this policy action might also lead market participants to expect a more rapid decline in inflation and possibly even to revise downward their perceptions of the committee ’s long - term inflation objective .
c PAR 23 if this is the case , long - term forward rates might decline and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could strengthen . money and debt forecasts 


