a PAR 20 if the committee views the renewed deterioration in financial markets and the sharper contraction in the housing sector as presenting a particularly severe threat to the economic expansion , it might want to lower the target funds rate 50 basis points , as in alternative a .   a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate would put the real funds rate close to the greenbook - consistent measure of its equilibrium value ( chart 5   and thus , under the baseline projection , would be consistent with output returning to its potential in the medium term .
a PAR 20 a reduction of this size would also be broadly compatible with the optimal policy simulations with a 2 percent inflation objective ( chart 6 ) and some of the simple policy rules with that goal ( chart 7 ) .
a PAR 20 moreover , given the deterioration in term funding markets and increased concerns about balance sheet capacity and counterparty credit risk , the committee might worry about the potential for substantial additional tightening of banks ’ lending terms and standards , particularly if it viewed the arrangement of swap lines with foreign central banks and implementation of a term auction facility as unlikely to provide significant relief to funding markets .
a PAR 20 members might also see incoming evidence of a deepening contraction in the housing sector , as well as the apparent softening in business and consumer spending , as presenting unacceptably large downside risks to overall economic activity .
a PAR 20 by contrast , incoming core inflation data have continued to be moderate , and the committee may see the inflation outlook , and the associated risks , as essentially unchanged .
a PAR 20 in these circumstances , members might conclude that the weaker modal outlook for growth and significantly class
a PAR 20 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 24 of 43 increased downside risks warrant a 50 basis point policy move at this meeting .
a PAR 20 members may believe that the committee would be able to reverse the easing quickly if appropriate .
a SENT -- the draft statement for alternative a begins with a reference to the further intensification of the housing correction and recent weakening in business and consumer expenditures , and it also mentions increased strains in financial markets .

b PAR 17 if the committee judges that tighter financial conditions , higher oil prices , and soft incoming data point to a weaker economic outlook than previously anticipated , then it may deem a more accommodative stance of policy to be appropriate and ease policy 25 basis points , as in alternative b .
b PAR 17 the real federal funds rate is nearly half a percentage point above its downwardly revised greenbook- consistent equilibrium value and a touch above the upper end of the range of model- based estimates ( chart 5 ) , suggesting that a reduction in the target funds rate may be required to keep output near its potential .
b PAR 17 several policy rules ( chart 7 ) also suggest that further policy easing would be appropriate .
b PAR 17 moreover , members might be concerned about the risk of possible further deterioration in financial conditions , particularly in the run - up to year - end , or about the potential for significant spillovers from the housing sector to the broader economy .
b PAR 17 if so , they may judge that a policy easing at this meeting might help insure against such developments .
b PAR 17 at the same time , the committee may believe that the risks to inflation associated with a 25 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate are modest , given recent readings on core inflation and the current outlook for prices .
b PAR 18 after noting that “ economic growth is slowing ” and that “ strains in financial markets have increased , ” the statement for alternative b suggests that the 25 basis point reduction in the target funds rate , together with the two previous policy actions , is likely to help promote moderate growth over time .
b PAR 18 the statement notes the modest improvement in core inflation this year but indicates that “ some inflation risks remain . ”   rather than provide an explicit assessment of the balance of risks , the statement concludes that uncertainty around the outlook for growth and inflation has increased and that the committee will “ continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments ” and act as needed to foster its dual objectives .
b PAR 19 market participants appear to place about two - thirds odds on a 25 basis point reduction in the target at this meeting , with most of the remaining probability class
b PAR 19 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 23 of 43 assigned to a 50 basis point move .
b PAR 19 as a result , short - term interest rates would likely rise modestly in response to alternative b .   however , judging from the desk ’s survey of dealers , the statement under alternative b would likely be read as broadly consistent with market expectations for additional policy easing .
b PAR 19 consequently , longer - term interest rates , equity prices , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would be little changed .
b SENT -- it then notes that the outlook for economic growth has weakened somewhat and , unlike alternative b ,

c PAR 23 if the committee judges that the current stance of policy is likely to foster sustainable growth and acceptable inflation over time , then it might be inclined to choose alternative c .
c PAR 23 members might read the incoming macroeconomic data as broadly consistent with the outlook underlying its october policy decision , including the expectation for a period of relatively slow growth late this year and early next year .
c PAR 23 conditions in short - term funding markets have deteriorated notably over the intermeeting period and credit has tightened further for some households and businesses , increasing the downside risks to growth .
c PAR 23 however , the committee might feel that the adverse effects of such developments are likely to be limited and that its earlier easing actions — and perhaps arrangement of swap lines with foreign central banks and implementation of a term auction facility — provide ample insurance .
c PAR 23 moreover , members may be concerned that the unsettled state of financial markets may make it difficult for committee to quickly reverse further policy easing , even if the prospects for economic growth improve .
c PAR 23 and , although core inflation has stayed moderate and the baseline outlook for inflation may be viewed as acceptable , members may view elevated oil and other commodity prices and a weaker dollar as posing large enough upside risks to inflation to make an immediate reduction in the target funds rate problematic .
c PAR 23 under these circumstances , the committee might see maintenance of the current stance of policy for now as appropriate but judge that downside risks to growth have become the dominant concern .
c PAR 23 such an approach would leave the committee well placed to see whether financial market strains diminish significantly after year - end and to accumulate additional information on the outlook for growth and inflation before deciding whether further policy easing should be implemented .
c PAR 23 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 26 of 43 
c PAR 24 the proposed statement for alternative c acknowledges that economic growth appears to be slowing but indicates explicitly that the softening is broadly in line with what the committee had anticipated .
c PAR 24 it then notes the increase in financial market strains and acknowledges that they pose greater downside risk to growth , but suggests that the monetary policy easing already in place is likely to promote moderate expansion over time .
c PAR 24 the wording on inflation closely follows the october statement .
c PAR 24 the draft statement then suggests that downside risks to growth are the predominant concern and concludes with the language used in the august and earlier statements that “ future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic growth , as implied by incoming information .


