a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee decides not to set a target for the federal funds rate , states that it anticipates that weak economic conditions are likely to warrant funds rates near zero for some time , and makes clear that its main policy tool going forward will be actions that make use of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 34 of 60 alternative a 1 .
a PAR 30 against this backdrop , the committee may decide not to announce a target for the federal funds rate at this meeting and signal instead that its focus has shifted to the use of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet as an especially important policy tool going forward , as in alternative a .   the federal reserve ’s balance sheet has already class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr
a PAR 30 39 of 60 expanded considerably in recent months and will continue to expand in the immediate future as the federal reserve begins to purchase agency debt and mortgage - backed securities in volume , as already announced , and as the talf becomes operational .
a PAR 30 federal funds have often traded below 50 basis points since the october meeting even with the current target of 1 percent .
a PAR 30 in the last week , with the anticipation of further policy easing at this meeting , federal funds have traded persistently below 10 basis points .
a PAR 30 members may thus view a shift away from interest rate targeting and towards balance sheet management as essentially already under way .
a PAR 30 committee members may also be mindful that announcing a target that is not possible to achieve may create the impression that federal reserve policy is ineffective , even though powerful tools remain at the committee ’s disposal to address the deteriorating economic and financial situation .
a PAR 31 one such tool is communication .
a PAR 31 as incorporated in the third paragraph of alternative a , the committee could explicitly state that it anticipates that short - term interest rates will remain low for some time .
a PAR 31 members may be reluctant to enter into an unconditional commitment because they may feel that such a commitment would be too constraining should they need to tighten policy sooner than now expected .
a PAR 31 to mitigate this concern , the committee could phrase the commitment in implicitly conditional terms by indicating its anticipation that “ weak economic conditions are likely to warrant federal funds rates near zero for some time , ” as suggested in the statement accompanying alternative a .10   in addition , if members were concerned that even increased use of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet as a policy tool and a 10 the committee may feel that a commitment that is conditioned on too precise a set of events may also be undesirable because , in the future , a need to tighten policy may arise well before those specific events materialize .
a PAR 31 the proposed sentence makes clear in broad terms that the commitment is not unconditional ( because the expectation of very low rates is based on “ weak economic conditions ” ) , but at the same time the condition is cast in terms broad enough that it likely will not constrain the committee ’s future decisions .
a PAR 31 the length of the commitment ( “ for some time ” ) is described in similarly broad terms for the same reason .
a PAR 31 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 40 of 60 commitment to keep interest rates low for some time might not be sufficient to counter deflationary pressures , the committee could explicitly state , as indicated in the bracketed sentence , that it will seek to achieve a rate of inflation of about 2 percent in the medium term , in order to buoy inflation expectations .
a PAR 31 higher inflation expectations , in turn , would reduce real interest rates and so support economic activity .
a PAR 32 the statement suggested for alternative a begins by acknowledging the further weakening of the outlook for economic activity rather than with a sentence about the federal funds rate .
a PAR 32 this departure from the standard structure of the fomc statement is intended both to emphasize that the focus of the committee has shifted away from the target federal funds rate and to provide a clear rationale for that shift .
a PAR 32 the second paragraph notes the weakening of inflationary pressures and the risk that inflation could decline for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability .
a PAR 32 as noted above , members may wish to conclude that paragraph with the sentence ,
a PAR 32 “ in support of its dual mandate , the committee will seek to achieve a rate of inflation , as measured by the price index of personal consumption expenditures , of about 2 percent in the medium term . ”   by using the words “ seek to achieve ” and “ in the medium term , ” the committee would acknowledge that it may not be possible to maintain inflation at the desired level over the specified period , but the statement would nonetheless signal the committee ’s policy objective .
a PAR 32 if members were uncomfortable with taking such a step at this meeting , they could simply omit that sentence from the statement .
a PAR 32 the third paragraph notes the committee ’s decision not to set a specific target for the federal funds rate , acknowledges that the federal funds rate has already declined to very low levels , and states the expectations that federal funds rate will remain near zero for some time .
a PAR 32 the statement goes on in paragraph 4 to indicate a shift of the committee ’s focus from the target rate to the use of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet .
a PAR 32 that paragraph repeats a number of measures class
a PAR 32 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 41 of 60 that have already been announced but not ( or only partially ) implemented , thereby emphasizing that a number of unconventional policy actions are already forthcoming , and foreshadows the possibility that the federal reserve will purchase longer - term treasury securities if conditions warrant .
a PAR 32 the intention to continue to actively consider policies that employ the federal reserve
a PAR 32 ’s balance sheet is also explicitly stated in order to clarify that other tools could also be used if needed to support credit markets and economic activity .
a PAR 35 achieving exactly a zero effective federal funds rate may be impossible since there would be no incentive for depository institutions to sell funds without compensation .
a PAR 35 it may even be undesirable , given the strains that it could put on some financial institutions and financial markets .
a PAR 35 on the other hand , members may feel that the direct monetary stimulus obtained by bringing the target rate to a very low but positive level , along with the increased flexibility thereby provided to use class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 43 of 60 nonconventional policy actions , outweighs the associated costs .
a PAR 35 as in alternative a , the committee may also be concerned that the sharp contraction in economic activity and the steep declines in the prices of energy and other commodities may cause inflation to fall to an uncomfortably low level .
a PAR 35 in such circumstances , conditional on their desire to maintain a federal funds rate target , committee members may prefer to make that target as low as possible immediately , rather than making a more gradual adjustment , to counter the risk of further severe deterioration in economic and financial conditions .
a SENT -- ( 51 )  if the committee decides not to set a target at all , as in alternative a , it could specify to the desk that it has suspended setting a target and that it anticipates that the reserve conditions associated with its open market operations and the liquidity programs put in place by the federal reserve will result in federal funds rates near zero .
a SENT -- directive wording alternative a :   the federal open market committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output .

b PAR 34 if the committee shares the staff view that the economic outlook has deteriorated markedly and thinks that , given the circumstances , moving the federal funds rate near the zero bound on nominal interest rates is desirable , but it wants to continue to provide an explicit target for the federal funds rate , then it might choose to establish a target range of 0 to ¼ percent as in alternative b .   continuing to set a target that encompasses very low federal funds rates would not compromise the committee ’s ability to resort to unconventional policy measures .
b PAR 34 in addition , some members may be concerned that switching to the use of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet as its main policy tool could delay a return to a more conventional monetary policy based on interest rate targeting because some unconventional policy measures ( such as the purchases of long - term assets ) may not be easy or cheap to unwind quickly .
b PAR 34 consequently , members may feel that maintaining a target range , however low , could be desirable because it may make a return to more traditional monetary policy simpler and more straightforward once economic and financial conditions improve .
b PAR 34 in addition , committee members may see the maintenance of a federal funds target as advantageous from a governance perspective , since the determination of the target rate is a prerogative of the committee , whereas the committee and the board both have separate authorities that can be used to affect the composition and size of the federal reserve ’s balance sheet .
b PAR 36 the rationale section of the statement under alternative b begins by noting the recent deterioration in economic conditions and in the outlook for economic activity .
b PAR 36 the statement is also explicit as to the reduction in inflationary pressures and notes the risks that inflation could decline for a time below levels that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer term .
b PAR 36 the fourth paragraph makes clear the intention to use all tools at the committee ’s disposal to promote the resumption of sustainable economic growth and to preserve price stability .
b PAR 36 some of these tools—
b PAR 36 the already announced purchases of agency debt and mortgage - backed securities , the possible expansion of those purchases , the possibility of beginning to purchase longer - term treasury securities , the implementation of the talf , and the possible expansion of other types of liquidity provision and other means of using the federal reserve ’s balance sheet — are also noted .
b PAR 37 given that most market participants appear to expect only a 50 basis point reduction in the target at this meeting , a decision to reduce it instead by at least 75 basis points will come as surprise , but likely not a large one since some investors apparently anticipate that the target will be brought down to ¼ percent at the january meeting .
b PAR 37 as a result , nominal interest rates would likely decline a little , stock prices may increase some , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar may decline modestly .
b PAR 37 as in alternative b , market participants may also be surprised by the class
b PAR 37 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 44 of 60 reference to unconventional policy measures , and medium- and long - term treasury yields might edge lower .
b PAR 50 under alternative b , the committee would direct the desk to seek conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range of 0 to ¼ percent .
b PAR 50 it may also want to direct the desk to purchase gse debt and agency- guaranteed mbs over the next intermeeting period , but to leave the desk ample latitude to vary the timing and pace of such purchases depending on conditions in the market for such securities and on broader mortgage market and housing sector conditions .
b PAR 50 the committee may want to reiterate the limits that have already been announced for such purchases .
b PAR 50 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 54 of 60 
b SENT -- it may also direct the desk to purchase gse debt and agency - guaranteed mbs over the next intermeeting period , as under alternative b , and subject to the same limits .

c SENT -- under alternative d , the federal funds rate target is left unchanged at 1 percent under the view that recent policy actions should help promote acceptable economic growth over time ; as in alternative c , the possibility of future policy easing is left open .
c SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 36 of 60 alternative c 1 .
c PAR 38 the committee may prefer alternative c for a number of reasons .
c PAR 38 members may feel that a substantial policy easing at this meeting is warranted in response to the sharp deterioration of the economic outlook in recent weeks .
c PAR 38 a 50 basis point cut in the target rate at this meeting may be seen as appropriate , considering that policy has been eased substantially over the last year , that a number of extraordinary liquidity measures have been put in place or are in train , and that mortgage rates have already dropped appreciably in light of the federal reserve ’s recently announced program to purchase agency debt and mortgage - backed securities .
c PAR 38 the committee may wish to give the stimulus produced by the combination of all these policies a chance to show its effects , while at the same time leaving open the possibility of a further reduction in the target rate and the implementation of more unconventional policy actions should macroeconomic conditions fail to improve .
c PAR 38 a reduction in the target rate to ½ percent that is matched by a comparable reduction in the interest rate on excess reserves would likely cause federal funds to trade below the new target .
c PAR 38 even so , the committee may still want to set a target of ½ percent to signal where it would want federal funds to trade once financial conditions begin to improve , some federal reserve programs are unwound , and the amount of excess reserves in the system returns to a more normal level .
c PAR 40 as a third motivation for favoring alternative c , members may view a decision to reduce the target rate by 50 basis points as an intermediate step towards reaching a level of rates closer to the zero bound at a later date .
c PAR 40 such an approach would be consistent with the staff ’s assumption in the greenbook projection , the prescriptions of a number of policy rules , and the optimal control simulations with an inflation target of either 1½ or 2 percent described in the monetary policy strategies section of this bluebook .
c PAR 40 even if members are not concerned that a sustained environment of very low interest rates will be particularly harmful to certain financial markets and institutions , they may still believe that making the move toward the zero bound in two steps would be preferable on the grounds that it would allow market participants more time to adjust to a world of near - zero interest rates .
c PAR 40 in addition , the committee may feel that such a gradual approach would not be overly costly in terms of its macroeconomic objectives since further monetary stimulus could be provided through additional unconventional policy measures .
c PAR 40 finally , an inclination to ease policy 50 basis points at this meeting might be reinforced by the fact that most market participants appear to expect a 50 basis point reduction in the target rate , and committee members might be reluctant to inject further uncertainty into financial markets at a time when markets remain extremely fragile .
c SENT -- ( 41 ) the rationale section of the statement accompanying alternative c begins by acknowledging that economic activity is contracting in the fourth quarter and by pointing to deterioration in labor markets , household and business spending , and class
c PAR 44 the rationale portion of the statement accompanying alternative d acknowledges that the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed further and that the near - term outlook has deteriorated .
c PAR 44 however , the statement notes that the committee expects the recent policy measures to improve credit conditions and promote a return to moderate growth over time .
c PAR 44 to underscore that the federal reserve has already taken concrete actions in response to the deterioration in the outlook , the remaining part of that paragraph notes that the federal reserve will class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 49 of 60 purchase large amounts of agency and mortgage - backed securities and will implement the talf early next year .
c PAR 44 the language on inflation remains unchanged from the october meeting , and the last paragraph acknowledges , as in alternative c , that federal funds may continue to trade below the target for some time .
c PAR 44 the statement concludes by noting that the committee will monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote its statutory objectives .
c PAR 44 that declaration , together with the indication of downside risks to the outlook , would likely be seen as signaling that the committee is open to further reduction in the target rate at upcoming meetings if conditions warrant .
c PAR 49 if the committee wants to keep a target for the federal funds rate of either ½ percent as in alternative c or 1 percent as in alternative d , and agrees that the options available to drain reserves from the system and enable the desk to meet the target are either unlikely to materialize or are likely to be otherwise undesirable , it may wish to change the wording of its directive to the desk to recognize that it does not expect the target to be consistently met given the circumstances .
c PAR 49 the committee may wish to include in the directive a sentence similar to that in the public statements that will accompany the policy decisions and explicitly indicate that it recognizes that the federal funds rate may tend to trade below the new target .
c PAR 49 if it were to choose alternative c , the committee may also want to direct the desk to purchase $ 100 billion in housing - related gse debt and up to $ 500 billion in agency - guaranteed mbs , as already announced , and to do so by the end of the second quarter of next year to provide a more specific time frame than the “ several quarters ” indicated in the november 25 press release .
c PAR 49 such a directive is not included under alternative d because if the committee were optimistic enough about the outlook to select that alternative , it might not want the desk to complete the full amount of the announced purchases .

