a PAR 20 if policymakers would prefer to move more aggressively to promote growth and mitigate downside risks , then they might choose to reduce the funds rate target by 75 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative a .   even after the funds rate cut on january 22 , the real federal funds rate exceeds the greenbook - consistent estimate of short - run r * by about 60 basis points ; thus , this degree of easing would be desirable if policymakers share the staff ’s outlook but would prefer to bring the unemployment rate back to the nairu more quickly than in that outlook , an approach that might leave inflation close to 2 percent at the end of the decade .
a PAR 20 following the january 22 move with another aggressive easing at this meeting might also be attractive from a risk management point of view
a PAR 20 that is , committee members may see benefits in moving more than they would perceive as needed merely to offset the weakening in the modal outlook .
a PAR 20 with the housing contraction steepening and financial stresses continuing to intensify , policymakers may be particularly concerned about reducing the likelihood of a nonlinear feedback cycle in which deteriorating macroeconomic class
a PAR 20 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 28 of 38 conditions generate further strains in financial markets and augment pressures on banks ’ balance sheets , further constricting the supply of credit and hence leading to a fairly deep and long - lasting recession .
a PAR 20 this policy approach might be particularly appealing if members anticipated that the committee would be equally flexible and decisive in reversing the course of policy once downside risks to growth start to wane—
a PAR 20 as in the “ prompt reversal ” scenario in the box on “ risk management
a PAR 20 strategies”—or upside risks to inflation start to loom larger .
a PAR 20 members might also be attracted to this alternative if they believe that a larger easing move at this meeting would diminish the probability that another rate cut would be needed over the subsequent intermeeting period .

b PAR 17 if incoming information in recent weeks has led policymakers to mark down their assessment of the modal outlook for aggregate demand relative to aggregate supply by an amount similar to that of the staff , then the committee may prefer to reduce the target funds rate by 50 basis points at this meeting , as in class
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 2 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 3 percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 3 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 3 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 17 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households .
b PAR 17 moreover , recent information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets .
b PAR 17 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households .
b PAR 17 moreover , recent information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets .
b PAR 17 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households .
b PAR 17 moreover , recent information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets .
b PAR 17 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and the tightening of credit and the deepening of the housing contraction could weigh further on economic growth .
b PAR 17 however , recent policy actions should promote moderate growth over time .
b PAR 17 rationale 3 .
b PAR 17 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , reflecting well - anchored inflation expectations , a projected leveling out of energy prices , and easing pressures on resource utilization .
b PAR 17 however , further increases in energy and commodity prices , as well as other factors , could put upward pressure on inflation .
b PAR 17 therefore , it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters .
b PAR 17 however , upward pressure on inflation could result from several factors , including further increases in energy , commodity , and other import prices .
b PAR 17 therefore , it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters .
b PAR 17 however , upward pressure on inflation could result from several factors , including further increases in energy , commodity , and other import prices .
b PAR 17 therefore , it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 assessment of risk 4 .
b PAR 17 today ’s policy action , combined with those taken earlier , should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 17 however , downside risks to growth may well remain .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects to determine whether further action is needed to address those risks .
b PAR 17 today ’s policy action , combined with those taken earlier , should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 17 however , downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks .
b PAR 17 today ’s policy action , combined with those taken earlier , should help promote moderate growth over time .
b PAR 17 however , appreciable downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks .
b PAR 17 appreciable downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks .
b PAR 17 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 23 of 38 january 22 , 2008 statement 1 .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 3 - 1/2 percent .
b PAR 17 the committee took this action in view of a weakening of the economic outlook and increasing downside risks to growth .
b PAR 17 while strains in short - term funding markets have eased somewhat , broader financial market conditions have continued to deteriorate and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households .
b PAR 17 moreover , incoming information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets .
b PAR 17 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 appreciable downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks .
b PAR 17 december 11 , 2007 statement 1 .
b PAR 17 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 17 incoming information suggests that economic growth is slowing , reflecting the intensification of the housing correction and some softening in business and consumer spending .
b PAR 17 moreover , strains in financial markets have increased in recent weeks .
b PAR 17 today ’s action , combined with the policy actions taken earlier , should help promote moderate growth over time .
b PAR 17 readings on core inflation have improved modestly this year , but elevated energy and commodity prices , among other factors , may put upward pressure on inflation .
b PAR 17 in this context , the committee judges that some inflation risks remain , and it will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 17 recent developments , including the deterioration in financial market conditions , have increased the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth and inflation .
b PAR 17 the committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth .
b PAR 17 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 24 of 38 alternative b .
b PAR 17 the staff forecast ’s assumes that the funds rate is cut to 3 percent at this meeting and then maintained at that rate through 2009 ;
b PAR 17 with that stance of policy , the unemployment rate remains about ½ percentage point above the staff ’s estimate of the nairu while core inflation edges just below 2 percent at the end of next year .
b PAR 17 members might consider this combination of outcomes to be about the best feasible under current circumstances , reflecting the extent to which recent data have pointed towards a noticeable worsening of the short - run tradeoff between economic activity and inflation .
b PAR 17 even if committee members are somewhat more optimistic than the staff regarding the modal outlook for economic activity , they may view this policy action as appropriate for mitigating the downside risks to growth that were emphasized in the january 22 fomc statement .
b PAR 17 indeed , since investors ’ uncertainty about the economic outlook is apparently contributing to elevated credit spreads and dampened consumer and business spending , a substantial easing move at this meeting could bolster confidence that policymakers will act as needed to foster sustained growth and reduce the likelihood of adverse macroeconomic developments such as the greenbook
b PAR 17 “ recession ” scenario .
b PAR 17 however , policymakers may prefer at this stage not to take out further insurance by easing more than 50 basis points , given the possibility that such a move could induce an upward shift in the distribution of inflation outcomes over coming quarters , as illustrated by the “ gradual reversal ” scenario in the box on “ risk management strategies . ”   nonetheless , by explicitly noting that downside risks remain , the committee would suggest the possibility that substantial further easing could be needed in response to incoming information .
b PAR 18 the statement under alternative b largely reiterates the rationale portion of the january 22 statement , including references to “ considerable stress ” in financial markets , tightening of credit conditions , deepening of the housing contraction , and some softening of labor markets , as well as restating the committee ’s assessment of the prospects for inflation .
b PAR 18 the final paragraph of the statement indicates that class
b PAR 18 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 25 of 38 percent federal funds rate recession scenario taylor rule full preemption risk management percent civilian unemployment rate percent core pce inflation percent federal funds rate benefits of risk management risk management outcome - based rule percent civilian unemployment rate percent core pce inflation
b PAR 18 four - quarter moving average risk management strategies simple policy rules can serve as useful benchmarks for monetary policy .
b PAR 18 however , such rules are generally specified in terms of the modal forecast and hence abstract from risk management considerations .
b PAR 18 in this box , we gauge the benefits and costs of alternative policy strategies using the version of the frb / us model in which expectations of the private sector are formed based on past economic data .
b PAR 18 as a point of reference , suppose that the greenbook outlook is the best feasible   under current circumstances , at least in the absence of   uncertainty .
b PAR 18 now consider the “ recession ” scenario presented in the greenbook alternative simulations .
b PAR 18 when monetary policy is determined by the bluebook ’s outcome - based rule ( dotted lines ) , the federal funds rate declines gradually in response to incoming data , reaching a trough of about ¾ percent in late 2009 before returning to the greenbook baseline a few years later .
b PAR 18 with this policy , the unemployment rate rises a bit above 6 percent next year and takes about five years to return to the nairu , while core pce inflation falls well below the assumed long - run inflation goal of 1¾ percent . if policymakers could instantly be sure that such a    recession was already in train , they might well cut the funds rate target immediately to a rate below 1 percent in order to reduce the severity of the downturn .
b PAR 18 in reality , of course , economic turning points are notoriously difficult to predict or even to identify contemporaneously .
b PAR 18 thus , policymakers might prefer to take out some insurance by easing the stance of policy even before the onset of recession was fully evident .
b PAR 18 such an approach is illustrated by the risk management path ( solid lines ) , in which the funds rate target is reduced to 1½ percent for two quarters and thereafter   follows the prescriptions of the outcome - based rule .
b PAR 18 this policy has visible effects in stabilizing economic    activity and inflation :   the unemployment rate at the peak of the recession is about ¼ percentage point lower than in the absence of insurance , and the inflation rate stays noticeably closer to the assumed long - run inflation goal of 1¾ percent .
b PAR 18 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 26 of 38 risk management strategies ( continued ) percent federal funds rate costs of risk management gradual reversal prompt reversal greenbook baseline percent civilian unemployment rate percent core pce inflation four - quarter moving average it is also important to gauge the costs that would be incurred in following such a risk management strategy if in fact no recession occurs .
b PAR 18 for this purpose , suppose that economic conditions unfold as in the greenbook baseline ( dotted lines ) but that policymakers have taken out some insurance against the risk of recession by lowering the target funds rate to 1½ percent for two quarters .
b PAR 18 in the prompt reversal case ( solid lines ) , the strength of economic activity is assumed to be recognized quickly and the policy insurance is then removed ; indeed , policy is tightened somewhat further to offset the effects of the initial policy stimulus , and thereafter follows the prescriptions of the outcome - based rule .
b PAR 18 in this case , the funds rate target rises almost a percentage point above the greenbook baseline path by the end of this year .
b PAR 18 with this policy path , core inflation remains very close to the greenbook baseline while the unemployment rate only deviates temporarily .
b PAR 18 in contrast , in the case of gradual reversal ( dashed lines ) , the strength of economic activity is assumed to become evident only over a longer period , and hence the policy insurance is removed over the course of a year rather than in a single quarter ; that is , after the first two quarters , the funds rate is adjusted according to the empirical outcome - based rule , which responds only gradually to incoming data .
b PAR 18 this path of policy generates persistent deviations of unemployment and inflation from the greenbook baseline ; even at the end of 2012 , core inflation remains nearly a quarter point above the assumed long - run inflation goal of 1¾ percent .
b PAR 18 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 27 of 38 this policy action , combined with those taken earlier
b PAR 18 , “ should help to promote moderate growth over time and mitigate the risks to economic activity ” but notes that “ downside risks to growth remain ” and emphasizes — as in the january 22 statement — that the committee “ will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks .
b PAR 19 since investors assign most of the remaining probability to a smaller easing , the adoption of this alternative might cause a modest decrease in interest rates , a rally in equity prices , and perhaps some depreciation of the foreign exchange value of the dollar .
b SENT -- as in alternative b , the risk assessment states that the stance of policy should help promote moderate growth and mitigate the downside risks to economic activity .

c PAR 23 if members are concerned that the stance of policy remains somewhat restrictive but would prefer a more incremental approach in responding to incoming information , then the committee could choose to reduce the funds rate target by 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .
c PAR 23 this alternative might be viewed as most consistent with the typical pattern of gradual funds rate adjustment in response to changes in resource utilization and core inflation .
c PAR 23 such gradualism reflects the usual pace of incoming information regarding the appropriate policy stance and reduces the odds of sudden reversals in the path of policy .
c PAR 23 members may also be concerned that more substantial policy accommodation could spark an increase in longer - term inflation expectations , as in the greenbook
c PAR 23 unanchored inflation expectations ” scenario .
c PAR 23 moreover , given the challenges in monitoring underlying inflation expectations , such a development might not become apparent very quickly and could then be quite costly to reverse .
c SENT -- ” moreover , in contrast to those two alternatives , the risk assessment in alternative c class i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 30 of 38 makes no reference to mitigating the risks to economic activity .
c PAR 25 market participants would be somewhat surprised by a 25 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate at this meeting , because the desk ’s survey and market data suggest that market participants are placing only about one - third odds on a 25 basis point easing , with virtually all of the remaining probability assigned to larger moves of 50 or 75 basis points .
c PAR 25 to be sure , the reference in the risk assessment to acting in a “ timely manner ” may be read as pointing to a possible intermeeting easing of policy .
c PAR 25 but , given the smaller - than - anticipated policy action at this meeting , financial markets might well conclude that further easing moves would be incremental .
c PAR 25 thus , alternative c would probably induce a rise in short- term interest rates ; however , intermediate - term yields might rise less or perhaps even decline if investors concluded that a sluggish near - term pace of policy adjustment implied that even more easing would be needed down the road .
c PAR 25 equity prices would likely fall while credit spreads on corporate debt would widen .
c PAR 25 at the same time , five - to - ten - year forward tips - based inflation compensation might retrace some of its recent increase , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could appreciate a bit .
c PAR 25 moreover , given the highly skittish attitudes of investors and relatively illiquid trading conditions in some markets , policy surprises might well generate unusually large reactions in financial markets .
c SENT -- ” this alternative reaffirms the committee ’s expectation that inflation will moderate in coming quarters , but adds the same explanation as in alternative c regarding the factors that could put upward pressure on inflation .

d PAR 26 in view of policy actions to date , policymakers might prefer to wait for additional economic and financial information before taking any further policy action , as in alternative d .
d PAR 26 some policymakers may judge that the current softness in the economy is likely to be transitory and that ongoing financial developments are likely to have less effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff and other class i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 31 of 38 forecasters .
d PAR 26 in addition , monetary policy has already been eased considerably , and significant fiscal stimulus seems likely to be enacted , perhaps reducing the need for further monetary accommodation .
d PAR 26 moreover , policymakers might be concerned about the extent to which recent elevated levels of inflation and forward inflation compensation might be pointing to a higher trajectory of prices going forward .
d PAR 26 this approach might also be appealing to policymakers who prefer a more distinct downward tilt of the trajectory for inflation over the next few years than in the staff forecast , as in the optimal - control simulation with an inflation goal of 1½ percent .
d SENT -- ( 27 ) the statement under alternative d reiterates several elements of the rationale portion of the january 22 statement — including references to considerable stress in financial markets , tightened credit conditions , and deepening of the housing contraction — but does not cite recent developments in labor markets .
d PAR 28 the absence of any policy action would be particularly difficult to understand in light of the january 22 fomc statement , which noted “ appreciable downside risks to growth ” and emphasized that the committee “ will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks . ”   while shorter - term interest rates would rise noticeably , investors would probably become more concerned about the class
d PAR 28 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 32 of 38 economic outlook , leading to a further drop in longer - term treasury yields , a marked widening of credit spreads on corporate debt , and sharp declines in equity prices . money and debt forecasts 

