
b PAR 27 if the committee views the staff forecast , which is conditioned on an unchanged target federal funds rate through the end of the year , as reasonable and sees the outcome as acceptable in the circumstances , it may wish to leave the policy rate unchanged at this meeting , as in alternative b .   the committee , like the staff , may expect financial conditions and the sharp contraction in the housing market to exert considerable restraint on aggregate spending over the next year or so , and thus may view a relatively low real federal funds rate as necessary to promote moderate economic growth .
b PAR 27 at the same time , the resilience to date in consumer spending may provide some assurance to policy makers that overall economic activity , though sluggish , is continuing to expand and is likely to accelerate gradually in coming quarters as the contraction in the housing sector begins to fade and financial market conditions begin to improve .
b PAR 27 the actual real federal funds rate based on lagged four- quarter core pce inflation is roughly in line with its greenbook - consistent equilibrium value ( chart 6 ) , a setting consistent with output moving back toward potential over the next few years .
b PAR 27 of course , headline inflation has been elevated , and is likely to jump this quarter , reflecting the earlier surge in crude oil prices .
b PAR 27 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 percent .
b PAR 27 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 percent .
b PAR 27 the federal open market committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2¼ percent .
b PAR 27 2 . recent information indicates that overall economic activity continues to expand , partly reflecting some firming in household spending .
b PAR 27 however , labor markets have softened further and financial markets remain under considerable stress .
b PAR 27 tight credit conditions , the ongoing housing contraction , and
b PAR 27 the rise in energy prices are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 27 overall economic activity continues to expand , partly reflecting growth in consumer spending and exports .
b PAR 27 however , labor markets have softened further and financial markets remain under considerable stress .
b PAR 27 tight credit conditions , the ongoing housing contraction , and
b PAR 27 elevated energy prices are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 27 over time , the substantial easing of monetary policy , combined with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity , should help to promote moderate economic growth .
b PAR 27 overall economic activity continues to expand , partly reflecting growth in consumer spending and exports .
b PAR 27 however , labor markets have softened further and financial markets remain under considerable stress .
b PAR 27 tight credit conditions , the ongoing housing contraction , and
b PAR 27 elevated energy prices are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 27 nevertheless , the accommodative stance of monetary policy , combined with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity , should help to promote moderate economic growth .
b PAR 27 rationale 3 .
b PAR 27 the committee expects inflation to moderate later this year and next year .
b PAR 27 however , in light of the continued increases in the prices of energy and some other commodities and the elevated state of some indicators of inflation expectations , uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high .
b PAR 27 inflation has been high , spurred by the earlier increases in the prices of energy and some other commodities , and some indicators of inflation expectations have been elevated .
b PAR 27 the committee expects inflation to moderate later this year and next year , but uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high .
b PAR 27 inflation has been high , spurred by the earlier increases in the prices of energy and some other commodities , and some indicators of inflation expectations have been elevated .
b PAR 27 although the committee expects inflation to moderate later this year and next year , the possibility that inflation may fail to decline as anticipated is of significant concern .
b PAR 27 assessment of risk 4 .
b PAR 27 the substantial easing of monetary policy to date , combined with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity , should help to promote moderate growth over time .
b PAR 27 although downside risks to growth remain , they appear to have diminished somewhat , and the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations have increased .
b PAR 27 the committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 27 although downside risks to growth remain , the upside risks to inflation are also of significant concern to the committee .
b PAR 27 the committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 27 the committee took this action to better balance the upside risks to inflation and the downside risks to growth .
b PAR 27 the committee will continue to monitor economic and financial developments and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 27 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 27 of 36 increase in coming months , the committee may anticipate that inflation pressures will moderate later this year and through next year .
b PAR 27 with such an outlook , the committee may judge that holding the funds rate constant at this meeting is appropriate given its dual objectives .
b PAR 27 indeed , the optimal - control simulation with an inflation goal of 2 percent , shown in chart 7 , prescribes a target funds rate that remains at roughly its current level through the end of 2009 before beginning to firm thereafter .
b PAR 27 the committee may also see risk considerations as arguing for an unchanged stance of policy at this meeting .
b PAR 27 surely , the downside risks to growth remain significant : consumer spending could weaken substantially , given the low level of consumer confidence , the weakening labor market , and diminishing credit availability ; fiscal policy may provide less impetus than currently anticipated ; and financial markets remain under considerable stress and may impose more restraint on growth than currently anticipated .
b PAR 27 at the same time , the persistent tendency of energy prices to increase in recent years — and importantly , the resulting upward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations—
b PAR 27 may cause the committee to feel that the upside risks to inflation are also substantial .
b PAR 27 overall , the committee may still see considerable uncertainty about the outlook for both growth and inflation .
b PAR 27 in these circumstances , the committee may wish to leave the target funds rate unchanged and await further economic and financial information before adjusting the stance of policy .
b PAR 28 in the statement under alternative b , most of the discussion of the outlook for growth is little changed from june .
b PAR 28 the statement notes that economic activity has continued to expand , “ partly reflecting growth in consumer spending and exports . ”
b PAR 28 this characterization has been changed from “ some firming in household spending ” because consumer spending slowed a bit in the second quarter and increases in exports have been contributing significantly to output growth and are expected to continue to do so .
b PAR 28 the statement again notes that “ labor markets have softened further and financial markets remain under considerable stress . ”
b PAR 28 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 28 of 36 language refers to “ elevated energy prices ” instead of “ the rise in energy prices ” because oil and natural gas prices have moved down , on net , since the last meeting , but remain high .
b PAR 28 the statement under alternative b would differ from the one in june by moving the sentence stating that past policy easing and federal reserve liquidity facilities should “ promote moderate economic growth ” from the assessment of risks paragraph to the economic rationale paragraph .
b PAR 28 in so doing , the factors that explain the outlook for economic activity are consolidated in the same paragraph , making the treatment parallel to that of the outlook for inflation .
b PAR 28 the rationale section makes the frank observation that “ inflation has been high , ” and attributes this situation to the previous increases in energy and other commodity prices .
b PAR 28 while the statement continues to note that the committee expects inflation to moderate through time , it also indicates that “ uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high . ”
b PAR 28 the assessment goes on to state that “ although downside risks to growth remain , the upside risks to inflation are also of significant concern to the committee .
b PAR 28 ” although it does not explicitly make a judgment as to the relative weight of these risks , on the whole the statement gives a bit more emphasis to the upside risks to inflation than the june statement .
b PAR 28 the statement uses the same language as in june to note that the committee will monitor developments and will “ act as needed ” to achieve its dual objectives .
b PAR 29 futures and options quotes suggest that investors do not expect any change in policy until the end of this year .
b PAR 29 moreover , market participants have taken particular note of monetary policy communications over the intermeeting period that seemed to stress the significant downside risks to economic growth , and most respondents to the desk ’s survey do not expect the statement to suggest increased inflation concerns .
b PAR 29 as a result , the language envisioned under alternative b might lead investors to conclude that policy tightening may commence sooner than currently thought .
b PAR 29 short - term interest rates would probably increase a bit following such an class
b PAR 29 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 29 of 36 announcement .
b PAR 29 longer - term interest rates would likely also move higher , but inflation compensation might tick down if investors surmised that policymakers were a little less tolerant of inflation than currently perceived .
b PAR 29 equity prices would probably decline some , while the exchange value of the dollar might increase .

c PAR 30 if the committee sees the economy as growing more robustly than the staff does and has fairly high confidence in the resilience of financial markets , it may prefer to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting as in alternative c .
c PAR 30 members may view the current stance of policy as too accommodative , providing substantial impetus to aggregate demand at a time when the economy apparently retains an unexpected degree of momentum and when inflation expectations may be less tightly moored than previously .
c PAR 30 if the committee is more upbeat about the underlying strength of the economy than the staff , along the lines of the “ resilient spending ” greenbook alternative scenario , members may believe that the time is right to reduce the current degree of policy accommodation so as to foster the desired moderation in inflation .
c PAR 30 although financial market conditions remain strained , and downside risks to growth persist , members may see those risks as having diminished considerably over recent months and believe that some of the policy accommodation that served as insurance against an extremely adverse outcome for economic growth should be removed .
c PAR 30 this view may be strengthened by the expectation that the various measures that the federal reserve has put in place to bolster market liquidity , including the new steps announced on july 30 , will help to mitigate the risk that policy tightening could have an outsized impact on financial market functioning .
c PAR 30 moreover , high readings on inflation have persisted for some time and could be causing inflation expectations to move higher , as illustrated in the greenbook
c PAR 30 inflation spiral ” scenario .
c PAR 30 finally , members may wish to bring inflation down more rapidly than in the greenbook projection and thus wish to begin tightening policy at this meeting , perhaps along the lines of the optimal control simulation with an inflation target of 1½ percent .
c PAR 30 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 30 of 36 
c PAR 32 investors marked down their expected policy path over the intermeeting period and now place very low odds on a rate hike at this meeting , or indeed before the end of the year .
c PAR 32 accordingly , they would be quite surprised by the adoption of alternative c .
c PAR 32 the expected trajectory for the federal funds rate would be marked up , perhaps substantially .
c PAR 32 short - term rates would rise accordingly , as the new , higher path for policy was built into asset prices .
c PAR 32 longer - term rates would probably increase as well , but inflation compensation would likely decline a bit , as investors concluded that the committee was taking a more aggressive stance toward inflation .
c PAR 32 equity prices would fall on the news , while the exchange value of the dollar would probably appreciate .
c PAR 32 if market participants interpreted this action as implying that policy would be tightened fairly rapidly in the near term , strains in financial markets could worsen , and perhaps significantly so if a tighter path for policy was seen as likely to depress house prices further or more rapidly than currently expected .
c PAR 32 in response to the class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 31 of 36 emphasis given to inflation developments in the statement , investors might respond more sharply to incoming news bearing directly on consumer prices over subsequent weeks .
c PAR 32 money and debt forecasts 

