a PAR 29 if the committee judges that the news on economic activity and financial markets since the january meeting has appreciably undermined the outlook for the economy and is reasonably confident that inflation will moderate , it might prefer to move more aggressively to promote growth and mitigate downside risks by cutting the funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative a .   despite the five policy moves over the past six months , the substantial downward revision to the greenbook forecast suggests class
a PAR 29 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 29 of 39 that significantly more easing than previously foreseen may be required to stave off a severe deterioration in macroeconomic conditions .
a PAR 29 indeed , in light of the rapidly eroding financial situation in recent weeks , policymakers might see an even weaker outlook than in the greenbook that would ultimately require even more policy easing than assumed in the staff forecast .
a PAR 29 alternatively , policymakers might see the cumulative 125 basis points of easing assumed in the staff forecast as likely to prove necessary to restore output to its potential , but might prefer to deliver the easing in a more rapid manner than in the staff forecast , in order to arrest the deterioration in investor sentiment currently afflicting financial markets .
a PAR 29 the downside risks around the growth outlook might be particularly worrisome , given the steeper - than - expected declines in house prices and the intensification of strains in financial markets .
a PAR 29 in such circumstances , the committee might view the odds of an intensifying adverse feedback cycle — that is , a worsening of the macroeconomic situation generating further distress in financial markets and among financial institutions , thereby prompting a further tightening in the supply of credit and so putting further downward pressure on real activity — as having risen appreciably over the intermeeting period ( a possibility suggested by the greenbook scenario , “ greater housing correction with more financial fallout ” ) .
a PAR 29 members might also find the case for a 75 basis point cut to be persuasive if they would be willing to tolerate a somewhat higher path for inflation than in the staff forecast in order to respond more aggressively to the prospect of significant weakness in output .
a PAR 29 instead , members might be more optimistic about the outlook for inflation than the staff .
a PAR 29 for example , with the unemployment rate seen as likely to rise markedly , policymakers might anticipate that workers will become particularly concerned about job security , a situation that could restrain wage demands and reduce cost pressures by more than assumed in the baseline forecast ( a possibility suggested by the “ worker insecurity ” scenario in the greenbook ) .
a PAR 31 with market participants putting significant odds on both 50 basis point and 75 basis point cuts at this meeting , selection of alternative a would likely leave short- and intermediate - term interest rates a little lower .
a PAR 31 market participants would probably interpret such an aggressive interest rate cut , together with the indication that downside risks to growth predominate , as suggesting that the committee is inclined to further policy easing .
a PAR 31 this combination might bolster market confidence , causing equity prices to rise and credit spreads on corporate debt to narrow some .
a PAR 31 however , longer - term yields might move higher if market participants became concerned that the committee was underestimating inflation risks or was more willing to tolerate higher rates of inflation going forward than earlier anticipated .

b PAR 27 the rationale section of the statement accompanying alternative b would begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity , pointing specifically to the softening in consumer expenditures and labor markets .
b PAR 27 the statement would also point out that financial markets remain under considerable stress and that the tightening of credit conditions , coupled with the deepening of the housing contraction , is likely to weigh on economic growth in the near term .
b PAR 27 the paragraph on inflation would note that the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters assuming “ a projected leveling - out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource class
b PAR 27 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 28 of 39 utilization . ”
b PAR 27 this alternative would highlight the risks that attend the committee ’s expectation regarding the trajectory for inflation by indicating that “ uncertainty about the outlook for inflation has increased ” and would note that the committee “ will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully . ”
b PAR 27 the final paragraph would repeat the assessment of risks from the january statement .
b PAR 28 investors place roughly even odds on both 50 basis point and 75 basis point reductions in the target federal funds rate at this meeting .   as a result , adoption of alternative b would likely cause near - term policy expectations to move somewhat higher .
b PAR 28 equity prices might decline , and yield spreads on private - debt instruments over those on treasuries could widen , should market participants conclude that monetary policy was not being eased sufficiently promptly to cushion adequately the weakness in economic activity .
b PAR 28 any such adverse effects , however , would likely be tempered by the committee
b PAR 28 ’s acknowledgment that the downside risks to growth remain and that the committee is prepared to act in a timely manner to address those risks , a communication that would likely be interpreted as indicating that members are still predisposed to ease policy further .
b PAR 28 given the smaller - than - expected policy move and the indication in the statement of greater concern about inflation risks , market participants could mark down their inflation expectations slightly .
b PAR 28 any move in the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely be relatively small .
b PAR 28 however , in light of impaired trading conditions in many markets and investors ’ increasingly skittish attitudes , even small policy surprises have the potential to generate an outsized reaction in financial markets .
b SENT -- the assessment of risks class i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 30 of 39 differs from that in alternative b by noting explicitly the risks to both growth and inflation .
b SENT -- as under alternative b , the statement would point out that members expect “ inflation to moderate in coming quarters , ” but would conclude that “ the upside risks to the outlook for inflation have increased .

c PAR 32 if the committee believes that the economic outlook has weakened but is concerned that aggressive further policy easing amid unfavorable inflation readings could increase the likelihood of a rise in longer - term inflation expectations , it may wish to lower the funds rate target by just 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .   in particular , this alternative might be favored if the factors underlying the recent increase in inflation were viewed as likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff ’s projection .
c PAR 32 in light of recent data , the committee might see the short - run tradeoff between economic activity and inflation as having worsened to a greater extent than judged by the staff and believe that the scope for monetary policy to provide stimulus to growth while applying adequate restraint to inflation has decreased noticeably .
c PAR 32 such a deterioration in the short - run tradeoff between economic activity and inflation could reflect in part an increase in inflation expectations , as illustrated in the greenbook
c PAR 32 ’s “ more inflationary pressures ” scenario .
c PAR 32 the difficulty of reliably detecting shifts in inflation class
c PAR 32 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 31 of 39 expectations may bolster the case for this alternative , especially if the committee perceives an upward drift of such expectations as being very costly to unwind .
c SENT -- ( 33 ) the statement accompanying alternative c would explicitly acknowledge that the upside risks to inflation have increased by pointing to recent unfavorable readings on inflation and by emphasizing the factors that could potentially exert upward pressure on inflation going forward .
c PAR 34 a decision to adopt alternative c would come as a significant surprise to the financial markets .
c PAR 34 investors would presumably revise up sharply their expectations for the path of policy over the next few quarters , leading to an increase in short- and intermediate- term interest rates .
c PAR 34 at the same time , long - term nominal treasury yields would likely rise by less or could even fall if investors concluded that the fomc had a lower tolerance for inflation than they had previously thought .
c PAR 34 with real rates higher , equities would fall , credit spreads on corporate debt would widen , strains in financial markets would intensify , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could rise .
c SENT -- ”   the rationale portion pertaining to the outlook for inflation would be identical to that in alternative c .

d PAR 35 if the committee believes that economic growth is likely to resume an acceptable pace before long and that inflation is on a higher trajectory than in the greenbook , it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged , as in alternative d .
d PAR 35 although measures of consumer and business sentiment have declined , the committee might view the data on final demand as only a bit weaker than expected class i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 32 of 39 and judge that financial turmoil , while posing significant risks , is likely to have less of an effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff .
d PAR 35 moreover , monetary policy has been eased considerably and substantial fiscal stimulus has been enacted , factors that are likely to provide a significant boost to aggregate demand in coming quarters .
d PAR 35 accordingly , policymakers might prefer to wait for additional information about the extent of that boost before making any further policy adjustments .
d PAR 35 in addition , given the recent run - up in energy and other commodity prices , the drop in the foreign exchange value of the dollar , and the apparent slight increase in long - term inflation expectations , the committee might now see it as increasingly unlikely that inflation will decline at an acceptable pace and might believe that the upside risks to inflation have risen unacceptably .
d PAR 35 a pause at this juncture might be particularly appealing to policymakers who prefer a more distinct downward tilt to the trajectory for inflation over the next few years than that shown in the greenbook , such as that illustrated by the optimal - control simulation with an inflation goal of 1½ percent .
d SENT -- ( 36 ) the first paragraph of the rationale portion of the statement associated with alternative d would acknowledge that economic activity has been weak and that financial markets remain under considerable stress .
d PAR 37 given the expectations embedded in financial market prices of further substantial policy easing at this meeting , a decision to adopt alternative d would stun market participants , leading to a sharp upward revision of their short - term outlook for the path of policy and a significant increase in short - term interest rates .
d PAR 37 despite the indication in the announcement that recent policy actions should help to promote moderate growth class
d PAR 37 i fomc - restricted - controlled ( fr ) 33 of 39 over time , investors would likely become gravely concerned about the economic outlook , a development that would cause credit spreads on corporate debt to widen substantially , market functioning to deteriorate further , equity prices to tumble , and longer - term nominal yields to decline .
d PAR 37 money and debt forecasts 

