a PAR 29 in contrast , if the committee continues to view the outlook for economic activity as unacceptably weak , it may prefer to reduce the target funds rate by 50 basis points at this meeting , as proposed in alternative a .
a PAR 29 the committee might judge that financial headwinds could continue to exert a significant drag on economic growth through much of next year and thus policy may eventually have to be eased by more than envisaged by the staff , a possibility explored in the “ greater financial stress ” scenario in the greenbook .
a PAR 29 alternatively , the committee might share the staff ’s assessment of the underlying forces shaping the economy and the probable extent to which policy will need to be eased in order to foster a return to more normal levels of activity , but judge that the downside risks to growth are such that it is preferable to adjust rates more promptly than suggested by the staff forecast .
a PAR 29 in particular , the committee might feel that an adverse feedback loop — in which weakness in the real economy exacerbates strains in financial markets which in turn feed back onto economic activity — remains a distinct possibility and that it is prudent for policy to respond decisively to reduce the risk of this dynamic taking hold .
a PAR 29 in this case , members might be willing to tolerate the likelihood of a somewhat higher path for inflation than in the staff forecast in order to respond more aggressively to the possibility of significant weakness in output .
a PAR 29 in that regard , the optimal - control simulation with an inflation goal of 2 percent prescribes a trajectory for the target funds rate that drops close to 1 percent by the end of 2009 , notably softer than the policy path assumed in the greenbook .
a PAR 31 with investors attaching little weight to the possibility of a 50 basis point cut in the target funds rate at this meeting , alternative a would come as a considerable surprise to financial markets .
a PAR 31 short- and intermediate - term interest rates would move lower .
a PAR 31 long - term nominal treasury yields and measures of inflation compensation could increase if the committee ’s action was interpreted as implying that it was willing to tolerate a higher trajectory for inflation than investors had previously thought .
a PAR 31 equity prices would probably rise and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could weaken further .
a PAR 31 however , these responses would be damped somewhat to the extent that the accompanying statement was read as suggesting that the committee was not inclined to ease rates further after this meeting .
a PAR 31 money and debt forecasts 

b PAR 23 if the committee judges that the target funds rate is nearing a level that would appropriately balance the risks to its dual objectives of fostering maximum employment and price stability , it may wish to reduce the target federal funds rate by 25 basis points , as in alternative b , a relatively modest action compared with those taken over the past several months .
b PAR 23 members may view the incoming data as broadly consistent with their earlier assessments concerning the underlying weakness of economic activity and the likely need for further monetary stimulus at this meeting to promote a timely resumption of moderate economic growth .
b PAR 23 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 2- 1/4 percent .
b PAR 23 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1 - 3/4 percent .
b PAR 23 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2 percent .
b PAR 23 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 - 1/4 percent .
b PAR 23 2 . recent information indicates that the outlook for economic activity has weakened further .
b PAR 23 growth in consumer spending has slowed and labor markets have softened .
b PAR 23 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and the tightening of credit conditions and the deepening of the housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 23 recent information indicates that economic activity remains weak .
b PAR 23 household and business spending has been subdued and labor markets have softened further .
b PAR 23 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and tight credit conditions and the deepening housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 23 recent information indicates that economic activity remains weak .
b PAR 23 household and business spending has been subdued and labor markets have softened further .
b PAR 23 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and tight credit conditions and the deepening housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 23 recent information indicates that economic activity remains weak .
b PAR 23 household and business spending has been subdued and labor markets have softened further .
b PAR 23 financial markets remain under considerable stress , and tight credit conditions and the deepening housing contraction are likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few quarters .
b PAR 23 rationale 3 .
b PAR 23 inflation has been elevated , and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen .
b PAR 23 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , reflecting a projected leveling - out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization .
b PAR 23 still , uncertainty about the inflation outlook has increased .
b PAR 23 it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 23 inflation has been elevated , and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months .
b PAR 23 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , reflecting a projected leveling - out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization .
b PAR 23 still , uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high .
b PAR 23 it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 23 inflation has been elevated , and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months .
b PAR 23 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , reflecting a projected leveling - out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource utilization .
b PAR 23 still , uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high .
b PAR 23 it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 23 inflation has been elevated , and some indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months .
b PAR 23 the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters , but uncertainty about the inflation outlook remains high .
b PAR 23 it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully .
b PAR 23 assessment of risk 4 .
b PAR 23 today ’s policy action , combined with those taken earlier , including measures to foster market liquidity , should help to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 23 however , downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 23 the committee will act in a timely manner as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 23 the committee judged that a further reduction in interest rates was appropriate to foster moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 23 the committee will act in a timely manner as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 23 the committee judged that a further reduction in interest rates was appropriate to foster moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 23 at this juncture , some time may be needed to better assess the effects of the policy actions taken to date .
b PAR 23 however , the committee remains prepared to act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 23 the committee judges that downside risks to growth remain but concluded that more time is needed to better assess economic prospects and the effects of the policy actions taken to date .
b PAR 23 the committee will act in a timely manner as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 23 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 27 of 38 indeed , the greenbook - consistent measure of the equilibrium funds rate is about ½ percentage point below the bluebook estimate of the current real funds rate , suggesting that policy likely still needs to be eased fairly significantly in order to bring output back to its potential over the medium term .
b PAR 23 however , the committee may view the calibration of the appropriate level of the funds rate as particularly problematic given the difficulty of assessing the effects of the substantial easing of policy to date and the myriad uncertainties surrounding the outlook for output and inflation .
b PAR 23 in light of this difficulty and with the gap between the real federal funds rate and its equilibrium rate now estimated to have narrowed , members may prefer to adjust policy more gradually than hitherto .
b PAR 23 the deterioration in the near - term outlook for inflation over recent months may also be viewed as supporting the adoption of a more incremental approach .
b PAR 23 in particular , members might be concerned that a more aggressive policy easing at this meeting would encourage a perception that the committee has a greater tolerance for inflation than previously thought , with the potential for adverse effects on longer - term inflation expectations .
b PAR 23 members might also worry that another substantial reduction in the funds rate would increase the likelihood of a steep decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar or possibly even a further run - up in commodity prices , developments that would put additional upward pressure on inflation .
b PAR 24 the discussion of the outlook for economic activity and inflation in the proposed statement accompanying alternative b is little changed from the march fomc statement .
b PAR 24 the characterization of the real economy has been amended to note that recent information indicates that economic activity “ remains weak ” in contrast to the march statement in which the outlook for economic activity was judged to have “ weakened further . ”   similarly , in light of the mixed developments in financial markets , credit conditions are described as “ tight ” as opposed to the class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 28 of 38 “ tightening ” highlighted in march .
b PAR 24 the paragraph about inflation is essentially unaltered from the previous statement , save for some modest adjustments to the references to the apparent rise in inflation expectations and to the increase in the uncertainty attending the inflation outlook in order to avoid giving the impression that either of these concerns has escalated over the intermeeting period .
b PAR 24 even though the economic outlook has not changed materially , the draft risk assessment notes that the “ committee judged that a further reduction in interest rates was appropriate to foster moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity .
b PAR 24 ”   in contrast to the march statement , the risk assessment no longer highlights the downside risks to growth and thus implies that policy has moved to a more neutral stance .
b PAR 24 the proposed risk assessment also indicates that “ some time may be needed to better assess the effects of the policy actions taken to date . ”   as such , the statement is likely to be interpreted as suggesting that policy may be on hold for a while .
b PAR 24 nonetheless , the statement concludes by noting that the committee “ remains prepared ” to act as needed to promote economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 25 investors ’ modal expectation as implied by financial futures and options prices appears to be for a 25 basis point easing at this meeting and for the target funds rate to be maintained at 2 percent at the june meeting .
b PAR 25 taken at face value , these financial market quotes suggest that the reaction of financial asset prices to alternative b is likely to be relatively muted .
b PAR 25 however , respondents to the desk ’s survey of primary dealers expected a notably lower path for the federal funds rate than that implied by futures prices , and this divergence makes the reaction to alternative b somewhat harder to predict .
b PAR 25 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 29 of 38 

c PAR 26 if the committee believes that the substantial easing of monetary policy to date together with the fiscal stimulus package is likely to provide considerable support to economic activity and is concerned that inflation might not moderate at an acceptable pace , it may prefer to keep rates unchanged at this meeting , as in alternative c .   with the real federal funds rate close to historically low levels , the committee may anticipate that the economy will avoid a pronounced downturn .
c PAR 26 the committee may not view the incoming data as suggesting the sort of broad weakening in spending that the staff expects as a result of the economy shifting to a “ recessionary state , ” and hence may put some weight on the “ near - term upside risk ” scenario in the greenbook .
c PAR 26 members might also be worried that inflation may follow a higher trajectory than in the staff forecast .
c PAR 26 energy and commodity prices have repeatedly surprised to the upside in recent years and members might attach some likelihood to this pattern continuing , as illustrated in the “ greater inflationary pressure ” scenario in the greenbook .
c PAR 26 moreover , members might feel that the pass - through of past cost increases into retail prices could be greater than anticipated by the staff .
c PAR 26 in addition , some indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months and members might worry that long - term inflation expectations could drift up further if inflation remains around its current elevated level , a development that would be costly to reverse .
c PAR 26 in that regard , members might be troubled that core pce inflation has averaged more than 2 percent in every year since 2004 and is forecast by the staff to do so again in 2008 .
c PAR 26 in a similar vein , members might be concerned that the apparent deterioration in inflation expectations could cause inflation to settle at an unacceptably high level once economic activity returns to more normal level and the downward contribution to inflation from the projected slack in resource markets dissipates .
c PAR 26 these considerations might suggest that the committee stay its class
c PAR 26 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 30 of 38 hand at this meeting in order to allow more information to accumulate on prospects for both growth and inflation .
c PAR 28 this surprise would be compounded if the accompanying statement is interpreted as suggesting that policy may remain on hold over the next few meetings .
c PAR 28 investors would likely mark up their expectations for the path of policy over the next few quarters , leading to an increase in short- and intermediate- term interest rates .
c PAR 28 pressures in short - term funding markets could worsen .
c PAR 28 long- term nominal treasury yields would rise by less or could even fall if the committee ’s decision caused investors to revise down their expected trajectory of future inflation .
c PAR 28 with real rates higher , equities would probably fall , credit spreads class
c PAR 28 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 31 of 38 on corporate debt might widen , and the foreign exchange value of the dollar might be expected to rise .


