a PAR 29 if the committee sees recent developments as pointing to a weaker economic outlook and less pronounced inflation pressures , members may instead be attracted to the statement language of alternative a .   the substantial decline in energy prices in recent months , if not reversed , will pull down top - line inflation , which may prevent elevated inflation rates from becoming embedded in expectations .
a PAR 29 indeed , near - term inflation expectations have come down appreciably over the intermeeting period , as has five - by - five inflation compensation .
a PAR 29 moreover , the passthrough of the lower energy prices , coupled with a higher level of unemployment , should add to downward pressure on core inflation .
a PAR 29 members may also see the recent marked rise in the exchange value of the dollar as likely to contribute to a reduction in inflation while restraining overall economic growth .
a PAR 29 in addition , financial strains appear to have extended to a wider range of financial institutions over the intermeeting period , in some cases creating severe pressures on their balance sheets and even uncertainty about their solvency .
a PAR 29 the ongoing pullback in credit availability has the potential to weigh on economic growth for a considerable period , as in the “ more - persistent headwinds ” scenario discussed in the greenbook .
a PAR 29 the real federal funds rate ( based on lagged four - quarter core pce inflation ) is roughly in line with its greenbook - consistent equilibrium value , which the committee may see as an appropriate policy stance in the present circumstances ( chart 6 ) .
a PAR 29 still , the committee may now see risks to both inflation and output as considerable and roughly equal and may wish to adjust the language in the statement to treat them symmetrically .
a PAR 31 despite the changes in the statement language in alternative a , the market reaction may not be very large .
a PAR 31 the observation that the substantial decline in oil prices is likely to contribute to a moderation in inflation will come as no surprise to market participants .
a PAR 31 furthermore , investors already expect policy to be unchanged for several quarters and reportedly read the august statement as essentially signaling a shift to a balanced assessment of risks , so a more explicit indication in that regard may not spark much reaction .
a PAR 31 indeed , the desk ’s survey found that primary dealers expect the statement to be changed slightly to indicate a somewhat weaker outlook for growth and reduced inflationary pressures .
a PAR 31 still , the greater confidence expressed in the statement that inflation will moderate may be seen as freeing up the committee to ease policy if necessary should the outlook for the economy worsen .
a PAR 31 in consequence , short - term interest rates may decline somewhat following such an announcement .
a PAR 31 long - term rates would likely edge down only a bit if at all , while inflation compensation could tick higher if investors see the fomc as having become less vigilant with respect to inflation risks .
a PAR 31 equity prices may increase moderately , and the exchange value of the dollar might decline a little .
a PAR 31 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 34 of 41 money and debt forecasts 

b SENT -- apart from these changes , alternative b is little different from the committee
b PAR 24 in the statement under alternative b
b PAR 24 , the rationale begins by noting that “ incoming information suggests that growth in economic activity has slowed in recent months , ” which is changed from “ economic activity expanded in the second quarter ” to shift the discussion to the current quarter and reflect the significant , albeit expected , deceleration that appears to be under way .
b PAR 24 in light of the continued deterioration in labor market conditions , the statement then indicates that labor markets have “ weakened ” further , rather than “ softened ” as in august .
b PAR 24 the statement again notes that “ financial markets remain under considerable stress ” and then states that “ tight credit conditions , the ongoing housing contraction , some slowing in export growth , and past increases in energy prices are likely to weigh on economic growth .
b PAR 24 some slowing in export growth ” is included to recognize that , after surging about 11 percent over the four quarters ending in q2 , exports are projected to decelerate to a rate more in line with historical norms , and “ past increases in ” energy prices are referenced rather than “ elevated ” energy prices because the net rise in energy prices over the past year or so continues to restrain growth despite the recent marked decline in prices .
b PAR 24 the remainder of the statement under alternative b is unchanged from that released by the committee in august , indicating that the class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 30 of 41 substantial easing of monetary policy will promote economic growth ; that the committee expects inflation to moderate , but the outlook is uncertain ; and that , although downside risks to growth remain , upside risks to inflation are also of significant concern .
b PAR 25 futures and options quotes as well as
b PAR 25 the desk ’s survey of primary dealers suggest that market participants do not expect any change in policy until the third quarter of next year .
b PAR 25 investors read the statement released in august as consistent with an outlook for unchanged policy , so alternative b , which is very similar , would probably not lead them to revise their views .
b PAR 25 market participants will note the shift in focus of the discussion to the weaker economic activity in the current quarter , but they will probably take more direction from the forward - looking parts of the statement , which are unchanged .   in sum , short- and longer - term interest rates , equity prices , and the exchange value of the dollar would probably be little changed in response to an announcement along the lines of alternative b . 

c PAR 26 if the committee both thinks that it is important that it be seen to be responding to the continued high levels of inflation and has fairly high confidence in the resilience of financial markets and economic activity , it may prefer to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting as in alternative c .   pce inflation in the third quarter is projected to be its highest since the first quarter of 1990 – and above 2 percent for its eleventh consecutive quarter – and some measures of longer - term inflation expectations remain above their levels of recent years .   against this backdrop , the committee may feel that failing to tighten policy could lead market participants and households to question its commitment to price stability , as in the “ unanchored inflation expectations ” alternative scenario in the greenbook .
c PAR 26 moreover , most simple policy rules call for a federal funds rate that is considerably above its current level ( chart 8) .
c PAR 26 although financial market conditions remain strained , members may judge that the financial situation is being adequately addressed class
c PAR 26 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 31 of 41 by the various measures that the federal reserve has put in place to support market liquidity and by the treasury
c PAR 26 ’s actions to stabilize fannie mae and freddie mac .
c PAR 26 as a result , the committee may see the slowdown in growth as transitory , along the lines of the “ financial rebound ” greenbook alternative scenario , and be concerned that holding the federal funds rate at its current level would impart excessive momentum to the economy going forward , undercutting efforts to bring inflation down .
c SENT -- the inflation paragraph in alternative c indicates that “ inflation has remained high . ”
c PAR 28 market participants are very confident in their outlook for no change in policy at this meeting and would be quite surprised by the adoption of alternative c .
c PAR 28 the expected trajectory of the federal funds rate for the next several months would likely be marked up at least 25 basis points , and might move up further if investors thought the committee was more likely to raise rates going forward .
c PAR 28 other short- term interest rates would rise accordingly .
c PAR 28 longer - term rates would probably increase as well .
c PAR 28 inflation compensation would likely decline a bit , as investors concluded that the committee was taking a more aggressive stance toward inflation .
c PAR 28 equity prices would fall , perhaps sharply , while the exchange value of the dollar would probably class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 32 of 41 appreciate .
c PAR 28 the policy surprise , along with the potentially large and unexpected movements in asset prices , would likely intensify strains in financial markets , perhaps significantly .

