a PAR 37 if the committee , like the staff , has marked down significantly its assessment of economic prospects and now sees an immediate and substantial policy response as appropriate , it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative a .
a PAR 37 recent economic data releases have been almost all weaker than anticipated , with consumer outlays down sharply .
a PAR 37 moreover , financial conditions have deteriorated substantially since the september meeting : equity prices fell sharply over the intermeeting period ; mortgage rates moved higher ; 12 the october 22 announcement of a decrease in the spread between the target federal funds rate and the rate of interest paid on excess reserve balances had little apparent effect on futures rates .
a PAR 37 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 36 of 45 corporate bond yields jumped ; and the october senior loan officer opinion survey shows that extraordinarily high percentages of banks tightened standards and terms on loans to businesses and households over the past three months .
a PAR 37 with regard to inflation , the latest news on commodity prices and inflation expectations , in conjunction with the appreciation of the dollar in recent months and the likelihood of a marked increase in economic slack , provides substantial assurance that inflation will moderate .
a PAR 37 even if the committee has not marked down its outlook for the economy as much as the staff , it may view the downside risks as having increased .
a PAR 37 moreover , with the greenbook - consistent measure of the equilibrium real funds rate having dropped about 2 percentage points below the level of the current real rate , even a less pessimistic outlook than
a PAR 37 the greenbook ’s could be consistent with a considerable further reduction in the target federal funds rate .
a SENT -- ( 38 ) the rationale section of the statement for alternative a highlights the recent deterioration in financial and economic conditions , with specific references to weak consumer spending and industrial production and to the slowdown in foreign economic growth .

b PAR 34 if the committee believes that further monetary policy accommodation is appropriate given the deterioration in the economic outlook , but wishes to adjust policy relatively gradually , it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting as in alternative b .   even if members have not revised down their forecast for economic activity as much as the staff , they may still believe that easing is called for .
b PAR 34 in view of the negative tone of the recent economic data , the worsening of financial conditions since mid - september , and the reduction of inflationary pressures implied by the large drop in energy prices and the outlook for significant economic slack , members may view the 50 basis point intermeeting move in early october as only a partial step toward suitably balancing the risks to the outlook and think that that action should be augmented with a further policy adjustment at this meeting .
b PAR 34 at the same time , members may be less pessimistic about class
b PAR 34 the federal open market committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1½ percent .
b PAR 34 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1 percent .
b PAR 34 the federal open market committee decided today to lower its target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 1¼ percent .
b PAR 34 the federal open market committee decided today to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 1½ percent .
b PAR 34 the committee took this action in light of evidence pointing to a weakening of economic activity and a reduction in inflationary pressures .
b PAR 34 incoming economic data suggest that the pace of economic activity has slowed markedly in recent months .
b PAR 34 moreover , the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending , partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit .
b PAR 34 the outlook for economic activity has weakened , and downside risks to growth appear to have increased .
b PAR 34 consumer spending and industrial production have declined in recent months , and slowing economic activity in many foreign economies is damping the prospects for u.s . exports .
b PAR 34 moreover , the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending , partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit .
b PAR 34 the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed markedly , owing importantly to a decline in consumer expenditures .
b PAR 34 moreover , the intensification of financial market turmoil is likely to exert additional restraint on spending , partly by further reducing the ability of households and businesses to obtain credit . reflecting in part the intensification of financial market turmoil , the outlook for economic activity has weakened .
b PAR 34 consumer spending and industrial production have declined in recent months .
b PAR 34 however , policy actions taken in recent weeks , including coordinated interest rate cuts by central banks , extraordinary liquidity measures , and official steps to strengthen financial systems , should help over time to improve credit conditions and promote a return to moderate economic growth .
b PAR 34 rationale 3 .
b PAR 34 inflation has been high , but the committee believes that the decline in energy and other commodity prices and the weaker prospects for economic activity have reduced the upside risks to inflation .
b PAR 34 in light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities and the weaker prospects for economic activity , the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent with price stability .
b PAR 34 in light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities and the weaker prospects for economic activity , the committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent with price stability .
b PAR 34 inflation has been high , but the committee believes that the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities and the weaker prospects for economic activity have reduced the upside risks to inflation .
b PAR 34 assessment of risk 4 .
b PAR 34 the committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 34 the committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 34 policy actions taken in recent weeks , including coordinated interest rate cuts by central banks , extraordinary liquidity measures , and official steps to strengthen financial systems , should help over time to improve credit conditions and promote a return to moderate economic growth .
b PAR 34 nevertheless , significant downside risks to growth remain .
b PAR 34 the committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 34 in these circumstances , the committee ’s primary concern is the downside risks to growth .
b PAR 34 the committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully in light of the recent policy actions and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price stability .
b PAR 34 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 33 of 45 the outlook than the staff for several reasons and hence believe that more limited policy action than assumed in the greenbook is appropriate .
b PAR 34 for example , they may believe that financial conditions will improve sooner than assumed by the staff , as in the greenbook
b PAR 34 ’s “ more rapid financial recovery ” scenario .
b PAR 34 or , they may think that passage of a second fiscal stimulus package is likely and perhaps that such a package could be larger or more potent than those presented in the greenbook
b PAR 34 ’s “ fiscal stimulus ” scenarios .
b PAR 34 although these greenbook alternative scenarios indicate that more policy easing would still be desirable , they might suggest less urgency to take further large steps .
b PAR 34 alternatively , should the committee share the staff ’s downbeat economic outlook but see a near - term reversal of policy as costly , members might view a series of gradual steps as more prudent than one or two large moves because there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the outlook , particularly concerning the effects of the many official actions recently implemented .
b PAR 35 the rationale section of the statement accompanying alternative b would begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity , pointing specifically to the softening in consumer spending .
b PAR 35 the statement would also point out that financial market strains have intensified and that the resulting tightening of credit conditions is likely to impose additional restraint on spending .
b PAR 35 the paragraph on inflation would note that recent declines in the prices of energy and other commodities , along with greater prospective economic slack , should cause inflation to moderate to levels consistent with price stability .
b PAR 35 ( see the box “ likely market interpretation of price stability language . ” )   the change in wording , from reduced upside risks in the october 8 statement to an expected moderation of inflation in the language for alternative b , suggests that committee members have become much more confident that inflation will decline .
b PAR 35 the final paragraph would note the numerous policy steps already taken in recent weeks to increase liquidity in financial markets , strengthen financial systems around the world , and promote economic class
b PAR 35 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 34 of 45 growth .
b PAR 35 while indicating that these actions should support economic activity going forward , the statement also notes that they have not eliminated downside risks .
b PAR 35 the statement concludes with the final sentence of the october 8 statement , highlighting the committee
b PAR 35 ’s intention to act as needed in support of its objectives .
b PAR 36 according to the desk ’s survey on october 20 , primary dealers assigned roughly 40 percent probabilities to both 25 basis point and 50 basis point cuts in the federal funds target at this meeting , with a 20 percent probability of no change .
b PAR 36 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 35 of 45 mean of dealers ’ expectations for the target funds rate was 1.2 percent , which is slightly above the rate of 1.1 percent implied by federal funds futures contracts at the time of the desk ’s survey .
b PAR 36 because futures contracts refer to the effective funds rate rather than the target rate , the difference between the dealer expectations and the futures rate may reflect the possibility that federal funds will continue to trade below the target in coming weeks ; 12 it is likely that at the time of the desk ’s survey , both dealers and futures market participants expected a cut in the target funds rate of about 30 basis points .
b PAR 36 however , over subsequent days , rates on federal funds futures contracts closing after the october meeting have declined another 10 basis points amid investor concerns about the economic outlook , and they now suggest expectations of about 40 basis points of easing at the upcoming meeting .
b PAR 36 thus , a 25 basis point cut to 1¼ percent would leave the target federal funds rate somewhat above current market expectations .
b PAR 36 nevertheless , the clear shift in the statement language away from concern about inflation risks and toward an emphasis on growth risks would likely lead investors to anticipate further rate cuts , and this alternative appears broadly consistent with readings for the funds rate at the end of the year that are implied by futures markets .   as a result , our best estimate is that adoption of alternative b would have only small effects on prices of financial assets .
b SENT -- as under alternative b , the section also points out the likely future spending restraint implied by the further tightening of financial conditions .

c PAR 40 if the committee believes that the economic outlook has not deteriorated as much as in the staff forecast or that there is still a significant risk that inflation will not moderate as expected , it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged , as in alternative c .
c PAR 40 although recent readings on real activity have been very weak , a wide range of monetary and other policy measures have been implemented recently , and members may feel that a gradual improvement of financial conditions could be in train .
c PAR 40 indeed , many yield spreads have been narrowing and liquidity measures have been improving gradually in recent days , albeit from highly strained levels .
c PAR 40 if this process continues in coming weeks , the cumulative improvement in financial conditions could be substantial .
c PAR 40 also , the committee may place a high probability on a major new fiscal stimulus package being enacted soon ; no fiscal package was factored into the staff ’s projection .
c PAR 40 moreover , members may be skeptical of the staff projection of a sharp reduction in inflation , perhaps feeling that it is based on assumptions that may prove to be overly optimistic .
c PAR 40 for example , the committee may not have confidence in the sharply lower trajectory for energy prices suggested by futures markets ; energy prices are highly volatile and futures market quotes over the past few years have been unreliable guides to subsequent developments .
c PAR 40 and some members may not put much stock in the notion that slack in labor and product markets will restrain future price pressures , but may instead worry that a very low funds rate will fuel rising inflation expectations , as illustrated in the greenbook
c PAR 40 ’s “ faster inflation ” scenario .
c PAR 40 indeed , members may want to see several months of lower data on inflation and inflation expectations before they feel comfortable with further reductions in the policy target .
c PAR 40 fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 38 of 45 
c PAR 41 the first part of the rationale portion of the statement associated with alternative c
c PAR 41 would acknowledge the recent deterioration in economic and financial conditions .
c PAR 41 the second part would point to the wide range of recent policy actions , noting that they should help to promote growth over time .
c PAR 41 the discussion of the outlook for inflation would be essentially identical to that in the october 8 statement , which focused on a reduction in upside risks rather than a material reduction in the modal forecast .
c PAR 41 finally , the risk assessment under alternative c begins by stating that the balance of risks has shifted toward downside risks to growth .
c PAR 41 the section concludes with a modification of the risk assessment of the october 8 statement , pointing to the possible effects of past policy actions as something the committee will be watching particularly closely .
c PAR 42 given the high odds embedded in financial market prices of at least a 25 basis point cut at this meeting ,
c PAR 42 a decision to adopt alternative c would surprise market participants , leading to an appreciable upward revision of their short - term outlook for the path of policy and probably an increase in short - and intermediate- term interest rates .
c PAR 42 equity prices would likely fall , perhaps substantially .
c PAR 42 financial market strains would probably increase and private yields would rise .
c PAR 42 money and debt forecasts 

