a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would reduce the federal funds rate target by 25 basis points to 1¾ percent , and its statement would suggest that the further easing of policy was motivated by a relatively downbeat assessment of the growth outlook .
a PAR 29 if the committee remains particularly worried about downside risks to the outlook for economic activity , then it may prefer to ease policy by another quarter point at this meeting , as in alternative a .
a PAR 29 the unemployment rate has increased sharply in recent months ; in the past , such sharp increases have always been accompanied by recessions .
a PAR 29 mortgage rates and corporate bond yields have risen over the intermeeting period , tightening financial conditions and adding to class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 35 of 41 the restraint on aggregate demand .
a PAR 29 members may also view financial market functioning as still quite fragile :   short - term funding markets remain strained , financial firms ’ share prices have fallen sharply over the intermeeting period , and some financial institutions have reported large losses and their credit ratings have been downgraded .
a PAR 29 a little more policy accommodation may be seen as appropriate insurance against the macroeconomic consequences of the risk that financial market functioning might deteriorate once again .
a PAR 29 the committee might also be concerned that the reasonably firm consumer spending data in the second quarter might simply reflect a greater degree of anticipatory spending by households of their fiscal stimulus rebates than assumed in the staff forecast , implying that growth in the second half of the year could be lower as this effect wanes .
a PAR 29 indeed , the apparent resilience in economic activity could be interpreted as just a delay in the possible onset of a cyclical downturn , along the lines of the “ recession ” alternative scenario in the greenbook .
a PAR 29 although the recent sharp increases in energy prices may well add to inflationary pressures in the short run , they are also likely to weigh on household and business spending .
a PAR 29 in such circumstances , the committee might think that there will be sufficient resource slack to contain inflation pressures , even with a slight further easing of policy .
a PAR 31 with investors expecting the funds rate to be increased this year , the adoption of alternative a would surprise financial markets .
a PAR 31 short- and intermediate - term interest rates would fall , but long - term nominal treasury yields and measures of inflation compensation would probably increase , as investors came to perceive the committee as willing to tolerate a higher trajectory of inflation than had been thought .
a PAR 31 equity prices might rise , while it is likely that the foreign exchange value of the dollar would depreciate .
a PAR 31 money and debt forecasts 

b SENT -- under alternative b , the target would be maintained at 2 percent , but the statement would point both to somewhat diminished downside risks to growth and increased upside risks to inflation .
b PAR 24 the discussion of the growth outlook in the statement proposed for alternative b replaces the assessment in the april fomc statement that economic growth remains weak by noting instead that overall economic activity continues to expand , and the firming in consumer spending data is cited as providing some support to aggregate demand .
b PAR 24 however , the discussion of the outlook for economic activity retains some of the more downbeat language from the previous statement , and adds the rise in energy prices to the list of factors that are seen as likely to restrain growth going forward .
b PAR 24 the housing contraction is described as “ ongoing ” rather than “ deepening ” to avoid the suggestion that housing markets are deteriorating more sharply than before .
b PAR 24 meanwhile , the inflation paragraph has a more hawkish tone than in the april statement .
b PAR 24 the observation that “ readings on core inflation have improved somewhat ” is deleted in light of the fact that core inflation readings moderated during the spring but have flattened out more recently .
b PAR 24 the statement suggests that inflation will moderate , but , unlike the previous statement , omits discussion of the economic forces that might cause this to occur .
b PAR 24 instead , the continued rise in energy and commodity prices and some indications of heightened inflation expectations are cited as factors that have increased the uncertainty about inflation prospects .
b PAR 24 although agricultural commodity prices have increased further since the last fomc meeting , other commodity prices , including those of many metals , have declined markedly .
b PAR 24 accordingly , the draft language points to further increases in the prices of “ energy and some other commodities . ”
b PAR 24 the balance of risks assessment is unchanged from april , except for the addition of a sentence that judges that there are downside risks to growth―which appear to have diminished somewhat―and upside risks to class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 32 of 41 near - term inflation and inflation expectations .
b PAR 24 the two opposing risks are not explicitly compared , but since the sentence ends on the discussion of upside risks to inflation , markets may read it as suggesting that increased upside inflation risks are now the greater policy concern of the committee .
b PAR 25 futures and options quotes suggest that investors think it highly probable that policy will be left unchanged at this meeting , but expect policy tightening to begin later this year , perhaps as soon as the august meeting .
b PAR 25 the combination of an unchanged funds rate and the slight implicit tilt towards upside risks envisioned under alternative b seems broadly consistent with these expectations , though it may cause investors to push back their expectations for the onset of policy tightening a bit .
b PAR 25 short - term interest rates might edge down , but longer - term rates would probably be little changed .

c PAR 26 if , in view of recent developments , the committee judges that the growth outlook has improved appreciably or that inflationary pressures have risen significantly , then it may prefer to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting , as in alternative c .
c PAR 26 also , members may see prompter firming than assumed in the greenbook as appropriate if they are more optimistic than the staff about growth prospects in the second half of the year―as they were in their economic projections in april .
c PAR 26 indeed , the current stance of monetary policy might now be viewed as giving excessive support to aggregate demand―some measures of real short - term interest rates have declined further over the intermeeting period , and members may believe that this will have a larger effect on spending than envisioned by the staff .
c PAR 26 risk considerations also might argue for beginning to firm policy relatively soon .
c PAR 26 in particular , since last august , the committee has eased policy aggressively , in part to mitigate downside risks to growth stemming from financial market turmoil .
c PAR 26 however , financial market conditions have improved somewhat in recent months :   risk spreads have generally declined , bond class
c PAR 26 i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 33 of 41 issuance has picked up , and many financial institutions have been successful in raising new capital .
c PAR 26 in these circumstances , the committee might see it as important to be prompt in reversing the earlier aggressive easing of policy .
c PAR 26 members may also be worried that the recent rise in many measures of inflation expectations could presage a more serious unmooring of inflation expectations that would prove costly to reverse later , along the lines of the “ higher inflation expectations ” scenario .
c PAR 26 in particular , members might be concerned that , in current circumstances , the committee could be perceived as willing to tolerate the inflationary consequences of higher energy prices and less resource slack .
c PAR 26 also , they may think that heightened inflation pressures could persist to a greater degree than incorporated in the staff forecast :   oil prices have soared over the last year , even as futures quotes consistently implied that they were about to level out .
c PAR 26 members may prefer a tighter stance of policy if they are worried that this pattern could continue ( along the lines of the “ ongoing commodity price pressures ” scenario ) , or if they believe that the pass - through of rising food and energy prices into core inflation may turn out to be greater than envisioned by the staff .
c PAR 26 finally , the committee might share the staff ’s assessment of the underlying forces shaping the economy , but may prefer a tighter stance of policy in order to foster a more rapid moderation in inflation than is foreseen in the staff forecast .
c SENT -- however , the inflation paragraph in alternative c points to the elevated level of headline inflation and acknowledges that some indicators of inflation expectations have increased further―referring to the increase in short - term inflation compensation and in some short - term survey measures of inflation expectations class
c SENT -- the final paragraph of alternative c has no balance of risks assessment , but simply notes that “ future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth .
c PAR 28 investors place only small odds on a rate hike at this meeting , and thus they would be surprised by the adoption of alternative c .   the expected path of policy over coming quarters would likely be marked up somewhat , notwithstanding the relatively pessimistic growth paragraph and the absence of any explicit mention of inflation risks .
c PAR 28 accordingly , short - term interest rates would rise and equity prices would fall .
c PAR 28 there is a risk that these moves could be quite pronounced if investors interpreted the adoption of this alternative as signaling a substantially more rapid pace of policy tightening than had been anticipated .
c PAR 28 however , longer - term nominal interest rates and inflation compensation might decline if the committee ’s decision caused investors to mark down their expectations for inflation at longer horizons .
c PAR 28 the foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably appreciate .
c PAR 28 conditions in short - term funding markets could worsen once again .

