a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would increase its purchases of treasury securities and potentially extend the period of time over which it expects to hold the funds rate at a very low rate .
a SENT -- in contrast , alternative a raises the amount of purchases of treasury securities by $ 150 billion and indicates that the “ full amount ” of $ 450 billion will be purchased by year - end ; this alternative does not mention a phase - out strategy for these transactions .
a SENT -- the   case   for   alternative   a if policymakers are concerned that the economic outlook is unacceptably weak and judge that additional monetary stimulus would be appropriate , the committee could decide to expand the total amount of purchases of treasury securities and to extend the timeframe for conducting those purchases , as in alternative a .
a SENT -- the second scenario corresponds to alternative a in the policy alternatives section , in which purchases of treasury securities are increased by $ 150 billion to $ 450 billion , and the purchases continue through the end of this year .
a SENT -- even under alternative a , treasury securities account for only about one - third of assets at the end of 2009 .
a SENT -- for alternative a , the peak occurs on the same date , but at a higher level of $ 2.8 trillion .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 50 of 71 growth rates for monetary base date baseline alternative a alternative memo : june baseline percent , annual rate monthly quarterly annual - q4 to q4 note :
a SENT -- in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , purchases of treasury securities are increased by $ 150 billion to $ 450 billion by the end of the year .

b SENT -- however , if policymakers perceive an appreciable probability that additional purchases of treasury securities could become warranted in coming months , they might prefer language like that of alternative b ' , which states that the committee is “ prepared to consider august 6 , 2009 class
b SENT -- this baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in the policy alternatives section of this bluebook .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the committee would trim the size of the lsaps and shorten the anticipated period of time over which its target range for the funds rate would be likely to remain extraordinarily low .
c SENT -- ”   alternative c also indicates that “ downside risks are diminishing . ”   as in june , all three alternatives reiterate the committee ’s expectation that inflation “ will remain subdued for some time .
c SENT -- if policymakers are substantially more optimistic than the staff regarding the economic outlook , the committee might choose to trim the size of the lsaps and to adjust its language regarding the anticipated period over which the funds rate would be likely to remain extraordinarily low , as in alternative c .
c SENT -- the third scenario corresponds to alternative c in the policy alternatives section , in which the total quantity of agency mbs purchases is reduced by $ 250 billion to $ 1 trillion . to construct the projections , we made assumptions about all components of the balance sheet other than reserve balances , which are the residual item .
c SENT -- for alternative c , the balance sheet peaks at $ 2.4 trillion at the end of 2009 , and assets decline to $ 1.4 trillion at the end of
c SENT -- in the scenario corresponding to alternative c , purchases of agency mbs are decreased by $ 250 billion to $ 1.0 trillion by the end of the year .


