a SENT -- in contrast , alternative a indicates that the recovery will be sluggish and slack in resource utilization will decline quite slowly absent further policy action .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would increase its purchases of agency mbs to a total of $ 1.5 trillion ( from the currently planned amount of $ 1.25 trillion ) and extend the timeframe for these purchases to the end of the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- to do so , the committee could increase the quantity of agency mbs purchases and extend the timeframe for those purchases while continuing to signal that the federal funds rate will remain at the effective zero lower bound for an extended period , as in alternative a .   even if they anticipate an outcome similar to the staff forecast as most likely , december 10 , 2009 class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 46 of 72 participants may see a significant risk that the economy could fall back into recession next year , perhaps after some of the support from government policies and liquidity facilities is removed .
a SENT -- an announcement such as that in alternative a would come as a surprise to market participants .
a SENT -- under alternative a , the agency mbs purchases are increased by $ 250 billion to a total $ 1.5 trillion and are completed by the end of the second quarter of 2010 ; purchases of agency debt securities under this alternative remain at $ 175 billion and are executed by the end of the first quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- for the baseline and alternative a scenarios , the balance sheet reaches a peak of $ 2.4 trillion and $ 2.5 trillion , respectively , with the peak occurring a quarter after the agency mbs lsaps are assumed to be completed .
a SENT -- in contrast , under alternative a , reserve balances do not peak until the third quarter of 2010 at $ 1.3 trillion , reflecting the extension of asset purchases through the middle of next year .
a SENT --  in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , the committee increases its purchases of agency mbs by $ 250 billion to a total of $ 1.5 trillion and extends the timeframe for these purchases to the end of the second quarter of 2010 .

b SENT -- under alternative b , the statement would be very similar to that for the november meeting .
b SENT -- the proposed statement in alternative b provides language to describe that development .
b SENT -- as in alternative b , the committee may also view it as appropriate to affirm that the various liquidity facilities will be winding down .
b SENT -- the baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in which agency mbs purchases of $ 1.25 trillion and agency

c SENT -- under alternative c , the amount of agency mbs purchases would be reduced to $ 1.1 trillion while agency debt purchases would be reduced to $ 160 billion .
c SENT -- participants might be particularly attracted to alternative c if they saw greater upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations than does the staff .
c SENT -- the adoption of alternative c would greatly surprise market participants and lead them to reevaluate , perhaps significantly , their beliefs regarding the committee ’s intentions .
c SENT -- under alternative c , the quantities of agency mbs purchases and agency debt purchases are reduced to $ 1.1 trillion and $ 160 billion , respectively ; all purchases under this alternative are completed by january 2010 .
c SENT -- in alternative c , the size of the balance sheet peaks at $ 2.2 trillion in december 2009 .
c SENT -- , the peak occurs at the end of 2009 under the baseline and alternative c scenarios at $ 1.2 trillion and $ 1.1 trillion , respectively .


