a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would increase its purchases of agency mbs to a total of $ 1.5 trillion ( from the currently planned amount of $ 1.25 trillion ) , reaffirm its intention to purchase up to $ 200 billion of agency debt securities , and extend the time over which these purchases would be executed through the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- ”   alternative a adds that “ inflation has fallen considerably over the past year .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 41 of 77 conducting agency mbs and agency debt transactions ( thereby allowing a higher amount of agency debt to be bought without causing market disruption ) , as in alternative a .
a SENT -- in order to expand the amount of these purchases and to allow for a gradual reduction in the pace of transactions so as to avoid adverse effects on market functioning , the committee may judge that it would be prudent to extend execution of the purchases through the second quarter of 2010 . expanding the amount of purchases of agency debt beyond $ 200 billion could generate significant distortions in the market for those securities , so this is not proposed in alternative a . to the degree that the policy path currently expected by market participants is steeper than policymakers see as likely to be optimal in current circumstances , the committee might deem it appropriate to change its forward guidance .
a SENT -- an announcement along the lines of alternative a would come as a considerable surprise to market participants .
a SENT -- language from the november 2009 statement alternative a .
a SENT -- the second scenario corresponds to alternative a , in which agency mbs purchases are increased by $ 250 billion to $ 1.5 trillion , while the maximum for agency debt securities purchases is left at $ 200 billion ; these purchases are completed by the end of the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- in alternative a , the size of the balance sheet peaks at $ 2.6 trillion in the third quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- in contrast , under alternative a , reserve balances peak in the third quarter of 2010 , because a greater quantity of assets is purchased and the purchases last well into next year .
a SENT --  in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , purchases of agency mbs are increased by $ 250 billion to $ 1.5 trillion and assumed purchases of agency debt securities amount to $ 200 billion .

b SENT -- these conditions include low rates of resource utilization and subdued inflation ; alternative b adds stable inflation expectations to the list .
b SENT -- on the current trajectory , agency debt purchases will not reach the previously stated maximum , and the committee may want to indicate that these purchases are likely to total $ 175 billion , as in alternative b .
b SENT -- the baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in the policy alternatives section .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the amount of agency mbs purchases would be reduced to $ 1.1 trillion and that of agency debt to $ 160 billion .
c SENT -- ”   alternative c also characterizes longer - term inflation expectations as stable and says that the committee expects inflation to “ remain at levels consistent with price stability , ” basing this expectation on appropriate adjustments to monetary policy rather than slack in resource utilization .
c SENT -- the   case   for   alternative   c if policymakers view the continued accumulation of positive data on spending as pointing to more underlying momentum in the recovery than they previously anticipated and are more concerned than the staff about the inflation outlook , they might choose to trim the size of the lsaps and to adjust the language regarding the anticipated period over which the funds rate is likely to remain low , as in alternative c .
c SENT -- indeed , alternative c omits reference to resource utilization .
c SENT -- the adoption of alternative c would certainly surprise market participants .
c SENT -- the third scenario corresponds to alternative c , in which the quantity of agency mbs purchases is reduced by $ 150 billion to $ 1.1 trillion and the quantity of agency debt securities purchases is reduced from its current $ 200 billion maximum to $ 160 billion ; these purchases are completed by january 2010 in this scenario .
c SENT -- this latter development occurs under the baseline and alternative c scenarios .
c SENT -- under alternative c , reserve balances peak earlier than in the baseline scenario , because asset purchases are completed earlier .
c SENT --  in the scenario corresponding to alternative c , purchases of agency mbs are decreased by $ 150 billion to $ 1.1 trillion and purchases of agency debt securities amount to $ 160 billion .


