a SENT -- ” regarding the prospects for economic recovery , alternative a indicates that in the absence of further monetary policy stimulus , “ the sharp rise in some longer- term interest rates over recent months ” could undermine the economic recovery .
a SENT -- ”   alternative a includes an option under which the committee would specify that the funds rate will likely remain exceptionally low “ at least through mid-2010 .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 51 of 79 securities and to extend the timeframe for conducting those purchases , as in alternative a .
a SENT -- since market participants reportedly see only small odds that the committee will announce an expansion of its securities purchases at this meeting , it is likely that longer - term yields would fall substantially following the release of a statement like that accompanying alternative a .   although considerable uncertainty surrounds any assessment of the effects of lsaps on asset prices , recent experience suggests that an expansion of $ 450 billion in purchases of treasury securities would induce a decline of about 20 to 45 basis points in treasury yields and other longer - term rates immediately following the announcement .
a SENT -- the second scenario is an expanded purchases scenario , which corresponds to alternative a in the policy alternatives section , where purchases of treasury securities are increased by $ 450 billion to $ 750 billion , and the purchases continue through the end of this year .

b SENT -- as in the previous two fomc statements , alternative b indicates that economic conditions are likely to warrant an exceptionally low funds rate “ for an extended period .
b SENT -- in contrast , alternative b ´ does not include this additional phrase .
b SENT -- this baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in the policy alternatives section .

c SENT -- ”   alternative c states that the funds rate is likely to remain at exceptionally low levels “ until late this year .
c SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 53 of 79 next year , as in alternative c .
c SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 54 of 79 statement like alternative c would likely push up short- and long - term yields and the foreign exchange value of the dollar , while equity prices would likely fall .


