a SENT -- ”   alternative a announces either a $ 250 billion increase in the federal reserve
a SENT -- controlled ( fr ) 39 of 52 alternative a 1 .
a PAR 41 if the committee shares the staff ’s assessment that policies already announced or expected will not suffice to prevent considerable economic slack and a heightened risk of deflation , and if it believes that additional policy measures could help to improve the economic outlook , it may opt for alternative a .
a PAR 41 the output gap in the greenbook remains larger than 5 percent over the next two years and core inflation falls below 1 percent , which is lower than the rates of inflation that most class i fomc -- restricted controlled ( fr ) 43 of 52 fomc participants would view as consistent with the federal reserve ’s dual mandate .
a PAR 41 most private - sector analysts have marked up their forecasts for the unemployment rate in 2009 and 2010 to levels about the same as projected by the staff , and they forecast relatively low rates of inflation , albeit not as low as the staff .
a PAR 41 even if members have a less gloomy outlook for the economy , they may view the downside risks to this outlook as unusually large and thus may wish to take out “ insurance ” against an unwelcome further weakening in growth or drop in inflation .
a PAR 41 the significant decline in long - term interest rates , including conventional mortgage rates , since the federal reserve announced plans to purchase agency debt and mbs may give policymakers confidence that nontraditional policies can provide significant economic stimulus .   as a result , the committee may conclude that an expansion of these purchases would likely lead to further reductions in rates and increases in mortgage availability .
a PAR 41 or , if the level of long - term interest rates is seen as higher than is consistent with a rapid economic recovery , the committee may wish to engage in large - scale purchases of long - term treasury securities .
a PAR 41 by lowering the general level of long - term interest rates , either of these options could support business and household spending .

b SENT -- i fomc -- restricted controlled ( fr ) 40 of 52 alternative b 1 .
b PAR 40 if the committee agrees that current economic conditions are very weak but suspects that there is a significant possibility that policy actions already announced or likely to be adopted will have a larger effect on economic activity than is assumed in the staff ’s forecast , it may wish to choose alternative b .   in many ways , the current circumstances are unprecedented , and we lack reliable metrics for gauging the effectiveness of nontraditional policies .
b PAR 40 in light of the aggressive monetary actions already taken or announced and the large fiscal package likely to be passed , members may believe that it is prudent at this stage to wait and assess further developments before committing the federal reserve to any additional actions .
b PAR 40 in particular , members may wish to observe the market reaction to the implementation of the talf , planned for next month .
b PAR 40 moreover , the incoming administration may move rapidly to ramp up efforts to deal with the financial crisis , and the committee will be better placed to assess these efforts in a few weeks .
b PAR 40 alternatively , members may be concerned about the challenges of exiting from measures already adopted , and thus may wish to be quite cautious in implementing further liquidity programs .
b PAR 40 at the same time , given that the forecasts of the staff and most private analysts imply that additional macroeconomic stimulus would be desirable , the committee may not want to signal a halt to further monetary actions .
b SENT -- finally , as in alternative b , the committee may be concerned that exiting from the existing facilities could prove challenging and prefer not to take the risk of adding to such difficulties .
b PAR 43 based on interest rate futures contracts and on the desk ’s survey of dealers
b PAR 43 , market participants attach virtually no probability to a change in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting .
b PAR 43 dealers generally expect the statement to continue to refer to the funds rate remaining low for some time and to focus on the federal reserve ’s nontraditional policy tools .
b PAR 43 on average , dealers place the odds of large - scale federal reserve purchases of long - term treasury securities at about 50 percent , with no time horizon specified for the onset of such purchases .
b PAR 43 although market expectations for the statement overall are difficult to judge , the message of alternative b seems most consistent with current market views .
b PAR 43 money and debt forecasts 

c SENT -- ”   alternative c omits all mention of possible increases in open market purchases or liquidity programs other than the talf .
c SENT -- i fomc -- restricted controlled ( fr ) 41 of 52 alternative c 1 .


