a SENT -- under alternative a , the committee would increase its purchases of agency mbs to “ a total of $ 1.5 trillion ” ( from the previous “ up to $ 1.25 trillion ” ) and would extend the time over which purchases would be completed through the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- ”   alternative a also notes that “ inflation has fallen considerably over the past year .
a SENT -- in this case , they could decide to expand the amount of agency mbs purchases , be more definitive about the total amount to be purchased , and extend the timeframe for conducting those transactions , as in alternative a .
a SENT -- expanding the amount of purchases of agency debt ( or even buying the maximum $ 200 billion ) could generate significant distortions in the markets for those securities , so this is not proposed in alternative a .
a SENT -- an announcement along the lines of alternative a would surprise market participants .
a SENT -- the second scenario corresponds to alternative a , in which purchases of agency mbs are increased by $ 250 billion to $ 1.5 trillion and completed by the end of the first quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- for alternative a , the peak also occurs in the second quarter of 2010 but at a higher level of $ 2.6 trillion .
a SENT -- at a quarterly frequency , the monetary base continues to expand for the first three quarters of 2010 for alternative a and b.   in 2011 , however , as securities holdings trend lower and the liquidity facilities wind down , the monetary base begins to contract .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 53 of 73 growth rates for monetary base date baseline alternative a alternative memo : baseline percent , annual rate monthly quarterly annual - q4 to q4 note : not seasonally adjusted .
a SENT -- in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , purchases of agency mbs are increased by $ 250 billion to $ 1.5 trillion and the purchases ( but not settlement ) are completed by the first quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- agency debt purchases mirror those in the scenario corresponding to alternative a .

b SENT -- if policymakers believe that the policy stimulus already in train is likely to foster the most satisfactory economic outcomes feasible given current economic circumstances , the committee could reaffirm its forward guidance regarding the funds rate and continue implementing its previously announced large - scale asset purchases ( lsaps ) , while providing additional information regarding the winding - down process , as in alternative b .   maintaining the current stance of monetary policy might be appealing if the committee shares the staff ’s assessment that incoming economic and financial news is consistent with inflation remaining subdued and economic growth picking up to an acceptable pace in coming quarters as financial market conditions and the housing sector continue to improve .
b SENT -- a statement such as that suggested for alternative b would be close to market expectations and would likely have muted effects in financial markets .
b SENT -- the baseline scenario corresponds to the variant of alternative b in the policy alternatives section , which has agency mbs purchases of $ 1.25 trillion and agency debt purchases of $ 150 billion both completed by the end of the first quarter of 2010 .

c SENT -- under alternative c , the size of agency mbs purchases september 17 , 2009 class
c SENT -- the adoption of alternative c would surprise market participants .
c SENT -- purchases of agency debt are equal to those in the baseline in terms of size but are completed by the end of this year rather than at the end of the first quarter of 2010.10   the third scenario corresponds to alternative c , in which the quantity of agency mbs purchases is reduced by $ 250 billion to $ 1 trillion and agency debt purchases stop at $ 150 billion .
c SENT -- for alternative c , in which asset purchases end in 2009 , the monetary base begins to contract in the first quarter of 2010 .
c SENT -- in the scenario corresponding to alternative c , purchases of agency mbs are decreased by $ 250 billion to $ 1 trillion .


