a SENT -- the case for alternative a if meeting participants are concerned about prospects for a subpar economic recovery and judge that additional monetary stimulus would help improve the outlook for economic activity and inflation , then they might wish to extend the federal reserve ’s agency mbs purchase program and reiterate that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period , as in alternative a .
a SENT -- a statement like alternative a would come as a surprise to financial market participants , who appear to anticipate that the federal reserve ’s lsap program will be completed on schedule at the end of this month .
a SENT -- we also present a projection for alternative a , in which agency mbs purchases are increased by $ 150 billion to a total of $ 1.4 trillion ; this additional $ 150 billion in agency mbs purchases is executed over the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- in alternative a , the size of the balance sheet peaks at a little over $ 2.4 trillion , with the peak occurring a few months after the additional mbs purchases march 11 ,
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 50 of 68 alternative a source .
a SENT -- in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , the committee increases its purchases of agency mbs by $ 150 billion to a total of $ 1.4 trillion and extends the timeframe for these purchases to the end of the second quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- though reserve balances fall more rapidly in the baseline scenario than in alternative a , reserve balances fall back to $ 25 billion by the end of the forecast horizon in both scenarios .
a SENT -- agency debt january alternative a baseline agency mbs january alternative a baseline talf january baseline credit extended to aig january baseline sfa january alternative
a SENT -- a baseline reserve balances january alternative a baseline reverse repurchase agreements january baseline tga january baseline march 11 , 2010 class

b SENT -- 34 of 68 march fomc statement — alternative b 1 .    information received since the federal open market committee met in january suggests that economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the labor market is stabilizing .
b SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 37 of 68 the case for alternative b if policymakers expect the pace of economic recovery to be moderate and inflation to be subdued for some time , and if they judge that the potential benefits of further large - scale asset purchases would not outweigh the costs , then the committee might choose to finish its securities purchases while reiterating that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period , as in alternative b . committee participants may see data releases and financial market developments over the intermeeting period as broadly consistent with the outlook embedded in their january projections
b SENT -- the baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in this bluebook .
b SENT -- the announced lsap purchases in alternative b and alternative
b SENT -- baseline scenario ( alternative b ) source .
b SENT -- the baseline scenario , corresponding to alternative b , incorporates large - scale asset purchases ( lsap ) roughly in line with those that have been announced .

c SENT -- ”   alternative c points out the recent modest pickup in headline inflation due to energy prices , while noting that underlying inflation pressures remain muted ; this alternative also states that the committee “ will adjust the stance of monetary policy as necessary over time to ensure that 12 all three alternatives note that the talf is scheduled to close on june 30 for loans backed by new - issue cmbs and on march 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral .
c SENT -- ”   alternative c modifies that forward guidance by substituting the phrase “ for some time ” and could also include the modifier “ at least through the end of the second quarter . ”
c SENT -- both versions of alternative c put additional emphasis on the prospects for policy tightening by stating that the committee will monitor the economic outlook and financial developments
c SENT -- the draft statement for alternative c does not announce any changes in the federal reserve ’s management of its securities holdings and indicates an expectation that asset sales will be gradual and will not be initiated until after policy firming has begun .
c SENT -- in contrast , alternative c ´ states that the federal reserve will be redeeming all maturing treasury securities and points to the possibility that gradual asset sales could commence fairly soon .
c SENT -- we do not present balance sheet projections for alternative c in this bluebook , because the committee is continuing to evaluate its strategy for asset sales and the use of other reserve draining tools .


