a SENT -- ” alternative a expands the amount of agency mbs purchases by $ 250 billion and indicates that these transactions will continue through the end of the third quarter .
a SENT -- a if meeting participants are concerned about prospects for a subpar recovery and believe that further monetary stimulus would help improve the outlook for economic activity and inflation , then they might wish to expand the amount of the federal reserve ’s agency mbs purchases by $ 250 billion and extend the horizon of those purchases through the third quarter of this year , as in alternative a .   with these adjustments , agency mbs purchases could continue over coming months at an average rate of around $ 10 billion per week , about the same as the volume of the desk ’s purchases over recent weeks .
a SENT -- an announcement like that of alternative a would come as a surprise to market participants , since they do not appear to be anticipating any changes in the overall size or composition of the federal reserve ’s lsaps .
a SENT -- we also present a projection for alternative a , where the agency mbs purchases are increased by $ 250 billion to a total of $ 1.5 trillion and are executed by the end of the third quarter of 2010 ; purchases of agency debt securities under this alternative remain at $ 175 billion and are executed by the end of the first quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- in alternative a , the size of the balance sheet peaks at $ 2.5 trillion , with the peak occurring a few months before all mbs purchases settle because of the runoff of january 21 , 2010 class i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 51 of 72 other assets .
a SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 54 of 72 memo : baseline growth rates for the monetary base date baseline alternative a note . not seasonally adjusted .
a SENT -- the additional sentence would seem not to be needed under alternative a , as the directive under that alternative would instruct the desk to continue to purchase mbs through the third quarter , and thus dollar roll transactions would remain authorized through that time as they are at present .
a SENT --  in the scenario corresponding to alternative a , the committee increases its purchases of agency mbs by $ 250 billion to a total of $ 1.5 trillion and extends the timeframe for these purchases to the end of the third quarter of 2010 .
a SENT -- reserve balances in the baseline scenario peak earlier and at a lower level than in the alternative a scenario .

b SENT -- the baseline scenario corresponds to alternative b in this bluebook .
b SENT -- the announced lsap purchases in alternative b and alternative
b SENT -- assets asset   purchases  the baseline scenario , corresponding to alternative b , incorporates large - scale asset purchases ( lsap ) roughly in line with those that have been announced .
b SENT -- the announced lsap purchases in alternative b and alternative

c SENT -- ”   alternative c modifies the forward guidance by using the phrase “ low ... for some time .
c SENT -- moreover , alternative c uses the phrase “ for some time ” to refer to the duration over which the funds rate target would remain at low levels
c SENT -- i fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) page 45 of 72 alternative c as conveying the committee
c SENT -- we do not present balance sheet projections for alternative c in this bluebook because the committee has not yet specified any strategy for asset sales or the use of other reserve draining tools .
c SENT --  projections for alternative c are not presented in this bluebook because the committee has not yet specified any strategy for asset sales or the use of other reserve draining tools .


