a SENT -- ” alternative a observes that longer - term inflation expectations have been stable but
a SENT -- also notes that recent data suggest inflation has been trending down in response to substantial resource slack ; moreover , alternative a indicates that the committee expects inflation to remain “ quite subdued .
a SENT -- after observing that inflation has been trending down in response to substantial slack , alternative a says :
a SENT -- the fourth paragraph of alternative a ( in brackets ) illustrates language that the committee might add to its statement if it wished to announce a more permanent adoption of that approach .
a SENT -- if so , policymakers may want to issue a statement like that in alternative a in an effort to bring market expectations for the federal funds rate into closer alignment with their own .
a SENT -- if policymakers see a significant risk of such outcomes , they may judge it appropriate to signal , as in alternative a , that monetary policy will remain unusually accommodative until measures of resource utilization increase appreciably or inflation pressures rise .
a SENT -- if so , they could include paragraph 4 of alternative a in the statement .
a SENT -- a statement like alternative a — with or without paragraph 4—would come as a surprise to financial market participants , who appear to anticipate only minor updating of the language .
a SENT -- the directive for alternative a directs the desk to not reinvest the proceeds of maturing agency debt and payments on agency mbs .

b SENT -- fomc - restricted controlled ( fr ) 39 of 59 the   case   for    alternative   b if policymakers expect the pace of economic recovery to be moderate and inflation to be subdued for some time , as they did at the time of the committee ’s march meeting , and if they still judge that the potential benefits of further purchases of longer - term assets would not outweigh the costs , then they might choose to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate and reiterate that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period , as in alternative b . fomc participants may see economic and financial developments during the intermeeting period as broadly consistent with their assessments of the outlook at the time of the march meeting ; they , like the staff , may have made only modest revisions to their forecasts for economic activity and inflation .
b SENT -- as noted earlier , the committee might conclude that the statement should contain neither version of the fourth paragraph of alternative b ; policymakers may judge it better to communicate reinvestment policy in the minutes or in the directive .
b SENT -- language along the lines of that proposed in alternative b — if it did not include an announcement that the committee will stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing treasury securities — probably would result in little change in bond yields , equity prices , or the foreign exchange value of the dollar .

c SENT -- the drafts offer paragraphs on reinvestment strategy— and in alternative c , on asset sales — that the fomc may wish to consider including in its statement .
c SENT -- ” alternative c highlights recent increases in energy prices but notes that inflation has remained subdued .
c SENT -- ” alternative c modifies the final words to “ for some time , ” signaling an earlier increase in the funds rate .
c SENT -- the adoption of alternative c would surprise financial market participants , who appear to expect only small changes in the statement at this meeting , in part because the minutes of the fomc ’s march meeting emphasized the conditionality and flexibility of the existing language and noted that it would not limit the committee ’s april 22 , 2010 class
c SENT -- thus the adoption of alternative c would surprise investors on several fronts .
c SENT -- investors likely would read the statement of alternative c as signaling earlier policy firming than they had previously anticipated and hence short - term interest rates would increase .
c SENT -- the directive for alternative c directs the desk to not reinvest the proceeds of maturing treasury and agency debt as well as payments on mbs .

