Revised projections of the adjusted credit proxy for the quarter, however, did strengthen relative to the previous bluebook. (3) While the staff had expected some gradual improvement in time deposit performance under the less restrictive alternative a opted by the Committee, the improvement developed more rapidly than projected partly because of an earlier and larger decline in bill rates than anticipated.

All additions to the total member bank deposit series and the last Wednesday total loans and investments series are seasonally un- adjusted numbers, since data have not been available for a long enough time to make seasonal adjustments. I/ January data only. Prospective developments (7) If the Committee wishes to continue on the growth path of monetary aggregates (taken together),and associated money market conditions, that are implicit in the policy stance adopted at the last meeting, it may wish to consider the following second paragraph alternative A): To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the current Treasury refundin possibble bank regulatory changes and] the Committee's desire to see moderate growth in money and bank credit over the months ahead, System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to MAINTAINING THE SOMEWHAT LESS [DEL: moving gradually toward somewhat less] firm conditions THAT HAVE BEEN ATTAINED in the money market; provided, however, that operations shall be modified promptly to resist any tendency for money and bank credit to deviate significantly from a moderate growth pattern.

It should be recognized, of course, that the projections are subject to a considerable range of estimating error, and that they depend importantly on realization of staff projections of the level of economic activity as presented in the greenbook. First Second Quarter Quarter Money supply 2% 3% Time deposits 0 12 Adjusted bank credit proxy 1/2 5 Total reserves1/ -3 -1 1/ Thereserve figures are affected by lagged reserve accounting in conjunction with the timing of sharp within-month deposit fluctuations. In addition they are affected by shifts in the deposit mix toward time deposits with relatively low reserve requirements and the general decline in Regulation M requirements associated with re- duction in Euro-dollar borrowings. Policy alternative (15) If it is the Committee's desire to encourage somewhat more growth in the monetary aggregates, and to move further toward less firm money market conditions, it may wish to consider the following alternative B): To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the current Treasury refunding possible bank regulatory changes and] the Committee's desire to see moderate growth in money and bank credit over the months ahead, System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to CONTINUING TO MOVE moving gradually toward somewhat less firm condi- tions in the money market; provided, however, that opera- tions shall be modified promptly to resist any tendency for money and bank credit to deviate significantly from THE growth pattern.

Under these conditions, the 3-month bill rate is likely to drop below 6-1/2 per cent over the next few weeks, and could move even lower as the spring progresses. (17) The anticipated weakness of the economy through the second quarter suggests that it will be difficult to generate much more growth in the money supply than indicated in alternative A without a substantially lower level of interest rates.

Mainly because of the rise in time deposits, the adjusted bank credit proxy would also be stronger than under alternative A, rising in an 8-11 per cent annual rate range in March and April together.

Mainly because of the rise in time deposits, the adjusted bank credit proxy would also be stronger than under alternative A, rising in an 8-11 per cent annual rate range in March and April together. It is assumed that the additional time deposits obtained by banks would substitute in part for funds now obtained through nondeposit sources. (18) Staff guesses as to how the monetary aggregates might develop under alternative B are shown in the table below representing percentage annual rates of change): First Second Quarter Quarter Money supply 2% 4% Time deposits 1/2 18 Adjusted bank credit proxy 1/2 7 Total reserves -3 1 Table 1 MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES (Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures) Member Banks Borrowings Period Free Excess R e s e r v e C i t reserves reserves Total Major banks O r Country 8 N.

