1- % Annual Rates of Change Actual Results 324.5 324.8 326.9 326.0 326.7 327.8 328.3 331.0  Alternative A path of previous Blue Book, levels and rates of growth for the money supply have been converted to a revised basis.

Alternative A involves a 5 per cent money growth rate; alternative B, 6 per cent; and alternative C, 7 per cent.

The last section of the text  possible directive language for various policy courses. (9) The bank credit proxy figures shown in the table assume, for alternatives A and B, no further decline in Euro-dollar borrowings from recent levels.

Under alternative C, declining market interest rates would very likely encourage some further shift away from Euro-dollar borrow- ings absent additional Board action.

Under alternative A, such growth is projected to be a little less in the first quarter than in the fourth, but under alterna- tives B and C, time deposits are assumed to grow somewhat more rapidly because market interest rates would be relatively lower.

1st Qtr Alternative A 5--5-1 67.

1st Qtr Alternative A 5--5-1/2 5% 5% B 4-5/8--5-1/8 5% 67. C 4-1/4--4-3/4 5% 77 Weekly figures for the aggregates between now and the next FOMC meeting  In the case of alternative A, the Federal funds range is wide enough to allow for some tightening from recent levels.

This greater demand may have been temporary, however, resulting from a sudden surge in financial market transactions, as noted earlier. Because of uncertainties as to the source of recent money demand and as to transactions needs associated with such a large bulge in prospective GNP growth, a fairly wide Federal funds rate range is also shown for alternatives B and C.

Under the circumstances, if short-term interest rates do show a sustained downward tendency in the period immediately ahead, a considerable rally in bond markets may again develop. Possible directive language (14) This section presents possible language for the second paragraph of the directive for the three alternative policy courses discussed above, as well as a fourth possibility involving renewal of the present directive language.  Alternative A. This alternative is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides upon a 5 per cent target growth rate for the money supply in the first quarter: To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote [DEL: some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead with allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike.

question is proposed in the two following alternatives also.)  Alternative B. This alternative is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to set its target for money at the 6 per cent rate indicated by the revised data to have prevailed in the three quarters before the auto strike: To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate growth in money [DEL:and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead AT ABOUT THE AVERAGE RATE PREVAILING IN THE FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF 1970, with ATTENDANT BANK CREDIT EXPANSION allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike.

This alternative is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to set its target for money at the 6 per cent rate indicated by the revised data to have prevailed in the three quarters before the auto strike: To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate growth in money [DEL:and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead AT ABOUT THE AVERAGE RATE PREVAILING IN THE FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF 1970, with ATTENDANT BANK CREDIT EXPANSION allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to main- taining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with those objectives.  Alternative C. This alternative is suggested for possible use if the Committee decides to step up its target growth rate for money to 7 per cent: To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate SOMEWHAT MORE RAPID growth in money [DEL: and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead THAN PREVAILED IN THE FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF 1970, with ATTENDANT BANK CREDIT EXPANSION allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike.

This alternative is suggested for possible use if the Committee decides to step up its target growth rate for money to 7 per cent: To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate SOMEWHAT MORE RAPID growth in money [DEL: and attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead THAN PREVAILED IN THE FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF 1970, with ATTENDANT BANK CREDIT EXPANSION allowance for temporary shifts in money and credit demands related to the auto strike.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with those objectives. Deletion of the word "some" from the statement that "the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets" is suggested because of the greater degree of credit market easing likely to ensue under this policy course.  Alternative D. There remains the possibility that, in light of the expected first-quarter surge in nominal GNP in the aftermath of the auto strike, the Committee may wish to accept a temporarily higher money growth rate during the first quarter than it would contemplate at this time for the longer run.

