over June October over September 7.0 0.7 4.5 0,  Alternative A path of previous Blue Book.

Two broad alternatives are discussed in alternative A) calls for maintaining the target for money growth for the fourth and first quarters taken together at a 5 per cent annual rate; the other (alternative B) calls for a higher average rate of growth over that time span.

Two broad alternatives are discussed in the next two subsections: one (alternative A) calls for maintaining the target for money growth for the fourth and first quarters taken together at a 5 per cent annual rate; the other (alternative B) calls for a higher average rate of growth over that time span. Policy alternative A. on a 5 per cent growth path for the money supply, but is wiling to permit some shortfall in the fourth quarter which would be made up in the first quarter, it might consider the following language for the second paragraph of the directive: "To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit expan- sion over the months ahead, WITH ALLOWANCE FOR TEMPORARY SHIFTS IN MONEY AND CREDIT DEMANDS RELATED TO THE AUTO STRIKE.

But once indivdual banks realized that it did not pay to be slow in disposing of excess reserves, a lower average level of excess reserves for the banking system would result for any given Fed funds rate. Policy alternative B. the event that the Committee may wish to consider a more aggressive easing in the money market than under alternative A in order to increase the likelihood of moving closer to a 5 per cent money growth rate (and around 6 per cent bank credit) in the fourth quarter, partly as a way station to moving on to a 6 - 7 per cent growth path for money for the fourth and first quarters taken together.

If money growth were less than 5 per cent in the fourth quarter, money market conditions probably would have to be eased somewhat further in the first quarter since it would take a larger than 7 - 8 per cent money growth rate in that quarter to compensate for the shortfall from 5 per cent in the fourth quarter. (20) The table below shows monthly patterns of monetary aggregates consistent with alternative B. Selected Monetary Aggregates, Monthly ($ billion, seasonally adjusted--% annual rates of change in parentheses) Adjusted Money Supply Adjusted Bank Credit Proxy September, 1970 October November December, 1970 March, 1971 Fourth quarter Dec.

