Under alternative A--which contemplates a Federal funds rate in a 5--5-5/8 per cent range--the annual rate of growth in M1 is likely to be only about one or two per cent in September and around 2 per cent for the fourth quarter.

Under alternative C, money supply growth would be expected to be a little more rapid in the fourth quarter than under alternative A.

The pick-up could be quite modest under alternative A, however, while under alternative C the cumulative impact of lower interest rates could lead to a return to growth rates of around 6 per cent or so.

Both long- and short-term rates would be expected to decline under those circumstances, with declines quite marked if and as the Federal funds rate moves down to trade consistently below 5 per cent. (12) Growth in time and savings deposits other than large CD's is expected to accelerate from recent low rates to about a 9-1/2 per cent annual rate in September, given experience in the first two weeks of the month, but, under alternative A, to drop back to a 7-1 the fourth quarter.

A somewhat more rapid growth in such deposits would be anticipated under alternative C, given the marked decline in market interest rates that would be expected.

Under alternative A, the adjusted bank credit proxy is expected to grow at an 8 per cent annual rate in September and 4-1/2 per cent in the fourth quarter. Under alternative C, the growth rate in the bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected to be around 6-1/2 per cent, as banks in a period of declining interest rates add to investments for purposes of obtaining high yields or capital gains.

Under alternative C, the growth rate in the bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected to be around 6-1/2 per cent, as banks in a period of declining interest rates add to investments for purposes of obtaining high yields or capital gains. Possible directive language  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to seek, or permit, the growth rates for the aggregates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative A, including rates for M 1 of 1-1/2 and 3-1/2 per cent in September and the fourth quarter, respectively.

not want to continue to call for 'more moderate growth" in light of the August experience, when M 1 and M 2 grew at rates of about 3 and 5 per cent, respectively.  Alternative B. The language of B differs from that of A in two respects.

This modification is proposed for consideration if the Committee does not wish to accept as aggregate targets the comparatively low growth rates of alternative A for a period longer than the weeks immediately ahead.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective."  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to seek somewhat more rapid growth rates in the aggregates than called for under alternative A.

