1 for alternatives B and C, allow for a possible increase in borrowings from one bank which has special problems.

1 for alternatives B and C, allow for a possible increase in borrowings from one bank which has special problems. Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Federal funds rate 4-7/8--5-1/8% 5--5-1/2% 5-1/2--6% Member bank borrowings $350-500 million $450-700 million $650-850 million 3-month bill rate 4-3/4--5-1/4% 5--5-1/2% 5-3/4--6-1/4% Growth in M1: (SAAR) August September 3rd Quarter 10-1/2% 9-1/2% 9-1/2% (7) For seasonal reasons--including Treasury cash borrowing require- ments and the ending of reinvestment demand that normally appears in the last half of June as mid-year tax bills mature--the 3-month bill rate is expected to rise in July from its recent level.

1971  Alternative A maintains money market conditions in a range around the average level of recent weeks; in the last few business days the Desk has been aiming at a rate around the upper end of that range.

The alternative A money market conditions would seem most likely to be associated with around a 10 per cent annual rate of growth in M1 over the third quarter. Alternatives B and C provide for more scope to vary money market conditions in an effort to reduce rates of growth in the monetary aggregates.

Indeed, under alternative C, little or no growth in M 1 would be expected in the fourth quarter; and alternative B, if maintained, might provide a growth rate of only modest proportions.

Of course, to the extent money market conditions tighten further (as under alternatives B and C market yields, relatively more slowing of expansion in consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks and in M 2 would be expected.

If money market conditions tighten, as assumed under alternatives B and C, we would anticipate somewhat more rapid growth in CD's and greater use of Euro-dollar borrowings as banks make an effort to compensate, at least in part, for smaller inflows of funds through private demand and consumer-type time deposits.

If money market conditions tighten, as assumed under alternatives B and C, we would anticipate somewhat more rapid growth in CD's and greater use of Euro-dollar borrowings as banks make an effort to compensate, at least in part, for smaller inflows of funds through private demand and consumer-type time deposits. (11) With the corporate calendar tending to moderate, corporate bond yields could decline under the conditions of alternative A, especially if there were no general rise in the prime rate, or if the rise was limited 4 of a percentage point.

Any significant drop in corporate rates would tend to moderate upward pressures in the municipal and mortgage markets. Alternative B money market conditions to the upper end of the range) would reduce the likelihood of any rally in the corporate bond market over the near-term, and could cause such yields to back up somewhat, at least for a time.

Under alternative C, substantial across- the-board increases in long-term interest rates would be highly likely.

It would seem to signal a rise in the discount rate, would bring the viability of even a 6 per cent bank prime rate under question, and would represent a sizable movement toward the point where the remaining Regulation Q ceilings on longer maturity CD's would begin to bite. Possible directive language (12) This section presents possible language for the second paragraph of the directive corresponding to the three alternative policy courses discussed above.  Alternative A. The following language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for preserving about the same money market conditions to which the credit markets have adjusted in recent weeks, subject to a proviso clause.

The following language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for preserving about the same money market conditions to which the credit markets have adjusted in recent weeks, subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead, taking account of developments in capital markets.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to MAINTAINING PREVAILING [DEL: achiveing bank reserve and] money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with those objectives] PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT FIRMER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED AND IF CAPITAL MARKETS ARE NOT UNDER EXCESSIVE PRESSURE." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec- paths.

The proposed language con- templates that firming actions under the proviso clause would be taken only "if capital markets are not under excessive pressure."  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to continue to formulate its primary instruction in terms of objectives for the monetary aggregates, sub- ject to any constraints that might be imposed by developments in capital markets.

If the Committee adopts alternative B it could choose to instruct the Manager to move gradually toward the upper end of the indicated range for the funds rate even if the mone- tary aggregates are growing at the rates specified earlier in connec- tion with alternative B, so long as it appears that such action would not be unduly disturbing to the capital markets.

If the Committee adopts alternative B it could choose to instruct the Manager to move gradually toward the upper end of the indicated range for the funds rate even if the mone- tary aggregates are growing at the rates specified earlier in connec- tion with alternative B, so long as it appears that such action would not be unduly disturbing to the capital markets.  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to strive for the more substantial modera- tion of growth in the monetary aggregates discussed earlier in connec- tion with alternative C.

