As noted in the final section of this blue book, the choice between directives A and B depends on the degree of emphasis the Committee wishes to place on monetary aggregates as compared with money market conditions. Alternative A/B Alternative C Federal funds rate 4-1/2--4-7/8 3-7/8--4-1/2 Member bank borrowings 150-300 50-150 Growth in M (SAAR) November -1 -1 December 1-1/2 3 4th Q.

1972 6 8  Money market conditions consistent with alternative A/B might encompass a Federal funds rate in a 4-1/2--4-7/8 per cent range; member bank borrowings in a $150-$300 million range; and, taking account of recent wide swings in excess reserves, a net reserve position for 150 million area.

Alternative C would imply a significant further easing of money market conditions from those that have recently evolved, with, for example, the Federal funds rate thought to be consistent with 2 per cent range.

Alternative C would imply a significant further easing of money market conditions from those that have recently evolved, with, for example, the Federal funds rate thought to be consistent with this alternative in a 3-7/8--4-1/2 per cent range.  Under alternative A/B, we would expect the 3-month bill 8 per cent range between now and mid-December.

Under alternative C, however, short-term interest rates would almost certainly decline over the period ahead, with the bill 4 per cent range.

These paths are based on the newly revised series (Two tables on pages 17 and 18 at the end of the text show weekly paths for the monetary aggregates and more detail on aggregate reserves.)  under alternative A/B is expected to show only a slight decline in November at a one per cent annual rate, but to resume growth beginning in December.

The lower interest rates and greater reserve supply under alternative C would likely lead to a more rapid 3 per cent rate of growth in December, followed by an 8 per cent expansion in the first quarter.

On balance, under alternative A/B, we would anticipate a growth rate in consumer-type time deposits of around 11 per cent in the fourth quarter, but slowing to about 7 per cent in the first quarter as consumer spending continues to rise.

Under alternative C there could be a pick-up in business borrowing from banks as lending terms ease further, but the increased inflow of demand and consumer-type deposits associated with that alternative would probably generate enough resources so that banks would not need to be more aggressive in that CD market.

Under alternative C, bank credit expansion would be somewhat more rapid in the last few weeks of the current quarter, and considerably larger than under alternative A/B in the first quarter of next year as growth in M2 accelerates.

Under alternative C, bank credit expansion would be somewhat more rapid in the last few weeks of the current quarter, and considerably larger than under alternative A/B in the first quarter of next year as growth in M2 accelerates. (16) Assuming the tight end of the money market range for alternative A/B, it is possible that the technical position of markets will lead to an increase in interest rates over the near-term despite the recent discount rate reduction.

An easing on the money market toward the lower end of the alternative A/B range would likely offset such a tendency should it arise.

And if the money market moved into the alternative C range, the whole market would likely adjust downward in yield, impelled in part by expectations of a further decline in the discount rate.

And if the money market moved into the alternative C range, the whole market would likely adjust downward in yield, impelled in part by expectations of a further decline in the discount rate. Possible directive language  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to place more emphasis on money market conditions than on the aggregates and wishes to call for maintenance of the conditions "that have evolved since the discount rate reduction", subject to a proviso clause.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to place more emphasis on money market conditions than on the aggregates and wishes to call for maintenance of the conditions "that have evolved since the discount rate reduction", subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over te months ahead.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: achieving bank reserve and] MAINTAINING THE money market conditions [DEL: consistent with that objective, taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financings.] that have evolved since the discount rate reduction; provided that somewhat easier conditions shall be sought if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are falling significantly below the growth paths expected." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph a description of the conditions to be maintained, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed paths.

The language for alternative B, "To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead.

As in alternative A, the Committee may wish to indicate a greater willingness to countenance overshoots in the aggregates than shortfalls.

As in alternative A, the Committee may wish to indicate a greater willingness to countenance overshoots in the aggregates than shortfalls.  Alternative C. This language differs from that of alternative B in indicating that the Committee seeks "to promote substantial growth" rather in the aggregates over the months ahead.

It is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to pursue the more aggressive course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for alternative C. "To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to PROMOTE SUB- STANTIAL [DEL: achieve moderate] growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead.

