text show weekly paths for the monetary aggregates and more detail on aggregate reserves). Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Federal funds rate 5--5-3/8 4-1/2--5 3-3/4--4-1/2 Member bank borrowings 300--450 150--300 50--150 Growth in M1 (SAAR) October 3% 3% 3% November 1 2 3 December 3-1/2 4 5-1/2 4th Q.

Overall credit conditions--as typified by behavior of short- and long-term interest rates--might well ease somewhat between now and the next Committee meeting even under Alternative A. Credit demands from businesses and State and local governments in long-term markets appear to be tapering off, and investors have shown a greater willingness to purchase longer-term securities.

Also, the Treasury's mid-November refunding--to be announced on October 27--may reduce short-term market pressures by emphasizing debt lengthening, perhaps partly through incorporation of an advance refunding. On the other hand, the Treasury could announce in conjunction with the refunding that it will raise cash around mid-November through a bill issue. On balance, we would expect the 3-month bill rate to be in a 4-1/4--4-3/4 per cent range between now and the next meeting of the Committee, given the money market specifications of alternative A. This bill rate range assumes no substantial bill sales by foreign central banks.

The lower the Federal funds rate were to drop-- and particularly if it moved into the range of alternative C--the greater would be the possibility of a large speculative build-up in bond positions, especially during this forthcoming Treasury financing period.

The timing and extent of this readjustment is especially uncertain in light of the limited degree to which Phase II has been spelled out thus far. (10) Our best present estimate is that under the money market conditions of alternative A, M1 will grow in the first quarter of next year at a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate following the 2-1/2 per cent rate indicated for the fourth quarter.

For alternative B, the annual rate of money growth rises from 3 per cent in the fourth quarter to 6 per cent in the first quarter,. ndfor alternative C from a 4 per cent annual rate to a 2 per cent annual rate over the same period.

For alternative B, the annual rate of money growth rises from 3 per cent in the fourth quarter to 6 per cent in the first quarter,.andfor alternative C from a 4 per cent annual rate to a 7-1/2 per cent annual rate over the same period. (11) The bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected to grow less rapidly than in the third quarter under any of the alternatives;  alternative A, the growth rate is projected to drop below 5 per cent.

Growth in time deposits other than large CD's is expected to remain moderate in the fourth quarter, with growth rates somewhat larger under alternativesB and C as a result of the lower market interest rates likely to develop.

Somewhat stronger business loan demands, assuming GNP growth as projected in the Greenbook, and a will- ingness to acquire securities in anticipation of declining long-term market interest rates are expected to encourage banks to issue CD's. It is likely, though, that banks will lower CD offering rates if short- term market rates decline, but not so rapidly as to forestall a somewhat greater increase in CD's in November under alternatives B and C than under alternative A, with the additional funds used to build up positions in securities.

In addition, in all three alternatives it is proposed to delete the instruction to take account of developments in capital markets, given the recent strengthening of those markets. Finally, in alternatives B and C--in which the primary instruction is oriented toward the monetary and credit aggregates rather than money market conditions--the objective is described in terms of growth "over the months ahead.

In addition, in all three alternatives it is proposed to delete the instruction to take account of developments in capital markets, given the recent strengthening of those markets. Finally, in alternatives B and C--in which the primary instruction is oriented toward the monetary and credit aggregates rather than money market conditions--the objective is described in terms of growth "over the months ahead." Restoration of tnat phrase is suggested on the assumption that, after focusing on the near-term at its September meeting, the Committee will now wish to return to its more customary time-horizon for policy.  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates, taking account of developments in capital markets.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: achieving bank reserves and] MAINTAINING ABOUT THE PREVAILING money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with that objective] PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT EASIER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT, TAKING ACOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING, IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE FALLING SIGNIFICANTLY BELOW THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph a description of "prevailing conditions", and for purposes of the pro- viso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in paths.

The proviso clause has been formulated in one-way terms, guarding against signif- icant shortfalls but not excesses, on the assumption that the Committee would not want money market conditions to be tightened in the coming period if M1 and M2 should appear to be expanding on paths above those projected, which represent comparatively low growth rates for the fourth quarter.  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to seek the growth rates for the aggregates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative B, including a fourth-quarter rate for M1 of 3 per cent and moving up to a 6 per cent path in the first quarter.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective, TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING."  Alternative C. This language differs from that of alternative B in indicating that the Committee seeks "actively to promote" rather than "to achieve" moderate growth in the aggregates over the months ahead.

It is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to pursue the more aggressive course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for alternative C. "To implement this policy, the Committee seeks ACTIVELY to PROMOTE [DEL: achieve] moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates [DEL: , taking account of developments in capital markets] OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD.

