Under alternative C the growth rate in December might be about 5 per cent.

Under alternative C the growth rate in December might be about 5 per cent. (13) The growth rate of M1 is expected to slow in January, except under alternative C. The assumption of a smaller than usual OFDI-related reflow at year-end temporarily depresses the level of M1 in January and its rate of growth relative to December.

It would move down from that range under alternative C and up under alternative A. (16) In long-term credit markets, fundamental forces working to hold interest rates down appear strongest in the corporate and mortgage markets.

Even under alternative A, interest rates in these two markets might not show any significant rise.

Moreover, U to banks to finance loans and investments are estimated to drop sharply on balance from December to February. Possible directive language  Alternative A. If the Committee wishes to formulate the directive in terms of money market conditions subject to a proviso clause, for purposes of the proviso clause it could employ the growth rates of either alternative A or B--e.

If the Committee favors the alternative A growth rates, it might adopt the following language.

If the Committee favors the alternative A growth rates, it might adopt the following language. "To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to promote somewhat greater growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: achieving bank reserve and] MAINTAINING ABOUT THE money market conditions THAT HAVE PREVAILED ON AVERAGE SINCE THE PRECEDING MEETING; [DEL: consistent with that objective] PROVIDED THAT OPERATIONS SHALL BE MODIFIED IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY FROM THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED." The primary instruction calls for maintaining "about the money market con- ditions that have prevailed on average since the preceding meeting" because the mid-points of the ranges for money market conditions noted in paragraph  for the alternative A growth rates are closer to the average level of money market conditions since the November 16 meeting than they are to easier conditions recently prevailing.

If the Committee would prefer to have the aggregates grow along the alternative B paths, it might modify the above language to call for "maintaining money market conditions consis- .

If the Committee would prefer to have the aggregates grow along the alternative B paths, it might modify the above language to call for "maintaining money market conditions consis- tent with the recent reduction in Federal Reserve Bank discount rates".  Alternative B. The following language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to continue to formulate the primary instruction in terms of aggregates, and to seek the growth rates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative B-including 2 per cent for M1 and M2, respectively.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achiev- ing bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective." If the Committe favors an aggregate-oriented directive but would like to have the aggregates grow at the alternative A rates, it might modify the above language to indicate that it "seeks to promote moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achiev- ing bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that objective." If the Committe favors an aggregate-oriented directive but would like to have the aggregates grow at the alternative A rates, it might modify the above language to indicate that it "seeks to promote moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead."  Alternative C. This language differs from that of alterna- tive B only in the omission of the word "somewhat" before "greater growth in monetary aggregates.

This language differs from that of alterna- tive B only in the omission of the word "somewhat" before "greater growth in monetary aggregates." It is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to pursue the more aggressive easing course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for alternative C. "To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote [DEL: somewhat] greater growth in monetary [DEL: and credit] aggregates over the months ahead.

