1 1/ Fairly firm deposit data are available only through the statement week ending February 24. (10) The table on the next page shows three alternative monthly paths extending throughout the second quarter for the major monetary aggregates. Alternative A assumes a Federal funds rate maintained at 3-1 is, it assumes current money market conditions.

The other two sets of paths presented are designed to indicate alternatives for the Committee that call for slower growth rates in the aggregates than now seem probable under unchanged money market conditions. Alternative B, for instance, shows a 7 per cent annual rate of growth for M1 over the second quarter and alternative C a 6 per cent rate of increase.

However, as indicated in the preceding paragraph, under alternative A, M1 would be expected to grow more rapidly in the second quarter than in the first.

Growth in M2 would be expected to moderate from the first quarter pace, even under alternative A, however, as the initial asset ad- justment by the public to the sharp drop of late 1970 and early 1971 in market rates relative to time deposit offering rates runs it course.

If money market conditions tighten--as may be required under alternatives B and C--expectations of rising short- term interest rates will give banks an added incentive to issue CD's in the near-term, especially longer-term CD's, offsetting in part expected slower growth under these conditions in demand and other time deposits.

If money market conditions tighten--as may be required under alternatives B and C--expectations of rising short- term interest rates will give banks an added incentive to issue CD's in the near-term, especially longer-term CD's, offsetting in part expected slower growth under these conditions in demand and other time deposits. (13) An effort to move onto growth paths for aggregates in the second quarter slower than shown for alternative A--given staff assumptions as to the strength of economic recovery and attendent credit demands--seems likely to require a rise in the Federal funds rate from current levels during the next four weeks.

The money market conditions now estimated to be con- sistent with alternative A through C are shown in the table below, using the second quarter annual rate of growth in M1 as a convenient index of the col- lection of monetary aggregates.

Difference in money market conditions of these dimensions would be expected to have only relatively minor effects on growth rates for the aggregates in March. Federal Funds Member Bank Net M1 Rate Borrowings Reserves Alternative A 3-1 Alternative B 3-3/4--4-1/4 400-500 -150 to -300 7% Alternative C 4-1/4--4-3/4 500-600 -250 to -400 6% (14) Weekly paths for key monetary aggregates are shown in the table on the next page.

How rapidly the bill rate moves up would depend for the most part on the attitudes of market participants--how soon they come to believe a rise in the funds rate would stick and whether they come to think that it would presage a further rise. Under alternative B money market specifications, a 3-month bill rate in a 3-1/2--4-1/2 per cent range might be anticipated, and under alternative C a 4 per cent range.

Thus, a rise in short-rates of about the magnitude indicated for alternative B might not be accompanied by any appreciable rise in long rates over the second quarter as a whole, although an initial market reaction would be likely; money market tightening of the degree contemplated under alternative C might well bring a more lasting long-term rate advance.

If in these circumstances the Committee would wish to promote somewhat easier over-all credit conditions, including near- term declines in long-term rates, it could consider a policy alternative-- such as Alternative D--that would call for some further easing of money market conditions.

Indications of a continuing easing trend in monetary policy would also make dealers more willing holders of, and under- writers more aggressive bidders for, long-term debt. (19) As nearly as can be judged, the expected effect on monetary aggregates of a policy consistent with the money market specif-  alternative D would be as shown in the table below.

Indications of a continuing easing trend in monetary policy would also make dealers more willing holders of, and under- writers more aggressive bidders for, long-term debt. (19) As nearly as can be judged, the expected effect on monetary aggregates of a policy consistent with the money market specif- ications of alternative D would be as shown in the table below. Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates-- alternative D) (Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars) Concepts of Money M1 M 2 February March April 217.

1971 Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates-- Alternative D) February 2 4 p March April 217.

1971 Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates-- Weekly (Alternative D) February 2 4 p March April 217.9 217.3 217.8 218.5 219.0 219.0 7 219.5 432.5 432.8 433.9 435.5 436.8 437.8 438.8 p--Preliminary. e--Estimated from partial data. Total Reserves 338.4 338.9 340.4 341.5 341.7 341.5 345.0 Possible directive language (20) This section presents possible language for the second paragraph of the directive for the four alternative policy courses dis- cussed above.  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to retain the structure of the present directive--involving a primary instruction concerned with money market conditions and long-term rates, and a proviso clause relating to the aggregates.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to retain the structure of the present directive--involving a primary instruction concerned with money market conditions and long-term rates, and a proviso clause relating to the aggregates. "To implement this policy, System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining prevailing money market conditions while accommodating ANY [DEL: additional] downward movements in long- term rates; provided that money market conditions shall [DEL: promptly] be MODIFIED [DEL: eased somewhat further] if it appears that the monetary AND CREDIT aggregates are DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY FROM [DEL: falling short of] the growth paths [DEL: desired] EXPECTED." As will be noted, the primary instruction in alternative A is identical to that of the present directive, except that it is proposed--in view of the recent increases in long-term rates--to call for accommodating "any" downward movements in such rates.

These include:  it a two-way clause, on the assumption that, in light of the recent stronger performance of the aggregates, the Committee would wish the Desk to react to sizable deviations in either direction; and (b) referring to "credit" as well as "monetary" aggregates, in order to explicitly include the bank credit proxy among the aggregates to be considered by the Manager. If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions set forth in the first line of the table in paragraph (13) above as a description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause, to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alternative A as the Alternative B.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates for the aggregates, and (b) to adopt as targets the growth rates (including a 7 per cent second-quarter rise in M1) dis- cussed earlier in connection with alternative B. "To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO PROMOTE SUSTAINED GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK RESERVES AND money market condi- tions CONSISTENT WITH THAT OBJECTIVE [DEL: while accommodating additional downward movements in long-term rates, provided that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling short of the growth path desired]." The phrase "sustained growth" is suggested as a description of the Committee's objective for the aggregates because the second-quarter growth rate for M1 shown for this alternative is the same as the rate now expected for the first quarter.  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates for the aggregates (including a 6 per cent second-quarter rise in M ) discussed earlier in connection with alternative C.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK RESERVES AND money market condi- tions CONSISTENT WITH THAT OBJECTIVE [DEL: while accommodating additional downard movements in long-term rates, provided that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling short of the growth path desired]." This language differs from alternative B only in that the word rather than "sustained" is suggested to describe the lower target growth rates for the aggregates.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK RESERVES AND money market condi- tions CONSISTENT WITH THAT OBJECTIVE [DEL: while accommodating additional downard movements in long-term rates, provided that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling short of the growth path desired]." This language differs from alternative B only in that the word "moderate" rather than "sustained" is suggested to describe the lower target growth rates for the aggregates.  Alternative D. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to place primary emphasis on achieving more accommodative credit market conditions at this time.

