18 p p-- Preliminary. July 27 Path 1/ 227.6 228.2 229.1 228.9 347.9 351.3 227.0 226.7 228.7 229.2 454.2 455.2 456.5 456.7 454.0 454.2 456.4 457.4 347.7 348.9 349.8 350.8 1/ Consistent with the directive the Committee adopted at the July 27 meeting, and close to the alternative A path in the blue book prepared for that meeting.

The specifications given for the second alternative (B) might also be employed with directive language presented in a later section under the label of alternative C. As noted in that section, C differs from B with respect to operating techniques rather than objectives.

Specifically, under C the Desk would place main emphasis on bank reserves rather than on money market conditions in making operating decisions. (10) The text table that follows specifies: (1) the growth path for M1 thought to be consistent with the unchanged Federal funds rate assumption of alternative A; and to achieve the 6 per cent annual growth rate in M1 (for the third and fourth quarters combined) that was associated with the directive adopted at the last meeting 1/ The table on the next page shows the paths for all of the monetary aggregates under the two alternatives.

However, given the current highly uncertain status of financial and economic relationships, it is difficult to be sure what rate of growth in M 1 is appropriate or how much confidence one can place in projections based largely on past experience.  Under alternative A, rates of growth in the other monetary aggregates are projected to slow significantly after August.

Also Government deposits are assumed to remain at higher than normal levels, as the Treasury hedges against the possibility of a sudden cash-in of special Treasury certificates by foreign central banks. Under alternative A banks would probably have to press more actively to obtain CD funds than under alternative B in order to offset the slower growth in demand accounts. Under alternative B, growth rates for both M2 and the credit proxy show little change from the third to fourth quarters on the assumption that the lower interest rates realized under ^that^ alternative would be associated with a greater improvement in time deposit performance.

Such a development would tend to be reflected in interest rate expectations in longer-term markets as well, where underlying supply- demand relationships might otherwise maintain downward pressure on rates. (16) While the market probably has already discounted some re- duction in the Federal funds rate, sizable downward movement--say, to the lower end of the range specified in alternative B--would undoubtedly be interpreted by the market as a significant policy move.

It is possible that such a move could carry rates to unsustainably low levels, but, on the other hand, it is still unclear whether the decline in market yields to date has fully discounted the changed outlook on inflation.  Alternative C, as noted earlier, differs from B only with respect to the indicated operating techniques.

This would imply the possibility of significantly larger changes in money market conditions, however, ̂ and^ the Committee may wish to set outside limits of acceptable variation in the Federal funds rate--perhaps a band of plus or minus one percentage point around the 4-3/4 per cent midpoint of the funds rate range specified under alternative B. (18) If the Committee adopts alternative C it may want to instruct the Manager to make his operating decisions on the basis of available evidence regarding the relationship between the actual supply of reserves and the supply considered to be best calculated to promote growth in the monetary and credit aggregates at the desired rates.

Similarly, he might be instructed to use information on the cost of reserves--as reflected primarily in the Federal funds rate--as a supplementary and early indicator of the effective supply of reserves in the market. (19) Shown in the table below are monthly and weekly aggregates reserve paths consistent with alternative C. The indicated percentage growth rates for reserves are far above those projected for M1 and M2 chiefly because of the use of reserves to support sharply increased levels of certain not included in M1 and M2 .

If the decline in borrowings needed to achieve the alternative B paths is some- what overstated, the growth in nonborrowed reserve could be commensurately smaller.

If the decline in borrowings needed to achieve the alternative B paths is some- what overstated, the growth in nonborrowed reserve could be commensurately smaller. Possible directive language (21) This section presents three possible alternatives for the second paragraph of the directive corresponding to the approaches to policy and operating techniques outlined in paragraph ( 9) above.  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintaining about the prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintaining about the prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: taking account of the current Treasury financing and of developments in capital markets, the Committee seeks to achieve more moderate growth in monetary aggregates overt he months ahead.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to MAINTAINING ABOUT THE PREVAILING [DEL: achieving bank reserve and] money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with these objectives] PROVIDED THAT MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS SHALL BE MODIFIED IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY FROM THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions notedfor alternative A in paragraph of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the growth paths for the monetary and credit aggregates discussed earlier paths.

If the Committee favors a money market orientation for its primary instruction but would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat above those projected under unchanged money market conditions, it might modify the alternative A language to call for operations with a view to somewhat less firm money market conditions" and associate with the revised language the money market and aggregate specifications described above in connection with alternative B.

If the Committee favors a money market orientation for its primary instruction but would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat above those projected under unchanged money market conditions, it might modify the alternative A language to call for operations with a view to "attaining somewhat less firm money market conditions" and associate with the revised language the money market and aggregate specifications described above in connection with alternative B.  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates in the monetary and credit aggregates, and (b) to adopt as targets growth rates similar to those associated with the directive adopted at the previous meeting, as discussed above in connection with alternative B.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with THAT [DEL: those] objectives." If the Committee favors an aggregate orientation for its primary instruction but would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat below those discussed in connection with this alternative, it could adopt the language of alternative B discussed in connection with alternative A.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with THAT [DEL: those] objectives." If the Committee favors an aggregate orientation for its primary instruction but would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat below those discussed in connection with this alternative, it could adopt the language of alternative B (or C) but associate with such language the growth rates discussed in connection with alternative A.  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible if the Committee decides to seek the objectives discussed above in connec- tion with alternative B, but would prefer to have the Desk shift emphasis from money market conditions to bank reserves in implementing policy.

As will be noted, the primary instructions of this alternative differs from the language of alternative B only in the deletion of the words "and money market" from the phrase "with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions.

