"desired" take the June levels for the aggregates indicated in the previous  alternative C as targets.

To clarify policy possibilities in view of these conflicts, three distinct policy alternatives--with sharply differing specifications --are presented on the following pages: Alternative A aims at stabiliz- ing credit market conditions; Alternative C aims at pursuit of the Committee's previously expressed desires with respect to M1 growth; and Alternative B aims at a "standard-sized" FOMC tightening of operational targets in the interest of moderating the growth of the aggregates some- what.

1971 8 M1 at the previous FOMC meeting together with needed modifications of other aggregates for the sake of consistency, given the recent changes that have evolved in relationships among the various aggregates. Alternative B takes a middle course.

The text table below shows money market conditions believed consistent with these alternatives. Fed Funds Member Bank M1 Rate Borrowings 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr Alternative A 4-1 Alternative B 4-3/4 250-350 8-1/2% 7-1/2% Alternative C 6--8 450-700 5-1/2% 6% (15) Under alternative A, with a funds rate around 4-1/4 per cent, M1 is expected to continue growing relatively rapidly through the third quarter, although slowing somewhat on balance from the very rapid pace of recent months.

For the second quarter, growth in the proxy may be at only a 4-1/2 per cent rate, followed by about an 8 per cent growth rate in the third quarter. (16) Between now and the next meeting of the Committee, the 3-month bill rate under alternative A may be in a 3-3 range.

The current Treasury refunding will be settled on May 17; dealer positions in the new issues are very light, as the Treasury has undertaken sizable buying of when-issued securities.  Alternative B--which assumes a funds rate centering on 4-3/4 per cent--leads to a somewhat slower growth in monetary aggregates over time.

Growth in M2 may be affected somewhat sooner by the higher funds rate, and over time the growth rate may diminish by about a percentage point relative to alternative A. Only a minor slow- ing in the credit proxy is projected, as CD growth may be sustained, if not enhanced, as tighter money market conditions lead to anticipatory borrow- ing by banks.

Only a minor slow- ing in the credit proxy is projected, as CD growth may be sustained, if not enhanced, as tighter money market conditions lead to anticipatory borrow- ing by banks. (18) The 3- onth bill rate would be likely to rise under alternative B, perhaps to around 4-1 expectations of an upward adjustment in the discount rate should develop.

Apart from the effects of such expectations, the recent run-up in bond yields has anticipated a good part of the firming in day-to-day money rates of the magnitude contemplated in this alternative.  Alternative C presents the staff's best estimate as of this moment of the money market conditions required to rapidly move M 1 back to the growth path previously desired by the Committee for the second quarter, and assuming M1 growth at a 6 per cent rate in the third quarter.

In addition, all three alternatives retain the language of the present directive relating to purchases of coupon issues.  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.

This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of the Treasury financing the terms of which are to be announced late in the month,] System open market opera- tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: attaining temporarily some minor firming in] MAINTAINING PREVAILING money market conditions, while continuing to meet some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in long-term credit markets; provided that SOMEWHAT FIRMER money market conditions shall be SOUGHT [DEL: modified] if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are [DEL: deviating] significantly EXCEEDING [DEL: from] the growth paths EXPECTED [DEL: desired], TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE CURRENT TREASURY FINANCING AND UNCERTAINTIES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec- paths.

A directive with this general structure-- putting primary emphasis on money market conditions rather than the aggregates--can, of course, be used in connection with specifications  alternative A, with suitable language changes.

A directive with this general structure-- putting primary emphasis on money market conditions rather than the aggregates--can, of course, be used in connection with specifications other than those shown for alternative A, with suitable language changes.  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates for the monetary and credit aggregates (subject to the constraints that might be imposed by the Treasury financing and foreign exchange market uncertainties), and (b) to adopt as targets the growth rates (including an 8-1/2 per cent second-quarter rise in M1) discussed earlier in connection with alternative B.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: attaining temporarily some minor firming in] MAINTAINING BANK RESERVES AND money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH THOSE OBJECTIVES, while continuing to meet some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in long-term credit markets; [DEL: provided that money market conditions shall be modified if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from the growth paths desired]." The phrase "to moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead" is suggested as a summary description of the objectives for the aggregates because the paths anticipated for both M1 and M2 involve some gradual slowing on average in coming months.  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates (including a 5-1/2 per cent second quarter rise in M1) discussed earlier in connection with alternative C.

System open market opera- tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL attaining temporarily some minor firming in] MAINTAINING BANK RESERVES AND money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH THOSE OBJECTIVES, while continuing to meet some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in long-term credit markets; [DEL: provided that money market conditions shall be modified if it appears that the monetary and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from the growth paths desired]." This language differs from that shown under alternative B only in that it describes the objective for the aggregates as that of seeking "to promote moderate growth" (rather than "seeking" to moderate growth')and it omits over the months ahead.

