9- 1 MI plus bank time ana savings deposits other than large Ct's.  Alternative B path of previous Bluebook.

The first column--called alternative A--makes up the shortfall by March and continues with a 6 per cent rate of growth in the second quarter. The second column, alternative B, shows a path which does not make up the shortfall by March; in other words, this alternative does not retain as a target the March average level of M 1 set at the previous two FOMC meetings.

The particular path would reach the same average level in June for M1 as indicated for alternative A. And the growth rate over the 9 months from September 1970 to June 1971 would be just under 6 per cent.

In either case the growth rates for the second quarter and the June level could, of course, be greater if the Committee should decide that a trend growth rate of more than 6 per cent is desirable for the longer run. Alternative A Alternative B End of Quarter Mo.

Thus, starting from a somewhat lower base, a somewhat higher growth rate is required to attain the previous desired March level. (8) The table on the next page shows monthly levels and growth rates for all of the monetary aggregates that are believed to be consistent with the M1 quarterly pattern shown for alternatives A and B in paragraph (9) To achieve either alternative A or B, an easing of the money market appears to be required between now and the next meeting of .

It would be anticipated, however, that by early spring, the Federal funds rate would have to rise rather sharply--to around 4-1/2 --5 per cent, with a concurrent snapback in bill rates--as reserves are provided less generously in order to move down to the assumed longer-run growth rate, typified in alternative A by a 6 per cent growth in M1 for the second quarter.

It would be anticipated, however, that by early spring, the Federal funds rate would have to rise rather sharply--to around 4-1/2 --5 per cent, with a concurrent snapback in bill rates--as reserves are provided less generously in order to move down to the assumed longer-run growth rate, typified in alternative A by a 6 per cent growth in M1 for the second quarter.  Since the alternative B pattern of growth in monetary aggregates involves a somewhat less rapid February--March annual growth rate for M1 of 9 per cent, attainment of this rate would seem to involve a smaller reduction in the Federal funds rate than under alterna- tive A--perhaps a funds rate in a 3--3-1/2 per cent range--and a net free 150 million.

The accompanying drop in the 3- month Treasury bill rate might be into a 3-1/4--3-3/4 per cent range. Because of the more gradual approach to making up the shortfall in M1 under alternative B, a sizable later snapback in money market rates would not be expected.

Still, in early spring the Federal funds rate and the bill rate might be somewhat above the upper end of these ranges as reserves are adjusted to bring growth in M1 onto a 7 per cent growth path for the second quarter as a whole. (11) The weekly paths for the monetary aggregates that would be consistent with the monthly patterns for alternatives A and B between now and the next meeting are shown in the table on the next page.

This tendency is likely to become more widespread, especially under alternative A, and may serve, along with an increase of consumer spending as projected in the Green Book, to moderate savings inflows.

Under alternative B, the rate of growth in M2 would be expected to be only slightly less rapid than under alternative A.

These estimates of M2 behavior in the future are highly problematical because of uncertainties about the timing and extent of bank cuts in offering rates on consumer-type accounts and the effect of this on savers in a period of declining market interest rates. (13) Growth in the adjusted credit proxy (rates of growth  alternatives A and B in the table on p.

Prevailing money market conditions can be taken to include a Federal funds rate around 3-3/4--4 per cent, which would reflect the most recent objectives of the Trading Desk; the 3-month bill rate might be in a 3-3/4--4-1/4 per cent range. Assuming such conditions are maintained, monetary aggregates for the remainder of the first quarter and for the second quarter, as well as weekly paths, are shown in the accompanying table. (15) With a policy of keeping to prevailing money market conditions, termed alternative C, M1 growth in the first quarter would be at a 6 per cent annual rate and no pick-up from this rate would be anticipated in the second quarter.

A relatively rapid M1 growth would, however, be expected in February and March as the effects of recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates-- Alternative C) (Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars) Concepts of Money M1 M2 December January February March 214.

Credit Proxy 331.2 334.2 336.6 340.1 349.1 Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth January February March 1st Q 1971 2nd Q 1971 Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates-- Alternative C) January February March 214.

If money market conditions ease further--as would appear to be necessary under alternatives A and B--long-term yields could be expected to decline more sharply as banks make further aggressive efforts to attract corporate borrowers and as investors react in anticipating further rate declines.

If money market conditions ease further--as would appear to be necessary under alternatives A and B--long-term yields could be expected to decline more sharply as banks make further aggressive efforts to attract corporate borrowers and as investors react in anticipating further rate declines. Possible directive language (17) This section presents possible language for the second paragraph of the directive for the three alternative policy courses discussed above.  Alternative A. As noted earlier, this alternative is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides that the shortfall in January from the path associated with its earlier first-quarter target growth rate (which in itself allowed for a make-up of the short- fall that occurred in the fourth quarter) is to be made up in the re- maining part of the first quarter.

the reference to the "narrowly defined money stock, ' followed by a separate reference to "the other monetary and credit aggregates") is suggested to make clear (1) that it is with respect to M1 that a shortfall is to be made up, and (2) that the Committee is also taking account of the behavior of key monetary aggregates other than M1.  Alternative B. This alternative is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides that past shortfalls are to be made up over a period extending through the second quarter, and that the target for growth of M1 in the first and second quarters should be set at 7 per cent.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with those objectives [DEL: taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financing]." As will be noted, the language of alternative B differs from that of alternative A only in the omission of the clause (following the reference to the narrowly defined money stock) reading "making up the shortfall from the desired growth path that has developed.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with those objectives [DEL: taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financing]." As will be noted, the language of alternative B differs from that of alternative A only in the omission of the clause (following the reference to the narrowly defined money stock) reading "making up the shortfall from the desired growth path that has developed." Such a clause might be considered unnecessary in this alternative in light of the extended period over which the shortfall is to be made up.  Alternative C. As will be noted, this alternative is similar to the second paragraph of the directive issued by the Committee on December 15, 1970.

