Though not as magnified, similar control problems could develop in moving onto other less restrictive paths--for instance,  alternative C path presented for consideration at this time.

In specifying the constella- tion of money market conditions, it should be pointed out that as the Federal funds rate moves above the discount rate, bank attitudes toward use of the discount window will change, with consequent uncertainties in estimating the expected level of member bank borrowings during such a transition period. Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Federal funds rate 4-3/4 5-1/4 6 Member bank borrowings 250 - 350 350 - 450 450 - 600 Growth in M1: Monthly June 9.

But by late in that quarter and in the fall a substantially slower growth rate would be expected, as the lagged effect on the demand for money of the higher short-term interest rates that will have prevailed since mid-March begins to take hold. (11) A tightening of the money market between now and mid-year to the degrees indicated by the suggested specifications for alternatives B and C would have little effect on growth in M1 during June, but would begin  Under alternative B the M 1 growth rate in the third quarter would be expected to be reduced to 9-1/2 per cent and under alternative C to 8 per cent.

However, by late summer or early fall, it is our best estimate that the growth rate would be sharply reduced, perhaps in alternative C to only about a 3--4 per cent annual rate, although there are great difficulties of course in pinpointing exact months in which low growth rates would be likely to emerge.

Thus, during fall the money supply could be growing considerably less than might be desired unless interest rates were moved sharply downward in the interim.  Alternative B, which indicates a somewhat more gradual deceleration of the aggregates than alternative C, is less likely to lead to sharp and sustained upward interest rate adjustments and hence to the need for a later easing in money market conditions.

However, over the near- 4 per cent, as specified in alternative B, would likely induce a renewed increase in long-term interest rates, particularly as expectations of a discount rate increase became more prevalent and another rise in the prime rate more likely.

But the general interest rate increase would not carry as far as under alternative C and there would be a greater probability of a corrective market rally later on.

Under alternative A, we would expect the 3-month bill rate between now and mid-year to be in a 4-1/4--4-3/4 per cent range, and it may be expected to rise somewhat above that range in the summer as the Treasury finances large and partly seasonal cash needs. Under alternative B, the 3-month bill would be likely to move into a 4-5/8--5-1/4 per cent range by or shortly after mid-year; and the rate would likely be substantially higher under alternative C.

Outstanding large CD's are expected to show little net change from current levels under alternative A, given the relatively comfortable liquidity position of banks.

But with tighter money market conditions--as under alternatives B and C--a moderate net growth in CD's might develop as banks attempt to compensate in part for slower growth in other time and demand deposits.

Although such uncertainties do, of course, continue, the likelihood that exchange market developments may pose significant problems for domestic financial markets in the near-term now seems considerably less than it did at the height of the tensions in early May.  Alternative A. The following language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevail- ing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.

The following language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevail- ing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: the committee seeks to moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead, taking account of the current Treasury financing, developments in capital markets, and uncertain- ties in foreign exchange markets.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be CONDUCTED WITH A VIEW TO [DEL: aimed initially at] maintaining [DEL: currently] prevailing money market conditions; [DEL: and thereafter conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with the above cited objectives.] PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT FIRMER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED AND IF CAPITAL MARKETS ARE NOT UNDER EXCESSIVE PRESSURE." If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec- paths.

to take account of such developments in any firming operations) by indicating that somewhat firmer conditions are to be sought under the proviso only "if capital markets are not under excessive pressure."  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in terms of desired growth rates for the monetary and credit aggregates (subject to any constraints that might be imposed by developments in capital markets), and (b) to adopt as targets for the time being the growth rates discussed earlier in connection with alternative B.

System open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall be [DEL: aimed initially at] [DEL: maintianing currently prevailing money market conditions, and thereafter] conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with the [DEL: above cited] THOSE objectives." It is proposed to use the phrase "to moderate growth in monetary aggregates in the months ahead" as a summary description of the objective for the aggregates, deleting the words "and credit", on the assumption that the Committee will not view recent rates of growth in the adjusted proxy as so large as to require moderation.  Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates dis- cussed earlier in connection with alternative C, and to instruct the Desk to move to the money market conditions noted in paragraph (9) in connec- tion with that alternative.

