The latter deletion is suggested on the assumption that the Committee will no longer consider it necessary to make explicit provision for the contingency that sudden large reflows from abroad will pose major problems for open market operations, given the passage of time since the Smithsonian agreement and the absence to date of market churning as a consequence of reflows.  Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides that the Desk should focus primarily on money market conditions as the day-to-day control variable, giving only as much weight to bank reserves as was customary in most of 1971.

This formulation could also be used, with appropriate interpretation, to call for about the same relative emphasis on aggregate reserves and money market conditions as was decided upon at the January FOMC meeting. "To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of international developments and the forthcoming Treasury financing,] the Committee seeks to ACHIEVE [DEL: promote the degree of ease in] bank reserve and (I - greater ) money market conditions [DEL: essential to] THAT WILL SUPPORT(II - AMPLE ) (III- MODERATE) growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead." The money market conditions the staff expects to be consistent with each of the three alternative targets for operations are noted in paragraph (5) above.  Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides that the Desk should place primary emphasis on bank reserves as the control variable, subject to a proviso constraining the range of fluctuations in money market conditions.

Under this alternative money market conditions would, of course, be expected to fluctuate more widely than under A, with the extent of fluctuation depending on the speci- fic interpretation the Committee attached to the proviso clause. "To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of inter- national developments and the forthcoming Treasury financing,] SYSTEM OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS UNTIL THE NEXT MEETING OF the Committee [DEL: seeks to promote the degree of ease in] SHALL BE CON- DUCTED WITH A VIEW TO SUPPLYING bank reserves [DEL: and money market (I - greater ) conditions essential to] AT A RATE CONSISTENT WITH (II - AMPLE ) (III- MODERATE) growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS DO NOT FLUCTUATE OVER AN UNDULY WIDE RANGE."  If the Committee were to adopt alternative B it could base reserve operating targets on the levels and growth rates for reserves shown earlier to be consistent with either patterns I, II, or III.

The effect of anticipated changes in such deposits was discussed in paragraph (11).  For the proviso clause in alternative B, the Committee may wish to consider a range of fluctuation for the Federal funds rate as large as 2 percentage points, as recommended by the report of the Committee on the Directive.

