7-1 Near-term growth in RPD (SAAR) May 7-1/2% 7% 7% June 13% 12% 10-1/2% May-June 10% 9-1/2% 9%  Of the three alternatives presented, alternative A involves money market conditions closest to those most recently prevailing.

This would be particularly likely under alternatives B and C, but even could occur under alternative A.

With sizable transactions demands, efforts to move onto a slower growth path for monetary aggregates--as in alternatives B and C--are likely to involve additional upward pressures on short-term interest rates, with such pressures particularly strong under alternative C.

This reflects pushing forward by one month the sharp drop in the Treasury balance that had been anticipated for May but did not develop.  For alternative B, the mid-point of the Federal funds rate range is just under 5 per cent.

If the rate were to move up toward that area, this would clearly impart upward impetus to other short-term rates and bring expectations of a possible increase in the 4-1/2 per cent discount rate increasingly into the thinking of market participants. We would expect the 3-month bill rate under this alternative to be in a 3-7/8--5-1/4 per cent range between now and the next Committee meeting.  alternative C, the bill rate could move higher more quickly.

Under alternative A, we would expect the rate of growth in such deposits in the third quarter to drop to around 9 per cent, somewhat below the expected second quarter pace, and about half the first quarter rate.

Under alternative A, we would expect the rate of growth in such deposits in the third quarter to drop to around 9 per cent, somewhat below the expected second quarter pace, and about half the first quarter rate. Under alternatives B and C, the rate of growth would likely be substantially smaller.

This would be particularly so under the money market conditions  alternative C aggregates.

If short-term rates rise into the alternative C range, we would expect that banks would have to rely particularly heavily on large CD's as interest rate ceilings constrain consumer-type time deposit inflows.

Expectations might not change to any significant degree under alternative A but would shift more markedly if short-term market conditions move into the ranges associated with B and C.

The Committee may wish, however, to consider including the capital markets reference--particularly under alternative C and possibly B--in view of the possibility under these alternatives that strong upward rate pressures could develop in longer-term markets.

