About 1 multiplier as a result of shifts in the mix of deposits. (5) Expansion of M1 and M2 in August exceeded growth rates thought to be consistent with policy alternative B in the last Blue Book by 1 .

At one limit, alternative A), we have shown an expansion in monetary aggregates that involves essentially no change between now and the first quarter of 1973 in money market conditions from those recently prevailing.

At the other limit alternative D), we have shown an M1 path under which growth is curtailed to a 6 per cent annual rate by the first quarter of next year; this path implies a full percentage point rise in the Federal fund rate between now and the next meeting.

There are a number of possibilities in between Alternative B and C are two, and they involve both a more gradual slowing in the monetary aggregate and a more gradual tightening of money market con- ditions.

7-1  Under alternative A, the Committee would be aiming at a constellation of reserve and money market conditions--essentially involving no change through the first quarter of '73 in money market conditions from those prevailing on average in the past few weeks--that would reduce M1 growth only modestly from the rapid 10-1/2 per cent rate expected in the third quarter.

But by the end of the first quarter, operations under alternative A would probably have set in train forces leading to quite rapid M1 growth as 1973 progresses, assuming the rate of expansion in nominal GNP remains strong.  The monetary aggregates under alternative B and C are con- sistent with progressive firming in reserve and money market conditions over the months ahead; however, alternative B moves in this direction more gradually than alternative C.

Old figures are still shown in the appendix tables. to around 5-3/4 and 6 per cent, respectively, under the two alternatives by mid-December, as RPD growth was further restrained to reduce M1 expansion to the annual rates shown for the first quarter in the table in paragraph (11).  Alternative D sets a path which is expected to result in a prompt upward move of interest rates.

Key developments affecting these aggregates are: (a) a slowing in the growth of time deposits other than large CD's in reflection of recent rises in market interest rates and, particularly in the cases of alternatives C and D, of further rises; and (b) continued sizable demand by banks for large CD funds associated with sustained strong loan demand.

A rise in the Federal funds rate to somewhat above 5 per cent, as contemplated in alternatives B or C, would very likely lead to further upward adjustments in short-term rates, with the 3-month bill rate moving up in a 4-3/4--5-1/2 per cent range.

Long-term market rates would probably rise somewhat, particularly if a rising funds rate were viewed as the beginning of a more sustained tightening in monetary policy. Upward market rate adjustments would, of course, be quite sharp under alternative D. Prooosed directives (18) Presented below are four alternative formulations for the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding section: Alternative A "To implement this policy, while taking account of developments in [DEL: capital] CREDIT markets, [DEL: and] international developments, AND THE EFFECTS OF BANK REGULATORY CHANGES, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support [DEL: moderate] SOME MODERATION OF growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.

In alternative D in C and B) the same language could be interpreted as calling for adapting Desk operations as necessary to facilitate orderly market adjustments to the higher interest rate levels foreseen.

::: Annual Growth Rates consistent with alternative B 1 Aug.

float, gold and foreign accounts, and other FR accounts September reflects alternative B, as shown in the August 11, 1972 that are consistent with the mid-points of target ranges that Monthly 1972 - Mar.

