It is proposed to delete the reference to international developments on the assumption that the Committee will not consider it necessary to take specific account of those developments in the currently quieter environment surrounding the exchange markets.  Alternative A. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international development and possible] THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.

It is proposed to delete the reference to international developments on the assumption that the Committee will not consider it necessary to take specific account of those developments in the currently quieter environment surrounding the exchange markets. (14) Alternative A. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international development and possible] THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead." Alternative A language is proposed for possible use if the Committee wishes to adopt essentially the same second-quarter growth rates for the monetary aggregates that were adopted at the meeting on March 21.

It is proposed to delete the reference to international developments on the assumption that the Committee will not consider it necessary to take specific account of those developments in the currently quieter environment surrounding the exchange markets. (14) Alternative A. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international development and possible] THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead." Alternative A language is proposed for possible use if the Committee wishes to adopt essentially the same second-quarter growth rates for the monetary aggregates that were adopted at the meeting on March 21. The pattern of specifications for this alternative is described in para- graph (5).  Alternative B. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international developments and possible] CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.

It is proposed to delete the reference to international developments on the assumption that the Committee will not consider it necessary to take specific account of those developments in the currently quieter environment surrounding the exchange markets. (14) Alternative A. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international development and possible] THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead." Alternative A language is proposed for possible use if the Committee wishes to adopt essentially the same second-quarter growth rates for the monetary aggregates that were adopted at the meeting on March 21. The pattern of specifications for this alternative is described in para- graph (5). (15) Alternative B. "To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international developments and possible] CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead." The language of alternative B differs from that of alternative A in that it includes a reference to developments in capital markets.

The pattern of specifications for this alternative could be the same as that for alternative A, but the phrase "taking account of capital market developments" could be construed as in- structing the Manager to be more liberal in providing reserves and more cautious in allowing the Federal funds rate to move upward if significant increases in long-term interest rates appear to be in process.

The pattern of specifications for this alternative could be the same as that for alternative A, but the phrase "taking account of capital market developments" could be construed as in- structing the Manager to be more liberal in providing reserves and more cautious in allowing the Federal funds rate to move upward if significant increases in long-term interest rates appear to be in process.  Alternative C. This language differs from that of alternative A in the inclusion of the word "more" before "moderate growth in monetary aggregates.

