The staff believes that efforts to obtain such a growth rate would lead to a very sharp rise in the funds rate during the winter, followed by a drop in the funds rate during the spring unless the Committee were willing to tolerate considerably slower growth rates in the aggregates as the year progressed.  Of the alternatives presented, alternative C--which encompasses a 5 per cent M1 target for the first half of 1973--does involve a slowing of M1 growth that eventually compensates for recent overshoots.

It is thought that attainment of the alternative C aggregate targets would be accompanied by a rise in the Federal funds rate to around 6 per cent over the next few weeks, with perhaps some modest further increase developing later in the winter.

It is thought that attainment of the alternative C aggregate targets would be accompanied by a rise in the Federal funds rate to around 6 per cent over the next few weeks, with perhaps some modest further increase developing later in the winter.  Alternative B encompasses a 6 per cent M1 growth rate over the first half of 1973, while alternative A involves a 7 per cent rate.

In addition, under alternative B, Treasury bill and other short-term market rates are likely to rise a bit over the first quarter, even given prevailing money market conditions, and thereby work to retard money demand later.

A movement of the Federal funds rate above 5-1/2 per cent--as would be contemplated under alternative C and is possible under alternative B--would set off larger short-term market rate adjustments.

And if the funds rate were to penetrate the 6 per cent level, the accompanying rise in short-term market rates could bring into question the substainability of ceiling rates on consumer-type time deposits as net inflows of such deposits decelerated markedly. (13) Long-term interest rates may show only little, if any, increase under alternative B in view of the moderate size of long-term credit demands.

The more substantial rise in short rates anticipated under alternative C, however, probably would exert considerable pressure on longer-term markets.

In all three alternatives a reference to Treasury financing operations is proposed in light of the forthcoming auction of $2 billion in notes and the announced plans for a 20-30 year bond offering in early January.

For alternatives B and C, a reference to credit market developments is suggested should the Committee wish to take account of the possible reaction to a further rise in the funds rate while the market is still adjusting to the rise that has already occurred.

