Suggested shorter-run operating targets that are thought to be generally consistent with the longer-run objectives are presented in paragraphs (10) to (14).  The longer-run targets under alternative A are indexed by an M1 annual growth rate of 7 per cent in each of the fourth and first quarters.

On balance, one might anticipate a 3-month Treasury bill rate rising to a 5-1/2--5-3/4 per cent area by the end of the first quarter.  Under alternatives B and C cent annual rates of growth in M1, respectively) the staff would expect upward Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates 1972 Sept.

C 30,900 31,401 31,931 31,692 of Growth -- I I I III pressure on short-term interest rates to emerge sooner and to carry rates to higher levels than under alternative A. It is likely that Treasury bill rates by some time in early 1973 would move above ceiling rates on consumer-type time deposits (for which the highest rate is 5-3/4 per cent on 2-year and over maturities), thus raising the odds on a substantial slowing in time deposit inflows to banks by late in the first quarter.

As a result, M2 growth,  alternative C, is targeted to slow more than M1 growth.

The institutional supply of funds would likely be  alternative C, and to a smaller degree under B.

Under alternative A, the Federal funds rate range centers on recently prevailing conditions, and the staff would expect that realization of the targeted growth rates in the aggre- gates would produce little movement in the average funds rate.

Under alternative B, the funds rate range is skewed above prevailing rate levels, indicating our expectations that restraining monetary growth to the rates targeted would induce a rise in the funds rate. Under alternative C, the range is skewed even more in an upward direction.

condition of credit markets.  In alternatives A and B, which call, respectively, for "somewhat more" and "more" moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead, it is proposed to add the phrase "than recorded in the third quarter.

:::: Annual Growth Rates consistent with alternative C 1 Sept.

