Alternative B repre- sents a continuation of the longer-run growth path for M1 reaffirmed at the last Committee meeting and depicted in the chart following p.

For alternative B, a 9-1 range is shown.

However, such a one- time stock adjustment is likely to be short-lived in its effects on cash balances mainly held for transactions purposes or for normal financial market operations.  Under alternative B, over the next two months, M2 expansion 4 per cent annual rate range is indicated.

By the fourth quarter, we would expect most of this divergence to disappear, and growth rates of consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks and thrift institutions are both projected at around 7 per cent. (16) Looking to all three money concepts, by the fourth quarter M1 2 per cent annual rate under alternative B, while M2 and M3 growth is expected to be around 5-1/2 and 6 per cent, respectively.

For M2 and M3, these would be lowest quarterly growth rates since early 1970. (17) The aggregates are specified to show less growth under alternative C and more under alternative A.

The wider range specified under this alternative reflects what we presume to be an icreasing diffi- culty in forcing the public to further economize on cash holdings at a time when interest rates have already increased to historically high levels. Under alternative A, we would expect the funds rate to drop between now and the next meeting, though perhaps not to the bottom of the indicated range.

The wider range specified under this alternative reflects what we presume to be an icreasing diffi- culty in forcing the public to further economize on cash holdings at a time when interest rates have already increased to historically high levels. Under alternative A, we would expect the funds rate to drop between now and the next meeting, though perhaps not to the bottom of the indicated range. (18) Other key assumptions in the monetary relationships pre- sented are: (a) continued strength in business loan demand on banks; (b) some reduction in demand for consumer and mortgage credit; (c) con- tinued active demand by banks for large CD funds, though perhaps less aggressive demand than in the past four months taken as a whole; (d) greater bank reluctance to participate in the securities market, par- ticularly under alternative C, in view of the wide spread of their bor- rowing costs over their return on portfolio.

Retention of the reference to domestic financial developments is proposed only for alternative C, the one alternative that contemplates a significant tightening of the money market.

