All of the tables are, of course, based on the unrevised figures since the new data will not be available on a firm enough basis to guide operations between now and the next meeting.  Under alternative B, M1 is indicated to expand in November- December at a 4-1/2-6-1/2 per cent annual rate, given a Federal funds rate range centered around 10 per cent.

Our estimates suggest a cash need of about $4 billion.  Under alternative A the Federal funds rate is likely to decline toward 8-3/4 per cent by the next Committee meeting as reserves are provided to support a movement toward the higher longer-run growth path for the aggregates indicated under that alternative.

And under alternative C the funds rate is likely to rise toward 11-1 in the process of moving toward its lower aggregate growth path.

Thus, an appreciable decline in market rates is likely under alternative A and a large rise under alternative C.

Thus, an appreciable decline in market rates is likely under alternative A and a large rise under alternative C.  Under alternative C, disintermediation would clearly once again become a pressing problem, particularly around the year-end reinvestment period. Under alternative B, however, net inflows of consumer- type time deposits to banks and to thrift institutions may be at a moderate pace over the next few months.

Growth of such deposits at banks is likely to slow from the relatively rapid pace of recent months, when banks were able to offer a varied and attractive menu of ceiling-free certificates. Banks and thrift institutions could, however, have an unfavorable experience around the year-end reinvestment period even under alternative B if credit demands are strong enough to generate rising short-term market interest rates around that time.

As a result, bond yields may come under some upward pressure under alternative B, upward rate pressure would be considerably greater under alternative C.

Alternatives A and C refer to growth in the monetary aggregates that "has occurred over the past 6 months"; the annual rates of growth from April through October for M1, M2, and the bank credit proxy are, respectively, 4.

