If the correction were to be completed within the next two quarters, growth from the indicated alternative B).

If the correction were to be completed within the next two quarters, growth from the indicated June level to December would have to be at a 4-1/2 per cent rate (alternative B). Similarly, as a result of the recent overshoot, a Committee decision to move alternative A) or THE MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATHS RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS 6%% GROWTH ALT.

B I I I I I I S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D -1270 -1250 I II I SI I I I 1 alternative C) would imply growth from the indicated June level to December at rates somewhat slower than those path rates.

B I I I I I I S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D -1270 -1250 I II I SI I I I 1 onto a lower 4 per cent path (alternative C) would imply growth from the indicated June level to December at rates somewhat slower than those path rates. (10) The combined third and fourth quarter rates of growth required to hit the longer-run targets specified for M1 amount to 5-1/2 per cent for alternative A; 4-1 native C.

5 Sept. (11) In the weeks immediately ahead, a Federal funds rate in the general neighborhood of the currently prevailing 8-1/2 per cent rate may be consistent with the specifications for the aggregates shown below for alternative B. Under B, M1 in June-July is indicated to rise in a 6--8 per cent annual rate, range with growth at a 9 per cent rate in June, but slowing to about a 5 per cent rate in July.

Because of these various uncertainties, and their possible effects on the demand for money and hence on RPD, the Federal funds rate ranges suggested are wider than in recent meetings (for example,  alternative B).

Interest rates would, of course, come under greater upward pressure if money market conditions should tighten, as they might under  alternative B or C.

However, market expectations concerning the likely content and effectiveness of Phase IV will be critical for interest rate behavior. (14) In view of the recent upsurge in short-term interest rates, growth in time deposits other than large CD's is expected to slow in the second half of the year to around a 5--6 per cent rate under alternative B. This does not allow for any increase in existing Regulation Q ceilings; if ceilings were raised across the board by one-half per cent, as is assumed in the analysis to be presented in Monday's chart show, growth rates would average about 2 percentage points higher.

A sharper slowing in time deposit inflows, is contemplated under alternative C and less of a slowing under alternative A.

On balance, taking all deposit flows into account, growth in the bank credit proxy is expected to slow further in the second half of the year under all three alternatives, with the slowing greatest under alternative C. Proposed directive (16) Presented below are three alternative formulations for the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding section.

Retention of the reference to domestic financial market developments is proposed in both alternatives B and C, because both involve the possibility of a significant tightening of the money market. As will be noted, both alternatives B and C refer to the indicated for the first half of the year.

