'73 (-5.3) (-3.5) (-7.9) (10.8) (11.5) (3.0) (-1.8) i - ~-"-3~- Prospective developments (6) Of the three alternatives summarized below for Committee consideration, alternative B includes a growth rate for M1 over the first half of 1974 that is consistent with the extension to mid-year of the 5 per cent growth path adopted by the Committee at its previous meeting.

'73 (-5.3) (-3.5) (-7.9) (10.8) (11.5) (3.0) (-1.8) i - ~-"-3~- Prospective developments (6) Of the three alternatives summarized below for Committee consideration, alternative B includes a growth rate for M1 over the first half of 1974 that is consistent with the extension to mid-year of the 5 per cent growth path adopted by the Committee at its previous meeting. This growth path starts from the revised September 1973 base (which is about $2-1/2 billion above the old series, as was indicated in the previous bluebook). In alternative B, M1 is targeted to increase at a 4-1 from December '73-to June '74.

Alternatives A and C involve more and less rapid growth in the aggregates, respectively.

C 32,652 32,725 32,731 (7) With regard to money market conditions, the staff would expect some decline in the Federal funds rate between now and mid-January if the Committee chooses to provide the reserves consistent with alternative B. 4 per cent is shown for that alternative.

If the rate were to drop toward the lower end of the range over the next few weeks, the staff would not anticipate that any significant further reductions would be needed in the first few months of 1974 to be consistent with the targeted growth rates for money. (8) The decline in the funds rate expected under alternative B and the greater decline expected under alternative A) essentially reflects the substantial downward revision in the staff's projection of growth in nominal GNP and the associated weakening in the demand for money and credit.

If the rate were to drop toward the lower end of the range over the next few weeks, the staff would not anticipate that any significant further reductions would be needed in the first few months of 1974 to be consistent with the targeted growth rates for money. (8) The decline in the funds rate expected under alternative B (and the greater decline expected under alternative A) essentially reflects the substantial downward revision in the staff's projection of growth in nominal GNP and the associated weakening in the demand for money and credit. At the time of the last meeting the staff was projecting about a 9 and 8 per cent rate of growth in nominal GNP in the first and second quarters of 1974 respectively; currently, the projected rates of growth are about 6 and 5 per cent for the two quarters. (9) If the Committee wishes to maintain money market conditions close to those currently prevailing, the staff would expect growth in the  alternative C dimensions.

Thus, an actual drop in the funds rate, such as would be likely to occur under alternative B, might trigger sizable further declines in short-term interest rates and also some decline in long rates.

This assumes no substantial central bank sales of Treasury securities as a result of reflows of dollars from abroad.  The greater decline in the funds rate under alternative A, as compared with B, would intensify market expectations of declining interest rates.

Market expectations of a decline in the discount rate would become much more prevalent. (12) Among the assumptions we have made in working out the various monetary and interest rate relationships are: (1) moderate growth in large negotiable CD's, in some part reflecting the lower cost of those funds resulting from the recent reduction in marginal reserve requirements; (2) continued fairly strong short-term credit demands by business (at least in the early part of next year when inventory accumulation is expected to be strong), but only moderate business loan growth at banks unless the prime loan rate drops relative to the commercial paper rate; (3) no Treasury cash borrowing until March (unless foreign central banks find it necessary to redeem sizable amounts of Treasury specials) and sharply diminished Federal agency borrowing; and (4) moderate growth in consumer-type time under alternative C) and more rapid growth as market interest rates decline (under alternatives B and A) as banks reduce time deposit offering rates only with a lag.

As will be noted, alternatives A and C refer to so far this year.

