C 2 per cent growth rate of alternative A returns M1 by March of next year to a long-run 5-1/4 per cent growth path (illustrated by the dashed . The 5 per cent growth rate of alternative B brings M1 by March to a 4-1/2 per cent trend line (shown by the dotted line on the chart) that starts from the September money supply estimate available at the last Committee meeting.

A sharper decline in the funds rate would be likely under A Under alternative C, money market conditions seem most likely to remain around those prevailing recently, given the more restrained growth in reserves and the aggregates posited.

Under A, the funds rate could drop considerably further to around 8 per cent and member bank borrowings to around $1 billion. However, it has become very difficult in recent weeks to anticipate shifts in member bank demands for borrowing as market conditions change, and these estimates of borrowing could even be a bit on the high side.  Under alternative C, unless the Federal funds rate declines to the lower end of the indicated range, Treasury bill rates are likely to move somewhat higher, as expectations of additional easing in monetary policy are disappointed.

Under alternative B, and even more so under A, short-term market interest rates are likely to decline over the next few weeks as market expectations of further easing in policy are confirmed.

Bank prime rates probably would be reduced, and some further rate declines would be likely to occur in long-term markets. (12) Although the interest rate declines anticipated under the easing alternatives might be fairly sharp, it is quite likely that rates will turn around, particularly under alternative B. This assumes that the economy expands as projected in the Greenbook and therefore that the underlying transactions demand for money will be relatively well maintained and credit demands will be fairly strong. Thus, under alternative B, bill rates might be back in the neighborhood of current levels, or perhaps above them, by around year-end.

The degree of any reversal would be tempered, however, if it proves necessary to reduce the funds rate somewhat below the bottom of the alternative B range later this year in order to achieve the desired monetary growth path.

Government deposits between now and year-end; (2) expansion of other time and savings deposits at banks at a moderate rate under alternative C as money market conditions remain unchanged and short-term interest rates rise from current levels, with net inflows strengthening under the easier conditions of alternatives B and A; (3) reimposition of some sort of interest rate ceilings on consumer-type certificates maturing in 4 years or more at banks and other savings institutions, with the ceiling structure working to redistribute savings flows at the margin toward nonbank savings institutions.

Alternatives A and C refer to the average growth rates in the monetary aggregates "than has occurred thus far this year.

