However, clear and significant shifts in the multiplier between RPD and deposits could provide a basis for adjustment of the RPD path in the inter-meeting period, depending on Committee preferences.  Alternative B shown in paragraph run paths for the aggregates that include a 5--6 per cent annual rate of growth for M1, the longer-run target specified by the Committee at its last meeting. Alternative A provides for somewhat more rapid growth in the aggregates and alternative C for somewhat less.

For example, in alternative B, the January-February M 1 growth is indicated at per cent, as compared with the 5--6 per cent longer-run target.

It is expected that revenue sharing payments in January and the beginning of tax refunds next month will exert some temporary stimulus to growth in holdings of cash and time and savings deposits. (12) All of the alternatives shown indicate a slowing in the second quarter growth rate in M1 and M2 relative to the first quarter. This reflects mainly (a) disappearance of the transitory upward effect on M1 from sizable Treasury refunds of taxes and smaller final payments by individuals, (b) the lagged effect on money demand of past interest rate  in alternatives B and C, particularly, reduced public interest in time and savings deposits other than large CD's as short-term rates rise further above ceiling rates.

It is expected that revenue sharing payments in January and the beginning of tax refunds next month will exert some temporary stimulus to growth in holdings of cash and time and savings deposits. (12) All of the alternatives shown indicate a slowing in the second quarter growth rate in M1 and M2 relative to the first quarter. This reflects mainly (a) disappearance of the transitory upward effect on M1 from sizable Treasury refunds of taxes and smaller final payments by individuals, (b) the lagged effect on money demand of past interest rate increases, and (c) in alternatives B and C, particularly, reduced public interest in time and savings deposits other than large CD's as short-term rates rise further above ceiling rates.  To achieve the aggregates of alternative B, the staff expects that money market conditions will tighten from around prevail- ing levels, given the continuing strong transaction demands for money implicit in the rapid growth in nominal GNP projected for the first and second quarters.

The potential for money market tightening implied by the alternative B monetary target paths is indicated by the 5-5 per cent Federal funds rate range shown for that alternative.

However, as borrowings continue large,many banks will wear out their welcome at the window and this will add further to pressure on open market rates and on banks to restrict acquisitions of loans and investments. (15) Efforts to achieve the reserve and monetary aggregates of alternative C are likely to entail an even greater firming of money market conditions, with the Federal funds rate probably moving well above 6 per cent by the time of the next meeting.

Some slight upward drift in money market rates would not necessarily be ruled out, depending on the psychological atmosphere around the refunding, but the great bulk of any tightening, should it be required, would have to be accomplished within the next two weeks.  Alternative A indicates more expansive paths for the reserve and monetary aggregates which are not likely to entail any significant change in money market conditions from those recently pre- vailing; this alternative, therefore, has the greatest probability of minimizing conflicts between even-keel considerations and monetary objectives.

In addition, apart from additions to the weekly and monthly bill auctions, the next sizable bill offering is not expected until early March, as noted earlier. (19) Long-term interest rates may not rise very much under alternative A, but would probably show greater upward adjustments, at least in the short-run, under alternatives B and C.

Pressures on long- term rates are thus most likely to come from the supply side, as.banks and other institutional investors find that their inflows of funds are dropping off or becoming significantly more expensive--conditions most  alternatives B and C.

Retention of the reference to credit market developments is suggested should the Committee wish to take account of the possibility of excessive market reaction to further increases in the  alternatives B and C.

