A Alt Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs, combined) M1  6¼ 5¼ 4¼ M2  7½ 6½ 5¼ Credit proxy 7½ 6½ 6 Associated ranges for August-September M1 5½-7½ 4¾-6¾ 4¼-6¼ M2  6¼-8¼ 5¼-7¼ 5-7 RPD 8¾-10¾ 7¾-9¾ 6¾-8¾ Federal funds rate range 9¾-11¾ 10¾-12¾ 11¾-13¾ (inter-meeting period)  Alternative B continues the 5¼ per cent annual growth rate for M1 over the second half of 1974 adopted by the Committee at its last meeting.

Alternative A encompasses a more rapid 6¼ per cent rate of growth for M1 over the July-December period, while Alternative C comprises specifications that might Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary M1 M2 Aggregates 1974 June Sept.

following page).  Under alternative B, and given the recent slowing in money growth, the staff expects that the Federal funds rate may decline a little further between now and the next meeting--centering around 11 per cent.

While this flow of new securities would work to limit down- ward rate adjustments, a sizable expectational decline in rates could take place if a further downdrift in the funds rate were accompanied by continued slow growth in the monetary aggregates and adverse business news.  Alternative A contemplates a significant further decline in the funds rate over the next few weeks, which would undoubtedly spur a sharp drop of interest rates generally. Alternative C, on the other hand, envisions a return of the Federal funds rate to the 13 per cent area, and this would be accompanied by a re-emergence of market tensions and generally rising interest rates.

Taking account of the strengthening indicated by fragmentary early-August data, M1 would be expected to grow in a 4¾-6¾ per cent range in the August-September period under alternative B. (13) Expansion in time deposits other than money market CD's at banks is expected to slow a little further over the months ahead under alternative B.

Growth in savings accounts at nonbank thrift institutions is expected to remain quite weak under alternative B, thus continuing sub- stantial constraint on the supply of private mortgage funds.

Growth in consumer-type time and savings at both banks and nonbank thrift institutions would be even more constrained under alternative C, whereas growth in such savings would begin to recover under alternative A.

In all three alternatives, it is proposed to delete the reference to Treasury financing because the quarterly refunding announced on July 31 has been completed. Alternative A To implement this policy, while taking account of {DEL: the forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would moderate] CONSISTENT WITH SOMEWHAT FASTER growth in monetary aggregates [DEL: over the months ahead] THAN HAS PREVAILED OVER RECENT MONTHS. Alternative B To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would] CONSISTENT WITH moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. Alternative C To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would moderate] CONSISTENT WITH RELATIVELY SLOW growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. (17) In the event the Committee wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions, the specifications of alternative B might be associated .

