The 4¾ per cent annual rate of growth for M1 in alternative C has been set to compensate for this upward revision.

As shown in the chart on the following page, such a growth rate would achieve the M1 level in September that was implicit in the longer-run path adopted by the Committee at its last meeting. Alternative B continues a 5½ per cent growth rate for M1, but from the MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS GROWTH .

Alternative A contemplates a somewhat more rapid 6¼ per cent growth rate in M 1 over the second and third quarters combined.

Alternative A contemplates a somewhat more rapid 6¼ per cent growth rate in M 1 over the second and third quarters combined. (13) A somewhat more rapid longer-run rate of growth in M1 than adopted by the Committee at its last meeting, such as envisioned under alternative A, appears necessary if money market conditions are not to tighten further. Under alternative A, the staff would expect the Federal funds rate to trade most frequently around 11-11¼ per cent.

We have assumed that member banks will want to increase their borrowing (apart from special borrowing) to 2 billion per week on average under alternative A, given the roughly 3 percentage point spread of the Federal funds rate over the current 8 per cent discount rate.

We would expect this tendency to continue even under alternative A, so that M2 growth over the second and third quarters would be expected to slow to around 6.

We would expect this tendency to continue even under alternative A, so that M2 growth over the second and third quarters would be expected to slow to around 6.5 per cent, and in M3 to about 5.0 per cent--on the order of 4 percentage points below the average annual rate of expansion in the fourth and first quarters. (18) Restraining M1 growth to a 5½ per cent annual rate over the second and third quarters--as under alternative B-- would be expected to put somewhat more pressure on the money market, with the Federal funds rate rising to around 12 per cent between now and the next Committee meeting.

now projected between money growth and interest rates makes no allowance for the possibility that liquidity preference may increase if confidence in financial markets continues to weaken. (19) To achieve the even greater restraint on monetary ex- pansion called for under alternative C, the Federal funds rate would be expected to rise to around 13 per cent over the next few weeks.

The time and savings deposits experience at banks and thrift institutions would be expected to deteriorate further--with deposit flows at thrift institutions probably negative as the Treasury bill rate adjusted sharply upward, perhaps to near 10 per cent.  Under alternative A, banks are expected to continue borrowing fairly heavily through CD's, and to obtain funds in the Euro- dollar market.

If, as seems quite possible, such resistance intensifies, CD growth could be substantially less than projected, bank credit expansion could be constrained, and strains in other financial markets (including the Euro-dollar market) could be exacerbated.  Under alternative C and possibly also B, sharply higher interest rates would erode asset values and bring the adequacy of bank liquidity into question.

Alternative C has the greatest potential for such a pattern, and might well bring about a severe wrenching of market conditions.

without separate reference to "international" and "domestic" developments. In alternative C, it is proposed to give special emphasis to that phase--i.

strong possibility of exaggerated market reactions to the sharp rise in interest rates associated with open market operations designed to achieve the specified rates of growth in the aggregates. Alternative A To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forthcoming Treacury financing and of internationl and domestic] financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would moderate] CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. Alternative B To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forthcoming Treasury financing and of international and domestic] financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that would moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. Alternative C To implement this policy, while taking CAREFUL account of [DEL: the forthcoming Treasury financing and of international and domestic] financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that would moderate SLOW APPRECIABLY THE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. (23) In the event that the Committee wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions, the specifications of alternative A might be associated with language .

