As may be seen from the chart on the following page, the level of M1 in August reflects a 5.2 per cent annual rate of growth thus far this year; since this is reasonably consistent with recent Committee desires, the August level is not unreasonable as a base for formulating longer-run targets.  Alternative C involves a 5¼ per cent growth rate for M1 over the target period and assumes money market conditions about unchanged from those recently prevailing.

Alternative B con- templates a 5¾ per cent growth rate for M1 from now on.

The more rapid 6½ per cent growth rate for M1 contemplated under alternative A would almost make up for the recent shortfall by year-end.

The recent Board action to remove the marginal reserve requirement on large time deposits maturing in four months or more is assumed to have a marginal effect on the structure of CD's issued by banks, but to have an insignificant effect on the total amount of CD's issued. (12) Adoption of the somewhat higher 5¾ per cent growth rate of alternative B would be expected to entail a further decline in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks to around 11 per cent, the center of the 10-12 per cent range shown for this alternative.

A very modest recovery in savings flows at banks and thrift institutions might develop, and mortgage market rates would be under less pressure.  Alternative A presents a more expansive policy alternative, characterized by a 6 per cent long-run rate of growth in M1 and a greater near-term decline in the Federal funds rate.

Banks could expand CD offerings over the near-term to obtain funds for investment in longer-term market securities while high yields on the securities are still available. (15) It was assumed in the preceding discussion that if the Committee adopts alternative B or A, it would want to have the money market conditions expected to be consistent with the higher growth rates for M1 established between now and the next meeting.

However, the Committee may wish to phase in any easing of market conditions over a longer period, particularly under alternative A. Thus, the funds rate could be permitted to decline in the inter-meeting period by less than implied by the mid-points of the ranges shown in the summary table of paragraph (6), in the expectation that some further decline would be sought later.

For example, under alternative A, a drop in the funds rate to 10¾ per cent over the next five weeks, followed by a further decline to around 10 per cent by mid-November, could be envisaged.

As will be noted, alternative A refers to the over recent months.

