1974 - Mar M 6½ 5¾ 5 M2 7¾ 6¾ 6 Credit proxy 7 6¾ 6¼ Associated ranges of tolerances for Oct.-Nov. M1  5¼-7¼ 4¾-6¾  4¼-6¼ M2 6¾-8¾ 5¾-7¾ 5¼-7¼ RPD 6-8 ¾ 5½-7½ 4¾-6¾ Federal funds rate 8-10 8¾-10¾ 9½-11½ (inter-meeting range)  Of the three alternatives shown, alternative B includes the 5¾ per cent longer-run target path for M1 adopted at the last Committee meeting.

Over the October-November period, M1 growth is indicated to be in a 4¾-6¾ per cent annual rate range under alternative B. Given the small rise in September, the 5¾ per cent growth rate from August to March implies a 6½ per cent rate from September to March--i.

The Treasury will also announce on October 30 the terms on which it will refund $4.3 billion of maturing publicly held coupon issues. These borrowing demands will tend to moderate the general declines in interest rates that would otherwise be prompted by a further drop in the funds rate to around 9¾ per cent. (10) The additional declines in interest rates expected under alternative B may involve a further easing in the 3-month commercial paper rate to the 9-9½ per cent range, compared with around 9¾ per cent currently, The 3-month Treasury bill should continue to fluctuate very widely--say, in a 6-8 per cent range--and may average a bit below 7 per cent, although very large additions to the supply of bills in the days immediately ahead would likely exert upward pressure on the rate.

The strained liquidity position of banks is likely to keep them from easing nonprice lending terms significantly, although the prime loan rate may decline further. Moreover, improved conditions in the commercial paper market should tend to divert some corporate borrowing away from the banks.  Alternative C involves a Federal funds rate range centering on 10 per cent, the average rate prevailing in the last full statement week, M1 expansion in this alternative is expected to be consistent with a longer-run target rate of growth of 5 per cent, annual rate (from Aug.

Corporate bond yields would probably be under upward pressure, while the recent slight moderation of mortgage market pressures would be unlikely to persist, both because of the general market atmosphere and because inflows to thrift institutions would be expected to show little improvement.  Alternative A contemplates a more rapid growth path for M1 than under alternative B.

