'74 to June '75 To Point A 714% To Point B 61/2% To Point C 6% To Point D 51/2% A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J 1974 1975 shows the relationship to this path (extended to June) of the longer-run growth rates for M1 contained in the four alternatives shown above. (9) The 5½ per cent growth rate in M1 from November forward, under alternative D, appears to be consistent with prevailing money market conditions, as typified by a Federal funds rate around 8¾ per cent.

This alternative does not contemplate making up for recent shortfalls in M1 growth.  Alternatives C and B involve growth rates of M1 of 6 and 6½ per cent, respectively, through the first half of next year.

This alternative does not contemplate making up for recent shortfalls in M1 growth. (10) Alternatives C and B involve growth rates of M1 of 6 and 6½ per cent, respectively, through the first half of next year. Under alternative B the level of M1 by June is the same as that obtained by extending the 5¾ per cent August-March growth path to June.

Under alternative C, the catch-up period would extend into the fall.

Under alternative C, the catch-up period would extend into the fall. (11) Because of the further weakening in GNP growth, pro- jected by the staff, some further decline in interest rates over the next few months now appears to be required to achieve the monetary  alternatives C or B.

Between now and the next Committee meeting, alternative C would appear to entail a Federal funds rate of around 8-3/8 per cent, and alternative B around 8 per cent-- .

M1 growth in the December-January period under both alternatives may be on the low side of longer-run growth rates, but growth would be expected to increase somewhat later on as a result of the lagged impact on money demand of the further interest rate declines.  Alternative A encompasses a higher 7¼ per cent annual rate of growth in M1 between now and mid-year.

A drop in the funds rate to around 8 per cent would have an appreciable downward effect on short-term market rates, would trigger further declines in bank prime loan rates, and would more noticeably ease long-term market conditions. Market expectations of a further decline in the discount rate might begin to develop, but they would become much more pronounced if the funds rate were to drop as much as is implied under alternative A. (14) Net inflows of time and savings deposits (other than money market CD's) at banks are likely to continue to be relatively strong under each of the alternatives presented, with growth highest, of course, under the easiest alternative.

The position of thrift institutions probably also will continue to improve, even under alternative D. However, it would probably require a further decline in market interest rates, and an accompanying more rapid inflow of savings funds,to ensure a significant liberalization in mortgage loan commitment policies by thrift institutions.

