A Alt Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs. combined) M1  7 5½ 4 M2 8 6½ 5 Credit proxy 9 7½ 6 Associated ranges for July-August M1 4¾-6¾ 4-6 3¼-5¼ M2  6½-8½ 5½-7½  4¾-6¾ RPD 10½-12½ 9¾-ll¾ 9-11 Federal funds rate range (inter-meeting period) 10-12 11-13 12-14  Of the alternatives presented, alternative B represents continuation of the longer-run target path for M1 adopted at the last Committee meeting.

This is slightly above the 5¼ per cent rate adopted at the last meeting simply because the June level for M1 turned out to be slightly lower than estimated at that time; the level set for December is unchanged from the previous meeting.  The specifications of alternative B would contemplate a Federal funds rate in an 11-13 per cent range between now and the next Committee meeting, and M1 growth for July-August in a 4-6 per cent annual MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS -- 1 - 285 RATE OF GROWTH JUNE '73 TO JUNE '74 5.

As a result, bank credit growth under alternative B is projected at around an 8½ per cent annual rate over the third quarter, substantially less than in the first half of the year.

The bank prime loan rate would probably also rise somewhat further.  Under alternative B pressures on thrift institutions would be expected to be somewhat greater than during the second quarter.

For a one-month period, this would represent a reduction in deposits at thrift institutions by 1½ per cent at an annual rate and in consumer-type time deposits at banks by ¾ per cent at an annual rate.  Alternatives A and C specify faster and slower rates of growth in monetary aggregates, respectively, than alternative B.

For a one-month period, this would represent a reduction in deposits at thrift institutions by 1½ per cent at an annual rate and in consumer-type time deposits at banks by ¾ per cent at an annual rate. (13) Alternatives A and C specify faster and slower rates of growth in monetary aggregates, respectively, than alternative B. Alternative C contemplates little change from the Federal funds rate that has come to prevail in recent weeks, and this would be expected to lead to a slowing in the growth rate of M1 to around 4 per cent over the second half of this year.

Under this alternative, interest rates would likely rise further in the weeks immediately ahead,  alternative B over the longer run.

Inflows to thrift institutions would be further curtailed, and the mortgage market--apart from Govern- ment support--would come under even greater constraint than at present.  Under alternative A--which contemplates M1 growth at a 7 per cent annual rate over the second half of the year--the Federal funds rate would be expected to decline to around 11 per cent between now and the next Committee meeting, probably stimulating a fairly marked decline of interest rates over a broad maturity spectrum.

The position of banks and thrift institutions would ease under this alternative, though remaining on the tight side as compared with historical experience, since an 11 per cent Federal funds rate implies a structure of market rates still quite attractive relative to present Regulation Q ceilings. (15) The possibility of a credit crunch in financial markets cannot be ignored, especially under alternative C. Such a development could be triggered by a series of failures of financial or industrial concerns, here or abroad.

For all three alternatives, it is proposed to include a reference to Treasury financing because the regular August refunding will be announced on July 31. Alternative A To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that] CONSISTENT WITH GROWTH IN the monetary aggregates AT ABOUT THE RATES PREVAILING OVER RECENT MONTHS [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. Alternative B To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD MODERATE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. Alternative C To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD SLOW APPRECIABLY THE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. (17) In the event that the Committee again wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of prevailing money market conditions, the specifications of alternative C might be associated with the language used in the directive adopted at the last meeting-- .

