A Alt Targets (2nd & 3rd qtrs. combined) M1 6¾ 6 5¼ M2 8¼ 7¼ 6¼ Credit proxy 11¼ 10½ 9½ Associated ranges for April-May RPD 10¾--12¾ 9¾--11¾ 8¾-10¾ M 1  6½ --8½ 6--8 5½--7½ M2 7¼--9¼ 6¾--8¾ 6¼--8¼ Federal funds rate range 8¾--10¼ 9¼ --10¾ 9¾--ll¼ (inter-meeting period)  Alternative C represents continuation of the strategy with regard to the aggregates adopted by the Committee at its last meeting.

C 33,122 33,549 33,662 33,725  Alternative B calls for somewhat more rapid growth in the monetary aggregates over the second and third quarters, typified by a 6 per cent growth rate for M 1 .

The still more rapid longer-run growth rates of alternative A--including a 6¾ per cent rate for M 1 over the second and third quarters--appear likely to be associated with declines in both short- and long-term interest rates.

Under alternative B, for example, M 1 growth is indicated in the 6--8 per cent range.

Given the lagged relationship between interest rates and money demand, however, M 1 growth is expected to moderate later as it approaches the longer-run path. (12) Between now and mid-May, short-term interest rates could decline somewhat under alternative B. Indeed, the very recent drop in the 3-month bill rate probably is anticipating some of the potential for downward rate adjustments.

Finally, the Treasury's May refunding--to be announced on May 1--might include some cash redemption of the $5½ billion of maturing publicly held debt because of the possibility of debt ceiling problems. (14) A rise in the funds rate over the next few weeks--such as would be likely under alternative C-- would generate market expecta- tions of a further tightening of monetary policy.

Over the next few months, the 3-month bill rate could be around 9 per cent, and possibly higher in the summer when Treasury cash borrowing demands are seasonally strong.  Under alternative B, with market interest rates little changed on balance from current high levels, net savings inflows to nonbank thrift institutions are likely to be slower than the 8 per cent first-quarter pace.

Under alternative C, these institutions would come under greater pressure, of course, but in either case some tightening in the availability of mortgage loan commitments would be likely, compared with the situation in the early months of the year.

Given the volume of private and governmental securities in prospect, bond yields could rise considerably further under alternative C. High-grade corporate issues, which are already above their summer highs, could approach their 1970 peaks, and Treasury notes and bonds could rise above them (the 20 year . Under alternative B, further upward adjustments in bond yields are likely to be comparatively modest, given the increases that already have occurred and the stabilizing tendencies that we would expect in short-term markets.

Under alternative B, further upward adjustments in bond yields are likely to be comparatively modest, given the increases that already have occurred and the stabilizing tendencies that we would expect in short-term markets.  Under alternative A, savings inflows to thrift institutions would be expected to recover to close to their first-quarter pace, as receding market rates provide less competition for savings funds.

For all three alternatives, it is proposed to include a reference to Treasury financing because the regular May refinancing will be announced on May 1. Alternative A To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF international and domestic financial market developments, [DEL: including the prospective Treasury financing] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would moderate CONSISTENT WITH growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead SUFFICIENT TO ACCOMMODATE MODERATE EXPANSION IN REAL GNP AT THE HIGHER DOLLAR VALUES NOW PREVAILING. Alternative B To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF international and domestic financial market developments, [DEL: including the prospective Treasury financing] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that would moderate SOMEWHAT growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. Alternative C To implement this policy, while taking account of THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF international and domestic financial market developments, [DEL: including the prospective Treasury financing] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that would moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. (21) In the event that the Committee wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions, the specifications of alternative B might be associated .

