Rates of growth consistent with that extended path are shown in alternative C. These include a 4¾ per cent annual rate of growth in M1 between June and year-end, which would compensate for the estimated 7 per cent annual rate of growth for Ml in the second quarter and would lead to an average 5½ per cent growth for the last three quarters of the year.

Financial strains would increase generally, and the odds on failure of some of the more vulnerable firms would rise.  Alternative B encompasses a 5¾ per cent growth rate for M1-- and growth rates of 6¾ and 5½ per cent for M2 and M3 respectively--in the second half of 1974.

Thus, upward interest rate pressure under this alternative would be considerably less than under alternative C. At this writing, interest rates generally appear to be in process of adjusting to Federal funds trading at rates somewhat above 11 per cent.

This process may be completed by, or shortly after, the forthcoming Committee meeting; and little further, if any, upward rate movement is likely to develop subsequently if the funds rate remains  alternative B range.

For the third quarter as a whole, M growth is indicated to be 5¼ per cent at prevailing money market conditions--though rising to 6¼ per cent in the fourth quarter when nominal GNP growth is projected to expand somewhat more rapidly. (14) The substantial injection of nonborrowed reserves that seems necessary to attain the aggregates of alternative A would probably lead to an easing of money market conditions.

Growth in M1 was at an annual rate of about 7 per cent in the first quarter, and including an estimate of 8.2 per cent for June, it is about 7 per cent for the second quarter as well. The comparable rates for M2 are about 10 per cent for the first quarter and about 8 per cent for the second quarter. Alternative A To implement this policy, while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that] CONSISTENT WITH GROWTH IN the monetary aggregates AT ABOUT THE RATES PREVAILING OVER RECENT MONTHS [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. Alternative B To implement this policy, while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD MODERATE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. Alternative C To implement this policy, while taking account of developments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACIIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD SLOW APPRECIABLY THE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance]. (16) In the event that the Committee again wishes to couch the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions, the specifications of alternative B might be associated with the language used in the directive adopted at the last meeting-- .

