'75 M1 8 7 6 M2  11 10 9  The short-run specifications of alternative B involve maintenance of prevailing money market conditions between now and the next Committee meeting.

For July, M1 growth is expected to be slightly negative, while growth in August is expected to resume at a pace more consonant with underlying transactions demands, given prevailing money market conditions.  While alternative B calls for maintenance of prevailing money market conditions in the short-run, given the temporary slowing expected in M1 growth, it appears likely that money market conditions will need to be tightened further later on in order to achieve growth in the aggregates as indexed by expansion in M1 over the next year at around the center of the 5-7½ per cent range adopted by the Committee at its last meeting.

6a, under alternative B, the one-year growth rate for M1 from June '75 to June '76 is shown as 5¾ per cent-- which is ½ point below the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent target range.

6a, under alternative B, the one-year growth rate for M1 from June '75 to June '76 is shown as 5¾ per cent-- which is ½ point below the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent target range. The staff used such a rate in the alternative B calculations because the substantial overshoot in M1 growth during June raised the base 1.

The long-run growth rate under alternative B measured on a quarterly average basis--that is, from the average level for M1 in the second quarter of 1975 to the average level in the second quarter of 1976--is around 6¾ per cent, as is also shown in the table.

The long-run growth rate under alternative B measured on a quarterly average basis--that is, from the average level for M1 in the second quarter of 1975 to the average level in the second quarter of 1976--is around 6¾ per cent, as is also shown in the table. (11) The same one-year growth rates are shown for alternative C as for alternative B--with alternative C implying a somewhat different pattern of monetary growth rates and interest rate movements over the two six month periods, as will be noted below. Alternative A includes a growth rate for the June '75-June '76 period of 6¼ per cent from the current estimate of the June '75 base.

This alternative implies M1 growth from QII '75 to QII '76 of around 6-3/4 per cent.  The short-run specifications for alternative C contemplate some further near-term tightening of the money market, involving a Federal funds rate range of 6¼-7¼ per cent for the period until the next meeting.

This alternative implies M1 growth from QII '75 to QII '76 of around 6-3/4 per cent. (12) The short-run specifications for alternative C contemplate some further near-term tightening of the money market, involving a Federal funds rate range of 6¼-7¼ per cent for the period until the next meeting. Adoption of this alternative would introduce an increased monetary restraint earlier than under alternative B. As a result, the staff would expect that less additional pressure would have to be exerted on the Federal funds rate later on to achieve targeted growth in the monetary aggregates over the next year.

Over the July-August period M1 growth under this alternative would be expected to be at about a 3-5 per cent annual rate, with growth over the last half of 1975 at around a 6 per cent annual rate, or one percentage point less than under alternative B. (13) If the Federal funds rate were to rise in coming weeks to the 6¾ per cent mid-point of the alternative C range, a very sub- stantial upward adjustment in other short-term rates would likely ensue.

However, if the Federal funds rate were stabilized at around 6 per cent, as is contemplated under alternative B, no more than minor upward market rate adjustments, if any, would seem likely in the weeks immediately ahead.

Such pressures could be moderated, of course, by postponements of corporate bond issues-- as might happen if borrowers thought that inflation was coming under control and,therefore,that higher bond yields were not sustainable over the longer run.  Alternative A involves an easing of money market conditions over the near-term, which in effect reverses the recent tightening.

The slowdown would be greatest over the near-term under alternative C, which involves the probability of a significant further rise in short-term market interest rates.

