For alternative A, however, it should be noted that the lower interest rates are not assumed to persist throughout the whole first half of the year, as will be explained below.

For alternative A, however, it should be noted that the lower interest rates are not assumed to persist throughout the whole first half of the year, as will be explained below.  Alternative A encompasses the 6 per cent longer-run annual rate of growth for M1 (over the seven-month November '74-June '75 period) that was preferred by the Committee at its last meeting, the achievement of which would now require a 6¾ per cent growth rate over the first half of this year.

Given the very low growth that seems in store for January, however, the M1 growth rate would be expected to be in a 4-6 per cent range for the two-month January-February period.  Interest rate declines under alternative A may begin to be reversed as spring progresses.

Assuming the Committee were to wish to hold monetary growth to around a 6-7 per cent annual rate in the second half of the year, this would appear to require an upward adjustment of the funds rate, as well as other short-term market interest rates, at a fairly early stage.  The specifications of alternative B contemplate a smaller decline in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks than under alternative A.

'74--June '75 period Because alternative B puts in place a lesser degree of monetary stimula- tion over the near-term, it would appear that any reversal of the interest rate decline would be delayed more than under alternative A.

However, market interest rates more generally could begin rising in spring in anticipation of continued exceptionally large Treasury cash needs in the second half of the year combined with a pick-up of total private credit demands (assuming that an economic recovery in the second half is still anticipated at that time).  Alternative C assumes money market conditions as indexed by a Federal funds rate centering around 7¼ per cent.

Demands may be particularly light in private short-term markets so that interest rate pressures, should they develop, are more likely to appear in longer-term market sectors. (13) The net inflow at banks of time and savings deposits (other than money market CD's) is expected to continue at about the pace of the fourth quarter of 1974 under alternative C. Greater inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits are assumed under alternatives A and B in the months immediately ahead, but under alternative A the rate of inflow is assumed to drop back somewhat in the spring as interest rates begin to rise.

Under all three alternatives, the staff has assumed that savings inflows will be sustained in late spring or early summer by initial payments of the proposed income tax rebate--which would also tend temporarily to enlarge demand deposits. Implied rates of growth for M2 under the three alternatives are shown in the bottom panel of the summary table in paragraph (6). (14) Similar assumptions to those for consumer-type time deposits at banks were made for deposit flows at thrift institutions. Given the apparently weak mortgage demand, downward pressures on mortgage interest rates might be expected in the months ahead under all three alternatives, with declines in mortgage rates the largest, of course, under alternative A. Under the easing alternatives, conditions leading to a reversal of such rate declines would tend to develop as time passes, though perhaps not until after mid-year.

