Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed. Prospective developments (7) Alternative longer-run growth rates for the monetary aggregates covering the 12-month period from June 1975 to June 1976 are summarized in the table below for Committee consideration. Alternative B encompasses generally the same growth rates that had been adopted by the Committee for the March '75--March '76 period at its April meeting.

A Alt M1  6-84 5-7½ 4-6½ M2  9-11 8-10 7-9 M3  10-12 9-11 8-10 Bank credit proxy 6-9 5½-8½ 4½-7  The longer-run path for M1 in alternative B does imply a somewhat more rapid rate of growth from March '75 to March '76 than contemplated by the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent range adopted by the Committee at its previous meetings.

The growth rate from March '75 to March '76 implicit in the currently pro- posed alternative B is around 7 per cent of course, within the adopted range, though toward the upper end.

'75 M1  8k 7k 6k M2 10l 9% 9 (10) As an operating guide for the intermeeting period under alternative B, the short-run specifications include a rise in the Federal funds rate to a range centered on 6 per cent.

Maintenance over the weeks immediately ahead of prevailing money market conditions (as shown for the short-run specifications of alternative A) would probably not be inconsistent with the longer-run objectives of alternative B, but such an approach would appear to entail the need for a more substantial constraint on monetary growth later on, and hence a larger rise in the Federal funds rate later in the summer.

We have, therefore, assumed that maintenance of pre- vailing money market conditions over the short-run would be more con- sistent with adoption by the Committee of higher longer-run growth objectives for the monetary aggregates, as shown under alternative A. (12) Given prevailing money market conditions, M1 growth over the June-July period is expected to be in an 8-10 per cent annual rate range.

Thus, any significant slowdown in M1 growth probably will be delayed until July. Tightening of the money market over the intermeeting period, as con- templated under alternative B, would work to lower these growth rates slightly, but most of the effect of higher interest rates on the monetary aggregates would develop later on.

Thrift institutions will be encouraged to continue expanding mortgage loan commitments, and mortgage interest rates could edge down somewhat further if conditions in money and capital markets remain stable. (15) A significant rise in the Federal funds rate--for example, to the 6 per cent mid-point of the alternative B range--would, however, alter market expectations and lead to upward adjustments in interest rates.

Adjustments in longer-term rates might be moderated by market expectations of a continued slowing in the rate of inflation, a gradual reduction in the prospective volume of new offerings, and by the relatively substantial upward slope to the yield curve that now exists.  Alternative C contemplates more tightening in money market conditions over the near-term--with the funds rate range centered on 6 per cent--than under alternative B.

But this alternative implies enough further tightening in the money market so that growth in the monetary aggregates would be below the bottom of the 5-7 per cent range for M 1 in the first half of 1976. (17) Near-term tightening in the money market of the magnitude suggested for alternative C would almost certainly lead to a fairly sharp reaction in other short-term markets and to an upward adjustment in long-term rates.

