Thus, M1 growth is expected to be fairly sub- stantial under any of the alternatives in the February-March period.  Of the alternatives shown, alternative A encompasses the 6 per cent annual growth rate for M1 specified by the Committee at its last meeting in its longer-run targets for the first half of '75.

If the Committee should wish to get back on the 6 per cent growth trend after mid-year, a sharp rise in interest rates would be necessary during the late spring and summer.  The specifications of alternative B involve attainment of a 6 per cent rate of growth in M1 by September, rather than by mid- year.

The annual growth rate for M1 over the first half of this year under this alternative would be around 4½ per cent, while M2 would expand at about a 7½ per cent rate.  Alternative B contemplates a further decline in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks to about the middle of a 4¾-5¾ per cent range.

The provision of bank reserves and easing of money market conditions needed to sustain growth in the monetary aggregates, as specified in alternative B, should, at least over the near-term, permit the new Treasury debt to be absorbed at declining interest rates, though the reductions may be modest.

Longer-term rates may show rather modest further declines, however, since corporate and state and local government demands on bond markets are expected to remain sizable.  Alternative C contemplates a smaller reduction in the funds rate than alternative B and hence a less rapid growth in the monetary aggregates between now and the end of summer.

By the time the year is over, M1 may have grown at near a 6 per cent rate under this alternative if economic activity in the second half of the year turns out to be as strong as projected in the Green Book.  Under alternative C, the funds rate would be expected to decline to around 6 per cent--the mid-point of the range shown in paragraph (7)--or a little below, between now and the next Committee meeting.

Moreover, the weight of Treasury financings could place upward pressure on the rate structure rather soon.  Under alternative D, which involves money market conditions in the neighborhood of those prevailing on average in the period since the last meeting, M 1 would grow at a rate of about 4 per cent over the first nine months of the year.

