A Alt Ranges of tolerance for November-December M1  7-9 6½-8½ 6-8 M2  8½-10½ 8-10 7½-9½ RPD 5½-7½ 5-7 4½-6½ Federal funds rate 4¼-5 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼  Under alternative B the Federal funds rate range is centered around the recently prevailing 5¼ per cent level.

A resolution of the problem would affect attitudes and expectations in a manner likely to put upward pressure on rates, whereas a dashing of hopes would have the opposite effect. (10) With bond volume in the corporate and municipal markets expected to be generally moderate, longer-term market interest rates are likely to show little further net change between now and year-end under the specifications of alternative B. If the New York situation is resolved without default, yields in the municipal market could well show significant declines.

Accordingly, the date for an assumed upward adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates has been shifted forward, from year-end to mid-1976.  Alternative A contemplates a modest further decline in the Federal funds rate between now and the next Committee meeting, to the mid-point of a 4 -5 per cent range.

We would expect that such a reduction in the funds rate would have to be reversed at least by early next year in order to keep longer-run growth in M1 at around the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent range, and that by Spring the funds rate would be around 7¾ per cent. (13) A reduction in the funds rate over the next few weeks of about the dimensions contemplated under alternative A would probably be accompanied by similar declines in other short-term rates and by some further decline in longer-term market rates.

Market attitudes will, of course, be influenced by the nature of incoming economic news and by the degree of use, if any, of other monetary policy instruments.  Alternative C involves some rise in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks, to the mid-point of a 5 -6 per cent range.

But if interest rates are pushed up over the next few weeks, it is likely that less of an increase would be required over the longer run than under alternatives A or B, since an early start will have been made in restraining money demand.

It seems probable that the alternative C strategy might lead to a funds rate that peaks out at around 6¾ per cent next year.

