Alternative A, which contemplates a near-term easing of money market conditions, and an 8 per cent rate of growth in M1 over the second and third quarters, would imply a considerable turn-around of interest rates later this year if growth in the aggregates over the 12-month period is to be kept at around the mid-points of the indicated longer-term ranges, assuming the GNP projection is correct.

Alternative A, which contemplates a near-term easing of money market conditions, and an 8 per cent rate of growth in M1 over the second and third quarters, would imply a considerable turn-around of interest rates later this year if growth in the aggregates over the 12-month period is to be kept at around the mid-points of the indicated longer-term ranges, assuming the GNP projection is correct. Alternative B implies a somewhat smaller rise in interest rates later.

Alternative A, which contemplates a near-term easing of money market conditions, and an 8 per cent rate of growth in M1 over the second and third quarters, would imply a considerable turn-around of interest rates later this year if growth in the aggregates over the 12-month period is to be kept at around the mid-points of the indicated longer-term ranges, assuming the GNP projection is correct. Alternative B implies a somewhat smaller rise in interest rates later. Alternative C involves rising interest rates over the near-term, lower growth in the monetary aggregates in the second and third quarters, and hence less upward interest rate pressure later.

Alternative A, which contemplates a near-term easing of money market conditions, and an 8 per cent rate of growth in M1 over the second and third quarters, would imply a considerable turn-around of interest rates later this year if growth in the aggregates over the 12-month period is to be kept at around the mid-points of the indicated longer-term ranges, assuming the GNP projection is correct. Alternative B implies a somewhat smaller rise in interest rates later. Alternative C involves rising interest rates over the near-term, lower growth in the monetary aggregates in the second and third quarters, and hence less upward interest rate pressure later.  The Federal funds rate range for alternative B is centered near the 5-5 per cent area in which funds have been most frequently trading in recent days.

Under the circumstances, and given the very recent decline in the funds rate, any significant increase in the rate would probably lead to fairly sharp upward adjustments of interest rates as market expectations abruptly change.  Alternative C contemplates a rise of the Federal funds rate into a 5½-6½ per cent range.

As market interest rates rise, net inflows of time and savings deposits to banks and thrift institutions would also diminish, as compared with alternative B. Mortgage market conditions would certainly tighten further.

As market interest rates rise, net inflows of time and savings deposits to banks and thrift institutions would also diminish, as compared with alternative B. Mortgage market conditions would certainly tighten further.  Alternative A involves a further easing of money market conditions, which would likely be accompanied by further downward adjust- ments in market interest rates more generally.

As will be noted, alternatives A and B on average in recent months.

