This process now appears to have been completed Under alternative A --which assumes the same Federal funds rate range for the forthcoming intermeeting period as that adopted at the last meeting--M1 is expected to rise at an annual rate in the 6½-3½ per cent area over this and the next month on average.

It is possible that the period of calm may last into the fall, but there are still substantial uncertainties in the market, typified by the slow reception initially accorded the recent offering of generously priced short-term New York State issues. (12) Given the large amount of Treasury borrowing that is being compressed into the next month or so, as well as the still sensitive state of the municipal market, a significant rise in the Federal funds rate--for example, toward the upper end of the 5-3/4--7 per cent range  alternative A--would likely lead to substantial further yield advances.

It is possible that the period of calm may last into the fall, but there are still substantial uncertainties in the market, typified by the slow reception initially accorded the recent offering of generously priced short-term New York State issues. (12) Given the large amount of Treasury borrowing that is being compressed into the next month or so, as well as the still sensitive state of the municipal market, a significant rise in the Federal funds rate--for example, toward the upper end of the 5-3/4--7 per cent range of alternative A--would likely lead to substantial further yield advances. Interest rate increases would be accentuated if strengthening credit demands on banks from businesses and consumers were at the same time reducing bank willingness to add to Treasury security holdings.  While alternative A basically assumes little or no change in the Federal funds rate between now and the next meeting, the staff believes the funds rate would have to rise later in the fall if the monetary aggregates are to remain on track with the Committee's longer- run objectives.

With this assumption, longer-run M2 growth is projected toward the low end of the Committee's announced target range under alternative A. (14) Alternative C encompasses an immediate substantial tightening of the money market and is characterized by a Federal funds rate range for the intermeeting period of 6 -8 per cent, centering on 7¼ per cent.

The staff would expect the annual rate of growth in consumer-type time deposits at banks and deposits at thrift institutions to drop to around a 7-8 per cent rate in October. Pressures on such flows would be intensified later in the fall and early next year, when further increases in the Federal funds rate would be expected.  Under alternative C mortgage market conditions may be expected to tighten rather promptly, with rates rising further over the next few weeks and with lenders becoming less willing to make loan commitments. Under alternative A, and to a certain extent under alternative B (to be discussed below), strains on the mortgage market would be more delayed and less severe.

The assumed adjustment in Regulation Q ceilings would temper the impact of upward market rate adjustments on savings inflows to thrift institutions after year-end, but the mortgage market would still be expected to come under additional pressure next year.  Alternative B contemplates a modest tightening of money market conditions between now and the next Committee meeting, as indicated by the 6-3/4 per cent mid-point of a 6-7 per cent Federal funds rate range.

