A Alt M1  6-8½ 5-7½ 4-6½ M2  10-12 8½-10½ 7-9 M3  11½-13½ 10-12 8½-10½ M4 7½-10½ 7-10 6-9 M5  10-12 9½-11½ 8-10 Bank credit proxy 7½-10½ 6½-9½ 5½-8½ 1/ Consistent with staff assumptions adopted for GNP projections in the Green Book.  Of the alternatives shown, alternative B most nearly corresponds to the longer-run objectives implied in Committee specifica- tions adopted at the last meeting.

In the case of alternatives B and C, the short-run specifications indicate a rise in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks.

The staff expects that such a rise would moderate the extent to which interest rates might have to rise later in order to restrain money demand.  Alternative A contemplates a Federal funds rate remaining in the 5¼-5½ per cent range most recently prevailing.

Recent postponements in the corporate bond market have relieved pressure in that area to some extent, but any interest rate decline will be limited over the near-term since the calendar remains heavy and recently postponed issues would likely be rescheduled as the market shows signs of improvement. (14) A rise in the Federal funds rate to around the 6 per cent level--as shown for alternative B short-run specifications in --would probably lead to a sharp market reaction.

The availability of mortgage market funds may not, therefore, be significantly limited in this period.  The rise of interest rates under alternative B would work to hold growth in M1 over the second and third quarters to around a 6¾ per cent annual rate, as noted earlier.

With some diminution in the expansion of interest-bearing deposits, growth in broader measures of money would be moderated, relative to alternative A. Bank credit expansion would be reduced somewhat, but with business and consumer loan demands expected to be weak at least over the next month or two, banks would still be in a position to participate heavily in Treasury financings.

Bank credit expansion would be reduced somewhat, but with business and consumer loan demands expected to be weak at least over the next month or two, banks would still be in a position to participate heavily in Treasury financings. (16) The roughly 1 percentage point rise in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks contemplated under alternative C would probably cause other short-term rates to rise by even larger amounts, at least temporarily, mainly because of expectational effects on markets in a period of heavy Treasury financings and with near-term prospects of economic recovery.

