- Sept 1/ Figures shown assume staff GNP projections through the third quarter, and Federal funds rate behavior as described in the paragraphs below.  Of the three alternatives presented, alternative A most closely approximates the longer-run growth rates that accompanied the specifications chosen by the Committee at its last meeting.

Growth rates in the other monetary aggregates are somewhat larger than the earlier speci- fications because of shifting relationships among the various forms of liquid assets.  Under alternative A, a further decline in the Federal funds rate to around 5 per cent--the mid-point of the 4½-5½ per cent range shown--would be anticipated over the next few weeks.

Given the rapid summer growth needed to attain a 6 per cent rate over the nine month period, the funds rate and other interest rates would likely need to rise fairly sharply in the late summer and fall if the Committee wishes to maintain M1 growth in the period after September at around the 6 per cent annual rate. (11) Consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks and thrift institutions would also be likely to expand somewhat more rapidly than in recent months under alternative A, given the further decline in market interest rates that is assumed.

As a result, broader monetary aggregates excluding large CD's (M2 and M3) would be expected to show more rapid growth over the next few months than their counterparts including large CD's (M2 and M4, respectively).  Alternative B shows the pattern of monetary aggregates that would be associated with little change in money market conditions from those recently prevailing.

Growth rates in key monetary aggregates would, of course, be slower than under alternative A--as indexed by a 7 per cent annual growth rate in M1 over the seven month February-September period and a 5¼ per cent growth rate over the first nine months of the year.

Growth rates in key monetary aggregates would, of course, be slower than under alternative A--as indexed by a 7 per cent annual growth rate in M1 over the seven month February-September period and a 5¼ per cent growth rate over the first nine months of the year. (13) Market interest rates probably would rise somewhat over the weeks ahead under alternative B. The Treasury will continue to raise sizable amounts of new cash, including continued cash additions to weekly bill auctions, and dealer positions in Treasury issues are relatively high.

Thus, mortgage market conditions would continue to ease, and bank prime loan rates might drop a little further, particularly since most banks are still at 8 per cent or above.  Alternative C indicates growth paths for the monetary aggregates intended to be consistent with some tightening of money market conditions over the weeks ahead, A rise in the funds rate back above 6 per cent--as is contemplated in this alternative--would very likely initiate a sharp upward adjustment in yields on Treasury securities and a turn-around, though perhaps less marked, in other market rates.

And with the change in prospects for savings inflows, mortgage market conditions would not be likely to ease much, if any, further. (16) Turning to the behavior of M1 in the March-April period, expansion is indicated to be in a 4½-6½ per cent range, given prevailing money market conditions (typified by a 5¾ per cent funds rate) as called for by alternative B. Near-term growth, of course, would be somewhat more rapid under the easier money market conditions of alternative A and some- what less rapid under the tighter conditions of alternative C.

We would expect that the acceleration in money growth would be relatively modest under alternative C, however, since rising interest rates would be working to restrain money demand.

