5a and 5b  Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate range is centered on the recently prevailing 4¾ per cent level.

In addition, the projected strength in economic activity in the first quarter should involve rising transactions demands. (9) Even if M1 growth in February-March is as rapid as implied by the mid-point of the range stipulated for alternative B, M1 would expand at only about a 3¼ per cent annual rate from the fourth quarter of 1975 to the first quarter of this year.

The funds rate under alternative B is expected to reach an average level of around 6¾ per cent by the fourth quarter of this year.

A further slowing in such deposit flows can be expected as the year progresses in view of the anticipated rise in short-term market interest rates. (11) Little further change in market interest rates would be expected between now and the mid-March Committee meeting under the specifications of alternative B. The 3-month bill rate could rise somewhat because a substantial part--perhaps half--of the Treasury's very heavy cash need of around $15 billion between now and mid-April may be raised in the bill area, where dealer bill positions are already large.

The municipal market is still subject to substantial uncertainty because of persisting doubts as to how New York State and certain other borrowers will cover forthcoming financing needs.  Alternative A involves a decline in the Federal funds rate to the mid-point of a 3¾ to 4¾ per cent range, and slightly higher growth rates for M1 and M2 over the near-term than under alternative B.

If alternative A were adopted, the funds rate would probably have to start rising by early spring, and during the third and fourth quarters would reach levels somewhat above those resulting under alternative B.

However, reflecting the initially somewhat more accommodative reserve policy under alternative A, growth in the aggregates would be a little stronger in the first half of 1976 than under alternative B.

Monetary growth would, of course, be somewhat less rapid in the second half.  Alternative C involves a rise in the Federal funds rate to the mid-point of a 4¾ to 5¾ per cent range over the next few weeks.

The prospect for reduced flows to thrift institutions would forestall any further decline in mortgage rates and may set the stage for some back-up. (15) However, under this alternative, mortgage markets, and credit markets generally, may tighten less over the course of the year  alternatives A or B.

