Under alternative C, the growth ranges for the broader monetary aggregates are about the same as those that now prevail, but the range for M1 is lower. Alternative B continues the current growth range for M1, but involves somewhat higher ranges for M2 and M3 . Alternative A-- which contemplates little change in interest rates over the next year-- contains higher ranges for all of the monetary aggregates.

The implied QII '77  alternatives A and B.

For M2 and M3, the implied levels for QII '77 are best approximated by alternative C, after taking account of the downward revision in levels associated with the new benchmark revision.

A Alt Ranges for Oct.-Nov. M1  5-9 4½-8½ 4-8 M2  10-14 9-13 8-12 Federal funds rate 4-5 4½-5½ 5-6 (Inter-meeting period)  Alternative B, which has a Federal funds rate range centered on 5 per cent, assumes that money market conditions remain unchanged between now and the next Committee meeting.

Growth in M2 is expected to remain quite large over the 2-month period, reflecting not only the projected rebound in M1 growth but also the expectation that net inflows into time and savings deposits (other than money market CD's) will continue large as market inter- est rates over the next few weeks remain low relative to offering rates on these deposits. (12) The staff would still expect interest rates to rise over the longer run under alternative B, given the projected pace of economic activity.

M2 and M3 would, as a result, probably show somewhat more strength over the longer run relative to M1 than previously expected-- although growth rates in the broader monetary aggregates would, of course, be expected to slacken over the next few quarters. (13) Over the next few weeks, interest rates would be likely to show little net change under alternative B. About licly-held debt maturing on November 15 will need to be rolled over, and the Treasury may also take the opportunity to raise about $2-1/2 billion of new cash.

Thus, interest rates in short- and intermediate-term market sectors are not likely to be under any pressure from market forces over the period immediately ahead. However, some upward pressure on private long-term rates may be generated if the Treasury offers a substantial amount of the new issues in the 10- year and longer maturity area, given the existing relatively narrow spread between Treasury and corporate issues and the sizable forward calendar of corporate and State and local government bonds.  Alternative C involves a rise in the funds rate over the 2 per cent mid-point of a 5-6 per cent range.

However, the net inflows of interest-bearing deposits would still remain ample, and banks and thrift institutions would not be likely to tighten non-price lending terms, even though the prime loan rate, and perhaps mortgage rates, might edge upwards. (15) Further increases in interest rates can be expected over the longer-run under alternative C, assuming M1 growth over the QIII '76- 4 per cent.

As shown in the appendix table, a funds rate as high as 7-3/4 per cent might develop by the fall of 1977.  Alternative A encompasses an easing of the money market between now and the next Committee meeting.

