A Alt Ranges for June-July M1 4½-8½ 4-8 3½-7½ M2  7-11 6½-10½ 5½-9½ Federal funds rate 4½-5½ 5-6 5½-6½ (intermeeting range) (8) If the Federal funds rate between now and the next meeting of the Committee remains around the recently prevailing 5½ per cent--the mid-point of the alternative B range--the staff would expect that the annual rate of M1 growth may be in a 4-8 per cent range over the June-July period.

Thus, for the June-July period, M2 growth may be in a 6½-10½ per cent annual rate range under alternative B. (10) In the near-term, if the money market remains stable, short- and long-term interest rates are likely to change little.

As may be seen from appendix Table II, under alternative B the staff would expect a Federal funds rate of around 8 per cent by early next year, given a growth rate in M1 from QI '76 to QI '77 of 5¾ per cent.

As may be seen from appendix Table II, under alternative B the staff would expect a Federal funds rate of around 8 per cent by early next year, given a growth rate in M1 from QI '76 to QI '77 of 5¾ per cent.  The specifications of alternative C include a tightening of the funds rate over the next few weeks to the mid-point of a 5½-6½ per cent range.

The funds rate under alternative C would be expected to peak at around 7¼ per cent by late this year, again assuming a 5¾ per cent growth rate in M1 over the QI '76-QI '77 period, (13) Growth in M1 in the June-July period may be in a 3½-7½ per cent, annual rate, range under alternative C, only a little less than under alternative B.

In the short run, member banks could be expected to offset the greater constraint on nonborrowed reserves that is specified under alternative C by increasing their borrowing through the discount window, as suggested in appendix Table I.

Expansion of M2 over the forth- coming 2-month period might be in a 5½-9½ per cent annual rate range, in part reflecting reduced inflows to time and savings deposits (other than money market CD's) as funds are increasingly diverted from such accounts to higher-yielding market instruments.  Alternative A assumes an easing in the Federal funds rate to the mid-point of a 4½-5½ per cent range between now and the next Committee meeting.

Such an easing would encourage more rapid money growth  alternatives B and C.

However, if the FOMC also wished to constrain longer-run M1 growth to 5¼ per cent, alternative A would entail a more pronounced slowing in the rate of expansion of M1 in early 1977 and a sharper rise in interest rates in late 1976 and early 1977 than would the other two alternatives.

