B Alt Ranges for May-June M1 6-10 5¼-9¼ 4½-8½ 7½-11½ 7-11 5½-9½ Federal funds rate 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼ (intermeeting range)  Alternative B assumes a Federal funds rate range centered on 5-1/4 per cent, the most recent Desk objective, while alternative A assumes some easing of the money market and alternative C some further tightening.

For instance, under alternative B growth may be in a 5-1 per cent annual rate range.

Perhaps indicative of the strength of underlying money demand, there was no significant reversal in late April and early May of the large build-up in private demand deposits in the first half of April. (11) Growth in M2 over the May-June period is expected to  alternatives A and B.

Nevertheless, growth under alternative B--as measured by the mid-point of a 7-11 per cent, annual rate, range--is expected to be slower than during the first four months of the year.

This reflects the higher level of market interest rates that has developed as well as some shift of funds out of savings and time deposits in payment for the $4.7 billion of new 10-year notes recently offered by the Treasury.  Under alternative C, growth in M2 is expected to slow more markedly over the May-June period.

This would probably lead to a considerable outflow from savings deposits of those interest-sensitive funds that were shifted into such accounts when short-term market rates first moved down to around 5 per cent, the Regulation Q ceiling rate on commercial banks' savings deposits. (13) The firming of money market conditions associated with alternative C would also exert upward pressure on longer-term interest rates over the next few weeks.

Moreover, the Treasury is likely to continue raising much of its new cash in the coupon area. Even if the Federal funds rate stabilizes around 5-1/4 per cent between now and the next Committee meeting--as is contemplated under alternative B-- some further upward adjustment in longer-term, as well as short-term inter- est rates may still occur, since markets probably have not yet fully 4 per cent funds rate.

Because the annual rate of M1 growth in the second quarter now seems likely to be in the area of 9½-10 per cent, annual rate, over the next three quarters the growth rate would have to be held to about 4-1/4 per cent (annual rate) if the 5-3/4 per cent growth of the QI '76-QI '77 range is to be achieved. (15) The staff's longer-run projections of the Federal funds rate under each of the three alternatives are shown in appendix table IV. As may be seen, the staff expects that under alternative B the funds rate 2 per cent early next year.

However, under alternative C, which contemplates a prompt further move toward restraint, the funds rate may peak out at a lower 7-3/4 per cent level by the winter of this year.

A considerably higher ultimate level for the funds rate is envisaged under alternative A, since it would be necessary to offset later the effects of near-term easing in reserve conditions contemplated by that alternative.

