A Alt Ranges for September-October M-1 5½-9½ 5-9 4½-8½ M-2 6-10 5½-9½ 5-9 Federal funds rate 5¼-6 5¾-6½ 6¼-7 (intermeeting period) (7) Assuming a Federal funds rate centered in the 5¾-6½ per cent range specified for alternative B, M-1 over the September-October period is expected to expand in a 5-9 per cent annual rate range.

We have assumed that the 7¼ per cent funds rate would lead to the 2½-3 per cent annual rate of growth in M-1 during the first half of 1978 that is necessary to meet the mid-point of the FOMC's current longer-run range, but it is quite possible we may be underestimating the strength of money demand, given GNP, and that higher interest rates would be required.  Under alternative B, in the September-October period M-2 is expected to expand in a 5½-9½ per cent annual rate range, assuming that short-term market interest rates show little change from currently prevailing levels in the period between now and the next meeting.

Nonetheless, even with savings inflows reasonably well maintained, large demands for mortgage credit, including takedowns of the very high level of outstanding commitments, would tend to exert substantial pressures on the position of thrift institutions. They would be forced to reduce liquidity and increase short-term borrowing. Under such circumstances, an upward adjustment in the Q ceiling rate might have to be considered.  Alternative C involves a more prompt rise in interest rates than alternative B and somewhat slower monetary growth rates over the balance of this year.

With additional monetary restraint in place somewhat sooner, the staff would expect interest rates to rise a little less over the longer-run than under alternative B. (12) Between now and the next Committee meeting an upward adjustment in the funds rate to around the 6-5/8 per cent mid-point of the alternative C range would probably be associated with an increase in the 3-month Treasury bill rate to the 6¼-6½ per cent area.

Long- term rates would probably rise for a time in response to the advance in short rates, but in the absence of indications of stronger economic activity or of a worsening of inflationary pressures such rate increases are not likely to be sustained. (13) An easing in the funds rate to the mid-point of a 5¼-6 per cent range is encompassed under alternative A. The lower interest rates and more rapid near-term growth in the monetary aggregates would require more upward interest rate pressure, and less monetary growth, in early 1978--as compared with alternatives B and C--if growth in the monetary aggregates over the QII '77-QII '78 period is to remain within the FOMC's longer-run ranges.

The projected funds rate pattern for alternative A, as well as the other alternatives, is presented in Appendix I.

As suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications  alternatives A, B, and C.

