For the second quarter as a whole, M1 growth would be around a 9¼ per cent annual rate, well above the 4.8 per cent rate of the first quarter.  Under alternative B, we would expect M2 to expand in a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range in the May-June period.

However, some further minor upward adjustments in market rates could develop between now and the next Committee meeting even if the funds rate remains unchanged. The Treasury may not be in a position to continue paying off bills in the weekly and monthly auctions after the end of May, and private short-term credit demands are expected to remain generally strong. If the upward adjustments that have already occurred in the commercial paper rate are sustained, a further rise in the bank prime rate is possible within the next few weeks. (11) We would expect the funds rate and other interest rates, particularly short-term rates, to rise substantially after mid- year, as the demands for money and credit continue to be generally strong and the Treasury once again becomes a sizable net borrower. By the first quarter of 1978, the staff anticipates a funds rate of around 7 per cent under alternative B, if M1 growth is to be near the mid-point of the Committee's 4 -6 per cent range for the QI'77-QI'78 period.

With the somewhat higher interest rates anticipated, inflows of interest-bearing deposits in M 2 and M3 would probably slow, and growth in these aggregates over the QI '77-QI '78 period may be around the lower ends of their longer run ranges.  Alternative C contemplates a tightening in money market conditions over the next few weeks while alternative A involves an easing. Under alternative C the Federal funds rate would be expected to rise to the mid-point of a 5¼-6¼ per cent range.

The immediate retarding effect on M2 is expected to be somewhat greater under alternative C. With the funds rate rising to around 5¾ per cent, the 3-month bill rate may adjust up to the 5½-5¾ per cent area.

In bond markets, rates may show some increase, but these increases may be limited by the continued large volume of institutional funds seeking long-term outlets and by any effect that a tightening of the money market may have in dampening inflationary expectations. (14) An immediate tightening of the money market, such as is called for under alternative C, would probably reduce somewhat the level to which the funds rate would have to rise ultimately to restrain monetary growth to within the FOMC's longer-run ranges.

We would expect the funds rate to peak at around 6¾ per cent in the winter of this year. (15) The near-term easing of the money market under alternative A would probably stimulate a substantial rally in debt markets, particularly in light of the sizable short position of U.

As suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market condi- tions--are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed  alternatives A, B, and C.

