A Alt Ranges for March-April M1 5½-9½ 5-9 4½-8½ M2 7½-11½ 7-11 6½-10½ Federal funds rate 3¾-4½ 4¼-5 4¾-5½ (inter-meeting period) (7) Assuming the Federal funds rate remains around 4-5/8 per cent--the midpoint of the alternative B range--we expect M1 growth in the March-April period to accelerate and be at an annual rate in a 5 to 9 per cent range.

Appendix tables II and III show longer-run projections for the Federal funds rate and the velocity of money under each of the three alternatives.  Alternatives A and C contemplate an easing and tightening of the money market, respectively.

A decline in the funds rate to the midpoint of the 3 to 4 per cent alternative A range could be accompanied by relatively modest reductions in other interest rates, if market participants were to view such a decline as temporary in light of the recent indications of strengthening economic activity.

A rise in the funds rate, as under alternative C, could be accompanied by fairly substantial upward adjustments in short-term rates--of about 50 basis points or so.

Increases in intermediate- and longer-term rates might be more modest, in view of rate increases that have already occurred in that area and the current relatively light dealer positions.  The decline in the funds rate under alternative A would probably have to be reversed shortly if the Committee is to attain growth rates in the aggregates within its longer-run ranges.

The easing of the money market would generate more rapid growth in the aggregates over the next few months than under alternative B, and higher interest rates would be required later in the year to restrain growth.

The tightening of the money market under alternative C would introduce monetary restraint earlier in the year and hence would require less of a rise in interest rates by year-end than either alternative A or B.

As suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifi- cations discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and "Monetary Aggregates" formulation The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth in M1 and M2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph.

