Alternatives A through C are the staff's estimates of consistent sets of specifications that pertain to the one-year QI '77-QI '78 period.

A Alt M1 5½-7½ 4½-6½ 3½-5½ 4½-6½ M2  8-11 6½-9½ 5½-8½ 7-10 M 3  9-12 7½-10½ 6-9 8½-11½ Bank credit proxy 8½-11½ 7½-10½ 7-10 7-10  Alternative B encompasses a one-year growth rate for M1 of 4½-6½ per cent, the same range as is currently in place.

A Alt Ranges for April-May M1 6½-10½ 6-10 5½-9½ M2  8½-12½ 8-12 7½-11½ Federal funds rate 3¾-4¾ 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ (intermeeting period)  Under alternative B growth in M1 is expected to be relatively sizable in the April-May period, reflecting the large increase in M1 that is apparently under way in April.

However, for the second quarter, M1 is anticipated to grow at about a 7 per cent annual rate, a more rapid pace than in the past few quarters, reflecting the recent strengthening of economic activity and presumably also of transactions demands for money.  M2 growth under alternative B is expected to be in an 8-12 per cent annual rate range during the April-May period, and to expand at about a 9¼ per cent annual rate from the first to second quarter.

Total private credit demands are also expected to expand along with continued relatively rapid growth in economic activity. With demands for money also anticipated to be rather substantial, interest rates, particularly short-term rates, are likely to rise substantially in the second half of the year if growth in the monetary aggregates is to be maintained around the mid-points of the longer-run ranges shown for alternative B. As shown in appendix III, the staff expects the funds rate under alternative B to average around 4-7/8 per cent in the current quarter, to rise to 5½ per cent in the third, and to reach about 6½ per cent by the first quarter of 1978.

The extent of upward rate pressure in long-term markets in general under this alternative may be fairly moderate, though, given the large cash flow to institutional investors, particularly insurance companies, and assuming inflationary expectations do not worsen.  Alternative A contemplates an easing of money market conditions between now and the next Committee meeting, with the funds rate dropping to the mid-point of a 3¾-4¾ per cent range.

Such a move would be accompanied by somewhat greater growth in the monetary  alternative B over the April-May period.

In view of the apparent strength of the economy, interest rates may be expected to rise even with the more rapid longer-run growth in the monetary aggregates encompassed by alternative A. The increase in rates would probably be moderate, though, with the funds rate rising to about 5 per cent by the first quarter of next year.

The increase in rates would probably be moderate, though, with the funds rate rising to about 5 per cent by the first quarter of next year.  Alternative C involves an increase in the Federal funds rate between now and the next Committee meeting to around 5¼ per cent, the mid-point of a 4¾-5¾ per cent range.

On the other hand, if many market participants do not expect the Fed to let the money market tighten at this time, evidence of a tightening could cause a more substantial market reaction. (18) The immediate tightening of the money market contemplated under alternative C would also more quickly set in train the market and .

And thrift institutions would begin re-evaluating their mortgage market participation. (19) If the growth in M1 over the QI '77-QI '78 period is to be constrained to around the mid-point of the 3½-5½ per cent longer- run range of alternative C, further firming in money market conditions would probably be required as the year progresses.

As suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevail- ing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed in the preceding section  alternatives A, B, and C.

The last three columns shown levels in the fourth quarter of 1977 and the first quarter of 1978 implied by the alternatives presented in the present blue book (which take QI '77 as the base). Of the three alternatives presented, alternative B is closest to the current longer-run path.

