A Alt Ranges for February-March M1  3½-7½ 3-7 2½-6½ M2  7½-11½ 7-11 6½-10½ Federal funds rate 3¾-4½ 4¼-5 4¾-5½ (intermeeting period) (7) Growth in M1 over the February-March period is expected to be in a 3-7 per cent annual rate range, assuming a Federal funds rate centered in a 4¼-5 per cent range, as in alternative B. The rate of expansion that is anticipated for M1 reflects in part the retardation in economic activity caused by the recent cold snap and associated fuel shortage.

The rate of expansion that is anticipated for M1 reflects in part the retardation in economic activity caused by the recent cold snap and associated fuel shortage.  M2 expansion under alternative B may be in a 7-11 per cent annual rate range over the February-March period.

Also, the rise in yield on intermediate-term Treasury obligations since the beginning of the year has made such securities somewhat more attractive to savers as compared with time certificates of deposit.  M1 and M2 under alternative B may be expected to rise at annual rates of about 5½ and 10 per cent, respectively, in the first quarter.

Under alternative B, the staff would expect the Federal funds rate to begin rising in the spring and reach around 6½ per cent by the fourth quarter of this year. (11) Interest rates are expected to show little net change over the next few weeks, though, given the specifications of alternative B. The Treasury will probably raise $7-9 billion of new money between now and the next meeting through routine offerings of 2- and 4-year notes, additions to the weekly and monthly bill auctions, and cash management bills.

The outstanding volume of CD's will probably continue to decline modestly.  Alternative C contemplates a tightening of the money market over the next few weeks, with the funds rate rising to the mid- point of a 4¾-5½ per cent range.

Yields on intermediate- and longer-term issues would also increase, though probably by less than the rise in short rates, given increases that have already occurred in longer-term interest rates. (14) The tightening of the money market and slower near-term growth in nonborrowed reserves under alternative C would also tend to hold down expansion of the monetary aggregates over the February-March period as compared with alternative B.

It would also be likely to lead to slower growth in the aggregates over the first half of 1977, assuming that the funds rate were permitted to rise somewhat further in the spring. However, alternative C would require a more rapid growth in the aggregates than alternative B in the second half of 1977 to attain the longer-run, QIV '76-QIV '77 ranges for the aggregates adopted by the FOMC.

Thus, monetary policy would have to be more accommodative in the latter part of 1977, and the Federal funds rate would not be likely to rise as high as under alternative B. We estimate that the rate would, as a result, peak at about 6 per cent in the summer of this year.

We estimate that the rate would, as a result, peak at about 6 per cent in the summer of this year. (15) The near-term easing of the money market encompassed by alternative A would, of course, lead to declines in interest rates over the next few weeks and higher growth rates in the monetary aggregates.

