Alternative B continues the ranges for M-1, M-2, and M-3 adopted by the Committee in April for the QI '78- QI '79 period, but specifies a somewhat higher range for bank credit. Alternatives A and C represent, respectively, more and less expansive policies.

7¼, 6¼, and 5¼ per cent for alternatives A, B, and C, respectively.

Thus, over the next several months a further substantial rise in short-term rates appears needed to restrain M-1 growth even to the high end of the ranges shown. As indicated in Appendix I, the staff anticipates that the Federal funds rate would have to rise to the 8¾ to 9¾ per cent range by fall under alternative B. Interest rates in the fourth quarter would be about one percentage point lower under alternative A and three- quarters of a percentage point higher under alternative C.

Under alternative B, V-1 is projected to rise by 4½ per cent over the QII '78-QII '79 period,1/ as compared with an increase of 3¼ per cent over the preceding four quarters.

As can be seen from the lower panel of appendix table III-1, the 6¼ per cent M-1 growth contemplated under alternative B implies annual rates of expansion of about 7 per cent for periods beginning as far back as the fourth quarter of 1975.

As can be seen from the lower panel of appendix table III-1, the 6¼ per cent M-1 growth contemplated under alternative B implies annual rates of expansion of about 7 per cent for periods beginning as far back as the fourth quarter of 1975. However, constraining M-1 growth over QII '78 to QII '79 to a 5¼ per cent rate, as under alternative C, would produce M-1 growth close to the 6½ per cent upper end of April longer-run range for periods beginning with the second quarter of 1977.

Two short-run alternatives are shown, one calling for no change in the funds rate over the inter- meeting period--which might be associated with either long-run alternatives A or B--and the other contemplating a ¼ point rise in the rate.

A or B Alt Ranges for July-August M-1 5 to 9 4½ to 8½ M-2 7 to 11 6½ to 10½ Federal funds rate (Intermeeting period) 7½ to 8 7¾ to 8¼  Alternative B contemplates a Federal funds rate centered on the prevailing 7¾ per cent level between now and the next FOMC meeting.

And for the third quarter as a whole M-1 growth may be around a 7-1/4 to 7-1/2 per cent annual rate-- high relative to the longer-run range but slower than in the second quarter, mainly reflecting the current deceleration in economic activity and a lagged response to the appreciable increase in short- term rates this spring.  Expansion in M-2 under alternative B is likely to be in a 7 to 11 per cent annual rate range over the July-August period.

While the short-term credit demands of financial and nonfinancial businesses and of Federal agencies are likely to be strong over this period, the Treasury is not expected to add substantially to the net supply of bills. (19) Interest rates on longer term securities are also likely to be little changed under alternative B. Corporate bond offerings are expected to increase in July, but the forward calendar for August is seasonally light.

As bond yields remain little changed, while thrift deposit flows are sustained at around current levels, mortgage rates are also likely to stay fairly stable. I/ The terms of this refunding are to be announced in late July. The staff expects the Treasury to sell $6 to $6 billion of new securities in this operation, rolling over $4k billion of publicly-held debt issues maturing on August 15, and raising about $14 to $2 billion of new money.  Alternative C involves an increase in the Federal funds rate to around the mid-point of a 7% to 8k per cent range by mid-August.

In these areas banks may charge more for such services and discourage some depositors from utilizing this service. Table IV-1 Possible Growth Rates for M-l and M-2 Without and With Automatic Transfers from Savings Accounts (per cent at an annual rate) 1978 QIV 1979 QI QII '78 - QII '79 1978 QIV 1979 QI QII '78 - QII '79 Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Without With!y  Without With!- Without With 7.

