Alternative A calls for no near-term change in the Federal funds rate, while Alternative B increases policy restraint in coming weeks.

A Alt Ranges for Nov.-Dec. M-1 1 to 6 ½ to 5½ M-2 6½ to 10½ 6 to 10 Addendum: M-1+ 2 to 6 1½ to 5½ Federal funds rate (Intermeeting period) 9¼ to 10 9¾ to 10½  Alternative A contemplates a Federal funds rate between now and the next meeting centered in the prevailing 9½ to 9¾ per cent range.

Over the fourth quarter as a whole, M-1 growth is expected to be 6¼ per cent on the assumption that ATS effects reduce growth by 1 percentage point for the period. the supplementary aggregate M-1+, should the Committee wish to provide additional quantitative guidance to the Desk during a period when measured M-1 growth will be reduced to an uncertain extent by ATS. Over the two-month policy period, this supplementary aggregate is expected to increase in a 2 to 6 per cent annual rate range--the midpoint of which is below the 6 per cent average annual rate of growth of this aggregate since mid-year.  Expansion of M-2 under alternative A is likely to be in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range over the November-December period.

Furthermore, the FHLBB has made it known to S&Ls that advances will not be liberally available to institutions that do not make reasonable efforts to roll over maturing 6-month certificates. (13) If the Federal funds rate remains around the 9½ to 9¾ per cent level over the intermeeting period, as envisioned under alternative A, short-term market rates may show mixed changes.

Mortgage rates, on the other hand, can be expected to move higher as demands for loans continue strong at a time when the thrift inflows are expected to slow.  Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate would rise by mid-December to the midpoint of a 9¾ to 10½ per cent range.

The alternative B pattern contemplates that the increase in the funds rate in the intermeeting period would be maintained through the first quarter of 1979.

This additional restraint on monetary expansion implies that the funds rate could be lower than the alternative A path by next summer while still achieving the same growth in the aggregates over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 period.

