Government 2/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches. NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions --which are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve require- ments are changed. Prospective Developments (7) The table below presents for Committee consideration alternative longer-run growth ranges for the monetary aggregates over the QI '78 to QI '79 period, along with ranges currently in place. Alternative B would continue the ranges for M-1 and M-2 adopted by the Committee in February for the QIV '77 to QIV '78 period.

To hold M-1 growth over the coming year to a rate around the mid-point of the 4 to 6 per cent range of alternative B would, under the circumstances, require a larger increase in interest rates than the staff had earlier expected.

As indicated in Appendix I, we would anticipate a Federal funds rate averaging around 8¾ per cent by early next year if the mid-  alternative B are to be attained.

As indicated in Appendix I, we would anticipate a Federal funds rate averaging around 8¾ per cent by early next year if the mid- points of the longer-run ranges of alternative B are to be attained. Interest rates would be slightly lower and slightly higher under alternatives A and C, respectively.

Assuming M-1 growth at the 5¼ per cent mid-point of the alternative B range, V-1 would be projected to rise by about 7 per cent over the coming four quarters, more than twice the average rate of the past two years.

Whether such a further downward shift in demand for M-1 will actually occur is quite uncertain, however. If it does not, efforts to constrain growth in M-1 to the mid-point of the ranges presented are likely to involve interest rate levels higher than those projected, and consequent growth in real GNP below the projected rate. (10) Even if growth in M-1 and M-2 were at the mid-points of their ranges over the year ahead, growth in these aggregates over more extended periods ending in QI '79 would--because of the relatively rapid rates of expansion of the aggregates in 1977--be above the mid-points of the proposed ranges under each alternative. For example, as shown in the table below, M-1 growth at around the 5¼ per cent mid-point of the alternative B range for the QI '78- QI '79 period would lead to a 6.

As contemplated under alternative B, a Federal funds rate centered on the recently prevailing 6-3/4 per cent level is likely to be associated with M-1 growth over the two-month period at an annual rate in a 6 to 10 per cent range.

However, growth would be more rapid over the course of the second quarter--with M-1 expansion at about an 7½ per cent rate from March to June. (13) Growth in M-2 over the April-May period is likely to be in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range under alternative B. Savings deposits at commercial banks are expected to show very small growth at best, though larger-than-seasonal tax refunds to individuals may temporarily strengthen flows into these deposits in coming weeks.

Since a major portion of these deposits is included in M-2, the interest-bear- ing component of this aggregate is expected to continue at near its recent pace.  Under alternative B, inflows to savings and loan associa- tions and mutual savings banks over the April-May period can be expected to remain at near the 6 to 7 per cent average monthly rate prevailing since year end.

While bond yields would also be under upward pressure, rate increases would be cushioned by a reduction of State and local advance refundings, a further shift of corporate financing from capital markets to banks, and continued substantial demands for long- term securities by insurance companies and pension funds.  Under alternative C the Federal funds rate would rise over the intermeeting period to the mid-point of a 7 to 7½ per cent range.

The rise in short-term rates under alternative C may provide some support for the dollar in international exchange markets.

The rise in short-term rates under alternative C may provide some support for the dollar in international exchange markets. (19) The near-term increase in interest rates under alternative C would be a step toward reducing the longer-run rate of growth of the monetary aggregates, but further upward adjustments in interest rates over the coming year would be required to limit M-1 growth to the mid-point of its 4 to 6 per cent longer-run range.

The rise in short-term rates under alternative C may provide some support for the dollar in international exchange markets. (19) The near-term increase in interest rates under alternative C would be a step toward reducing the longer-run rate of growth of the monetary aggregates, but further upward adjustments in interest rates over the coming year would be required to limit M-1 growth to the mid-point of its 4 to 6 per cent longer-run range. The funds rate would probably have to rise to 9 per cent by late this year.  Alternative A calls for a reduction in the Federal funds rate over the intermeeting period to the mid-point of a 6 to 6 per cent range.

On the other hand, the dollar would almost certainly decline in foreign exchange markets.  Alternative A is consistent with a policy designed to encourage more rapid growth in the aggregates over the longer-run.

As suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend on the specific condi- tions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications  alternatives A, B, and C.

