Alternative B is based on the same growth rate range for M-1 as adopted by the Committee in July for the QII '78 to QII '79 period, while alternatives A and C encompass, respectively, more and less expansion of M-1.

Thus, a further rise in the Federal funds rate appears needed under alternatives B and C if growth in the aggregates is to be held within their ranges. Even under alternative A, some further increase in the funds rate might well be required.

Staff projections of the funds rate for each alternative are shown in appendix I.  Under alternative B, we would expect the Federal funds rate to level off in a 9 to 10¼ per cent range by early next year if M-1 growth over the QIII '78-QIII '79 period is to be at around the upper end of a 4 to 6½ per cent range, abstracting from the effects of ATS.

The interest rate forecast might have been expected to decline because alternative B in effect forgives the "overshoot" in M-1 growth during the third quarter and, hence, does not imply as low a rate of monetary growth over the next few quarters as it did earlier.

There has been no evidence of such a shift in recent quarters, and without the restraint of even higher interest rates than earlier projected it appears that growth in M-1 (or M-1+) would run above the 1/ Allowing for the ATS effect on M-1, and given the 1½ to 4½ per cent range of probable ATS effect, M-1 growth in a 2 to 5 per cent range after ATS would be economically equivalent to 6½ per cent ex-ATS. alternative B range.

Thus, under alternative B, M-2 growth for the year ahead is expected to be in a 7 to 9½ per cent range and M-3 growth in an 8 to 11 per cent range, ½ and 1 percentage point higher than current longer-run ranges.

Of course, net inflows of deposits to thrifts should slow from its recent pace in the months ahead, as rising interest rates further moderate inflows of deposits subject to fixed rate-ceilings, the effects of the stock adjustment from other financial assets wane, and depository institutions perhaps 1/ Appendix II displays projected velocity changes, with and without automatic transfers in the case of M-1. 2/ The $2 billion shift that we have assumed would increase M-2 growth by about ¼ percentage point over the QIII '78 QIII '79 period. become less aggressive in offering the new certificates as the spread continues to narrow between their deposit costs and mortgage rates.  The longer-run alternative C ranges encompass growth rates for M-2 and M-3 nearer to those currently in place.

In addition, alternative C calls for a slower longer-run growth in M-1--in a 3 to 5 per cent range, abstracting from ATS.

This alternative appears particularly appropriate if the Committee opts for the slower longer-run growth in the aggregates encompassed by alternative C. It would also be consistent with the longer-run policy stance indexed by alternative B, as well as with near-term efforts to support the dollar in exchange markets.

The tightening of the funds market over the weeks ahead envisaged by alternative II would--by introducing restraint earlier-- increase the likelihood that the funds rate would not have to rise into the upper part of the 9 to 10¼ per cent range projected for next year under alternative B. (21) Under alternative II, M-1 growth, including the effect of automatic transfers, would likely be in a ½ to 6½ per cent annual rate range over the October-November period, M-2 in a 5½ to 9½ per in a 2½ to 6½ per cent range.

