Alternative A calls for no near-term change in the Federal funds rate, while alternative B increases policy restraint marginally in coming weeks.

A Alt Ranges for Dec.-Jan.1/ M-1 2½ to 7½ 2 to 7 M-2 6 to 10 5½ to 9½ Addenda M-1+ 1 to 5 ½ to 4½ Federal funds rate (Intermeeting period) 9½ to 10¼ 9¾ to 10½  Alternative A presumes a Federal funds rate between now and the January meeting centered in the prevailing 9¾ to 10 per cent range.

Appendix II displays projected rates of growth of velocity. passbook accounts at commercial banks will begin to rise in December, following their unusually large recent contraction, the average level of such accounts is expected to grow only modestly, if at all, over the period.  Under alternative A, M-2 is projected to expand in a 6 to 10 per cent annual rate range in December-January, a somewhat more rapid pace than in recent weeks.

Sample data for early December indicate that S&L's are not only rolling over their maturing 6-month certificates, but continuing to issue a substantial net volume of these instruments. Aggressive marketing of MMC's is being induced by competitive pressures, by a need for funds to meet mortgage loan commitments, and by FHLB advances policies.1/ (16) If the Federal funds rate remains within the 9¾ to 10 per cent range over the intermeeting period, as envisioned under alternative A, interest rates on short-term market instruments will likely fluctuate within a narrow range.

Net borrowing by the Treasury in the domestic market over the next several weeks is expected to be limited to a $1¼ to $1¾ billion auction of 15-year bonds to be conducted around the turn of the year; since participants are anticipating this offering, they have presumably already discounted it.1/ With deposit flows slowing somewhat, yields on commitments for new conventional mortgages may continue to edge higher.  Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate would rise by mid-January to the midpoint of a 9¾ to 10½ per cent range.

Reflecting monetary restraint already in train, the midpoint of alternative A would call for no further rise in the funds rate over the longer-run policy period.

This additional restraint on monetary expansion would imply that the funds rate could be lower than the alternative A path by next summer, while still achieving the same growth in the aggregates over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 period.

