A Alt Ranges for Aug.-Sept. M-1 5½ to 9½ 5 to 9 M-2 7 to 11 6½ to 10½ Federal funds rate 7¾ to 8 7¾ to 8½ (inter-meeting period)  Alternative A contemplates continuation of a Federal funds rate around the mid-point of the existing 7¾ to 8 per cent range.

Even so, as with the interest-bearing component of M-2, thrift deposits are expected to grow somewhat more rapidly than in the first half of the year.  Under alternative A, the recent upward readjustment of market rates, following the unexpectedly sharp decline of recent weeks, may continue, with rates returning closer to their mid-July levels.

In short-term markets, the 3-month Treasury bill rate is still quite low relative to the Federal funds rate--a spread of about one percentage point--and the bill rate should rise more than other short rates unless there is a substantial volume of foreign central bank purchases. (12) If the funds rate were to move up to the mid-point of the 7¾ to 8½ per cent alternative B range, the upward adjustment in market rates would likely be prompt and marked.

And corporate bond yields may also rise fairly substantially given the prevailing narrow rate spread between Treasury and corporate issues.  Growth in M-1 and M-2 under alternative B may be in ranges of 5 to 9 and 6½ to 10½ per cent, respectively.

Neverthe- less, the rising marginal cost of time and savings deposits, if not an actual slowing of deposit inflows, is likely to exert additional upward pressure on primary mortgage interest rates. (14) The staff still expects that interest rates between now and mid-1979 will have to rise beyond those contemplated under the short-run specifications for alternative B--given projec- tions for GNP growth--if M-1 growth over the one-year QII '78 to QII '79 period is to be around the upper limit1/ of the 4 to 6 per cent range adopted for that aggregate.

The language of alternative A is consistent with the specifications of alternative A discussed in the preceding section.

Like the directive adopted at the last meeting, it places main emphasis on money market conditions and calls for operations directed at maintain- ing the weekly-average Federal funds rate within the range of 7-3/4 to 8 per cent.  The language of alternative B is consistent with the specifications of the tightening alternative discussed in the preced- ing section; it calls for operations directed initially at attaining a weekly-average Federal funds rate slightly or somewhat above the current level.

