Alternative B calls for no near-term change in the Federal funds rate, while alternatives A and C, respectively, would ease and increase restraint in coming weeks.

Thus, we have--again-- projected a resumption of M-1 growth for the policy period immediately ahead.  Under alternative B, with the funds rate remaining un- changed from the currently prevailing level of 10 per cent or a little higher, given the staff's GNP projection, we expect M-1 to increase over the March-April period in a range centered on a 4 to 9 per cent annual rate range.

Growth at the 9 per cent upper end of the alternative B short-run range, would bring M-1 to a level in April just above the low end of the Committee's longer-run range, as shown in the chart on the next page.

Growth at the 9 per cent upper end of the alternative B short-run range, would bring M-1 to a level in April just above the low end of the Committee's longer-run range, as shown in the chart on the next page.  Under alternative B, M-2 is expected to expand in a 3 to 7 per cent annual rate range in March-April, considerably above its recent rate of growth.

Any tendency for short-term rates to rise, however, would be blunted by stability of the funds rate at near current levels, as contemplated under alternative B. The dollar may well continue to trade around current levels in the exchange markets over the next few weeks, accompanied by continuation of some central bank net sales of dollars.

The dollar may well continue to trade around current levels in the exchange markets over the next few weeks, accompanied by continuation of some central bank net sales of dollars.  Under alternative B, bond yields can be expected to fluctuate in a fairly narrow range.

While there appears to be little reason to expect any significant rise in bond market rates under alternative B, the projected slowing of deposit flows at thrift institutions suggests that primary mortgage yields may edge higher in coming weeks.

While there appears to be little reason to expect any significant rise in bond market rates under alternative B, the projected slowing of deposit flows at thrift institutions suggests that primary mortgage yields may edge higher in coming weeks.  Under alternative C, the Federal funds rate would rise 4 to 11 per cent range.

Such developments would, in domestic markets, tend to raise shorter-dated Treasury bill rates further relative to other short-term interest rates and, if foreign official institutions continued to liquidate their holdings of nonmarketable Treasury issues, increase Treasury borrow- ing in domestic markets.  Alternative A involves a decline in the funds rate over the 4 to 10 per cent range.

The funds rate might drift upward between now and mid-year under alternative B and would, of course, more surely rise under alternative C.

But interest rates might tend to decline somewhat in the latter half of the year, especially under alternative C, as the rate of growth in nominal GNP decelerates further. Under alternative A, however, we would expect interest rates to rise later in the year to offset the stimulative effect on the aggregates of the easing in market conditions assumed for the weeks ahead if M-1 growth over the year is to be near the middle of the 1½ to 4½ per cent range.

