Alternative B would maintain the Federal funds rate at about the 10 per cent level that has prevailed since late last year, while alternatives A and C, respectively, would ease and tighten money market conditions in coming weeks.

Under alternative B, with the funds rate remaining at the prevailing level of about 10 per cent, we expect M-1 to increase over the April-May period in a 3 to 7 per cent annual rate range.

For the second quarter as a whole, staff projections call for M-1 expansion under alternative B at about a 3¼ per cent annual rate, following the 2½ per cent rate of decline in the first quarter.

The remaining increase in velocity is still quite large and assumes a continued downward drift of money demand, though at a sharply decelerated pace. Growth Rates from March Required to Achieve Levels Implied by FOMC Longer-run Ranges for M-1 and M-2 Low End Midpoint High End of Range of Range of Range Achieve level by: May 1979 (in 2 mos.) 8.5 13.0 17.5 September 1979 (in 6 mos.) 3.8 6.4 8.9 QIV '79 (end-point of longer-run range) 3.3 5.5 7.8 May 1979 (in 2 mos.) 10.8 15.3 19.8 September 1979 (in 6 mos.) 6.9 9.4 11.9 QIV '79 (end-point of longer-run range) 6.4 8.7 10.9 M-1 and M-2 under alternative B, would be unlikely by May to reach levels implied by the lower ends of their longer-run ranges.

This is also true for alternatives A and C.

Unless the downward shift in money demand continues to be very strong, or the economy weakens much more than projected, the staff believes that M-1 is likely to move into the Committee's longer-run range by late summer, given the current Federal funds rate.  Under alternative B, M-2 is expected to accelerate into a 4 to 8 per cent annual rate range in April-May.

In such an environment, even stability in the funds rate, as contemplated under alternative B, could be associated with relatively wide fluctuations in interest rates arising from changing expectations.

Borrowing by Federally-sponsored credit agencies this quarter is projected to recede from the high levels of the first quarter, and the slate of new corporate security offerings likely will remain moderate.  Alternative C contemplates a rise in the Federal funds rate to the midpoint of a 10¼ to 11 per cent range.

But it is equally likely that they may show little net change, or perhaps even decline some, if the market comes to believe that interest rates may peak sooner than otherwise.  Alternative A calls for a decline in the funds rate over the intermeeting period to the midpoint of a 9¼ to 10 per cent range.

A near- term increase in the funds rate,as under alternative C,likely would necessitate some decline of interest rates in the second half of the year in order to induce strength in the aggregates as the rate of growth of nominal GNP decelerates further. Under alternative A, however, 1/ On the basis of recent evidence, the staff has lowered somewhat its assumption regarding the impact of ATS shifts on M-1 growth, and now believes that such shifts will reduce M-1 by about 2½ percentage points over the QIV '78 to QI '79 period.

