The funds range currently in effect is shown under alternative B. Because of recent upward adjustments in the upper limit, the range has become considerably wider than the 4 point width that had been usual since the October program was adopted.

If the Committee wished to return to a narrower range, the staff would suggest that a 13 or 14 to 18 percent range would be generally con- sistent with alternative B under present market circumstances .

'80-June '80 7 Quarterly Average 1980 QI 71 7% 7% 8 8% 8t QII 8 7% 7% 9% 9% 9 QIII 6% 7 7k 8 8k 8 QIV 6% 7 7k 7k 7k 7% Annual 1979 QIV to 1980 QIV 74 7% 7% 8% 8% 81 NOTE: The following annual rates of growth in bank credit for the year and for the quarters are expected under alternative B: year 1980, 7 growth rates would be expected under the other alternatives.

For the December to June period, bank  alternative B would be 9k percent.

For the December to June period, bank credit growth under alternative B would be 9k percent.  Alternative B extends through June the FOMC's previous target rates of growth of M-1A and M-1B for the December to March period of 4 and 5 percent annual rates, respectively.

With a significant weakening in these aggregates recently, and with nominal GNP growth projected by the staff to decelerate in the spring quarter, such average rates of growth might be consistent with a federal funds rate over the next few weeks not far from the 16 to 17 percent level that has prevailed recently.1/ Restraints on use of credit cards and check overdraft facilities in the new anti-inflation program could tend to increase the demand for money (or more particularly currency), but probably by no more than a minor amount, if at all, since a certain amount of spending might be curtailed and some spenders may simply write more checks on existing demand deposit holdings.  The staff expects that under alternative B M-2 for the December-June period would grow around 7¾ percent and by 7 percent from February to June.

Thus, we would expect only a relatively minor effect on the total of M-2 and M-3 growth from the new program, though the distribution of growth among components of the aggregates would be affected.  The specifications of alternative B imply an annual rate of growth from February to June of the monetary base and of total reserves of about 7¾ percent and 5¾ percent, at annual rates, respectively.

Thrifts and mortgage markets too are likely to remain under considerable tension in the months ahead absent any substantial decline in short-term rates over the near-term-- which seems unlikely given the monetary targets of alternative B. (13) Alternative C calls for lower money targets than alternative B.

The tightening of money markets that appears needed under alternative C might be construed by the market as reinforcing the new anti-inflation program, and this could lead to some easing of bond market pressures even as short rates rise.

monetary restraint would not come as a great surprise to the market; foreign central bank intervention sales, however, would likely limit the extent of the rise in the dollar's exchange value. (14) As shown in the charts, the aggregate specifications of alternative C imply that M-1A and M-1B would be below their midpoint paths by June.

A federal funds rate of around 14 per- cent would be projected for late 1980 under alternative B, and would be a bit lower under alternative C.

A federal funds rate of around 14 per- cent would be projected for late 1980 under alternative B, and would be a bit lower under alternative C.  Alternative C would probably require growth in the monetary base over the February to June period at about a 7 percent annual rate, while total reserves would expand at a 5 percent rate.

Nonborrowed reserves may expand at about a ½ percent annual rate, assuming an initial level of borrowing of around $2¾ billion and a gradual decline beginning around mid-spring.  Compared to the other alternatives, alternative A involves a greater increase in money over the four months ending in June, with M-1A targeted to expand at a 3¾ percent rate over that period.

As shown in the charts, the more rapid rates of growth of aggregates anticipated under alternative A would carry them to levels in June above their midpoint paths.

Nonborrowed reserves would expand at about a 6½ percent annual rate in the February to June period. (17) The immediate decline in money market rates that could develop under alternative A might be viewed by the markets as inconsistent with the new anti-inflation program.

