Alternative B is indexed by growth in M-A of 4½ percent from December to March, and, for all practical purposes, can be considered to be equivalent to the 4½ percent M-1 target for that period adopted at the last meeting.

The monetary base might be expected to grow at an annual rate of 5¾ from January to March, but total reserves may show little change (assuming some decline in excess reserves and relatively little expansion in member bank deposits). (16) Given a GNP projection in which the economy is not as weak as earlier anticipated, alternative B may be accompanied by little change in the funds rate over the next few weeks.

On that assumption, nonborrowed reserves, like total reserves, would change little from January to March. (17) The easing of money and credit demands in the second quarter, when the economy is projected to weaken more substantially than in the first, enhances the probability of some decline of interest rates at that time, particularly if the Committee were to opt for the slight acceleration in M-1A growth over the March to June period to the 5½ percent annual rate proposed in alternative B. Such growth would bring M-1A by June to around the mid-point of a 3½ to 6½ percent target band for 1980.

However, in framing its policy and in guiding the Manager, the Committee may wish to recognize that M-1A and other aggregates might tend to expand more than targeted over the next few months because of a transitory factor whose impact cannot be readily quantified in advance.  Alternative A would call for a more rapid increase in money targets for the current and next quarter, implying a step-up in M-1A growth from January to March to about a 5½ percent rate, with more rapid expansion in the second quarter.

Thus, if monetary growth over 1980 is to be kept around the mid-point of the alternative II range, reserve supply would have to be more restrained in the second half of the year--with the federal funds rate probably rising at a time when the economy is projected to be weakening even further.  Alternative C contemplates a reduction in money targets for the current quarter to a 4 percent annual rate, as indexed by M-1A.

As shown in the charts, alternative C implies that the money stock will be below mid-point paths in March and further below them in June.

Consequently, in order to achieve longer-run targets, policy would have to be more expansive in the second half of the year, leading to more substantial downward pressures on short rates at that time than under alternative B. (22) A rise or fall in short-term rates could prompt some sympathetic movement in bond yields, but developments in the bond market are likely to be more influenced by incoming evidence on inflation prospects and by international events.

