A Alt 1980--November December 1981--January February Growth Rates Monthly 1980--December 1981--January February December '80 - March '8 1 Quarterly Average 1980--QIV 19 8 1--QI 1979 QIV to 1980 QIV NOTE: The following annual rates of growth in bank are expected under alternative B: year 1980, variations in growth rates would be expected credit for the year and for the quarters 8; 1980 QIV, 15; 1981 QI, 11.

Only minor  alternatives A and C.

However, as noted earlier, inflationary trends will be giving considerable impetus to the public's demand for transactions balances over the whole of 1981, and thus interest rates may well stay at high levels on average next year.1/  Alternative B has been designed to place M-1A and M-1B in March near the midpoints of the FOMC's tentative long-range targets for 1981 adopted last July.

Substantially lower growth rates are included in alternative C. This alternative would tend to limit the potential for interest rate declines should the economy weaken as projected and may tend to reduce the risk of pronounced interest rate fluctuations in the course of the year. Alternative A proposes some- what higher growth rates of money than alternative B.

following pages depict the near-term behavior of the monetary targets under the three alternatives, with M-1A and M-1B shown both before and after adjust- ment for the impact of NOW accounts; the alternatives are shown in relation to the tentative long-run ranges for 1981 established at the July meeting.)  Under alternative B, actual M-A growth may be slightly negative after the turn of the year, on the assumption that the NOW account effect reduces M-1A growth by about 5½ percentage points over the first three months of the year.

Measured M-1B growth may be around 7½ percent in the early months of next year on the assumption that shifts out of assets 1/ Appendix IV displays quarterly interest rates in 1981 associated with alternative B. Chart 1 Actual and Tentatively Targeted M-1A Abstracting from NOW Accounts Impact -- onger-Run Pange .

To achieve the monetary expansion indicated by alternative B, total reserves would have to increase at about a 1¾ percent annual rate from November to March, and by 3 percent over the shorter-run period from November to January.

To achieve the monetary expansion indicated by alternative B, total reserves would have to increase at about a 1¾ percent annual rate from November to March, and by 3 percent over the shorter-run period from November to January.  Under alternative B, the federal funds rate might be expected to drop over the forthcoming intermeeting period to around 17 percent, and probably by more later in the quarter, unless the economy proves to be stronger than expected.

Even though short rates drop more under this alternative than under alternative B, long rates may be little different, particularly if inflationary expectations remain high--as they may if a substantial easing in short rates occur well before signs of a weakening in price pressures or before there are clear signs of a significant drop-off in economic activity.

Even though short rates drop more under this alternative than under alternative B, long rates may be little different, particularly if inflationary expectations remain high--as they may if a substantial easing in short rates occur well before signs of a weakening in price pressures or before there are clear signs of a significant drop-off in economic activity.  Alternative C is the most restrictive of the three short-run options presented.

The alternative C monetary targets are consistent with virtually no growth in total reserves.

For the first quarter, monetary growth was assumed at the rate specified in Alternative B of this Bluebook.

