Thus, achievement of the 6 percent annual growth rate for M-1 over the first quarter in alternative A--which appears to involve increases of about 8 and 3 percent in the monetary base and total reserves, respectively--may be accompanied by relatively substantial declines of interest rates from current levels.

Of course, if the discount rate were reduced significantly under the circumstances, member bank borrowing would be somewhat higher. (19) A sizable rally in bond markets would seem likely under this alternative, even though some pick-up in bond offerings may be expected as corporations take the opportunity to fund large short-term indebtedness. Mortgage rates also would decline, as spreads widen against bond yields and thrift institutions become more confident about the availability of lower cost deposits to fund mortgage acquisitions. (20) The substantial decline in short rates that appear to be implied by alternative A probably would be accompanied by significant downward pressures on the international value of the dollar, especially if the dollar also remains under pressure because of the crises in the mid-East.

For a given longer- run growth rate, interest rates would be at higher levels by year-end under this alternative than under alternatives B and C, partly because it will provide a little greater stimulus to economic activity and partly because the larger expansion of M-1 in the first quarter will allow less scope to accommodate the subsequent increase in the transactions demand for money as nominal GNP expands in the second half.

For a given longer- run growth rate, interest rates would be at higher levels by year-end under this alternative than under alternatives B and C, partly because it will provide a little greater stimulus to economic activity and partly because the larger expansion of M-1 in the first quarter will allow less scope to accommodate the subsequent increase in the transactions demand for money as nominal GNP expands in the second half. (22) In order to achieve the 5 percent rate of growth of M-1 in the first quarter specified under alternative B, a decline in interest rates from current levels would also be likely.

Over the first quarter the monetary base and total reserves might have to increase at about 7½ and 2½ percent rates, respectively, and with member bank borrowings falling to around $800 to $900 million, nonborrowed reserves would expand by about 8 percent over the 3-month period. (23) Even the more modest decline in money market rates associated with alternative B is likely to induce a rally in bond markets as it becomes clear that interest rates have peaked.

Net inflows of funds to thrift institutions are likely to pick up only modestly from their second half of 1979 pace, and costs of such funds would not decline as much as under alternative A. The exchange value of the dollar under alternative B is likely to decline somewhat as market participants focus on the decline of interest rates, but there would be less downward pressure than under alternative A, in part because any interest rate declines under alternative B would be associated with slower money growth.

The exchange value of the dollar under alternative B is likely to decline somewhat as market participants focus on the decline of interest rates, but there would be less downward pressure than under alternative A, in part because any interest rate declines under alternative B would be associated with slower money growth. (24) The more modest money growth over the next few months under alternative B provides more scope for expansion in M-1 in the second half of 1980 than does alternative A.

Moreover, the smaller reduction of interest rates, as compared with alternative A, would provide less stimulus to nominal GNP and money demand later this year.

However, under the more restrictive longer-run policy of alternative II, interest rates would probably begin rising by spring as the quantity of money demanded tended to expand more rapidly than the supply that would be provided consistent with the 4½ percent midpoint of the alternative II path.  Alternative C contemplates a rate of growth of M-1 of about 4 percent in the first three months of 1980, which, given the staff's GNP outlook, would probably involve little, if any, decline in interest rates from current levels in that period.

Alternative C would tend to help support the exchange value of the dollar since it would be associated with maintenance of a relatively high level of interest rates.

The funds rate would be expected to decline by early spring, and reach levels by year-end lower than under alternative B. However, should the Committee seek to restrain M-1 growth to a 4½ percent rate during 1980, interest rates would probably change little over the balance of the year.

