A Alt Growth from February to June M-1B 8-3/4 6-3/4 5-1/2 M-2 12-3/4 12-1/4 12 Implied growth from March to June M-1B 8-3/4 6 4-1/2 M-2 11-1/2 10-3/4 10-1/4 Intermeeting federal funds rate range 13 to 19 14 to 20 15 to 21 (10) As shown in the first chart on the following pages, the alternative A target specifications are designed to return adjusted M-1B by June to the midpoint growth path of the Committee's QIV '80 to QIV '81 2 to 6 percent. Alternative B specifies slower growth in M-1B that would carry it only to the lower end of the Committee's longer-run range by June but, assuming a continuation of that growth rate, to the midpoint of the longer-run range by September.

Alternative C is designed to increase the odds of constraining M-2 growth to within its longer-run range for 1981.

Though the expansion of the nontransaction component of M-2 is expected to slow from its exceptionally strong March pace, it will probably be faster on average over the next three months than in the first quarter. (12) The projected strengthening of demand for transactions balances implies that interest rates will probably be under upward pressure over the coming quarter, particularly under the alternative B and C speci- fications, but also possibly to a degree under alternative A.

Under alternative A--which involves growth in total reserves from March to June at a 9-3/4 percent annual rate-we would expect the funds rate to be in a 14 to 16 percent range over the next few-weeks, with borrowing at the discount window ranging around $1 billion, given the current discount rate structure.

In the projected interest rate environment, corporate and tax-exempt bond offerings are unlikely to rise further over the spring months, although business demands on banks will probably pick up from the recent depressed pace. (14) Greater restraint on money growth relative to demand would be imposed under alternatives B and C, which involve limiting growth in adjusted M-1B to rates of 6 and 4-1/2 percent, respectively, over the next three months-substantially lower rates than the 8-3/4 percent of alternative A.

Growth in total reserves over the period would be at annual rates of  alternatives B and C, respectively.

A federal funds rate in the area of 15 to 17 percent, or somewhat higher, might emerge over the next few weeks under alternative B1 would develop under alternative C.

The upward response of market interest rates, particularly short-term rates, to the increased pressures on bank reserve positions of alternatives B and C may be quite marked over the period ahead.

Any rise in long-term rates, though, might be muted as corporate borrowers back away from the market in anticipa- tion of lower rates later. (15) From the perspective of the year as a whole, the degree of rate pressure we would foresee over the next several months under alternative C, which is consistent with a strategy of lowering M-1B growth for the year to the bottom of its range, would be likely to weaken the outlook for GNP  alternative B).

By year-end interest rates  alternative C thus could be lower than under alternative B.

They probably would continue to be reluctant lenders in the mortgage market. 1/ See Appendix II for interest rate projections for 1981 under alternative B. Directive language (17) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at the meeting in early February.

