B Billions of dollars - 2400 9'/*% 100O N 0 J F M A M J J A S 0 N D 1981 1982 1 December level is poectd.  Alternative B calls for M1 growth from QIV '81 to March at a 4 percent annual rate, but probably involves M2 growth slightly above the upper end of its range.

On the other hand, upward pressures could emerge, even with a weak GNP, if the demand for money were relatively strong either because of a return to historical relationships or because economic uncer- tainties caused the public to continue to save more than earlier in the year and to hold part of this saving in NOW accounts.  The alternative B specifications would require expansion in total reserves at a 2 percent pace from December to March.

Even though thrift operating losses can be expected to moderate further at the projected short- term interest rate level as high cost deposits are rolled over, their deposit growth is not expected to be robust; this, together with continuing uncer- tainties about future rate developments, is likely to discourage them from aggressively offering mortgages.  Alternative A calls for a 5-1 M1 from the fourth quarter to March and 4-1/4 percent from the estimated December level to March, and involves a greater risk that the level of M2 in the first quarter will be above the upper limit of its tentative long-run range.

With an indication of lower borrowing costs, thrift institutions would be somewhat more willing to cut mortgage rates further and increase commitment activity. (21) The contemplated modest decline in short-term interest rates under alternative A might be accompanied by a tendency for the dollar to decline on exchange markets.

However, any decline could be short-lived, or limited, as foreign central banks take advantage of any strengthening in their currencies to lower their own interest rates further in light of continued weak performance of their economies.  Alternative C--which calls for virtually no growth in M1 between December and March--may be expected to bring M2 into the upper part of its tentative long-run range by March.

The table below shows interest rate forecasts for the year, assuming alternative B for the first quarter and midpoint growth of M1 thereafter.

Selection of alternative A might involve a larger rise in rates later in the year to compensate for the greater near- term monetary stimulus associated with this approach if the Committee desires to slow money growth later in an effort to achieve midpoint growth for the year. Alternative C, on the other hand, by exerting near-term restraint would probably be associated with lower rate levels later in the year, reflecting not only the greater scope for faster money growth at that time but also possibly weaker economic activity.

