A Alt Growth from December to March M-1A 7½ 6¾ 4¼ M-1B 7½ 6¾ 4¾ M-2 8¾ 8½ 8 Implied growth for January-March M-1A 8 6¾ 3 M-1B 7¾ 6½ 3¾ M-2 8¾ 8½ 7½ Intermeeting federal funds rate range 14 to 20 15 to 21 16 to 22 (13) As shown in the upper panel of charts 1 and 2 on the following pages, alternative A is based on growth in M-1a and M-1B at a rate that would bring the level of these aggregates by March to the midpoints of their tEntative longer-run ranges adopted in July.

Alternative 3 achieves the midpoint of the alternative II longer-run path by March, and implies growth in M-1B at a 6¾ percent annual rate over the first three months of  Alternative C accepts the December shortfall, at least for the first quarter, and specifies from that lower base the same growth rate in the narrow aggregates over the first three months of the year that had been adopted by the Committee at its December meeting.

This would mean, for instance, that under alternative A actual M-1A 1/ Under alternatives A and B, M-1A would grow at the same rates as M-1B over the December to March period.

For example, implied quarterly average growth in M-1B ranges from a high of 3¾ percent under alternative A to a low of 2 percent under alternative C.

The sizable implied velocity increases would indicate little room for further short-term interest rate declines. Under alternative A, rates might be near, or perhaps a bit below, current levels over the balance of the quarter. Alternative B might involve somewhat higher interest rates, while alternative C seems quite likely to entail an increase in interest rates over the balance of the quarter.

Of course, great uncertainty attaches to these interest rate projections, with market reaction to the forthcoming economic program of the new Administration likely to be a critical factor in near-term rate movements.  The aggregate specifications of alternative A would appear to involve growth in total reserves at a 1/1½ percent annual rate from January to March, and, as noted earlier, only a small decline, if any, in the funds rate from the recent trading range of 17 to 19 percent.

While an average level of borrowing at the discount window of about $1¼ billion might be associated with attainment of the alternative A specifications, borrowing demands have been erratic recently--with the funds rate first staying high as borrowing declined and then falling as borrowing rose.

Over the next two months total reserve growth under alternative B would be only percent at an annual rate and reserves would decline at a 3 percent annual rate under alternative C.

Under alternative 3, borrowing might be $1½ billion, or a little less, and under alternative C (18) Credit demands over the months immediately ahead are expected to remain substantial.

