A Alt M1-B 10½ 8½ 6½ M2 9½ 8½ 8 Federal funds range 14 to 20 16 to 22 18 to 24  Alternative A was designed to return M1-B to the lower end of its longer-run range by September.

Assuming a fairly smooth month-by-month trajectory, the quarterly average growth of M1-B under alternative A would be 4 percent at an annual rate, as compared to a projected third-quarter growth of nominal GNP of about 7½ percent.

Business credit demands are expected to expand, as internally generated funds do not keep pace with capital outlays.  Under alternative B, M1-B would grow at a rate that would leave it below the lower end of the FOMC's 1981 range until November.

Growth of total reserves of about 10½ percent, at an annual rate, from June to August,  alternative B monetary target.

Given the present discount window structure, borrowing likely would run $2 billion or a bit more. (22) The federal funds rate probably would be around the 19 to 20 percent area during the intermeeting period under alternative B. Other interest rates would probably rise from recent levels, perhaps substantially as the market is disappointed in its expectations that the funds rate would decline gradually as the summer progresses.

Business demands on commercial banks could surge for a time, partly in response to higher bond market yields, possibly requiring heavy CD issuance and/or Eurodollar borrowing.  Alternative C calls for more constraint on reserve growth over the next three months than alternative B--with total reserves growing at an 8 percent annual rate--should the Committee wish, for example, to take an approach that provided greater assurance that broader aggregates would come within current longer-run ranges.

Government securities with this alternative might not be long sustained, though, as high financing costs and added strains on key financial intermediaries lead to a marked near-term weakening in aggregate demand.  Even under alternatives A or B, the earnings problems of thrift institutions would remain intense, although they obviously would be greatest with the higher interest rates implied by alternative C.

