A Alt Growth from September to December M-1B 12 9 6 M2 12½ 11 10 Implied growth from QIV '80 to QIV '81 M1-B 3 2 2 M2 10 9¾ 9 Federal funds rate range 9 to 15 11 to 17 13 to 18  Alternative A is designed to achieve a rapid enough expansion of M1-B over the next three months so that it would reach the lower limit of the FOMC's 3½ to 6 percent longer-run target range by December.

Alternative C is designed to bring M2 closer to its target for the year, with the projected small overshoot accounted for mainly by shifts of funds out of non-M2 assets into ASCs; such an approach would Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M1-A M1-B Alt.

Alternative B falls midway between the two approaches.1/  Under the specifications of alternative C we would expect growth in M1-B at a 6 percent annual rate over the September to December period to be consistent with maintaining M2 relatively near to the upper limit of its longer-run target range.

Business net demands on financial markets are expected to remain sizable as profits continue to be squeezed, and to focus, as in the recent past, on short-term markets. About half of the Treasury's large cash need between now and year end is expected to be raised in the bill market. (12) Total reserves would need to expand at a 3 percent annual rate over the last three months of the year if the monetary specifications  alternative C are to be achieved.

Nonborrowed reserves would be targeted to expand at a 4 percent annual rate over the last three months of the year.  The specifications of alternative B call for a more rapid growth in M1-B at around a 9 percent annual rate from September to December, sustained by 6 percent annual rate of growth in total reserves.

Declines in mortgage rates are likely to lag drops in other longer-term yields, in part reflecting continued pressures on thrift institutions only partially relieved by ASCs. It would probably take some time before any significant pick-up in mortgage commitments was evident, given the past volatility of market conditions and the relatively short-term maturity of ASC deposits.  Under alternative A, M1-B growth is targeted to rise at about a 12 percent annual rate from September to December in order to bring this aggregate back to the lower bound of its long-run range by the end of the year.

Such upward interest rate pressures would be intensified as the sharp easing of credit conditions between now and year-end contemplated by alternative A leads to more of a strengthening in economic activity in the first part of next year than is in the current staff projection.

