A Alt Growth from June to September M1-B 7 6 M2 10½ 10 Implied Growth from July to September M1-B 8½ 7½ M2 11½ 10½ Federal funds rate range 15 to 21 16 to 22  Alternative A retains the Committee's 7 percent June-to- September target for M1-B adopted at the last meeting, a target that would require an 8½ percent annual rate of growth over the two-month July-to- September period.

Short-Run Alternatives CONFIDENTIAL (FRJ Class I-FOMC Billions of dollars 91/2% - 2100 6'/a% -2050 -- 1950 *NOTE: A and B alternatives are indistinguishable on this scale. I I1 I I I I I I I I I I O N D J F M A M J ANK CREDIT - Actual Level J A S O N 0 N D J M A M J J Billions of alternative A to be on the order of 10½ percent.

The specifications for alternatives A and B assume that MM growth slows a bit from its recent extremely rapid pace, while small time deposit growth strengthens relative to July, owing to growth of the 30-month SSC, whose ceiling rate since August 1 can fluctuate in line with Treasury yields.

The specifications for alternatives A and B assume that MM growth slows a bit from its recent extremely rapid pace, while small time deposit growth strengthens relative to July, owing to growth of the 30-month SSC, whose ceiling rate since August 1 can fluctuate in line with Treasury yields. M3 is expected to remain well above its longer-run range under both alternatives, reflecting continued CD growth to finance loan expansion.  To achieve the alternative A specifications, total reserves probably would have to expand at about a 13 percent annual rate in August and September, considerably more than in July.

Even with the alternative A target specifi- cations, income velocity of M-B would rise at a relatively rapid annual rate of about 5 percent this quarter.

It seems reasonable to expect that under alternative A the federal funds rate over the next few weeks might be in the area of 18 percent.

Tax-exempt and foreign borrowings in U markets are also projected to remain large.  The alternative B specifications imply growth of total reserves from July to September at an 11 percent annual rate.

Under alternative B, market interest rates, especially short-term rates, are likely to rise, perhaps appreciably.

Pressure on thrift institution earnings would be more intense under this alternative than under alternative A, and mortgage rates would probably rise further.

The language would be consistent with either alternatives A or B indicating under B that the Committee had lowered its third quarter .

Thus, if this directive included the July to September growth rate for M1-B in alternative B, the language of the directive would permit the higher growth in M1-B needed to meet the 7 percent quarterly target should M2 remain at or fall below the upper bound of its longer-run range.

