A Alt Growth from September to December M1-B 7 6 5 M2 11 10½ 10 Implied Growth from October to December M1-B 8¾ 7 5¾ M2 12 11¼ 10½ Federal funds rate range 8 to 13 10 to 15 11 to 16  Alternative A maintains the September to December target for M1-B adopted by the Committee at its last meeting, while alternatives B and C reduce that target by one and two percentage points, respectively.

Thus, unless the downward shift in money demand halts, or is reversed, the odds are that the proposed alternatives, particularly alternatives A and B, may involve further downward pressures on short-term interest rates.

Thus, unless the downward shift in money demand halts, or is reversed, the odds are that the proposed alternatives, particularly alternatives A and B, may involve further downward pressures on short-term interest rates.  Alternative A--which calls for maintaining the Committee's 7 percent growth rate target for M1-B for the last three months of the 1/ The introduction of International Banking Facilities in early December might have a temporary downward impact on M1-B to the extent that foreign IPC demand deposits are shifted to 2-day notice accounts in IBFs.

Alternatives B and C, which involve reducing the Committee's fourth quarter target for M1-B set at the last meeting, would tend to limit downward pressures on interest rates between now and year-end and possibly work toward a smoother transition to targets for 1982.

Because it is so late in 1981, the impact on annual growth of the aggregates this year from adoption of either of these alternatives rather than continuing with alternative A would be relatively small, as may be noted from the detailed tables on pp.

6 and 7  Alternative B would require expansion in total reserves at a 6 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year, while growth in reserves under alternative C would be at a 4½ percent annual rate.

The aggre- gates specifications of alternative C are likely to be associated with a funds rate in a 12 to 14 percent range, implying the that the funds rate could drop below the current discount rate.

The aggre- gates specifications of alternative C are likely to be associated with a funds rate in a 12 to 14 percent range, implying the that the funds rate could drop below the current discount rate. (14) Declines in market interest rates, both short- and long-term, generally would be more modest under alternatives B and C than under alter- native A, and potential downward pressure on the dollar in exchange markets would be reduced.

Under alternative C, that might also develop, but it would be less certain as the weight of Treasury financings and possible market disappointment about the likely course of the funds rate (and hence of dealer financing costs) would work to hold bill and other short-term rates up.

Thus, under C an easing in mortgage market conditions would be relatively more delayed, both because of institutional uncertainty about positive earnings and because long-term market rates may remain higher than otherwise. (15) The possibility of the funds rate dropping significantly below the current 13 percent discount rate introduces complications in the  alternatives A and B.

The nonborrowed reserve path for alternative C, the alternative involving the least expansion in reserves, might be initially 400 million in borrowing.

The more reserve expansion of alternatives A and B logically should be based on lower levels of borrowing, but whether set at frictional levels or higher, we would expect the demand for reserves soon to fall well short of supply.

