A Alt Growth from September to December M1 5 2½ 0 M2 9½ 8½ 7½ Federal funds rate range 7 to 11 8 to 12 9 to 13 (9) All of the alternatives imply a slowing of M1 and M2 growth over the last three months of the year from their summer pace; however, they generally also imply some overshoot of the FOMC's annual targets. Alternative C would achieve the upper limit of the Committee's 2-1 5-1/2 percent longer-run M1 range for 1982, while the growth rates of alternatives B and A would lead to overshoots in the 1/2 to 1 percentage point range.

Under all alternatives, M2 would remain above the upper end of its 6 to 9 percent longer-run range.  Alternative B, which calls for M1 growth from September to December at a 2-1/2 percent annual rate, appears consistent with the federal funds rate over the intermeeting period continuing on average to be a little above the current discount rate, and with little net change in other short-term rates.

Even with a slowing in M1 growth to the 2-1/2 percent annual rate contemplated for the last three months of the year, growth in the fourth quarter on a quarterly average basis would be at a 6-1/4 percent annual rate, about the same as the pro- jected growth in nominal GNP. (12) Growth of M2 would also be at a relatively moderate 8-1/2  alternative B over the last three months of the year.

When it be- comes available, possibly in early December, the new instrument is likely to have a substantial impact on M1 and on the composition and possibly the total of M2, depending on the exact character of the account or 2/ A bulge in M1 related to ASCs cannot be ruled out for the first week of October, when certificates with a maturity value of $25 billion come due. Some of the proceeds of maturing ASCs could be temporarily placed in de- mand deposits or NOW accounts in the process of being reinvested or used to support consumption. (13) Bond rates are likely to remain near current levels under alternative B, and could even decline a bit further if investors continue to see little, if any, sign of an economic recovery.

For the third and fourth quarters together, credit raised by all domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a 9-1/2 percent annual rate, up from 8-1/2 percent in the first half of the year, with increased borrowing by the Treasury more than accounting for the pickup in the total.  Alternative C calls for virtually no further growth in M1 from September to December, which would achieve the upper limit of the FOMC's annual target for that aggregate.

A considerable further strengthening of the dollar on exchange markets might develop, particularly if money market rates abroad continue to ease.  Alternative A, which targets M1 growth at a 5 percent and M2 at a 9-1/2 percent annual rate from September to December, would probably accommodate an easing in money market conditions over the months ahead.

The language in brackets, which indicates that a shortfall in growth would be acceptable in the context of declining interest rates, is suggested for consideration if the Committee were to opt for alternative A, the most expansive alternative, although it may also be useful for alternative B.

