interest rates, on balance, than in foreign interest rates over the period. Alternative near-term targets (7) The table below presents three alternative targets for M2 for the current quarter, along with associated federal funds rate ranges. Alternatives B and C encompass growth rates of M2 quarter consistent with the Committee's decision with respect to these aggregates at the previous meeting, while alternative A looks to somewhat higher growth rates.

However, there might be some effects, perhaps raising M1 or M2, in the interim if and as the public lodges funds in deposits in anticipa- tion of the new account.-  Alternative B, which calls for M2 growth this quarter at the upper end of the 8½ to 9½ percent range adopted by the Committee at its last meeting, would be associated with an increase in total reserves at about a 6¾ percent annual rate over the last two months of the year.

Businesses also are projected to continue the recent pattern of heavier issuance of bonds and reduced borrowing from banks. Largely as a result, bank credit growth in coming months is expected to remain close to the more moderate pace established in the second half of this year. (13) An increase in the Committee's fourth-quarter M2 target to a 10 percent annual rate, as in alternative A, might be required for some further easing of money market conditions in an environment of continued strong liquidity demands on the part of the public.

The percentage point of more rapid growth in M2 under this alternative, as compared with alternative B, would entail a relatively more rapid expansion in M1--by about 1¼ percentage points over the 3-month period.

Thus, a given change in market interest rates will have a more substantial impact on M1 growth rates than on M2 rates.  Under alternative A, we would expect the federal funds rate to decline from its present level to the area of 8½ percent, with total reserves rising at about an 8 percent annual rate in November and December.

Nonborrowed reserves would rise at about an 11½ percent annual rate over the balance of the year. (15) The further easing in bank reserve positions contemplated by alternative A might involve a drop in the 3-month bill rate to around 7½ percent, or perhaps somewhat lower depending on expectations of further policy adjustments.

The further decline in U rates would tend at least to blunt the strength of the dollar on foreign exchange markets, and may well bring some depreciation.  Alternative C involves M2 growth over the fourth quarter at a 9 percent annual rate and constraint on reserve provision that would probably lead to a federal funds rate of 10 percent or somewhat higher.

