detailed and longer-run data for the alternatives are contained in the table and charts on the following pages, and the quarterly interest rate pattern underlying the staff's GNP projection for 1982 is contained in  Alternative A, calling for a 4½ percent rate of growth of M1 in the March-to-June interval, would, as shown in Chart 1, maintain the level of narrow money above the upper end of the Committee's 2½-to-5½ percent longer-run range throughout the second quarter; however, that rate, if sustained over the second half, would bring M1 down to the upper end of range by year-end.

The 3 percent M1 rate of growth from March to June of alternative B is designed to bring the level of that aggregate to about the upper limit of the Committee's longer-run range by around mid-year.

The 3 percent M1 rate of growth from March to June of alternative B is designed to bring the level of that aggregate to about the upper limit of the Committee's longer-run range by around mid-year. The alternative C specification of 1½ percent M1 growth would place that aggregate at about the middle of the upper half of the range by mid-year.

Thus, while we have allowed for a bulge in growth in April, a relatively moderate growth cannot be ruled out, particularly if tax payments are made out of NOW accounts that were built up earlier or out of money market funds (thereby avoiding a temporary build-up in demand deposits).  Alternative A, which entails growth of M1 at a 4½ percent rate from March to June, would call for an increase in total reserves over the quarter at about an 8½ percent annual rate.

With U tendency for the foreign exchange value of the dollar to decline from recent advanced levels, though any such weakening would be limited if foreign monetary authorities took the opportunity to permit their interest rates to decrease further.  The alternative B specifications, which call for M1 growth at a 3 percent rate from March to June, imply an increase in total reserves at a 7 percent rate.

In addition, to the extent that the market has discounted a considerable bulge in money growth in April, market rates could decline somewhat if such a bulge does not develop.  Alternative C, involving a 1½ percent rate of growth of M1 over the March-to-June period, would require a growth in total reserves at a 5½ percent rate.

If the M1 specification of alternative A is adopted for the second quarter, this would imply a further deceleration of M1 growth over the last six months of the year to a 2¾ percent annual rate to be consistent with growth for the year (QIV to QIV basis) at 4¾ percent rate, the middle of the upper half of the FOMC's M1 range for column in the table below.

If the M1 specification of alternative A is adopted for the second quarter, this would imply a further deceleration of M1 growth over the last six months of the year to a 2¾ percent annual rate to be consistent with growth for the year (QIV to QIV basis) at 4¾ percent rate, the middle of the upper half of the FOMC's M1 range for the year (see the top line of the "4¾" column in the table below.) The last column of the table shows that growth at about a 4 percent annual rate over the last six months of the year would be consistent with hitting the upper limit of the longer-run range under alternative A--which would provide more scope for financing expected economic recovery.

If the Committee were to adopt the second-quarter targets of alternatives B or C, some acceleration in growth over the 6-month June-to-December period--to just above a 4 percent annual rate under alternative C--would be in prospect even if growth for the year were constrained to 4¾ percent.

If the Committee were to adopt the second-quarter targets of alternatives B or C, some acceleration in growth over the 6-month June-to-December period--to just above a 4 percent annual rate under alternative C--would be in prospect even if growth for the year were constrained to 4¾ percent. Should the Committee accept growth in M1 for the year at the upper limit of its longer-run range, even more rapid growth in the second half would 5 to 6 percent, depending on whether alternative B or C .

