A Alt Growth from March to June M1 4½ 3 1½ M2 8½ 8 7½ Implied growth from April to June M1 -1¼ -3½ M2 7¾ 7 6¼ Federal funds rate range 10 to 14 11 to 15 12 to 16  Alternative B represents the Committee's current March-to- June target of 3 percent (annual rate) growth of M1 and of 8 percent for M2; the M1 target implies a contraction at about a 1 percent annual rate in the remaining two months of the quarter, while M2 would expand at about a 7 percent annual rate.

Alternative A, calling for M1 growth from March to June at a 4 percent rate, would be consistent with a slower approach of both M1 and M2 toward the upper ends of their ranges.

Alternative C calls for more restrictive short-run targets than either A or B, and both aggregates would be within their long-run ranges by June.  Under alternative B, we would expect some further downward drift in short-term rates between now and mid-year.

In addi- tion, we would anticipate the relatively strong precautionary demands of early this year and late 1981 to begin to moderate as economic prospects improve. (10) The small decline in M1 over May and June called for by alternative B would appear to be consistent with a 6 percent growth in total reserves over the two months.

short-term interest rates could extend the recent reduction in the foreign exchange value of the dollar from its current relatively high level.  Alternative A, which calls for a 4 percent annual rate of growth in M1 from March to June, probably would result in appreciable interest rate reductions along the maturity spectrum.

Growth in M2 could be expected to be somewhat higher than under alternative B, largely reflecting the stronger growth in M1 and possibly greater interest in MMCs and MMMFs, both of whose yields lag declines in market rates.

Growth in M2 could be expected to be somewhat higher than under alternative B, largely reflecting the stronger growth in M1 and possibly greater interest in MMCs and MMMFs, both of whose yields lag declines in market rates.  The 3-month bill rate under alternative A would probably drop below the current discount rate, and range around 11 percent.

Reduced deposit costs would diminish earnings pressures over time on thrifts, work toward making them more willing mortgage lenders, and contribute to further declines in mortgage rates.  Alternative C, which calls for limiting M1 growth to a 1½ percent rate from March to June, implies an increase in total reserves over the latter period at a 4 percent rate.

Underlying this projection is the assumption that a marked acceleration of the growth of nominal GNP to about a 9¼ percent annual rate can be financed by relatively modest growth of narrow money--keeping Ml growth within the upper portion of its longer-run range--without upward interest rate pressures in the second half. Under alternative B, for example, growth in M1 in the second half of the year of 3 to 4¾ percent, as shown in the table below, would be consistent with growth for the year at the upper limit or just below.

The implied velocity expansion, with no rise of interest rates, depends not only on increased willingness to draw on previously accumulated liquidity to finance spending but also on a downward impact on money demand from the continued spread of financial innovations, such as sweep accounts. Alternative A would provide less room for growth of M1 in the second half of the year, assuming the present longer-run target range is retained.

The implied velocity expansion, with no rise of interest rates, depends not only on increased willingness to draw on previously accumulated liquidity to finance spending but also on a downward impact on money demand from the continued spread of financial innovations, such as sweep accounts. Alternative A would provide less room for growth of M1 in the second half of the year, assuming the present longer-run target range is retained. Alternative C, of course, provides the most scope for monetary expansion in the second half, but has a slightly greater risk of delaying the onset of economic recovery.

That directive is shown below would be most consistent with alternative B, although it also could be adapted to alternatives A and C. If the Committee adopted alternative B, it might wish to note that it has reaffirmed objectives adopted at the .

