to March M2 12 11 10 M3 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 Federal funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11  While the specifications of alternative B call for an observed 11 percent assumed rate of growth in M2 over the next three months, such growth, given our preliminary estimate of shifts from market instruments, Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 _Ml- ' Alt.

M2 balances grew unusually rapidly relative to GNP in 1982, and we would anticipate an abate- ment of such liquidity demands in the course of 1983 as economic activity begins to rise and consumer and business confidence is restored.  It would appear that alternative B would be consistent with a federal funds rate around the current 8-1/2 percent discount rate, or edging down further, and other market interest rates generally little changed.

With bond rates expected to stay close to current levels, business borrowing in long-term markets should remain quite strong, as corporations continue to attempt to strengthen balance sheet structures; bank business loans probably will continue to be fairly weak. (14) Total reserve growth at about a 6-1/2 percent annual rate over the December '82 to March '83 period would probably be consistent with the M2 and M3 specifications of alternative B. The relation of reserves to M2 is more uncertain than usual, however, because of the wide range of possible shifts of funds into or out of deposit accounts included in M1, which bear sizable reserve requirements.

We would anticipate non- borrowed reserve growth under alternative B at about 8 percent over the next three months, assuming borrowing from the discount window in the 250 million.

We would anticipate non- borrowed reserve growth under alternative B at about 8 percent over the next three months, assuming borrowing from the discount window in the neighborhood of $250 million.  Alternative A calls for a more rapid expansion in aggregates during the first quarter of the year.

Such an approach may make it a bit more difficult than under alternative B to keep M2 growth over the year as a whole within its longer-run target range.

Such an approach may make it a bit more difficult than under alternative B to keep M2 growth over the year as a whole within its longer-run target range. Since alternative A would probably be associated with a drop in short-term rates over the near-term--typified by federal funds falling to around 7-1/2 percent and a 3-month Treasury bill to around 6-3/4--it is possible that a fairly substantial reversal of interest rates as the year 1983 progresses may be required under this alternative to restrain M2 growth to its longer-term range (assuming that economic activity improved in the .

Such an approach may make it a bit more difficult than under alternative B to keep M2 growth over the year as a whole within its longer-run target range. Since alternative A would probably be associated with a drop in short-term rates over the near-term--typified by federal funds falling to around 7-1/2 percent and a 3-month Treasury bill to around 6-3/4--it is possible that a fairly substantial reversal of interest rates as the year 1983 progresses may be required under this alternative to restrain M2 growth to its longer-term range (assuming that economic activity improved in the course of the year). (16) Total reserves might increase at a 9-1/2 percent annual rate over the first three months of the year under alternative A and nonborrowed reserves at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate, assuming adjustment 100 million or so.

On the other hand, signs of an easing in reserve availability, particularly against a backdrop of continued relatively rapid money growth, might intensify inflationary concerns, exerting upward pressure on bond yields.  Alternative C involves slower growth in the monetary aggregates than alternatives A or B, with M2 growth specified at 10 percent over the first quarter.

