When trading resumed on the Monday following the realignment, exchange markets were judged to be disorderly and the United States intervened for the first time since March 1981, purchasing $21 million equivalent of marks and $9 million equivalent of Longer-run targets (7) Two options that seem reasonable under current circumstances in reconsidering the monetary aggregate targets for 1982 are retention of shown as alternative A below .

A Alt M1 2½ to 5½ 2½ to 6 M2 6 to 9 6½ to 9½ M3 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 10 (8) Whether the Committee retains its current longer-run ranges, or raises them modestly as in alternative B, a marked slowing in growth of M1 would be required from the first-half pace of a little over 7 percent at .

A Alt Growth from June to September M1 5½ 4 2½ M2 8½ 7¾ 7 Federal funds rate range 10 to 15 11 to 16 12 to 17  Under alternative A, M1 over the next three months would grow at a rate matching that of the upper bound of the Committee's current longer-run range.

Because such a trajectory would mean that there would be no narrowing of the existing absolute gap relative to the top of the range, alternative A might be viewed as especially consistent with a deci- sion to raise the 1982 range or to tolerate a small overshoot.

Under alternative B, M1 would expand at a rate that, if sustained, would result in growth for the year at about the 5½ percent upper bound of the longer- run range, while alternative C contemplates growth in M1 which would move the aggregate to just within this year's range by September.

Under all alternatives, the level of M2 by September would be around its upper limit-- a bit above in the case of alternative A and somewhat below in the case of alternative C.

Household borrowing is likely to remain restrained, owing to the deterrent effects of high real interest rates and lender caution.  Alternative A, which targets faster growth in M1 than alternative B, could well produce a fairly substantial decline in money market rates.

In exchange markets, the dollar likely would probably decline substantially; this tendency could be limited to a degree, however, if foreign central banks responded by seeking an easing of their domestic interest rates.  Alternative C sets the most restrictive monetary target, with M1 growth during the third quarter specified at only 2½ percent.

