With regard to M1, the alternatives indicate a more rapid growth in that aggregate over the second quarter than the 6 to 7 percent anticipated earlier, given the unexpected surge in May. (14) While estimates of the relationship between the aggregates and bank reserve positions are subject to considerable uncertainty, the money supply specifications of alternative B are expected to be consistent with little change in the current degree of restraint on bank reserve positions--that is, with borrowing at the discount window fluctuating around $250 million, associated with a federal funds rate generally just above the current 8½ percent discount rate.

Nonborrowed reserves in June would be expected to expand at about a 9 percent annual rate, and total reserves by about 6 percent.  Under alternative B, there is little reason to believe that interest rates in general would change much from current levels, given the recent back-up in interest rates.

Given the moderate June growth expected under alternative B, M1 on a quarterly average basis would expand at about an 11 percent annual rate, which would imply a 2 percent decline in its income velocity--a much smaller decline than in the first quarter but still in sharp contrast to the increases that have usually been registered in the early stages of business cycle upturns.

Given the moderate June growth expected under alternative B, M1 on a quarterly average basis would expand at about an 11 percent annual rate, which would imply a 2 percent decline in its income velocity--a much smaller decline than in the first quarter but still in sharp contrast to the increases that have usually been registered in the early stages of business cycle upturns.  M2 growth under alternative B is anticipated to be around a 9 percent annual rate over May and June on average.

Growth in M3 is likely to be held down by CD run-offs at banks, as loan demand--particu- larly from businesses--remains soft, and by declines in the assets of institution-only money market funds, though at a slower pace than in recent months.  Alternative A envisions an easing in bank reserve positions that would help move the broader aggregates more in the direction of the short-run path expected at the last Committee meeting, but at the same time would probably cause M1 to move even further above the Committee's previously held expectations for the second quarter.

A similar easing of money market conditions could be attained with a drop in the discount rate to 8 percent, and borrowing to about $200 million.  The approach of alternative A, particularly if it also involved a cut in the discount rate, could lead to fairly sizable declines in short-term interest rates, partly because it would tend to confirm that the Committee was discounting the recent behavior of M1.

In foreign exchange markets, a drop in short rates here would help reverse the rise in the dollar of recent days, but it is doubtful that the dollar would drop very substantially, given the continuing attractiveness of dollar assets and the probability of some easing action by foreign central banks. (20) Over the longer run, looking toward the year as a whole, alternative A would, with greater probability, involve M1 growth above the FOMC's longer-run range, unless interest rates moved up again in the second half of the year.

Since the contemplated interest rate declines are small,a substantial impact on spending would seem to be contingent on whether the easing engendered a significant improvement in business and consumer confidence.  Alternative C, which contemplates an increase in the federal funds rate to the 9 to 9½ percent area, would imply a level of adjustment 700 million at the current discount rate.

