Moreover, underlying transactions needs and income growth are likely to be fairly sizable, as indicated by the staff projection of about a 9 percent growth in nominal GNP in the fourth quarter. Even with the acceleration in monthly growth rates under alternative B, on a quarterly average basis M1 is projected to increase at only a 5-1/2 per- cent annual rate in the fourth quarter.

The money paths allow for only small near-term effects--in the direction of restraining M1 and increasing M2 growth.  Federal funds under alternative B would be expected to trade in the area of 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent, and adjustment plus seasonal 750 million.

The increase in household mortgage indebtedness should also be roughly the same in the fourth quarter as in the third, but consumer installment credit may pick up a little further with the strengthening in consumer durables purchases. Business borrowing may remain modest as a quite moderate growth in invest- ment spending is accompanied by a further rise in profits.  Alternative A contemplates that the federal funds rate would need to fall to an area just above the current 8-1/2 percent discount rate--with a drop in borrowing to the $200 to $400 million range-- if the Committee were to seek the more rapid growth rates in money specified by this alternative.

M3 would approach its upper limit (16) A substantial rally in financial markets would probably accompany an easing in bank reserve positions of the dimensions suggested in alternative A, with the 3-month bill rate falling to the neighborhood of 4 percent.

The foreign exchange value of the dollar would decline further. (17) Whether the rate declines contemplated under alternative A, with money market rates hovering around the current discount rate, would be sustained into next year is, at this point, questionable. Assuming moderate continuing strength in the economy, interest rates might have to rise later this year or early next to begin restraining MI and M2 growth to rates within the Committee's reduced longer-run ranges for 1984 tentatively set at 4 to 8 percent and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent, respectively.  Alternative C--which calls for some tightening of money money market conditions in the period ahead--would tend to restrain M2 growth within the lower part of its longer-run range, while bringing M1 growth to its midpoint.

This alternative implies M1 growth at 5 percent from September to December, about the same as in the previous three months, while M2 and M3 growth would accelerate only modestly.  The federal funds rate under alternative C would be expected to rise to around 10 per cent, with discount window borrowing rising to around $1 billion, as reserve provision is constrained relative to demand.

