A Alt Growth from June to Sept. M2 9 8½ 8 M3 8½ 8 7½ M1 7 6 4½ Federal funds rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11 8 to 12  The specifications of Alternative A contemplate no further tightening of money market conditions over the next few months.

Banks and thrift institutions may continue to rely more heavily than in the early part of this year on issuance of large CDs, as loan demands tend to strengthen in reflection of the more rapid pace now evident in economic recovery.  Under alternative A, M1 growth is anticipated to slow much more substantially than growth in the other aggregates.

Should the public continue to place a substantial amount of savings in components of M1, and over the next few weeks some of the tax cut may well be lodged in such deposits, the velocity of M1 could continue to fall--with M1 1 On a quarterly average basis M1 growth in the third quarter under alternative A would be around 10¾ percent at an annual rate.

On the other hand, the large build-up in M1 balances of the past several quarters could well support a rapid expansion in GNP without much further increase in M1 should confidence generated by continuing favorable economic news entail a substantial reduction in demand for liquidity. (21) Given recent market rate adjustments, it would seem most likely that interest rates would generally remain near current levels  alternative A or decline some.

However, some pick-up in bond offerings from the relatively moderate June pace might be expected, particularly if the bond market shows signs of a decline in yields.  Alternative B encompasses a further increase in pressures on bank reserve positions in an effort to increase the-odds that growth in the broad monetary aggregates will remain within their longer-run target ranges and to exert even more restraint on growth of M1.

Mortgage loan rates would probably advance further to the neighbor- hood of 13½ percent, which would be a new high for the year. (25) M1 growth could be expected to slow to about 6 percent from June to September under this approach and, assuming the market pressures of alternative B were maintained through year-end, to expand at a somewhat slower pace in the final months of the year.

While thrift deposit flows might be about the same as under alternative A, higher deposit costs would once again begin to eliminate the earnings of a large number of S&Ls and MSBs, exerting upward pressure on mortgage rates.

While thrift deposit flows might be about the same as under alternative A, higher deposit costs would once again begin to eliminate the earnings of a large number of S&Ls and MSBs, exerting upward pressure on mortgage rates.  Alternative C involves an approach that would exert relatively strong restraint on the aggregates and credit markets over the near-term.

With the level of borrowing at the discount window expanding to about $1¼ billion and market interest rates rising, the current level of the discount rate would be called into question, as indeed it also would under alternative B. Total reserves would change little from June to September, and nonborrowed reserves would drop by about 5 percent at an annual rate if borrowing rose as specified.

