The speci- fications of alternative B retain the growth rate for the broad aggregates chosen by the Committee at its last meeting; however, they also include a somewhat higher growth for M1 in light of recent experience with the relation- ship between the narrow and broader aggregates. Alternative A calls for more rapid money growth, and alternative C involves slower growth, with M1 growing at the rate specified at the previous meeting.

A Alt Growth from November to March M2 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 M3 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 M1 7-1/2 6-3/4 6 Federal funds rate ranges 6 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 7 to 11 Implied growth from January to March M2 9-1/4 8-1/4 7-1/4 M3 8-1/2 7-1/2 6-1/2 M1 6-1/2 5 3-1/2  The specifications of alternative B, which are expected to involve little change in money market conditions over the intermeeting period, would bring M2 growth to the middle of its alternative II range by Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates Alt.

While M1 growth may slow over the next two months, growth in the nontransactions component of M2 is expected to pick up from its depressed January pace and be more in line with growth in income, thereby sustaining M2 growth at around an 8 percent annual rate.  Borrowing at the discount window under alternative B would be expected to range around $650 million, and federal funds to remain in 2 percent area.

By March, however, excess reserves may be closer to  on that assumption growth in total reserves over the next two months is likely to be around 5 percent under alternative B. Nonborrowed reserve growth, assuming borrowing settles down around $650 million, would increase at a 6 percent annual rate.

Nonborrowed reserve growth, assuming borrowing settles down around $650 million, would increase at a 6 percent annual rate.  Interest rates under alternative B would be expected to fluctuate in a narrow range around current levels over the intermeeting period.

Corporate borrowing, on the other hand, may be greater than in the fourth quarter as internal fund generation levels off while spending for capital and inventories continues to rise.  The less rapid growth of money under alternative C, though still leaving the aggregates well within the alternative II longer-run range by March, would also be consistent with the slower annual growth rates of longer-run alternative I.

The tendency for bond yields to rise might be moderated--especially once the forthcoming Treasury refunding is distributed--as corporate bond offerings fall off and if expectations of a weakening in economic activity become more pervasive.  The more rapid growth of money under alternative A would bring M1 near the upper limit of, and M2 into the upper part of, their respective alternative II longer-run ranges.

