A Alt Growth from June to September Ml 4-1/2 4 3-1/2 5-1/2 M2 7-1/4 7 6-3/4 7-1/2 M3 9-1/4 9 8-3/4 9 Federal funds rate range 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 8 to 12 8-1/2 to 12-1/2 8 to 12  Under alternative B, M1 growth would be expected to pick up to around a 6-3/4 percent annual rate in August and September, with growth larger in the latter month.

We are assuming that mortgage markets and confidence in thrift institutions generally will not be adversely affected to any significant extent by repercussions from the Financial Corporation of America (FCA) situation.  The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at 1 billion.

Over the July-to-September period total reserves can be expected to increase at about a 2-1/2 percent annual rate, while nonborrowed reserves would rise less. (12) There is little reason to expect the average level of short-term rates to change much over the balance of the quarter under alternative B, but the structure of these rates could well vary, depending on such factors as the evolution of the FCA situation and the progress of negotiations with Latin American borrowers.

A noticeable back-up in rates cannot be ruled out in the weeks ahead, particularly should money growth accelerate more rapidly than projected in the context of strong economic indicators.  The specifications of alternative A are designed to bring M1 and M2 closer to the path adopted at the previous Committee meeting, while not leading to much more rapid M3 and credit growth.

As interest rates fell, the dollar would tend to depreciate on foreign exchange markets. (14) The easier reserve and market conditions that are expected to develop under alternative A would probably have their greatest impact on money growth in the final months of the year.

Thus, alternative A seems most consistent with Ml growth more clearly in the upper portion of its range for this year and M2 growth around its midpoint.

Expansion of both M3 and debt is more likely to be somewhat further above the upper ends of their respective long-run ranges than under alternative B as private credit demands respond to the stronger economy.

Expansion of both M3 and debt is more likely to be somewhat further above the upper ends of their respective long-run ranges than under alternative B as private credit demands respond to the stronger economy.  Alternative C calls for sane tightening in money market conditions over the period ahead, should it be desired to place even more constraint on the growth of credit.

