A Alt Growth from Nov. to March M1 8 6-3/4 5-1/2 M2 9-1/2 8-1/2 7-1/2 M3 9 8-1/2 8 Federal funds rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11 8 to 12  The aggregates specifications of alternative B, which are expected to be consistent with maintenance of about the current degree of pressure on reserve positions, would place all of the money supply measures in March close to the upper limits of their tentative longer-run ranges for 1985 established last July.

The pace of mortgage lending to households, which had been slowing since the spring of 1984, is projected to stabilize in response to the easier conditions that have developed in that market.  Discount window borrowing under alternative B is expected 400 million.

Nonborrowed reserves would be expected to increase at a 16 percent annual rate, and total reserves at a 12-1/2 percent rate over the November-to-March period. (13) Short-term rates are not likely to show much change on balance over the intermeeting period under alternative B, with the 3-month Treasury bill rate generally in an 8-1/8 to 8-3/8 percent range; the prime rate may drop a little further, given current rate relationships.

In long-term markets, yields could move somewhat higher should there be no real progress toward putting together a credible deficit reduction package, if there were signs of strengthened economic activity, and if M1 growth were sustained as expected under alternative B. Mortgage rates may stabilize in the period immediately ahead, and could begin to rise, parti- cularly should bond rates turn up as the first quarter progresses.

Mortgage rates may stabilize in the period immediately ahead, and could begin to rise, parti- cularly should bond rates turn up as the first quarter progresses. - 10 -  Alternative A involves growth in the aggregates that would bring them above the upper limits of their tentative longer-run ranges .

The more rapid growth of M2 under this alternative would reflect, in addition to faster expansion of its M1 component, continued strong inflows to MMDAs and money market mutual funds, given the further drop assumed in market rates and the lag in reduction of yields on these instruments.  The money supply specifications of alternative A are expected to entail an increase in total reserves of about 15 percent at an annual rate from November to March, accompanied by a drop in the funds rate to 8 percent or a little below.

If the discount rate were reduced from the present 8-1/2 percent level, reserve growth consistent with this alternative could be accomplished with somewhat less expansion in nonborrowed reserves than otherwise. Under this alternative, the 3-month Treasury bill rate may drop to around 7-1/2 percent, but yield declines in long-term markets may be more limited. The dollar probably would come under downward pressure in foreign exchange - 11 - markets, although any depreciation would be moderated if foreign monetary authorities allowed their domestic rates to fall as well under the circum- stances.  Alternative C is designed to hold growth of M1 and M2 to rates close to the midpoints of their tentative long-run ranges and is expected to involve some tightening of reserve conditions.

The bracketed language would seem to be more relevant to alternatives B or C, since alternative A contains a growth rate for M1 from November to March that, as de- , already takes more account of the shortfall.

