A Alt Growth from March to June Ml 8 6-1/2 5 M2 8-3/4 8 7-1/4 M3 9 8-1/2 8 Federal funds rate ranges 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 to 8-1/2 to 10-1/2 11-1/2 12-1/2 Implied growth from QIV to June M1 7-1/2 7 6-1/4 M2 7-3/4 7-1/2 7 M3 9 8-3/4 8-1/2  The specifications of alternative B, which are those considered most consistent with the staff's GNP outlook, call for some slowing of M1 growth from the pace of the December-to-March period, although this aggregate would remain above the midpoint of its longer- run range in June.

While M1 would still be well in the upper part of its range by June, its expansion would be expected to moderate further toward the middle of the range over the second half of the year partly in lagged response to further interest rate increases and also reflecting a slowdown in GNP growth. (10) The expansion of M2 is expected to accelerate from its unusually slow pace of recent months under alternative B--and the other alternatives as well--after the extraordinary 5-1/2 percent rise in its velocity in the first quarter.

While CD issuance at banks and thrifts may moderate somewhat as growth of core deposits picks up, the need for the managed liabilities in M3 should remain sizable given projected strength in demands on these institutions for credit by households and businesses (including additional financing that may be associated with merger activity). (11) Borrowing at the discount window of around $1 billion, or perhaps a bit more, probably would be associated with the monetary aggregate specifications of alternative B, and nonborrowed and total re- serves could be expected to increase at annual rates of 3 and 6 percent, respectively.

While immediate transitional adjustments to CRR seem to be behind us, it should be noted in this context that there are still uncertainties about the lasting impact of CRR and the lengthening of the reserve period on bank reserve management policies. (12) The market has probably not entirely discounted the degree of reserve restraint implied by alternative B, and interest rates generally would be expected to increase somewhat further, with the Trea- sury bill rate possibly moving up about 1/4 percentage point to around 10 percent or a little higher, partly in anticipation of a rise in the discount rate.

Businesses' financing gap is projected to rise, as investment spending grows rapidly in the face of moderating profit growth, but the amount of borrowing by this sector may not increase if the accumulation of liquid assets slows as expected. Growth in domestic nonfinancial debt for the year as a whole is current- ly projected to be at, or slightly above, its 8 to 11 percent long-run range, assuming a slowdown in debt formation over the second half of the year as economic expansion slows.  The specifications of alternative A contemplate more rapid growth of the aggregates, with M1 coming closer to the upper limit of its longer-run range by June and M2 moving above its midpoint.

Moreover, a tendency for growth in the monetary aggregates to be relatively strong, as is anticipated in this alternative, particularly for M1 and M3, would probably lead to market expectations that any moderation in the degree of pressure on bank reserve positions was not sustainable.  The approach of alternative A would probably lead to more rapid GNP growth over the spring and summer than in the staff's current forecast.

In such a case, this alternative increases the odds that a substantial rise of interest rates later this year and into 1985 may be needed to keep money growth rates within their long-run target bands and/or to forestall greater upward pressures than currently projected on the average price level.  Alternative C involves a more restrictive policy than either A or B--slowing M1 growth, for example, over the March-to-June period to about 5 percent at an annual rate, which would place it at about the middle of its longer-run range by mid-year.

Alternative A would be consistent with language to "maintain" the existing degree of reserve restraint (interpreted as borrowing averaging over time on the order of . Alternatives B and C would be consistent with language reserve restraint, respectively.

Maintenance of such pressure could be construed as consistent with the approach of alternative B or an approach between A and B.

