In all cases, M2 remains at or a little below its midpoint.  Alternative B--which underlies the staff's GNP projection- contemplates a marked slowing in M1 growth to around a 5-1/2 percent annual rate over the June-to-September period in the process of bringing Chart I Actual and Targeted M1 CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC Billions of dollars v---- 7ft "ACTUAL LEVELS a SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES I I I 1 I I I 1 I I 0 N .

That growth in money may not involve much, if any, further rise of interest rates over the summer, assuming nominal GNP grows no faster than the 9-1/2 percent annual rate currently projected for the third quarter and given the rise of interest rates that has already taken place.  The deceleration of M1 growth under alternative B is not expected to be accompanied by any significant slowing of M2 from its rate of growth of the previous three months.

If that occurred, it might entail greater expansion over time in nonborrowed reserves--as banks more willingly lend and add to deposits-and hence more money growth than assumed for this alternative. (21) Interest rates generally might show little net change under alternative B, though probably edging higher from the most recent 4 percent.

Thus, alternative B may be consistent with growth in M1 over the year 1984 in the area of 6-1/2 percent with only a little further upward movement of interest rates.

Growth of M2 would be expected to be around the midpoint of its long-run range.  Alternative A involves a policy approach that keeps M1 growth nearer the upper end of its longer-run range.

A reversal of the rate declines and a further rise seems most likely, given the projected overall strength of money and credit demands, if such objectives encompass M1 growth in 1984 and 1985 in the 6-1/2 and 6 percent areas, respectively.  Alternative C contemplates a very considerable decelera- tion in M1 growth-as more consistent with growth around the midpoint of its longer-run range over the year as a whole-and greater restraint on growth of the broader money and credit aggregates.

