implied growth for the QIV 1983 to QIV 1984 period, can be found in the table  Alternative B--which is expected to involve continuation of roughly the current degree of pressure on bank reserve positions--calls for growth in M1 that would keep this aggregate at the midpoint of the Ccmmittee's long-run range, with M2 moving a little higher in its range, though remaining below the midpoint, and M3 continuing near the upper end of its range. Alternative A calls for somewhat faster money growth over the September-to-December period, consistent with an easing in reserve pressures, while alternative C contemplates somewhat slower money growth, associated with tighter reserve conditions.

Transactions demands are expected to strengthen in association with the projected pickup in nominal GNP growth in the fourth quarter, while the dampening effects on money demand of earlier increases in short-term interest rates should diminish over the quarter and begin to be reversed by the recent moderate declines in short rates. On a quarterly average basis, M1 in the fourth quarter would increase at 4 percent annual rate under alternative B, implying an increase in 4 percent, given the staff's GNP forecast.

Transactions demands are expected to strengthen in association with the projected pickup in nominal GNP growth in the fourth quarter, while the dampening effects on money demand of earlier increases in short-term interest rates should diminish over the quarter and begin to be reversed by the recent moderate declines in short rates. On a quarterly average basis, M1 in the fourth quarter would increase at a 5-3/4 percent annual rate under alternative B, implying an increase in velocity of around 2-3/4 percent, given the staff's GNP forecast.  Alternative B, and the other alternatives as well, also call for somewhat more rapid growth of M2 over the September-to-December period than in the summer.

Despite the slowing of credit growth over coming months, for 1984 the debt of non- financial sectors is projected to increase around 12-1/2 percent, compared to the Committee's range of 8 to 11 percent, with about one percentage point of this total attributable to credit associated with merger and related activity.  The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at 750 million level.

Further improvement, if any, in long-term markets is expected to be quite limited, given the anticipated strengthening of incoming economic data and the expectation that M1 growth will not fall well below the midpoint of its long-run range. Moreover, during the intermeeting period, note and bond markets will have to absorb a very substantial volume of Treasury issues-including both the large end-of-quarter note and bond auctions that had to be postponed from late September due to debt ceiling constraints, and the regular mid-quarter .refunding scheduled for the first week of November. (14) The somewhat more rapid money growth specifications of alternative A would be expected to involve a further reduction in pressures on bank reserve positions, with discount window borrowing 500 million.

The dollar would tend to decline on foreign exchange markets, although any declines might be limited should market participants anticipate a subsequent firming of interest rates.  Alternative C, which involves some tightening of money market conditions over the intermeeting period, would be expected to restrain M1 growth over the balance of the year to a rate below the midpoint of its long-run range and to exert particular restraint on credit growth.

