On the other hand, M2 and M3 are likely to be near or within their respective ranges for the year without so substantial a tightening.  Alternative B assumes unchanged pressures on reserve positions, with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window between $450 550 million and federal funds trading around 8 percent, or a bit higher.

Such a decrease would bring the drop for the year to around 5-1/2 percent, about matching the decline over 1982 that was unprecedented over a four-quarter period in the postwar years. (12) Growth of M2 and M3 is also expected to slow in the September-to-December period under alternative B, owing primarily to the deceleration of their M1 component.

Roughly one percentage point of the growth reflects unusual merger and financial restructuring activity and another small amount (perhaps 1/4 percentage point or so) represents acceleration of tax-exempt borrowing in anticipation of possible tax law changes. (14) Both total and nonborrowed reserves are likely to grow at around a 7 percent annual rate over the final three months of the year, given reserve pressures assumed under alternative B. With federal funds trading persistently around 8 percent, other private short-term rates would rise from current levels.

securities at a time when external financing needs remained large and foreign investors may come to expect further exchange losses.  Alternative A assumes a reduction of adjustment plus sea- sonal borrowings to a $250 to $350 million range, or a cut in the discount rate.

In that case bond yields might not decline in sympathy with short-term rates, partly for reasons noted in paragraph (14) but also partly because of possible concerns about inflationary impli- cations of a rapid drop in the dollar occurring in tandem with an easing of money markets and relatively rapid M1 growth. (16) An easing of reserve pressures would be expected to keep M1 farther above its upper bound than under alternative B and increase the likelihood that M2 would remain slightly above the upper end of its range through December. The fall in market rates under alternative A could retard a movement by the public away from highly liquid monetary assets.

In contrast, M3 would very likely stay well within its annual range, moving only slightly more above its midpoint by December, as reduced reliance by depository institutions on issuance of managed liabilities partly offsets the greater influx of core deposits.  Alternative C assumes some tightening of reserve conditions consistent with a marked slowing of M1 growth over the next three months to around a 5-1/2 percent annual rate and with enough moderation of M2 growth possibly to move just within the target range for the year.

