A Alt Growth from Dec. to March Ml 8-3/4 8 7-1/4 M2 11-1/2 10-1/2 9-1/2 M3 10-1/2 9-3/4 9 Federal funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11  The specifications of alternative B, which are expected to involve continuation of about the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, can be considered most consistent with growth over a longer period within the ranges of alternative II.

On a quarterly average basis, M1 would increase at 4 percent annual rate in the first quarter under alternative B, and velocity would decline at about a 1-1/4 percent annual rate, given the staff's GNP projection.

By March, M1 under this alternative would have increased by about 8-3/4 percent from the QIV '84 long-run base. (17) A less rapid expansion in the nontransactions components of M2 and M3 is also expected to contribute to a slowdown in growth in the broader monetary aggregates under alternative B. Weakness in inflows to MMMFs is already evident in the most recent data, as yields on these assets have declined into fairly close alignment with the lower level of market interest rates; a similar pattern for MMDAs can be expected as their offering rates continue to drop in response to previous declines in other yields.

However, M2 velocity in the first quarter would decline at around a 4 percent annual rate under alternative B, owing mostly to the surge in growth of this aggregate around year-end.

Federal debt issuance is expected to be relatively large over the balance of the quarter.  The specifications of alternative B are expected to in- volve reserve conditions consistent with borrowing at the discount window 300 million.

However, increases are likely to be limited by still pervasive uncertainties about the federal budget, by strength in money relative to long-run target ranges, and an economic outlook that is not at the moment weakening.  Alternative A, which contemplates that M1 growth will slow relatively little from the December-January average to around an 8-1/2 percent annual rate over February and March, seems most consistent with long-run alternative I.

Non- borrowed reserves would be expected to grow at about a 20 percent annual rate over the February-March period. (22) Market interest rates would be expected to drop fairly sharply in the near term under alternative A, especially if it was accompanied by a lower discount rate.

In addition, rate declines in long-term markets could be limited by concerns that such an approach might lead to an intensification of inflationary pressures, or in any event to a tightening of market conditions later in the year to avert such pressures and to constrain growth in the aggregates to within the long-term ranges adopted. In exchange markets, the dollar would be likely to come under downward pressure.  Alternative C specifies a sharper slowing of money growth in February and March, consistent with a more rapid return of the aggregates toward their longer-run ranges, an approach that may be particularly in line with a Comittee choice of long-run alternative III.

The federal funds rate would probably rise to around 9 percent (24) Other interest rates would also be expected to rise substantially under alternative C, with the Treasury bill rate increasing 4 percent.

