Alternative B contemplates maintenance of about the current degree of pressure on reserve positions, indexed by discount window borrow- ing of $450 to $550 million, with federal funds continuing to trade around 8 percent.

Although, as noted above in paragraph 1, concurrent seasonal adjust- ment yields M1 growth for October that is several percentage points faster than the current seasonal factors, it has very little effect on the seasonally adjusted growth rate for the second half of this year, calculated using the specifications of alternative B. anticipated, partly in association with somewhat greater household saving in the fourth quarter.

Issuance of the managed liabili- ties in M3 over the balance of the year should decline from the rapid pace in September and October, as asset expansion at banks remains fairly moderate and Treasury deposits rebound once the debt ceiling is lifted. For the year as a whole, M2 growth under this alternative would be around 8-1/2 percent, somewhat below the upper end of its long-run range, while M3 growth of 7-3/4 percent would be at the midpoint of its long-run range. (11) With federal funds continuing to trade around 8 percent under alternative B, other short-term interest rates would probably show little net change over the intermeeting period.

All in all, the debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to increase at an annual rate of a little more than 13 per- cent over the fourth quarter, bringing growth for the year on a quarterly average basis to nearly 13 percent.  Alternative A contemplates an easing of reserve pres- sures, with discount window borrowing falling to $200 to $300 million and the federal funds rate dropping to around the 7-1/2 percent discount rate.

The pickup in M3, on the other hand, might be restrained as business loan demand at banks was held down by a greater issuance of bonds.  The drop in market interest rates under alternative A may be appreciable.

The dollar would probably drop noticeably further on foreign exchange markets.  Alternative C assumes an increase in borrowing at the discount window to the $700 to $800 million area, which would be expected 2 percent.

