A Alt Growth from June to Sept. M1 7 5-1/2 4 M2 8-1/2 7-1/2 6-1/2 M3 8 7-1/4 6-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11  Alternative B contemplates a slowing of M1 growth to a 5-1/2 percent annual rate over the June-to-September period, consistent with seasonal and adjustment borrowing at the discount window at around the $350 million level used in constructing reserve paths since the last FOMC meeting.

Growth in total and nonborrowed reserves would slow to 3-1 and 5-1/2 percent annual rates respectively over the June-to-September period as the expansion of transaction deposits moderates.  In part, the slowing of M1 growth under alternative B is expected to result from a substantial weakening in the demand deposit component, working off a portion of its recent unusually large bulge.

On a quarterly average basis, M1 would be expected to increase at around a 10 percent annual rate, implying another appreciable decline in velocity of more than 3-3/4 percent at an annual rate given the Greenbook GNP forecast.  Under alternative B, M1 by September would be about 10 percent at an annual rate above the fourth-quarter 1984 long-run target base.

As a result, M1 by the fourth quarter on average might be about 8-3/4 percent above its QIV '84 level and 7 percent, annual rate, above a QII '85 level.  Growth of M2 and M3 under alternative B would also be expected to slow relative to their average pace of May and June.

Under alternative B, M2 in September would be just below the upper end of its current long-run range, while M3 would be expected to be a little above the midpoint of its range.

However, federal government borrowing is likely to pick up, seasonally adjusted, and credit growth for the year probably would be just above the upper end of the Committee's long-run range. (24) Unchanged reserve and money market conditions, as under alternative B, are likely to be associated with a modest back-up in short- term interest rates as the summer progresses, given fairly widespread expectations of some easing of Federal Reserve policy over coming months.

Some upward movement in long-term rates may develop, however, should there be sub- stantial disappointment with Congressional action on federal deficits. In foreign exchange markets, the dollar is expected to remain within the trading range prevailing in the last few months.  Alternative A contemplates an easing in money market conditions consistent with somewhat more rapid money growth over the June- to-September period.

The dollar would decline in foreign exchange markets  Alternative A incorporates M1 growth at a 7 percent annual rate over the third quarter, and at a 10-1/2 percent annual rate from its fourth-quarter 1984 base.

Under those conditions, growth of M1, M2 and debt for the QIV 1984 to QIV 1985 period could be around the upper ends of the specifications of alternative II.  Alternative C contemplates a more marked slowing of money growth over the months ahead than alternative B, with M1 specified to grow at a 4 percent annual rate.

