cluding implied growth from the fourth quarter to June, can be found on  Alternative B, which appears consistent with roughly unchanged pressures on reserve positions, calls for money growth that would keep M1 in June around the upper limit of the parallel band that extends back from the endpoints of the longer-run range for the aggregate.

A more marked slowing of money growth is specified in alternative C, keeping M1 within the band though still above the upper limit of the cone; alternative A contemplates somewhat more rapid money growth than B that would pull M1 above the upper limit of the band.

A Alt Growth from March to June M1 7-1/2 6-1/2 5 M2 8 7 5-1/2 M3 8-3/4 8 7 Associated federal funds rate range 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 7 to 11 (8) M1 growth at around a 6-1/2 percent annual rate from March to June under alternative B represents a fairly considerable modera- tion from the average pace of the past three months.

Federal government borrowing is projected to increase (after seasonal adjustment), mirroring to some extent swings in its cash balance over the first two quarters rather than a fundamental shift in credit market pressures.  The money growth objectives of alternative B are expected to involve continuation of about the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, with reserve paths based on adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window averaging around $350 million and 2 percent.

In foreign exchange markets the dollar might decline a little further, on balance, if interest rates tend a bit lower or if uncertainties about the strength of the U.S. economy or the stability of financial markets become more prevalent.  Alternative A contemplates some easing of pressures on reserve positions, with borrowing dropping to around $200 million and the federal funds rate declining to close to the 8 percent discount rate.

Moreover, there is potential for quite rapid growth for a while in the broad aggregates, particularly if market rates were to decline abruptly in face of lagging institutional rates. (16) From the fourth quarter to June, M1 would increase at an 4 percent annual rate under alternative A. Growth would have to slow to about a 3-1/4 percent annual rate over the last six months of the year, if growth for the year (QIV-to-QIV basis) were to be just below the upper limit of the long-run range.

This would increase the odds that interest rates will rise in the second half of the year.  Under alternative C, the 5 percent pace of M1 growth from March to June would keep this aggregate below the upper limit of the band.

The bracketed phrase in the first sentence, which is drawn from the previous directive, seems more appropriate if the Committee opts  alternatives A or B rather than the tightening of alternative C.

