A Alt Growth from November to March Ml 7-3/4 7 6-1/2 M2 6 5-3/4 5-1/2 M3 7 6-3/4 6-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 6-1/2 to 10-1/2  Given recent behavior of the aggregates, alternatives A and B are reasonably consistent with the short-run ranges from November to March adopted at the last meeting-7 to 9 percent annual rate of growth for M1 and 6 to 8 percent for M2 and M3--although the aggregates of B are somewhat lower than A relative to those ranges.

The differences in the alternatives in that context would be reflected in the degree of near-term bank reserve pressures--with alternative B assuming unchanged pressures and alternative A some easing--and implications for the trajectory of money growth over the months ahead relative to longer-run ranges. In the tightening alternative C, both M1 and M2 would be expected to fall short of the December meeting ranges.

In the tightening alternative C, both M1 and M2 would be expected to fall short of the December meeting ranges.  The specifications of alternative B envision a continua- tion of discount window borrowing in a range of $300 to $400 million, with 4 percent or a little higher.

By March M1 would be a little under the upper bound of its tentative 4 to 7 percent 1986 range.  A pickup in M2 growth is expected under alternative B in February and March, after its sluggish performance in January, as RP behavior ceases to be a drag and core deposits advance more in line with income.

The recent pace of decline in the exchange value of the dollar may not continue under alternative B, though if the dollar is fundamentally tending downward, a significant rise in the exchange rate is unlikely.

The recent pace of decline in the exchange value of the dollar may not continue under alternative B, though if the dollar is fundamentally tending downward, a significant rise in the exchange rate is unlikely.  Alternative A assumes a reduction in reserve pressures associated with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window 150 million.

Additional downward pressure on the dollar would emerge, with the extent depending in part on whether the market comes to anticipate even further easing action--and particularly if key foreign countries do not lower their interest rates.  Under alternative A, M1 growth would be expected to pick up to about an 8-1/2 percent annual rate over February and March, as interest rates decline.

The 7-3 and March under this alternative would be bring this aggregate to around the lower bound of its tentative range by quarter-end. (23) The exact response of these monetary aggregates, especially M1, to the lessening of reserve pressures under alternative A is somewhat difficult to assess.

A further decline of market rates could bring the spread between short-term market instruments and checkable accounts to quite low levels depending on institutional reactions, with the potential for strong inflows as the opportunity cost of liquidity and safety becomes less practically significant.  Alternative C encompasses a modest firming in reserve condi- tions, with discount borrowing increasing to $450 to $500 million and federal funds trading consistently somewhat above 8 percent.

If that base is retained, the ranges adopted at the last meeting would be generally consistent with expectations of growth under alternatives A or B .

