A Alt Growth from August to December M2 9 8-1/2 8 M3 7-3/4 7-1/2 7-1/4 Ml 13-1/2 12-1/2 11-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Alternative B assumes continuation of the current degree of pressure on reserve postions, with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

current account deficit  M2, under alternative B, is expected to expand at an 8 per- cent rate over November and December, a little below the average pace of September and October and appreciably slower than over the summer months.

The specifications of alternative B imply a 5 percent rate of decrease in M2 velocity in the fourth quarter, given the staff GNP forecast, bringing the drop in velocity for the year to an historically large 4 percent.

The specifications of alternative B imply a 5 percent rate of decrease in M2 velocity in the fourth quarter, given the staff GNP forecast, bringing the drop in velocity for the year to an historically large 4 percent.  Growth of M3 under alternative B also would be expected to slow slightly further over November and December, coming in a little below the 9 percent upper limit of its long-term range.

The implied decline in M3 velocity would be at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter and nearly 4 percent over the year as a whole, the largest annual drop since 1982.  M1, under alternative B, would be anticipated to expand in November and December at about the reduced average September-October pace- as a rebound in demand deposit growth would offset some moderation in in- flows to OCDs.

Household borrowing, however, is likely to moderate somewhat from the pace of earlier months as automobile financing weakens in the wake of the expiration of incentive programs; mortgage borrowing is likely to be sustained near the relatively heavy pace of the summer and early fall.  Alternative A assumes either a reduction in discount window borrowing to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a cut in the discount 300 million.

M1 under this alternative would be expected to pick up somewhat relative to its growth over September and October, increasing in line with average growth in 1986.  Alternative C contemplates an increase in discount window 500 million.

