A Alt Growth from March to June Ml 9 7-1/2 6 M2 8 7 6 M3 7-1/4 6-1/2 5-3/4 Associated federal funds rate range 5 to 9 5-1/2 to 6 to 10 9-1/2  Under alternative B, which assumes maintenance of about the current degree of pressure on bank reserve positions as indexed by $300 million in borrowing, M1 would be expected to grow at about a 7-1/2 percent annual rate from March to June.

M3 would be somewhat below the midpoint of its range.  With reserve conditions unchanged under alternative B, federal funds would be expected generally to trade in the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent area.

The accompanying flattening of the yield curve, by working to reduce offering rates on small time deposits, would also seem to add to demands for interest-bearing M1 balances.1 On a quarterly average basis, M1 would be expected to expand at a 9 percent annual rate in the second quarter under alternative B, implying a drop in velocity at around a 4 percent annual rate, given the staff GNP forecast.

Moreover, results of a survey of large institutions indicate that, in adapting to the new regulation, banks are not looking to higher demand deposits but are emphasizing other approaches, such as restructuring federal funds transactions and adjusting the timing of payments.  M2 under alternative B would be expected to increase considerably more rapidly from March to June than its relatively sluggish rate of growth in the first quarter, partly as shifts to bond and stock investment vehicles moderate as portfolio adjustments to the recent surge in securities prices abate.

The final phase-out of savings deposit rate ceilings on April 1 is not expected to have a perceptible impact on money growth, given the wide variety of deregulated accounts already available and the likelihood that funds shifted into newly deregulated accounts will come predominantly from other M2 components.  Alternative A encompasses some easing of reserve conditions, with discount window borrowing dropping to minimum levels of $100 to $150 million, and the federal funds rate averaging around, or a little below, the 7 percent discount rate.

Under those circumstances, and particularly if transactions- related demands were also on the strong side, greater restraint on reserve positions and an increase in interest rates might be needed at some point later in the year if M1 were to be constrained within its longer-run range for 1986.  Under alternative A, the stronger growth of M2--bolstered by inflows from market instruments mainly into MMMFs and MMDAs--would move this aggregate up into its longer-run range by June.

Bank credit growth through the second quarter would be further restrained by softness in business loans as corporations rely more heavily on bond financing in response to a further drop in long-term rates.  Alternative C entails a firming of reserve conditions 500 million.

The foreign exchange value of the dollar would tend to firm over the short run. (17) M1 growth under the money market and reserve conditions of alternative C would be expected to slow over the March to June period, bringing this aggregate to within its long-run range by June.

