A Alt Growth from August to December M2 9-1/2 8-1/2 7-1/2 M3 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 M1 14 12 10 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Under Alternative B, which assumes continuation of the cur- rent degree of pressure on reserve positions, growth in M2 and M3 expected over the next four months would leave these aggregates at the 9 percent upper ends of their annual ranges.

With the moderate easing or tightening of reserve pressures assumed for alternatives A and C, respectively, the broader aggregates would be expected to move above or below the upper bounds of their annual ranges, with the gap widening as the year comes to a close.

M1 growth for the year under all the alternatives is projected to be not far from the 14-1/2 pace registered so far this year.  Under alternative B, reserve paths would continue to be constructed assuming $300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window.

While forthcoming inflation indicators may suggest only a moderate uptick in price pressures, as in the staff forecast, strength in near-term data on economic activity, expansion of broad money measures along the upper bounds of their ranges, and the continued downtrend in the dollar in foreign exchange markets expected under this alternative would tend to limit the potential for retracing the recent climb in bond yields.  M2 growth under alternative B is expected to average around 8-1/2 percent at an annual rate over the remainder of the year, appreciably below its average pace in July and August, but still well in excess of in- come growth.

With money market rates staying around current levels under alternative B, in- flows from market instruments to liquid retail accounts should continue to be stimulated by their relatively attractive returns, though flows would tend to be somewhat smaller than in recent months, reflecting the diminishing impacts of earlier declines in market rates.

The expectation of a moderate slowing of inflows to retail M2 accounts is based on an assessment that rates on savings and regular NOW accounts will continue to be reduced very sluggishly over the balance of the year, despite unusually low spreads to market rates; should depository institutions show more willingness to cut offering rates, M2 growth could slow somewhat more. Growth in M2 also may be restrained by further ebbing in the expansion in overnight RPs as net purchases of Treasury securities by banks continue to abate as interest rates stabilize. (11) M3 also is expected to decelerate from August to December  alternative B--to an 8 percent annual rate.

Thrifts' asset expansion, meanwhile, is expected to pick up only marginally in coming months. (12) M1 growth, though expected to moderate somewhat from its July-August pace, is still likely to be quite rapid over the rest of the year under alternative B. With offering rates on NOW accounts adjusting only slowly, inflows to other checkable deposits would continue to be boosted by funds shifting from small time deposits as well as from market instruments, though abating from their recent extraordinary pace.

Overall, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a 12 percent rate from August through year end, implying growth for the year on a fourth- quarter average basis of 13 percent, cmpared with the 11 percent upper bound of the Committee's monitoring range.  Alternative A assumes either a reduction in discount borrow- ings to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a one-half percentage 300 million.

Absent monetary easing abroad, lower short-term rates would tend to lessen the attractiveness of dollar assets, and any heightening of inflationary concerns in this environment could place the foreign exchange value of the dollar under considerable down- ward pressure.  Under alternative A, growth in M2 and M3 of around 9-1 and 8-1/2 percent, respectively, would be anticipated from August through December.

M1 growth from August to December would be expected to continue near its rapid pace for the year to date, bringing growth for the year to 14-3/4 percent.  Alternative C assumes an increase in discount borrowing to 500 million.

