A Alt Growth from November to March M2 8 7 6 M3 6-1/2 6 5-1/2 M1 14 12 10 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at the 300 million.

Down- ward pressures on the dollar could re-emerge in light of continued large current account deficits, especially absent evidence of a greater willing- ness of foreign authorities to lower interest rates.  M2, under alternative B, is expected to slow further from its average growth over October and November, expanding at a 7 percent pace over the November-to-March period--in the middle of its tentative range.

The new mortgage-backed securities favored by tax reform--REMICs--appear unlikely to attract many funds from retail M2 accounts, especially in the near-term. alternative B, M2 would outpace nominal GNP, given the staff forecast, and its velocity thus would decline further in the first quarter, though by considerably less than in the fourth quarter or the year 1986.

The new mortgage-backed securities favored by tax reform--REMICs--appear unlikely to attract many funds from retail M2 accounts, especially in the near-term. alternative B, M2 would outpace nominal GNP, given the staff forecast, and its velocity thus would decline further in the first quarter, though by considerably less than in the fourth quarter or the year 1986.  Under the specifications of alternative B, M3 would expand at a 6 percent rate from November to March, near the reduced pace of recent months and in the lower half of its tentative range.

However, underlying conditions would seem to continue to point to some moderation in M1 growth under alternative B from the exceptional pace of recent quarters.

Total domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to grow at about a 10 percent annual rate over the first quarter of 1987, within the Committee's tentative annual monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent.  Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow- ing to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a reduction in the dis- count rate of one-half percentage point with borrowing maintained at $300 million.

That scope could widen, though, should incoming indicators on the economy point to more softness early in the year than is now generally expected and to subdued price pressures.  Under alternative A, growth in M2 would slow only a little from its average pace of recent months, and by March this aggregate would be in the upper portion of its tentative long-run range.

M3 would tend to be boosted by inflows to money mar- ket funds, as their yields lagged the decrease in market interest rates. In addition, bank funding needs might be enlarged by more lending to busi- nesses, especially if long-term rates did not similarly decline.  Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with an 500 million of discount window borrowing.

