A Alt Growth from June to September Ml 10 8 6 M2 8-3/4 7-1/2 6-1/4 M3 7-3/4 7 6-1/4 Associated federal funds rate 4 to 8 5 to 9 6 to 10  M1 growth under alternative B, which assumes reserve pres- sures remain unchanged, would average 8 percent at an annual rate over the next three months.

M1 growth on a quarterly average basis, though, would drop only to 11-1/2 percent in the third quarter under alternative B, owing to the arithmetic carryover effect of the rapid buildup of cash balances in recent months.

Such an increase in M1, given the 4-3/4 percent growth in nominal GNP projected in the third quarter, implies a decline in M1 velocity somewhat in excess of 6 percent-- about the same as the average pace over the past year and a half.  M2 growth under alternative B would slow further from June, remaining close to the midpoint of its longer-run range through September.

M3 would grow at around its pace of both May and June under alternative B, also keeping it close to the midpoint of its longer-run range.

Overall debt growth, however, is likely to remain in line with the pace of recent months. (21) The current market optimism regarding the likelihood of a decline in the discount rate presumably would not be validated under alternative B, and some edging up of rates from their most recent lows could be expected, especially should economic activity begin to show signs of the moderate strengthening as anticipated in the greenbook forecast.

Despite the slight firming of interest rates, the downward trend of the dollar on foreign exchange markets is likely to persist in light of the continued large external deficit.  Alternative A contemplates an easing of reserve conditions, characterized by frictional discount window borrowing of around $150 2 percent.

Despite the slight firming of interest rates, the downward trend of the dollar on foreign exchange markets is likely to persist in light of the continued large external deficit. (22) Alternative A contemplates an easing of reserve conditions, characterized by frictional discount window borrowing of around $150 million and the federal funds rate averaging a little below 6-1/2 percent. Alternative A would also be consistent with a combination of a 6 percent discount rate and maintenance of borrowing at the current $300 million level.

If key foreign authorities similarly adjust their monetary policies, however, pressure on the dollar would be lessened.  Alternative C contemplates a tightening of reserve condi- tions and a more sizable slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates from their pace of recent months.

