Even so, with reserve conditions about unchanged as assumed for alternative B, growth of the broader aggregates would be expected to come in around the upper end or a bit above the Committee's 7 to 9 percent range for June to September.

Even so, with reserve conditions about unchanged as assumed for alternative B, growth of the broader aggregates would be expected to come in around the upper end or a bit above the Committee's 7 to 9 percent range for June to September. Growth within that range would seem to require a moderate increase in pres- sures on reserve positions, as embodied in alternative C. Should pressures be eased as under alternative A, M2 in particular would be expected to be more noticeably above the short-run range, though likely remaining just within its long-run range through September.

M1 growth would be anticipated to remain quite rapid under any of the alternatives, though below the extra- ordinary pace of the second quarter.  Alternative B assumes adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window averaging around $300 million (abstracting from any Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

Inflows to institution-only money funds should abate in response to the realignment of fund yields with market rates, and the expected deceleration in bank credit would act to reduce issuance of managed liabilities. (10) Growth of M1, while diminishing over August and September  alternative B, is likely to remain quite strong at around 13 percent.

The decline in the velocity of M1 would be at an 11 percent rate in the third quarter, nearly as large as the 12 percent drop in the second quarter.  The money growth specifications of alternative B imply increases in both M2 and M3 from their fourth-quarter base to September of around 8-1/2 percent at an annual rate, with growth in M1 at nearly a 14 per- cent annual rate through September.

From its fourth-quarter base, debt is projected to stay well above the upper end of its monitoring range through the third quarter and to remain above the upper end of its range for the year, despite sane further moderation expected in the fourth quarter. (13) Short- and long-term interest rates are expected to remain around their current levels under alternative B, at least initially, though with federal funds continuing to trade in a 6-1/4 to 6-3/8 area some modest upward pressures on interest rates could emerge as market participants begin to reassess the odds on a near-term easing in policy.

In addi- tion to the usual economic news, financial markets may be confronted with important developments in tax reform and federal budget policy that could significantly affect investor sentiment during the weeks ahead.  Alternative A involves an easing of pressures on reserve positions, either through a reduction in regular adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to a frictional level of perhaps $150 million or so, or a cut in the discount rate by 1/2 percentage point with discount borrowing maintained 300 million.

M1 would be expected to increase at a 16 percent rate between June and September under this alternative, moving even further above the upper end of its range by the end of the quarter. (15) Short-term rates would decline appreciably, with the 3-month 4 percent under alternative A. Bond yields probably would also decline, but any sustained sizable drop likely would require signs of continuing sluggishness in the economy and lack of price pressures, as well as the absence of substantial weakness in the dollar.

Bond yields probably would also decline, but any sustained sizable drop likely would require signs of continuing sluggishness in the economy and lack of price pressures, as well as the absence of substantial weakness in the dollar. The dollar could come under heavy selling pressure with this alternative, unless key foreign central banks were also to take easing steps.  Alternative C assumes a tightening of reserve positions, with borrowing from the discount window rising to around $500 million and the 8 percent area.

