They are based on the options of maintaining current reserve and money market conditions, or seeking somewhat easier alternative C) conditions.

A Alt Implied growth from Tentative 1988 Q4'87 to March range (Q4 to Q4) M2 5-3/4 4-3/4 3-3/4 5 to 8 M3 6-1/2 6 5-1/2 5 to 8 Ml 5-1/2 3-1/2 1-1/2  Alternative B would involve federal funds trading continuing 8 percent.

Private short-term rates should decline once year-end pressures have passed, while Treasury bill yields could edge higher, with the 3-month bill rate rising to above 6 percent under alternative B. However, any narrowing of spreads could be limited, as economic uncertainties here and abroad, combined with the overhang of previous financial difficulties, sustain market concerns about the financial strength of debtors and the institu- tions that have extended them credit.

This compares with an increase in V2 that averaged 3 percent at an annual rate over the first three quarters of this year. (12) M3 is expected to grow at a 6 percent annual rate from Novem- ber to March under alternative B, about the same pace as in recent months; such growth would keep this aggregate through March well within its tentative range for 1988.

In all, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors in March is expected to stand 9 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base--the midpoint of its 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent tentative range for 1988. (13) M1 growth is expected to average 4 percent over the next four months under alternative B. This represents a slight pickup from its average pace over October and November, abstracting from the effects of the bulge.

Even so, the monthly pattern of M1 growth is expected to produce an increase in velocity of 2 percent in the first quarter. (14) The 1/2 percentage point lowering of the federal funds rate under alternative A would bring it to the 6-1 This probably would be associated with minimal borrowing in the near- 150 million in the new year.

If inflationary concerns in financial markets are intensified, declines in bond yields may be limited. (15) Lower short-term market rates relative to deposit offering rates under alternative A would prompt more rapid inflows into M2-type accounts.

But higher interest rates would enhance the attractiveness of dollar assets to international investors, and a ten- dency for the exchange value of the dollar to appreciate in the near- term could emerge.  The higher interest rates of alternative C can be expected to prevent M2 from accelerating much from its recent pace.

