A Alt Growth from August to December M2 5-1/2 4-1/2 3-1/2 M3 6-1/4 6 5-3/4 Ml 4-1/2 3 1-1/2 Implied growth from Q4'86 to Q4'87 M2 4-1/4 4 4 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 M3 5-1/2 5-1/4 5-1/4 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 M1 6-1/4 6 5-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 6 to 10  Under alternative B, reserve paths would continue to be drawn with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the $600 million level that has been specified since early September.

In light of the higher federal funds rate compared with its level expected at the last FOMC meeting, the federal funds range associated with alternative B, given in the last line of the table, is suggested at 5 to 9 percent; this would be 1 percentage point above the range now in the directive, and more nearly centered on the federal funds rates thought likely to prevail under this alternative.

In light of the higher federal funds rate compared with its level expected at the last FOMC meeting, the federal funds range associated with alternative B, given in the last line of the table, is suggested at 5 to 9 percent; this would be 1 percentage point above the range now in the directive, and more nearly centered on the federal funds rates thought likely to prevail under this alternative. (10) The slight further firming of short-term rates likely under alternative B would tend to support trading of the dollar on foreign exchange markets at around current levels for a while.

1  The monetary aggregate specifications of alternative B assume that the reserve pressures of this alternative are maintained through year- end.

This forecast might be considered consistent with the reserve conditions of alternative B over the intermeeting period followed by a firming later in the quarter, or with a path intermediate between alternatives B and C.

This forecast might be considered consistent with the reserve conditions of alternative B over the intermeeting period followed by a firming later in the quarter, or with a path intermediate between alternatives B and C. implying quarterly average growth of 3-1/4 percent in the fourth quarter and a 2-1/4 percent rate of velocity expansion. (12) Growth in M3 from August to December is anticipated at a 6 percent rate under alternative B. This would be a little stronger than its pace earlier in the year, and would move this aggregate close to, though not quite within, its longer-run range.

For the year, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to rise by 9-1/2 percent on a quarterly average basis, in the middle of the annual range for this aggregate.  Under alternative C, the borrowing assumption would be raised 800 million.

Bond yields probably would move higher, although if the mar- kets were to view this measure as forestalling future inflationary pressures, any rise in long-term rates could be rather small.  Under alternative C, M2 growth over the August-to-December period would slow to about a 3-1/2 percent pace, as opportunity costs of holding M2 balances widened substantially further.

Banks and thrifts, faced with even smaller inflows to core deposits, would step up their issuance of managed liabilities to fund only marginally weaker credit demands, and M3 would expand at a 5-3/4 percent rate over the August-to-December period, leaving growth for the year at 5-1/4 percent.  Alternative A assumes that reserve paths would be constructed 400 million.

The dollar might well come under consider- able downward pressure, and this would tend to limit possible declines in bond yields.  Under alternative A, all of the monetary aggregates likely would accelerate from their pace of recent months, bringing M3 to the lower bound of its long-run range.

