In these circumstances the borrowing-funds rate relationships given in paragraph (11) are subject to considerable uncertainties.  Alternative B would maintain the easier reserve conditions that have come to prevail recently; the assumption for adjustment and sea- sonal borrowing would remain at $450 million, with federal funds trading expected to center at 7 percent or a bit below.

Additional easing would be sought under alternative A, either through a further reduction in the bor- rowing assumption to $250 million or a 1/2 point cut in the discount rate; the funds rate would be likely to fall to, or a little below, the 6-1/2 percent area. Alternative C would involve some slight firming of reserve conditions, with borrowing being increased to $550 million and the funds 4 percent.

A Alt Growth from September to December M2 6-1/2 6 5-3/4 M3 7-1/4 7 6-3/4 M1 9 8 7-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 5 to 9  Under alternative B, persistence of the federal funds rate near 7 percent implies that a substantial rise of Treasury bill rates would accompany a partial restoration of normal interest rate relationships.

Growth of its M1 component would be expected to slow substantially following its October bulge, with growth at 8 percent over the September to December period and about 7 percent for the year. (14) M3 growth over the fourth quarter at around 7 percent is expected under alternative B, bringing growth for the year to 5-3 cent, just within its annual range.

Overall, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at around an 8 percent rate from September to December, implying growth of 9 percent from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987.  Under the reserve market conditions of alternative B, most bond yields might edge higher as the increased preference for fixed-income securities subsides and the possibility of further near-term monetary ease is seen as diminishing.

economic activity remains robust, an inverse relationship between the dollar and bond yields could reemerge.  Under alternative A, the further easing of the funds rate could help allay investor concerns about immediate financial strains.

M2 would be expected to increase at a 6-1/2 percent rate over this interval as its nontransaction components picked up noticeably from September when inflows had been damped by pre- vious increases in interest rates.  Under alternative A, long-term bond yields would likely continue to decline as market perceptions of impending weakness in the economy tended to work against a revival of inflation concerns.

While downward pressure on the dollar could well intensify under this alternative, foreign central banks might be more likely to ease monetary policies as the outlook for their export industries weakens further.  Alternative C calls for a slight firming of reserve pres- sures, indexed by an increase in borrowing of only $100 million, and a rise 4 percent.

Even so, the choice of alternative C before any dollar decline were generally linked with renewed inflation concerns would risk further disquieting domestic financial markets.

Growth in the aggregates under alternative C would be retarded a little over the rest of the quarter by the renewed upward movement in opportunity costs on monetary assets.

This variant is shown with proposed changes and additions in the usual strike-through and capitalized form. In keeping with the asymmetric specifications in the bluebook, alternative A calls for decreasing the degree of pressure on reserve positions.

