A Alt Growth from March to June M2 4-1/2 4 3-1/2 M3 6-1/4 6 5-3/4 Ml 9-1/4 8-1/2 7-3/4 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Alternative B assumes maintenance of the current allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing.

'  I I l i I I I I l l l 0 N D J F M A M J J A S O N D 1986 1987 ____ ___ __ III Ions of dol IIr - 8500 S- 8400 - 8300 - 8200 - 8100 -7600 I 7200 partly reflected market perceptions that the System is, or soon would be, seeking firmer reserve conditions than those assumed in this alternative. Under normal circumstances, attainment of the alternative B borrowing path and its broad perception as the System's operating objective might be as- sociated with the federal funds rate dropping to appreciably below 6-1/2 percent.

Moreover, the staff expects the dollar to remain under downward pressure with alternative B, in light of slow progress in the adjustment of nominal external imbalances, arising in part from weak growth in our major trading partners.

Under these conditions, markets are likely to continue to anticipate a firming in monetary policy before very long.  Under alternative B, M2 growth is expected to be held down in May, in part by the unwinding of tax payment effects.

While an increase in velocity would be expected with the further rise in the average opportunity cost on M2, under alternative B this increase would be somewhat greater than predicted by most available models of M2 demand.

M2 growth in the second quarter apparently is being depressed by special factors, perhaps related to a draw- down of balances accumulated late in 1986 when capital gains were realized, and to shifting preferences for financing consumer purchases out of liquid assets rather than with credit. (11) M3 growth is expected to average around 6 percent in May and June under alternative B, keeping this aggregate near the lower end of its long-run range.

Expansion of all credit to nonfinancial sectors, in markets as well as through depositories, is expected to continue at around a 10 percent rate over May and June, placing the debt aggregate just below the upper end of its monitoring range. (12) Owing to the clearing of tax payments in late April and early May, M1 likely will be flat in May on a monthly average basis before rebound- ing in June to around an 8 percent annual rate under alternative B. June growth would represent a moderation from the average pace since the fourth quarter of last year, in response to the upward movement of market interest rates.

Under alternative B, quarterly average growth for M1, at 7-1/2 percent, still would slightly exceed projected GNP expansion, implying a decline in M1 velocity for the tenth straight quarter.

Under alternative B, quarterly average growth for M1, at 7-1/2 percent, still would slightly exceed projected GNP expansion, implying a decline in M1 velocity for the tenth straight quarter.  Alternative C assumes either a $600 million, in the borrowing allowance used to construct reserve paths, or a rise in the discount rate of one-half percentage point.

inflation if the higher rates were seen as raising the odds on a weak economic perform- ance, or were to intensify concerns about the international debt situation. An additional increase in the prime rate seems likely under this alternative. (14) The continued widening of opportunity costs of monetary assets implied by alternative C would further depress demands for core deposits, with M2 growth from April to June likely slowing to a 2-1/4 percent pace.

M3 growth would be expected to remain at about its April pace as bank credit growth stayed strong, placing this aggregate at the lower bound of its long-run range in June.  Alternative A, which assumes a reduction of borrowing at the discount window to $200 million, would induce the federal funds rate to drop back over time, probably to below 6 percent.

M1 under this policy alternative would be expected to grow at only a 4-3/4 percent average rate over the last two months of this quarter, but its June pace of 10 percent would be more suggestive of its underlying momentum entering the remainder of the year.  Under alternative A, short-term interest rates would retrace their recent increases.

