Under A and B, the pickup in M2 would be sufficient to lift this aggregate to around the lower end of the alternative II long-run range by September, although it would remain below its alternative I long-run range. Under alternative C, the pickup in M2 growth would be inadequate to raise this aggregate to near the lower end of even the alternative II long-run range by September.

A Alt Growth from June to September M2 6-1/2 5 3-1/2 M3 8 7-1/2 7 Ml 6 4 2 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Alternative B assumes the current for adjustment and seasonal borrowing.

In the event of mounting concern about the solvency of some thrift institutions, retail deposit growth at thrifts could be damped, although any effects on M2 would be limited by conversions of large time deposits to accounts of less than $100,000 and by shifts of core deposits to commercial banks and money funds in view of the absence of other liquid or insured alternatives. With somewhat stronger third-quarter M2 growth, the advance in M2 velocity would slacken to about a 2 percent rate, given the staff GNP forecast.  M3, under alternative B, would probably expand at a 7-1 percent annual rate, up about 2 percentage points from the March-to-June period.

With faster expansion of M3 in the third quarter, its velocity would resume contract- ing at about a 1-1/2 percent rate, broadly in line with its longer-run trend. (23) M1 would be expected to grow at a 4 percent annual rate over the June-to-September period under alternative B, implying quarterly average growth at only a 1 percent rate and the first M1 velocity in- crease-at a 5 percent rate--in nearly three years.

House- hold credit usage will remain concentrated in the mortgage category, boosted by continued shifting from consumer credit into home equity loans.  Alternative A assumes a reduction in the borrowing allow- ance to $300 million; the federal funds rate is likely to decline to the 4 percent area.

With an unwinding of some of the rise over recent months in opportunity costs, M2 would move closer to the lower end of its current longer-run range by September and, given the lagged effect of the lower market rates and faster income growth, would be likely to rise to just within this range in the fourth quarter. The boost to M3 growth stemming from a small pickup in depository credit expansion would lift this aggregate well into its current annual range.  The decline in short-term rates under alternative A would contribute to a resumption of downward pressure on the dollar, potentially to a significant degree if this were seen as adding to inflationary pres- sures.

Under these circumstances, any tendency for long-term rates to decline would be limited and possibly more than offset by the market re- action to the weaker dollar and inflation anxieties.  Alternative C assumes a 700 million.

