A Alt Growth from November to March M2 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 M3 7-3/4 7-1/2 7-1/4 M1 16-1/2 15-1/2 14-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  The specifications of alternative B involve maintaining a 300 million.

The dollar could well come under some renewed downward pressure--given persistent large current account deficits. (19) It now appears that maintenance of current conditions in reserve markets under alternative B will be consistent with slightly more rapid growth of the broad money aggregates over the November-to-March period than foreseen at the last FOMC meeting, though within the upper bounds of the Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

The decline in M2 velocity is expected to moderate from around a 5-1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter to 3 percent in the first.  M3 under alternative B also is expected to slow in February and March from the average pace of recent months as credit demands on banks decrease sharply from elevated year-end levels, reducing needs to issue man- aged liabilities.

On balance, M1 growth would slow in February and March under alternative B from the exceptional pace of recent months, although continuing to outpace GNP by a substantial margin.

In the first quarter, M1 velocity is projected to contract at about a 10 percent annual rate, after falling at nearly a 14 percent rate in the fourth quarter.  Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow- ing to $150 million, a near-frictional level, or a one-half percentage point cut in the discount rate with the borrowing allowance maintained at $300 million.

In the context of a weaker dollar, and possibly greater concern about inflation, the scope for long-term rates to fall might be limited; however, should the easing in money markets be followed by economic indicators pointing to a weaker economy and less inflationary pressure than is now expected, long-term rates would be more likely to fall appreciably.  Under alternative A, M2 growth would slow only moderately from its pace of recent months and the level of M2 in March would be within the alternative I long-run range, but near the upper end of the alternative II range and above the alternative III growth cone.

M3 growth would be augmented by larger inflows to money market mutual funds and heavier bank funding needs as businesses took down more bank loans, especially if long-term rates did not register appreciable declines.  Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with a borrowing level of $500 million, which would likely lead to a rise in the 2 percent area.

