plied by each alternative from the fourth quarter to June, can be found in the table and charts on the following pages.) Expansion in the monetary aggregates under all three alternatives is expected to pick up from the sluggish pace of February and March; even so, growth is projected to be relatively moderate, and by June the broader aggregates would still be well below the midpoints of their ranges under alternatives A and B and at or a bit below the lower bounds under alternative C.

A Alt Growth from March to June M2 7 6 5 M3 6-1/2 6 5-1/2 Ml 10-1/2 9 7-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Alternative B assumes maintenance of the current degree of pressure on reserve positions, with reserve paths allowing for $300 million of borrowing at the discount window.

markets owing to con- cerns about monetary policy responses and the strength of overall demand for dollar assets.  Under alternative B, growth in M2 would be expected to strengthen to a 6 percent annual rate over the March-to-June period, lifting this aggregate to the lower end of its long-run range.

On a quarterly average basis, M2 would rise at only a 4-1 annual rate in the second quarter, given the pattern of growth over the first quarter, and the staff's GNP forecast would imply a small rise in M2 velocity, the first increase in more than a year.  M3 growth under alternative B also would be expected to strengthen to a 6 percent rate over the March-to-June period.

On a quarterly average basis, M3 would grow at only a 4-3/4 percent rate, the slowest pace in more than a decade and a half; M3 velocity, which has trended downward, would post a small increase.  Under alternative B, expansion of M1 is anticipated to strengthen to a 9 percent annual rate over March to June.

Similarly, household borrowing is likely to continue to be con- centrated in mortgage markets, reflecting strong single-family housing activity and further substitution of home equity loans for consumer credit. On a seasonally adjusted basis, federal borrowing will rebound from its recent reduced pace, though in part this would serve to boost the Treasury's cash balance over the quarter.  Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow- ing to a near-frictional $150 million or a 50 basis point decrease in the 300 million.

Absent indicators pointing to a much weaker economy, the pressure on the dollar and perhaps more concern about inflation might limit the extent of any decline in long-term rates.  Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with a borrowing level of $500 million, which would push the federal funds rate up 2 percent area.

Given the weakness of this aggregate in the first quarter, which may have reflected shifts in portfolio preferences, alternative C would tend to bring M2 farther below the lower end of its long-run range over the second quarter.

