A Alt Growth from June to September M2 5-1/2 5 4-1/2 M3 5-3/4 5-1/2 5-1/4 M1 5 4 3 Associated federal funds rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9  Alternative B is based on retaining ment plus seasonal borrowing as the assumption in constructing reserve paths.

Likewise, other money market rates generally should vary around current levels under alternative B. Longer-term rates also are most likely to fluctuate near Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 ------------------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------ Alt.

I I I I I recent levels into the late summer, though they should remain sensitive to developments in the Persian Gulf and other factors bearing on the inflation outlook and the dollar.  Under alternative B, and the other alternatives as well, M2 growth is projected to strengthen in August and September relative to the weak expansion of recent months.

Given the staff's greenbook projection for nominal GNP, M2 velocity would be expected to increase at a 3 percent rate, around the pace of the first half of the year. (11) M3 growth over August and September would be expected to accelerate substantially from its unusually depressed July pace, to a rate of 7 percent under alternative B. Bank credit should resume its expansion, boosting issuance of large CDs.

Since mid-July, growth of both demand deposit balances and NOW accounts has resumed, and expansion of M1 at a 5-1/4 percent rate is expected on average over August and September under alternative B. But the arithmetic effect of weakness in June and July implies quarterly average growth of less than 1 percent in the current quarter and a velocity increase of almost 6 percent, the largest advance since early 1984.

But the arithmetic effect of weakness in June and July implies quarterly average growth of less than 1 percent in the current quarter and a velocity increase of almost 6 percent, the largest advance since early 1984. (13) With respect to the long-run ranges, M2 growth from the fourth quarter to September is expected to come to only 4-1/4 percent under alternative B. Expansion at around an 11-1 December would be required to hit the lower end of the long-run range in the fourth quarter; 9-1/2 percent growth would be needed to bring this aggregate to the lower end of its growth cone in December.

M3 growth from its fourth-quarter 4 percent rate by September under alternative B. With moderate increases in bank and thrift credit projected, this aggregate is likely to climb to within the lower portion of its range in the fourth quarter, even if interest rates moved a little higher in the latter part of the year, as in the staff forecast.

Growth of M1 from the fourth quarter of 1986 to 2 percent under alternative B; with rates re- maining close to current levels under this alternative through the third quarter, M1 growth for the year is not likely to differ very much from its growth through September.

Growth of M1 from the fourth quarter of 1986 to September is projected at 6-1/2 percent under alternative B; with rates re- maining close to current levels under this alternative through the third quarter, M1 growth for the year is not likely to differ very much from its growth through September.  Alternative A assumes adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of 300 million would be used to construct reserve paths.

In such circumstances, bond yields might not fall much, if at all, over the intermeeting period, absent a sharp break in oil prices. (15) Owing to the decline of short-term market interest rates relative to offering rates on deposits, M2 growth under alternative A would be expected to jump to 7 percent over August and September.

For M3, the 7-1 percent growth foreseen for August and September under alternative A would lift this aggregate to around the lower bound of its annual range.

Prospects would be good that the aggregate would move well within its range in the fourth quarter; the steeper yield curve expected under this alternative would provide additional incentives for businesses to focus credit demands on banks and for home mortgage credit to be met through ARMs at thrifts.  Alternative C assumes an increase in the reserve path allow- 700 million.

The dollar's recent firmness in exchange markets would be more likely to persist, at least for a time.  The backup in short-term market rates under alternative C, together with lagging returns on deposits, would widen opportunity costs of holding liquid monetary assets.

