Current reserve and money market conditions would be maintained under alternative B while alternatives A and C would involve somewhat easier or somewhat tighter conditions, respectively.

The level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing associated with alternative B, $250 million, is expected to entail federal funds trading around recent 4 percent levels.

Alternative C would be associated with an increase in the borrowing objective to about $450 million and a rise in the federal funds 2 percentage point.

A Alt Growth from November to March M2 7 6-1/2 6 M3 6-1/4 6 5-3/4 Ml 6-3/4 6 5-1/4 Associated federal funds rate range 4 to 8 4 to 8 5 to 9 Implied growth from December to March M2 8-1/2 8 7-1/2 M3 7-1/2 7-1/4 7 M1 10 9 8  Alternative B contemplates a continuation of reserve conditions now expected to prevail after the recent slight easing.

Chart 4 Billions of dollars - Actual Level -- - Estimated Level I I I I I I I I I I I iI OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 1986 1987 the long-term credit markets appears to reflect an outlook for sluggish economic growth, broadly consistent with the staff forecast; consequently, long-term rates are expected to vary around current levels, absent renewed substantial downward pressure on the dollar.  Under the specifications of alternative B, M2 would be expected to grow in February and March at nearly a 7 percent annual rate, a little above the average pace of December and January.

From the fourth quarter, M1 by March would rise at a 5-3/4 percent rate.  M3, under alternative B, would advance at a 6 percent annual rate from November to March as growth over February and March strengthens somewhat from the 5 percent average of December and January.

By March domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to be around 9 percent above its fourth-quarter base, also in the middle of its tentative range. (19) Although some easing of reserve conditions is now thought by market participants to be in train or at least in prospect, the reserve specifications of alternative A embody a larger move by the Federal Reserve than has been anticipated in market rates.

The easier conditions of alternative A are likely to put considerable downward pressure on the dollar, though the extent to which this would show through in dollar declines over the near-term would be affected by the incoming trade data.

If economic conditions were thought to be quite soft-- weaker than consistent with the staff forecast--and incoming price data suggested no more inflationary pressures, the drop in the dollar would be less likely to adversely affect the bond market, which could register further substantial gains.  The tightening of conditions under alternative C would be entirely unexpected, and probably would result in substantial increases in both short- and, at least initially, long-term interest rates.

The effects on long-term rates and markets might be muted over time, however, if this policy initiative bolstered confidence in the future purchasing power of the dollar, in circumstances in which inflation concerns had been aggravated by strong downward pressure on the dollar or greater economic strength than now generally anticipated.  The changes in reserve conditions under alternatives A and C would have fairly small effects on money growth in the current quarter, which has less than two months to run. Under alternative A, growth of the aggregates would accelerate noticeably relative to the pace of the last two months, leaving both M2 and M3 at or a little above the midpoints of their tentative long-run ranges in March.

Under the tighter reserve conditions of alternative C, the broad aggregates would remain within the lower halves of their tentative ranges through March.

By reversing most of the interest rate declines since October, Alternative C would tend to keep money growth on a fairly slow path over coming months, dropping further below the midpoint of the tentative ranges, and might be most consistent with the growth rates in long-run alternative III.

