The assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing would be kept at $400 million under alternative B 200 million under alternatives C and A, respectively.

The federal funds rate would be expected to average around 7 percent under alternative B, and around 7-1 alternatives C and A.

Under alternative B, the effects on money demand for the March-to-June period of somewhat higher interest rates than anticipated at the last FOMC meeting are offset by upward revisions to income, and the growth rates of M2 and M3, respectively, are projected to be 2.

The intermeeting consultation range for the federal funds rate suggested for alternative B in the table below is 5 to 9 percent, up from 4 to 8 percent at present, in order to be better centered on expected federal funds rates.

A Alt Growth from March to June M2 7-3/4 7 6-1/4 M3 6-3/4 6-1/2 6-1/4 M1 6-1/2 5-1/2 4-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 5 to 9 (9) Market interest rates now appear to incorporate the policy stance of alternative B. Thus, with federal funds continuing to trade around 7 percent, the three-month Treasury bill rate could remain in the 4 percent area in the near term.

policy restraint in the face of the maintenance of the reserve conditions of alter- native B, could result in a decline in the dollar.  Under alternative B, opportunity costs of holding liquid retail accounts would remain higher through midyear than in recent months, given the likely very gradual response of offering rates on such accounts to the recent rise in market rates.

Assuming the staff projection of second-quarter growth in nominal GNP of around 7 percent, M2 velocity would fall by about 1 percent, approximately half of the decline in the first quarter. (11) M3 growth should moderate to around a 6-1/4 percent rate over May and June under alternative B. Money market mutual funds in M3 probably will decline further for a while as returns lag behind recently elevated short-term market rates.

But with federal government borrowing light over the rest of the second quarter, the growth in the debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors by June is expected to be moving closer to, though still staying a little above, the 9 percent mid- point of the Committee's annual range. (12) The increase in discount borrowing to $600 million under alternative C would raise the federal funds rate by 1 carry Treasury bill rates up by similar amounts.

While the course of economic activity and prices would not be much affected by small variations in the time path of interest rates, alternative C is closer to what was contemplated in the staff GNP forecast, which anticipates a fairly substantial rise in money market yields through early 1989.

M3 could be supported somewhat by a further shifting of business credit demands to banks as higher bond yields curtail firms' offerings of longer-term debt, necessitating greater reliance on managed liabilities by banks than under alternative B. (14) Alternative A would be implemented through restoring the assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to the level of $200 mil- lion that was in force from late January through late March, with federal funds probably returning to the 6-1/2 percent trading area; even lower rates could prevail if seasonal credit, which is now above $200 million, responded relatively little to the decline in reserve pressures.

