Under alternative C, the borrowing objective would be raised to $400 million and the funds rate would move up to the vicinity of 7 percent. Under alternative A, federal funds would be expected to trade around the current 6 percent discount rate; this could be accomplished by reducing the discount rate by 1/2 point while keeping the $200 million borrowing objective, or by decreasing this objective.

Such changes could include the normal pattern of seasonal credit as well as other influences. (8) The relationship between the funds rate-discount rate spread and borrowing specified in alternatives B and C discount rate cut) corresponds to average experience over the period since December.

I -- ---- * I ' - - - Sc I ,*V -' .--II - II -r -4 820 -- 800 -- 780 -- 760 I I I I I I I I I I O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D - Actual Level -- - Estimated Level ------ Growth From Fourth Quarter - Short Run Altematives - 880 -1 860 I I I Chart 4 Billions of dollars - Actual Level -1 9300 - 9100 - 9000 -8600 -8500 - 8300 -- 8100 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D 1987 1988 (10) With recent conditions in the reserves market maintained under alternative B, interest rates would tend to remain around current levels, at least for a time.

On a March-to-June basis, M1 is expected to increase 2 percent under alternative B. Demand deposits are anticipated to strengthen only a little on balance over the next three months, after the somewhat inexplicable weakness through the first quarter.

M1 velocity would continue to increase, but at a slower rate than in the first quarter.  The more restrictive monetary posture of alternative C, at least at this time, would come as some surprise to financial markets.

A special adjustment was made to prevent last year's tax payments from distorting demand deposit seasonal factors. the dollar in the near term, and over time the net increase in bond yields could be limited.  The broader monetary aggregates under alternative C would post a more marked slowing over the course of the quarter than under the other alternatives, as the effects of the rebound in market interest rates increasingly took hold.

M1 probably would be growing very sluggishly by June, leaving its growth from the fourth quarter to June a bit below its current 4 percent rate through March.  Under alternative A, the easing of reserve market condi- tions would ripple through other financial markets.

