Under alternative B, reserve paths would continue to be built with seasonal plus adjustment borrowing of $600 million, while under alternatives A and C reserve paths would incorporate borrowing levels of 800 million, respectively.

CD and commercial paper issuance should balloon, possibly putting some upward pressure on private short-term rates, and substan- tial new supplies of low-grade corporate bonds also may be forthcoming. In the Treasury market, some increases in bond rates could occur if the Treasury were to announce a larger-than-usual offering on the mid- quarter refunding to take advantage of the shortage of bonds created by the absence of a long bond at the previous refunding as well as by skimpy offerings of investment-grade corporate bonds.  Under alternative B, M2 growth would strengthen modest- ly--to a 3 percent rate--from the 1-1/4 percent pace of September and October, largely reflecting some turnaround in overnight RPs and Eurodollars.

Under this alternative, M2 would enter the year at around the lower end of its provisional range for 1989, and absent a significant subsequent change in policy, would strengthen only gradually next year, remaining well down in its range for some time. (12) M3 growth is expected to pick up to a 6-1/2 percent rate over November and December under alternative B, implying quarterly average growth of 4-1/2 percent in the current quarter and a further rise in its velocity--at a 2 percent rate.

Issuance of tax-exempt debt is expected to moderate somewhat, especially now that authority to issue tax-exempt revenue bonds has been extended another year.  Under alternative A, money market interest rates would decline about 1/2 percentage point, with the 3-month Treasury bill drop- ping to a little below 7 percent.

M3 growth would pick up to a 7 percent rate over November and December, placing this aggregate on a path above the midpoint of its provisional range early next year. (16) With little anticipation of a near-term tightening of policy remaining in the market, short-term interest rates would climb 2 percentage point under alternative C. The dollar probably would reverse some of its recent decline, and long-term interest rates also would rise.

The extent of this rise could be relatively small if the tightening of policy were interpreted as damping activity and reduc- ing inflationary risks in an economy that was already seen to be experiencing more moderate growth.  Under alternative C, M2 would expand at only a 2 percent rate over the remainder of the year.

