Under alter- native B, reserve paths would continue to be drawn with adjustment plus 600 million, while under alternatives A and C reserve paths would embody borrowing levels of $400 million and $800 mil- lion, respectively. Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would be 4 percent area.

The funds rate 4 percent area under alternative A and rise 4 percent area under alternative C.

In addition, bond yields may have been held down by a paucity of supply, which could be reversed by congressional passage of long-bond authorization for the Treasury or by decisions by corporations or state and local governments to take advantage of recently reduced long-term rates. (10) M2 is expected to continue to grow at a 3 percent annual rate from August to December under alternative B, with particular weakness in liquid deposits; M1 is projected to increase at only a 1/2 percent annual rate over this period.

M2 velocity would rise at a 3 percent rate in the fourth quarter, somewhat faster than in the current quarter, and M1 velocity at a 5-1/2 percent rate. (11) M3 likely would continue to grow at a 5 percent rate under alternative B, and its velocity would edge up again in the fourth quarter.

Total borrowing by businesses is expected to strengthen some- what over the balance of the year, reflecting larger external financing needs and substantial further share retirements, with credit demands still focused to a large extent on the short- and intermediate-term markets. Domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to rise at a 8-1/2 percent rate over the last four months of the year and for the year as a whole, leaving it somewhat below the midpoint of its 7 to 11 percent monitoring range. (12) With markets not now expecting a near-term tightening of policy, the rise in the federal funds rate under the firmer reserve condi- tions of alternative C would be about matched by increases in other short- term rates--perhaps including the prime rate.

The further rise in oppor- tunity costs under alternative C would likely damp M2 growth to only a 2 percent rate over the August-to-December period, and its M1 component would be expected to decline a little.

M3 growth also would slow from its pace of recent months, mainly reflecting further weakness in institution-only money market mutual funds.  Under alternative A, M2 and M3 would strengthen over the August-to-December period.

