Under Alternative B, a borrowing objective of $400 million would be retained, and federal funds would be expected to settle mainly into an 8-3/8 to 8-1/2 percent range, though slightly higher rates are possible through year-end. Alternative C incor- porates an increase in intended discount borrowing to $600 million, with 8 to 9 percent.

Under both alternatives, M2 growth over coming months would be relatively restrained, reflecting recent and, under alternative C, prospective increases in mar- ket interest rates.

B Alt Growth from November to March M2 4 3 M3 7 6-1/2 M1 1-1/2 0 Associated federal funds rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11 (10) Short-term market interest rates are likely to retreat some- what under alternative B. These rates now embody some near-term firming of policy, and as funds ease back a bit from their recent trading range and as no subsequent tightening move materializes, short-term rates are likely to drop.

Moreover, the dollar likely would come under downward pressure under this alternative, raising concern about future inflation trends, especially if the decline occurred in the context of continued strength in the economy as envisioned in the staff forecast. (11) From a November base, M2 growth is expected to average 4 per- cent at an annual rate through March under alternative B, maintaining its average pace of October and November.

Based on the greenbook forecast for GNP, M2 velocity is expected to rise at a 4 percent annual rate in the first quarter, near its estimated pace in each of the last two quarters of 1988. (12) M3 growth of 7 percent at an annual rate is anticipated from November to March under alternative B, somewhat above the average of the last two months.

In the household sector, mortgage borrowing is likely to continue near the pace of the last few quarters as home sales are anticipated to hold close to recent levels for several months, especially to the extent that interest rates stabilize or ease off under alternative B. Consumer credit growth may pick up tempo- rarily early next year if, as expected, auto makers step up their sales promotions to boost demand.

State and local government offerings are likely to stay relatively subdued, though any tendency for rates to drop under this alternative might foster a renewed interest in refunding outstanding debt. (14) Although market rates incorporate some near-term firming of policy, an immediate rise in federal funds to the 8-7/8 to 9 percent area associated with alternative C likely would elicit some further increase in short-term market interest rates.

Any upward pressure on the dollar would likely be mitigated by firmer policy abroad, as foreign monetary authorities took advantage of this opportunity to respond to the potential for inflation pressures in their own economies. (15) M2 growth probably would be held down to a 3 percent annual rate from November to March under alternative C, placing this aggregate just at the lower end of its tentative 1989 target range.

