Alternative B would continue to specify 550 million.

Alternative B would continue to specify adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window of $550 million. Alternative C would specify a borrowing level of alternative A, borrowing is assumed to decline only $100 million, to $450 million, reversing the most recent increase and part of the tightening early in the period.

Federal funds are expected to trade in a range 2 percent or a little below under alternative B and would move up toward the 8 percent area under alternative C and down to 7-1/4 percent or a bit below under alternative A.

Growth rates presented in the table are measured from a June base Estimates of the monetary aggregates for June are a little less certain than is typical at the mid-year Committee meeting owing to the earlier time of the meeting this year. Growth from June to September M2 6-1/4 5-1/2 4 M3 7-1/4 7 6-1/2 M1 4-1/2 3-1/2 1-1/2 Associated federal funds rate range 5 to 9 5 to 9 6 to 10 (18) Market rates appear to have incorporated the recent firming of policy, which would be retained under alternative B, and most rates should remain near current levels over the near term.

A back-up in yields would be reinforced if the dollar came under some downward pressure, for example, because incoming data suggested a less rapid pace of reduction in external imbalances.  Under alternative B, the widening of opportunity costs over the spring would continue to exert a restraining influence on M2 and M1 in the months ahead.

In reflection of this pattern, M1 would slow to only a 3-1/2 percent pace under this alternative.  M3, under alternative B, is expected to pick up a little over June to September from the pace of recent months as outflows from money funds abate with the stable interest rates assumed under this alternative.

Total nonfinancial debt is expected to expand at around an 8 percent annual rate over the June- to-September period, about in line with that of the second quarter, placing this aggregate 8-1/2 percent above its fourth-quarter 1987 base. (21) The market does not appear to be anticipating an immediate further monetary tightening as contemplated in alternative C. Thus, the half-point increase in the funds rate under this alternative would prompt other private short-term rates to move up by a similar amount.

Recent firmness of the dollar could be sustained for a time unless foreign authori- ties took this opportunity to tighten their policies substantially.  The boost in opportunity costs under alternative C would reduce monetary growth substantially below the pace of recent months.

M3 should grow at a 6-1/2 percent rate from June to September under this alternative and drift down only slightly within its annual range. (23) The reversal of part of the recent tightening, as envisioned under alternative A, would result in some edging down of short-term rates, espe- cially on private securities, perhaps heading off any increase in the prime rate.

