Alternative B maintains the current $600 million assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing and alternative C increases intended borrowing to Under alternative B, a federal funds rate of around 8 percent would be consistent with the average relationship that prevailed over the first half of this year between borrowing and the funds rate-discount rate spread.

Alternative B maintains the current $600 million assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing and alternative C increases intended borrowing to $800 million. Under alternative B, a federal funds rate of around 8 percent would be consistent with the average relationship that prevailed over the first half of this year between borrowing and the funds rate-discount rate spread. However, expectations of a further tightening of policy could persist under alternative B, causing funds to trade somewhat higher, in an 8 to 8-1 percent range.

Federal funds likely would trade between 8-1 percent under alternative C, perhaps more toward the lower end of this range if the additional firming acted to dispel expectations of still further near-term policy moves.

B Alt Growth from June to September M2 3-1/2 3 M3 5-1/2 5-1/4 M1 5-1/2 4-3/4 Implied growth from July to September M2 3-3/4 3 M3 5-1/2 5 Ml 3-3/4 2-3/4 Associated federal funds rate range 6 to 10 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 (9) Financial markets in recent days have largely built in a federal funds rate of around 8-1/8 percent, although some further adjust- ments may occur under alternative B. For example, the 3-month Treasury bill rate might edge higher to around 7-1/8 percent as some of the remain- ing uncertainties about any further responses of capital markets in the U.

In any case, the long-term Treasury bond yield would tend to move higher, perhaps by 10 to 20 basis points, if the Treasury receives authority to issue more of such securities.  M2 under alternative B is expected to increase at a 3-3 percent pace over the last two months of the quarter, slightly higher than in July.

Nonetheless, this relationship is more uncertain than usual, given the effects of the drought in boosting the ratio of final sales to current income; on the one hand, for a given level of income, higher nominal pur- chases would tend to increase transactions demands for money and depress income velocity; on the other, in order to finance these purchases saving flows and associated acquisitions of financial assets, including those in the monetary aggregates, would be reduced, tending to raise income velocity.  Under alternative B, average M3 growth over August and September is projected to stay at its 5-1/2 percent July pace, despite a pickup in bank and thrift credit.

The higher real rates would boost the dollar on foreign exchange markets, at least for a time, and the greater foreign demand for dollar assets could cushion somewhat the effects on bond and stock prices.  With the higher interest rates of alternative C, M2 is pro- jected to record only 3 percent growth over August and September.

Growth of M3, by contrast, would probably not be damped enough  alternative C to move below its midpoint, even by year-end.

Long- term debt issuance by businesses likely would be more restrained under alternative C, shifting some business credit demands to banks, despite a probable further increase in the prime rate.

