At the same time, the M2 range would appear suf- ficiently low to trigger some policy restraint should inflation pressures turn out to be stronger than expected and GNP begin to accelerate appre- ciably. Short-Run Policy Alternatives (24) Three short-run policy alternatives are presented below. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade in the 9-1 8 percent area.

Under alternative C, funds would trade 850 million.

The easing of policy under alternative A might be associated with less than 200 million reduction in borrowing.

As a consequence, the staff estimates that a funds 8 percent area under alternative A would be consis- 550 million.

interest rates could postpone the projected depreci- ation of the dollar for a time.  Under alternative B, M2 would grow at a 6-1 over the June-to-September period, lifting this aggregate to the bottom of its annual target cone in September.

Its M1 component would edge higher over the June-to-September period, but owing to the declines in May and June would decline at a 3 percent rate on a quarterly average basis. (28) M3 growth would strengthen to a 7 percent clip over the June-to-September period under alternative B. Bank credit is projected to be somewhat stronger in coming months, partly reflecting the possibility of major corporate restructuring activity, which would be funded initially by banks.

Long-term rates would tend to move lower, although with some easing already built into the yield curve the decline could be minor. (30) With money market rates and opportunity costs dropping under alternative A, M2 growth would strengthen to an 8 percent rate over the June-to-September period, bringing this aggregate into the lower end of its annual target cone in August.

Bond rates would tend to rise under this alternative, although the extent of any such rise would be limited to the degree that market participants saw the move as unsustainable or focused on its impact on inflation pressures over time.  Under alternative C, M2 would expand over the June-to-Sep- tember period at a 5 percent rate and would remain below the lower bound of its annual growth cone in September (though on a trajectory to touch .

