Alternative B involves federal funds continuing to trade mostly in a 9 to 9-1/8 percent range and adjustment plus seasonal borrow- 550 million.

Under alternative A, a funds rate of 8-1/2 to 8-5/8 percent would be expected to be asso- 450 million, while under alternative C, a funds 650 million.

Under alternative A, seasonal credit would have to drop significantly from current levels.

The stability of the funds rate around the current level under alternative B, especially if combined with incoming economic data in line with the greenbook forecast of sustained economic growth, would raise further doubts in securities markets about the likelihood of such an easing.

Supported by slightly higher market rates, strength in the dollar on foreign exchange markets could persist, at least for a time.  Alternative A's policy easing likely would engender general declines in market yields.

A rally in bond markets also would seem probable, espe- cially because inflation concerns do not now seem to be weighing on market psychology; however, should spending prove reasonably strong, there is some risk that such concerns would be reignited against the background of the further easing of policy in alternative A. Some downward adjustment to the exchange value of the dollar also could occur since foreign author- ities would be unlikely to follow up with comparable easing actions in light of inflationary pressures abroad.

Some downward adjustment to the exchange value of the dollar also could occur since foreign author- ities would be unlikely to follow up with comparable easing actions in light of inflationary pressures abroad.  Under alternative C, market interest rates would back up abruptly, given that the Federal Reserve policy tightening would come as a surprise.

Partly as a consequence, M2 growth under alternative B is projected to slow from around 8 percent in August to 6 percent in September, with the resolution impact accounting for per- haps as much as 1 percentage point of the moderation.

On balance, the thrift situation is projected to damp M3 growth by about 2 percentage points in September to 5 percent under alternative B. (15) In the fourth quarter, if short-term interest rates remain around current levels, as in the staff economic forecast, M2 growth is seen at a 6-1/2 percent rate, a little above the projected pace of nominal GNP.

Growth for the year of the total debt measure is projected at 8-1 percent, with about 1/4 percentage point of this total accounted for by the additional federal borrowing associated with the on-budget thrift financing.  Alternative C, by widening opportunity costs on liquid balances, would tend to retard M2 growth to a 4-1/2 percent rate in Sep- tember.

For the year, M2 likely would grow at a 3-3 lower interest rates of alternative A could boost M2 growth to a 7-1 percent rate in September, and, with comparable growth in the fourth 4 percent for the year.

