Under alternative B, a federal funds rate of around 9 percent would be expected to be asso- ciated, at least initially, with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of 500 million.

This also implies that, under alternative A, a decline of only borrowing objective--to $400 million--is likely to be associated with a decrease in the federal funds rate to around 8-1/2 percent; similarly, a rise of only $100 million in borrowing--to $600 million--would be asso- ciated with an increase in the federal funds rate to around 9-1/2 percent under alternative C.

-4 780 -- 770 -- 760 -1 750 " -5% Chart 4 Billions of dollars - Actual Level * Projected Level O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J 1989 1990 10000 (10) Interest rates would be expected to remain near current levels under alternative B. Markets do not now appear to be anticipating any near-term change in policy, and incoming economic data consistent with the staff greenbook forecast are not likely to provoke significant change in market sentiment.

Should the dollar rebound strongly, however, domestic interest rates might edge off if market participants saw this as implying reduced inflation pressures and greater prospects for policy easing in the United States.  Under alternative B, M2 is expected to grow at a 6-1 cent annual rate over the September-to-December period, a little below the recent pace.

Overall, Ml should grow at around a 4-1 rate over this period, near its September pace.  Under alternative B, M3 growth would pick up a bit from its 2 percent rate.

In total, domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to grow at around an 8 percent annual rate over the fourth quarter, implying similar growth for the year, a little below the midpoint of its annual monitoring range.  Under alternative A, short-term interest rates are likely to fall in tandem with the 50 basis point drop in the funds rate.

M3 growth would strengthen to a 5 percent rate over the September-to-December period under alternative A. (14) The tightening of policy under alternative C would come as a surprise to the markets, especially in the present international environ- ment.

