Under alternative B, maintaining federal funds trading around 8-1/4 percent is anticipated to be associated with about $150 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing, the assumption used since the last FOMC meeting in constructing reserve paths.

Alternative A embodies a 7-3 borrowing assumption of $100 million, while the 8-3/4 percent funds rate 200 million.

A Alt Growth from March to June M2 7 6 5 M3 4-1/2 4 3-1/2 Ml 6 4-1/2 3 Associated federal funds rate ranges 6 to 10 6 to 10 7 to 11 (9) Financial market participants evidently expect no monetary policy change in the near term, meaning that a funds rate around the 8-1/4 percent level of alternative B is built into the current structure of market interest rates. Even so, alternative B would involve some easing in Treasury bill rates from most recent levels to the extent that supply pressures in the market dissipate.

Moreover, central bank sales of Treasury securities to fund their dollar sales in foreign exchange markets could drop off at any time should intervention activity decline. The staff anticipates relative stability in the exchange value of the dollar under alternative B. Decisions regarding economic and monetary union of East and West Germany, which are to be made by the end of April, could affect the dollar's value against the mark.

economic growth and inflation Incoming data on prices and the economy about in line with staff expecta- tions should not change market expectations that Federal Reserve policy will remain essentially unchanged for a time, and consequently would be associated with only minor movements in bond yields.  An immediate policy easing under alternative A that brought the federal funds rate down to 7-3/4 percent would run counter to market sentiment and ripple through the money market, with other short-term rates likely declining a similar amount.

economic activity to heighten domestic inflationary expectations, limiting the declines in longer-term yields.  The rise in the federal funds rate under alternative C to 8-3/4 percent also would surprise market participants, inducing an across- the-board increase of comparable size in other short-term rates.

The addi- tional policy restraint might reinforce current concerns about default risk on some loan categories, and would tend to encourage a further firm- ing in credit standards, implying additional restraint on economic activity.  Under alternative B, M2 growth from March to June is pro- jected at a 6 percent annual rate--about 1/2 percentage point below its average growth rate over the first three months of the year.

With opportunity costs little changed, velocity probably will be about flat in the second quar- ter.3 M1 is expected to continue expanding at a 4-1/2 percent annual rate from March to June, as a slowing of currency growth is offset by a little faster inflow to transactions deposits than over the first quar- ter.4  M3 growth under alternative B is projected at a 4 percent pace, somewhat higher than the December-to-March rate of advance.

Overall debt growth from the fourth quarter of last year to June is foreseen at the middle of its 5 to 9 percent monitor- ing range.  Under the less restrictive policy posture of alternative A, M2 and M3 growth from March to June would be boosted to 7 and 4-1/2 per- cent rates, respectively.

Under the tighter financial market conditions of alternative C, M2 and M3 growth from March to June likely would slow to 5 and 3-1/2 percent rates, respectively.

