Under alternative B, federal funds would con- tinue to trade in the 7-1/4 percent area and adjustment plus seasonal bor- 100 million.

Alter- native A could be implemented through a reduction in the borrowing assump- tion of only $25 million to $75 million or through a half-point cut in the discount rate combined with the same borrowing assumption as specified for alternative B.4 (11) Implementing alternative A through a reduction in borrowing would bring the funds rate below the discount rate and borrowing to fric- tional levels.

Another  sonal borrowing moves down to its normal annual trough in mid-January; this would also apply to alternative A. 4.

Because of the unusually low levels of borrowing at present, this reduction is half the difference between alternatives A and B in recent bluebooks.

Funds rate volatility would tend to increase a bit if borrowing were reduced to implement alternative A. In any case, over the intermeet- ing period the Desk's task will be complicated by uncertainties both about year-end effects on required and excess reserve demands and about the impact of the reserve requirement change on demands for excess reserves.

In any case, over the intermeet- ing period the Desk's task will be complicated by uncertainties both about year-end effects on required and excess reserve demands and about the impact of the reserve requirement change on demands for excess reserves. The potential for volatility in the funds rate under alternative A would be reduced a little if instead this alternative were implemented through a 1/2 percentage point cut in the discount rate, leaving a larger cushion of borrowing.

Hence, market interest and exchange rates would not react much to the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B, at least initially.

Were current reserve conditions to be maintained through the intermeeting period in the face of weak economic data, markets might begin to reassess the Federal Reserve's intentions, and interest and exchange rates might edge higher-- although favorable effects on inflation expectations would work to moder- ate any such rise in bond rates. (13) With the easing of the funds rate by 1/2 percentage point under alternative A, other short-term market rates would decline, but by smaller amounts given current market expectations.

The reaction of foreign exchange and other financial markets to alternative A may depend on how it is implemented.

A Alt Growth from November to March M2 5 3-1/2 M3 1 1/2 M1 6 4 (15) In the staff's judgment, M2 growth under the unchanged funds rate of alternative B will pick up to a 3-1 November to March, placing the aggregate just above the lower bound of the cone associated with the Committee's provisional growth range of 2-1/2 to Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates Alt.

Even so, M2 growth on a quarterly average basis would edge up to only a 2-3/4 percent rate in the first quarter, which would be below the projected pace of nominal GNP and represent a reversal of the decline in M2 velocity experienced this quarter.  Some of the acceleration in M2 under alternative B would show through to M3.

With federal debt growth remaining around 10 percent, overall domestic nonfinancial debt is anticipated to post about a 6 percent growth rate from November to March, placing this aggregate in the middle portion of the Committee's provisional monitoring range of 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991.  Selection of alternative A would provide added impetus to M2 growth but would affect M3 and credit expansion only a little, at least over the next few months.

