Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 8-1/4 percent in association with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window starting out at 450 million. Alternative A embodies an expected federal funds rate of 7-3/4 percent and discount borrowing of $400 million, while alternative C 500 million.

Alternative A embodies an expected federal funds rate of 7-3/4 percent and discount borrowing of $400 million, while alternative C incorporates a funds rate of 8-3/4 percent and borrowing of $500 million. With seasonal borrowing typically rising another $75 million to its peak in August, increases in the borrowing specification likely would be needed as the intermeeting period progresses to keep the borrowing allowance consistent with the expected funds rate under each alternative.  Under alternative B, market interest rates probably would vary around current levels.

Thus, even under the essentially stable interest rates of alternative B, the staff now foresees M2 increasing at a 3 percent annual rate from June to September, only a little faster than in June, leaving this aggregate 3-1/2 percent at an Alt.

Owing primarily to the continued rapid pace of RTC activity, M3 is projected to grow at only a 1 percent rate from June to  alternative B, remaining well below its current range.

Projected federal debt growth from June to September remains at just over 8-1/2 percent, incorporating continued heavy RTC activity.  Under alternative A, the 1 federal funds rate could be expected to show through nearly in full to other money market rates, as market participants generally do not antici- pate such an action in the period just ahead.

This alternative also could spark a bond market rally; given the market outlook for sluggish economic activity, investors' inflation concerns probably would not be much inten- sified by the choice of alternative A. The value of the dollar could be expected to weaken on foreign exchange markets in response to the drop in U.

M1 is projected to grow at a 4 percent pace from June to September Growth in currency at a 6-1/2 percent rate over this interval, along with a 3 percent growth rate of total reserves, would imply expansion of the monetary base at a 6 percent rate.  Under alternative A, rates of return on retail deposits, especially small time accounts, may be somewhat more responsive than normal to declines in market rates, considering the already ample avail- ability of retail deposits relative to the flat projected level of deposi- tory credit.

M3 from June to September would be expected to expand at only a 1-1/2 percent rate, placing growth from the fourth-quarter base of its annual range through September at 1-1/4 percent.  The tightening of monetary policy under alternative C would not accord with the prevailing expectations of investors, and interest rates across the maturity spectrum, along with the exchange value of the dollar, would ratchet higher.

