Under alternative B, federal funds would be expected to continue to trade around 8-1/4 percent, with an initial level of adjust- 350 million.

The specifications of alternative A call for federal funds trading around 7-3 borrowing level of $300 million, while those of alternative C call for federal funds in the 8-3/4 percent area, which is likely to involve $400 million of borrowing.

Judging from the experience of recent years, it is anticipated that seasonal borrowing will rise about $100 million over the intermeeting period; the borrowing levels suggested above incorporate a $50 million technical increase to take account of the expected rise in the next few weeks, but an additional increase in the borrowing path may be necessary under all three alternatives. (7) Interest rates generally would be expected to show little net change under alternative B. Market expectations now embody federal 4 percent, as under this alternative.

A breakthrough in negotiations on the budget between the Administration and the Congress in coming weeks would be likely to spark a rally in capital markets, which after a time might induce a downward adjustment in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Absent such a breakthrough, the dollar likely would remain around recent levels on foreign exchange markets; with the dollar stable and German reunification impending, a tightening of monetary policy in Germany and Japan before the next FOMC meeting appears unlikely. (8) Projected growth rates for the monetary aggregates from March to June are given in the table below for all three alternatives. (The table and charts on the following pages show more detailed data.) Under alternative B, growth in both M2 and M3 would pick up over May and June from the sluggish pace of April.

Total domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to expand at a 7 percent rate over the three months and - 12 - by June would be 7 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter 1989 base, at the midpoint of its 1990 monitoring range.  The easing of reserve conditions under alternative A would tend to strengthen money growth over May and June to something more in line with rates incorporated in the Committee's expectations at the last meeting.

The easing of policy under alternative A would come as something of a surprise to most market participants, and money market rates would decline by the full 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate.

The decline in market rates would tend to buoy borrowing and spending by those with market access, helping to offset the effects of tighter credit availability on spenders dependent on depository intermediaries.  The tighter reserve conditions under alternative C would be expected to keep money growth damped.

