Under alternative B, federal funds would continue trading 4 percent. Under alternative A, the funds rate would move down to the 7-1/4 percent area, while under alternative C it would firm slight- ly, returning to around the 8 percent level prevailing at the last meet- ing.

The associated level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing under alternative B would be set at after the meeting and might need to be lowered another $50 million over the intermeeting period to accommodate the ongoing decline in the demand for seasonal credit. Under alternative A, the initial level of borrowing would be lowered to $200 million (or the discount rate could be cut by 1/2 percentage point), while under alternative C it would be raised to $275 million.

Nevertheless, market rates are not likely to back up significantly under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B, since expectations of an easing would be maintained if, as expected, incoming information confirms a weakening economy.

Under these conditions, it will be difficult to distinguish transitory disturbances in relative interest rates and credit flows from signals of more fundamental and last- ing problems of borrowers. (10) In view of the expectations of some easing already built into rates, short-term interest rates would decrease somewhat less than the 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate, under alternative A. Banks may be encouraged to advance credit less reluctantly by the wider margins they would enjoy, and by greater confidence of repayment as lower interest rates countered weakness in the economy and bolstered asset prices.

From this perspective, the risk that market participants would interpret a 1/2 percentage point cut in the federal funds rate as conveying such signals might be increased if the cut were accomplished by a reduction in the discount rate.  Under alternative C, the dollar would retrace at least some of its recent decline in response to a rise in the federal funds rate.

to Dec M2 2 1-1/2 1-1/4 M3 0 0 0 M1 1-1/2 1 3/4 Associated federal funds rate ranges 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 6 to 10  Under alternative B, M2 probably would strengthen, but only 4 percent rate over November and December.

Under alternative A, the drop in opportunity costs would boost M2 to a 2-3/4 percent rate over the Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

