Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 6 percent and would be associated with adjustment plus seasonal 125 million.

Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would fall to 5-1/2 percent, effected either through a reduction in borrowing to $75 million or a 50 basis point cut in the discount rate and the same borrowing specification as in alternative B.

However, the discount window becomes a marginally less effective buffer to unpredictable changes in reserve supply or demand, and the federal funds rate likely would be a little more volatile than if alternative A were achieved through a discount rate cut.

Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 6-1/2 percent and the initial borrow- 175 million.

Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 6-1/2 percent and the initial borrow- ing level would be increased to $175 million. (9) The structure of market interest rates does not now appear to incorporate expectations of any further easing in monetary policy in the weeks ahead; thus under alternative B, short-term interest rates are unlikely to change substantially, though they may edge lower.

Thus, they might not rise much, if at all, even should incoming information confirm that the economy was reaching a trough.  Under alternative A, money market rates would likely decrease by close to the full amount of the reduction in the federal funds rate, and the prime rate would be lowered 1/2 percentage point, given its already wide margin over funding costs.

A reversal of any adverse reaction would occur, however, if incoming data began to con- firm that the easing had correctly anticipated weaker money growth, more favorable trends in prices, or a substantial further shortfall in economic activity.  The tightening of policy under alternative C would surprise market participants, coming on the heels of recent easing measures, and 2 percentage point.

A Alt Growth from March to June M2 6-1/2 5-1/2 4-1/2 M3 4 3-1/2 3 M1 7 5-1/2 4 Implied growth from 1990:Q4 to June M2 5-1/2 5 4-1/2 M3 4-1/2 4-1/4 4 M1 6-3/4 6 5-1/2  Under alternative B, M2 would expand at about a 5-1 percent rate over the March-to-June period, in line with its December-to- March growth, placing it a little above the midpoint of its 1991 range.

Growth in small time deposits, by contrast, should continue anemic, given the much larger adjustment of the rates on these deposits to declines in market yields.  On a quarterly average basis, M2 under alternative B would expand at a 6 percent annual rate in the second quarter, a shade faster than nominal GNP.

Under alternative B, M1 also is projected to grow at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent over the March-to-June period, as transaction deposits complete their adjustments to interest rate changes, and as currency demand abates with the end of war-related uncertainties.

While opportunity costs will rise as offering rates continue to adjust, they are not expected to become unusually wide in coming months. (15) Growth in M3 would slow to a 3-1/2 percent rate over the March-to-June period in the case of alternative B. To be sure, a modest pickup in bank lending and in the associated needs for funds is antici- pated as credit demands strengthen with spending; banks should be willing to meet this demand in light of improved prospects for borrowers, enhanced access to capital markets and the recent regulatory initiatives.

Growth in the debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to be merely 5 per- cent from February to June, keeping this aggregate in the lower half of its 1991 monitoring range.  Under alternative A, M2 would strengthen to a 6-1 rate over the March-to-June period.

M3 would expand at a 4 percent rate over this period, buoyed by larger inflows to money funds and by some spillover of the strength in M2.  The tighter money market conditions of alternative C would slow M2 from the pace of December to March, holding this aggregate down to the midpoint of its 1991 range by June.

