Under alternative B, federal 4 percent.

Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 4 percent.

More detail- ed data are presented in the tables and charts on the following pages.  Under alternative B, market interest rates would probably remain near their current levels.

The foreign exchange value of the dollar also is not expected to show much change from its current level under this alterna- tive.  Alternative B embodies the staff projections for money and debt consistent with the nominal GNP and unchanged interest rates of the greenbook forecast.

M3 is expected to increase at a 3 percent rate from June to September under alternative B, keeping this aggregate a Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

Total nonfinancial debt is projected to increase at a 6-3/4 percent annual rate over June to September, raising this aggregate well into the lower bound of its monitoring range by Sep- tember.  Alternative A would provide more assurance of a pickup in the growth of the monetary aggregates, and by implication in the growth of the economy as well later this year and in early 1992.

The staff pro- jects that M2 growth would be at a 6-1/2 percent rate from June to Septem- ber under alternative A. By September, M2 would be a little above the midpoint of its annual range.

The further easing of monetary policy contemplated under alternative A would catch market participants by surprise, and short-term market interest rates would drop considerably.

The further easing of monetary policy contemplated under alternative A would catch market participants by surprise, and short-term market interest rates would drop considerably. Bond yields are unlikely to fall much, absent favorable inflation news. The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets likely would decline substantially.  Alternative C also would catch market participants un- awares, and short-term interest rates likely would adjust upward rather sharply.

