Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would continue to center around 4-1/2 percent, in association with the allowance for ad- 75 million.

Although the former variant of alternative A, which involves funds trading 1/2 percentage point below the discount rate, would be technically possible, it likely would be associated with somewhat greater day-to-day volatility in the funds rate.

In addition, the unusual negative spread could engender confusion among market par- ticipants, with some speculating that a discount rate cut was imminent and others perceiving a signal that monetary easing in this economic cycle was over.  Under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B, interest rates may exhibit an initial tendency to firm a little, as market expectations of another modest policy easing in the near term are disappointed.

Announcement of a significant shift in Treasury auctions away from longer-term notes and bonds and toward bills would precipitate some decline in bond rates and rise in bill rates--judging from recent market reactions to such proposals.  Under alternative A, the 1 funds rate to 4 percent would foster a smaller drop in other short-term interest rates, given the expectations of near-term policy easing al- ready incorporated in current market quotes.

Unless data were clear-cut in pointing to continuing weakness in the economy, the half-point easing of alternative A--closely following the quarter-point decline in the funds rate last week--would be seen as signalling a priority on encouraging a strong recovery.

Under alternative B, both M2 and M3 are projected to be only somewhat above the lower edges of their tenta- tive 1992 target cones in March.

Even under the lower short-term inter- est rates associated with alternative A, these aggregates probably would remain noticeably below the midpoints of their ranges.

However, some of the factors restraining monetary expansion in the first quarter relative to income and interest rates may well hold down subsequent spending as well, so that the slow M2 growth cannot simply be interpreted as a benign downward shift in money demand with no implications for spending.  Under alternative B, both M2 and M3 are projected to grow a little more slowly than their average rates over October and November.

This forecast assumes no major change in the degree of caution exercised by borrowers or lenders. However, further tightening of credit terms could result should lending officers involved in upcoming bank consolidations begin to behave more cautiously or should unanticipated deterioration in loan portfolios make banks' access to funds more uncertain. (17) The lower short-term interest rates associated with alternative A would put M2 on a path that would carry it toward the middle portion of its range later in 1992.

From November to March, M2 is projected to turn in a 4 percent growth rate under alternative A. The acceleration would be wholly concentrated in liquid deposits, which should respond to the narrowing of their opportunity costs.

While deposit rates will be reduced further--perhaps appreciably at some institutions, if lower market rates jolt them into reassessing long-standing rates on NOW accounts and passbook savings--they are not likely to drop enough to eliminate the additional stimulus to money growth of the lower interest rates in alternative A. The induced pickup of inflows to liquid depos- its should more than offset greater outflows from small time deposits and M2-MMMF shares into capital market instruments with increasingly attractive relative returns.

