Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would remain in the 5-3/4 percent area, in association with an initial specification for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $225 million--an increase of $25 million from the current level to take account of the likely rise of sea- sonal borrowing. Under alternative A, federal funds would trade around 5-1/4 percent; this level could be achieved either by a reduction in the initial borrowing specification to $175 million together with the current 5-1/2 percent discount rate, or by a cut in the discount rate to 5 percent 225 million initial borrowing specification.

This shortfall occurs despite the slight easing in money mar- ket rates at the end of April and persists even with the further drop in rates under alternative A. The March-to-June growth projected for M3 also has been lowered since the last meeting, but in this case the reduction results entirely from the aggregate's unexpected weakness in April.

-4 820 1990 1991 Chart 4 Billions of dollars - Actual Level * Projected Level I I I I I I I I I O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D 11400 -- 11200 -I 11000 -4 10800 -- 10600 -1 10400 -- 10200 1990 1991  Under alternative B, M2 is expected to strengthen to a 4 percent pace in May and June.

The 4 percent growth of M2 from March to June under alternative B implies a quarterly average growth rate of 5 percent; this exceeds the staff's projected growth of nominal GNP by 2 percentage points, producing a third straight quarter of M2 velocity decline.

Some lessening of concerns about the soundness of depositories and the virtual cessation of RTC activity and associated disruptions to deposit flows may be the main factors behind the closer alignment of second-quarter M2 growth with historical patterns.  The growth of M3 under alternative B is seen as picking up to a 3 percent average pace in May and June, lifting its March-to-June 6.

Even so, total domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to grow at only a 4-1/2 percent rate from March to June, putting expansion from its fourth-quarter base close to the lower bound of the aggregate's monitoring range. (12) The current structure of interest rates appears to embody market expectations of no further monetary policy move in the near term, so implementation of alternative B is unlikely to engender any immediate reaction in domestic financial or foreign exchange markets.

With expectations somewhat fragile, there may be frequent adjust- ments to financial asset prices in the face of these mixed signals. Markets also may be particularly sensitive to clues about the Federal Reserve's policy strategy around the cycle trough; the unchanged policy stance of alternative B--if maintained through the intermeeting period in the absence of clear evidence of a trough--could be seen as incorporating a more cautious policy approach to assuring an upturn.

With expectations somewhat fragile, there may be frequent adjust- ments to financial asset prices in the face of these mixed signals. Markets also may be particularly sensitive to clues about the Federal Reserve's policy strategy around the cycle trough; the unchanged policy stance of alternative B--if maintained through the intermeeting period in the absence of clear evidence of a trough--could be seen as incorporating a more cautious policy approach to assuring an upturn. (13) Because the immediate 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate under alternative A would come as a surprise to finan- cial market participants, most of it would be passed through to other short-term market interest rates, and the prime rate likely would be reduced again.

However, with this easing coming on the heels of the recent discount rate reduction, alternative A would be seen as especially aggressive and could arouse concerns about the expected downward trajec- tory for inflation unless softness in the economy or prices were confirmed by subsequent data.

The exchange value of the dollar would tend to adjust downward; this movement would be limited to the extent the upward pressure on foreign currencies, against a backdrop of a general softening in economic performance abroad, occasioned a relaxation of monetary policy in some major trading partners.  The lower market rates of alternative A would further en- hance the attractiveness of retail deposits, likely boosting the average growth of M2 in May and June to around a 5-1/2 percent rate, and to 4-1/2 percent from March to June.

This aggregate's growth over the three months ending in June, projected at a 2-1/4 percent pace, is only 1/4 percentage point faster than under alternative B. For both aggregates, the major effect of lower interest rates under alternative A would occur in the third quarter; with no subsequent change in policy, M2 likely would end up in the upper portion of its range by next fall, and M3 somewhat above the midpoint of its range.

