Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would be expected to remain centered on 5-1/4 percent, in as- sociation with an initial specification for adjustment plus seasonal 325 million.   Under alternative A, federal funds would tend to trade around 4-3/4 percent, which could be fostered either by lowering the borrowing specification by $50 million to $275 million or by lowering the discount rate by a further 1/2 point to 2 percent. The latter approach to alternative A would preserve the present spread of the funds rate over the discount rate and thus the current degree of cushioning of transitory shocks to the supply and demand for reserves.

Nonetheless, the unchanged federal funds rate associ- ated with alternative B is unlikely to engender a marked backup in yields in financial markets over the intermeeting period, so long as incoming nonfinancial and monetary data are mixed, as would be the case under the staff's forecast.

Over the intermeeting period, seasonal borrowing would be expected to diminish, necessitating downward technical adjustments to the borrowing specification. (9) The size and timing of the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate of alternative A would tend to catch financial markets unawares, inducing almost as large a drop in other short-term interest rates.

A Alt Growth from September to December M2 4 3 M3 2 1-1/2 M1 8-1/2 6-1/2 Implied growth from 1990:Q4 to December M2 2-3/4 2-1/2 M3 1 1 Ml 7-1/2 7  Under the unchanged interest rates of alternative B, M2 growth is projected to pick up to a 3 percent rate over the last three months of the year, leaving this aggregate at the lower bound of its Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates M2 M3 M1 Alt.

The implied 3-1 percentage point error in the staff's standard econometric model for M2 growth would be about half the size of the record miss of the third quarter.  Under alternative B, growth in M3 from September to 2 percent annual rate.

For businesses, issuance of long-term debt should be sustained if intermediate- and longer-term interest rates remain around current levels, while business loans at banks and commercial paper outstanding should fall noticeably less rapidly as inventory liquidation abates. (15) The 1/2 percentage point decline in the federal funds rate under alternative A would promote faster money growth than under alternative B, improving the odds that the aggregates would end up in the ranges.

This reasoning yields projected M2 growth over the  alternative A of 4 percent at an annual rate.

