Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3-1/4 percent in combination with an initial allowance for 250 million.

Alternative C involves a return of the federal funds rate to 275 million.

Although money market interest rates might firm a bit over the intermeeting period under the unchanged policy of alternative B, any increase would be limited if, consistent with the Greenbook forecast, information continued to suggest modest economic expansion.

The dollar, under alternative B, would be expected to trade around its recent lower levels.

The dollar, under alternative B, would be expected to trade around its recent lower levels.  Under alternative A, short-term interest rates would fall by nearly the full 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate, espe- cially were the easing to take the form of a discount rate cut, which 3.

Easing in the United States might lessen constraints on more expansive monetary policies in a few other coun- tries, but with many countries, especially in Europe, highly unlikely to follow suit, the dollar would tend to depreciate significantly further. (9) A reversal of the July easing would take market partici- pants completely by surprise and short-term interest rates would rise by 2 percentage point under alternative C. Bond rates, too, would retrace some of their recent declines under this alternative, at least initially, and quality spreads on private debt could widen if such a tightening were seen as placing the recovery at risk.

Growth rates for M2 and M3 are projected to be quite subdued For the June-to-September period, expansion in the broad aggregates is likely to fall well short of the rates envisioned at the time of the  alternative A is adopted.

Moreover, runoffs of brokered deposits may be acceler- ating after the June 16 effective date of FDICIA restrictions.  Under alternative B, M2 is expected to resume expanding this month and to grow at a 2-1/4 percent pace on balance over the remainder of the year.

This projec- tion assumes the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B ex- tended through year-end and the Greenbook economic forecast.

With the assumed income and interest rates, standard money demand models predict velocity decreases through this period; experimental models that embody yield-curve effects and other alternative measures of opportunity costs are predicting veloc- ity increases in the second half of the year, though not as large as embodied in the staff forecast.  The firming in M2 under alternative B shows through in part to M3, which bottoms out in coming months and then edges higher.

Continued strong federal borrowing will boost total debt growth to 4-3/4 percent for the year--near the lower end of its annual monitoring range.  The lower interest rates of alternative A would be expected to buoy money growth over the balance of the year.

Over time, the lower real and nominal interest rates would raise income growth and, through that channel, further augment demands for money, though the effects through year-end would be small. The slightly faster growth in M2 deposits would feed through partly to M3, as would relatively more attractive rates on M3 money funds, leading to a resumption of 1 percent expansion in this aggregate over the balance of the year.  Under alternative C, M2 and M3 would drop further below their annual ranges, as opportunity costs widen, banks become even more cautious lenders, and income growth is more restrained.

