Under alternative B, the federal funds 4 percent.

Under the easier alternative A, the funds rate would be reduced to 3-1 placing it 1/4 percentage point below the discount rate, in association 200 million.

Under alternative C, the funds rate would be raised to around 4-1 250 million.

Thus, in the near-term, rates would rise somewhat under alternative B. Over the course of the third quarter, with infla- tion pressures subdued and the pace of economic expansion moderate, as in the staff forecast, short-term and long-term rates might come back down.

The exchange value of the dollar would probably average around current levels.  Under alternative A, most of the drop of 50 basis points in the funds rate would be transmitted to other money market interest rates.

Still, the easing would provide some stimulus to economic activity as real long-term yields moved lower and the recent weakening in the exchange value of the dollar was extended. (23) The increase of 50 basis points in the funds rate under alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to market partici- pants.

Even under alternative A, M2 would be on a trajectory that would bring it closer to, though still a bit below, its lower bound in the fourth quarter, and M3 also would be expected to remain somewhat below its current range through year-end.

The declines in intermediate-term mar- ket yields relative to rates on retail time deposits of comparable maturity during the spring, as well as a prospective flattening of the yield curve, should damp the shifting out of small time deposits.  The turnaround in M2 growth under alternative B should show through to M3.

Domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to move gradu- ally above its lower bound in coming months, placing its growth from the fourth quarter of last year through September at 4-3/4 percent. This strengthening owes almost entirely to heavy federal borrowing, as non-federal debt growth is expected to remain sluggish.  Choice of alternatives A or C would entail somewhat stronger or weaker M2 over the third quarter.

