Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent, in association with an initial assumption for 200 million.

Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent, in association with an initial assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $200 million.4  Under the easier policy stance of alternative A, the expected federal funds rate 2 percent.

With a 1 count rate, for example, an initial borrowing assumption of $200 million would be retained under alternative A. (9) Projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates under the two policy alternatives appear on the table below.

charts on the following pages give more detailed data.) The differences between the money growth paths in alternatives A and B over the next three months are relatively small, as the near-term responsiveness of demands for M2 to declines in short-term interest rates is likely to continue to be damped.

Under these circumstances, selection of the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B would initially induce some backup in interest rates across the maturity spectrum and some rise in the ex- change value of the dollar.

In any event, a decline in long-term rates could eventually develop even at an unchanged funds rate as evidence of disinflation takes firm enough hold to offset skittishness about fiscal policy; indeed, failing to meet market expectations about policy easing could well strengthen perceptions that the disinflation trend will be sustained.  Under alternative B, M2 is projected to grow at a 2 percent rate from September to December, somewhat slower than in the last two months.

Were the federal funds rate to be maintained at 3 percent beyond the Committee meeting in November, M2 growth in the first quarter probably would be on a trajectory below the Committee's tentative 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent range, with continued sizeable velocity increases.  Under alternative B, the staff foresees M3 growth of 1 percent from September to December, also somewhat slower than over August and September.

As a result, total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to slip off to only a 4-1/2 percent rate, leaving growth over the four quarters of this year around the 4-1/2 percent lower bound of its annual monitoring range. (14) The immediate 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate under alternative A would exceed the market's expected change.

In such circumstances, long-term market rates probably would move still lower, pulled down by the weight of a reduced expected path for short-term rates over at least the intermediate term.  Under alternative A, M2 and M3 likely would grow at rates of 2-3/4 and 1-1/4 percent over the September-to-December interval.

In addition to the limited stimulus to M2 demands arising from the reduction in oppor- tunity costs, spending by then should have begun to respond to the monetary policy easing embodied in alternative A. Real interest rates would be lower than under alternative B, though actual declines in real rates may be limited by a continued ebbing of inflation expec- tations.

