Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 4 percent in association with an initial bor- 100 million.

Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to the 3-1/2 percent area in conjunction with a reduction in the initial 75 million.

Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to the 3-1/2 percent area in conjunction with a reduction in the initial borrowing allowance to $75 million.5 In contrast, the funds rate would return to 4-1/2 percent and the initial borrowing allowance would 125 million under alternative C. Under any of the alterna- tives, the staff anticipates little difficulty in bank reserve manage- ment from the cut in reserve requirements effective in early April, and as a result there is unlikely to be much additional funds market vola- tility.

The difference in the borrowing assumptions between alterna- tives B and alternatives A and C has been narrowed from million.

To date, only a few banks have increased their required clear- ing balances or communicated their intention to do so to offset the drop in required reserve balances. (9) Markets appear to anticipate no change in policy over the intermeeting period, and thus interest rates should remain close to current levels under alternative B. Nevertheless, there could be a downward bias to rate movements over coming months.

Under these circumstances, the dollar could reverse some of its recent gains. (10) The steepening yield curve for maturities out to two years and the pattern of futures market quotations suggest some firming of expectations that policy will tighten beginning later in the year. In this context, the unexpected easing of money market conditions of alternative A might cause a market reassessment of the intentions of the Federal Reserve, leading to a significant downward revision in the expected course of short-term interest rates for the next year or so.

In either case, the dollar would fall.  The tightening of policy under alternative C would lead to about a 50 basis point rise in money market rates, which likely would be passed through fully to the prime rate.

Under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B, M2 growth is projected to moderate to a 3-1 rate from March to June.

O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D 1991 1992 I /-- 1-- -- I-- -- I-1-- -- \-- -- \-\-- ----- - --- 970I I - - 1991 910 I I --r * - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 890 Chart 4 Billions of dollars - - Actual Level - -- Estimated Level * Projected Level -- 11900 ,.w -1 11700 - 11500 -- 11300 -1 11100 I I I I I I I I I O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D 10900 -4 12300 12100 1991 1992 components remain favorable, inflows to nontransaction M2 are expected to continue to be concentrated in savings deposits (including MMDAs), while sizable outflows from retail time deposits persist. (13) As a consequence of rising opportunity costs and waning effects of special factors, M2 velocity is projected to increase sig- nificantly in the second quarter--at about a 2 percent annual rate under alternative B. The modest deceleration of M2 embodied in this alterna- tive is expected to be consistent with the greenbook forecast of a con- tinued pickup in the economy.

For the year, M2 now would be expected to increase around 4 percent, a little faster than projected in February in line with stronger projected nominal GDP.  Growth in M3 under alternative B would moderate slightly 2 percent pace over the March-to-June period.

Federal debt, in contrast, will accelerate noticeably, boosting overall debt growth to a 6 percent pace over the second quarter and lifting the debt aggregate to within its 1992 monitoring range at quarter-end.  Under the lower interest rates of alternative A, M2 is expected to grow at a 4-1/2 percent rate over the March-to-June period, keeping this aggregate around the midpoint of its 1992 target range.

M3 would continue to grow at a 2 percent rate over the March- to-June period, remaining noticeably above the lower end of its range. (16) M2 growth would slacken to a 2-1/2 percent rate over the March-to-June period under alternative C, bringing this aggregate ap- preciably below the midpoint of its annual range.

