Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent, in association with the allowance for adjustment 50 million.

ordinarily would be expected to edge down in January, but with such borrowing already at a very low level of about $20 million, little  Alternative A incor- 2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate.

With an unchanged federal funds rate under alternative B, other private short-term rates will decline over the intermeeting period as remaining year-end pressures unwind.

Proposals to put greater emphasis on shorter maturities in Treasury debt management, while motivated primarily by possible saving in federal interest expense, may flatten the yield curve a little. (8) The 1/2 percentage point decline in the federal funds rate under alternative A would be passed through fully to other short-term interest rates.

The foreign exchange value of the dollar could drop noticeably, although in present circumstances, foreign central banks might ease their own policies somewhat sooner than they are likely to otherwise, muting the dollar's decline. (9) Although many market participants have come to the view that monetary policy easing has run its course for the current economic cycle, none appears to expect a tightening to be implemented in the near term, as in alternative C. Consequently, short-term Treasury rates would jump by the full 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate.

M3 growth would be about 3 tive 1 to 5 percent target range in March.  The lower interest rates of alternative A would boost M2 growth well into 1993, putting this aggregate near the lower end of the current provisional range by March.

M1 is projected to grow at a 5-3 to March under alternative B. With currency growing at a 7-1 cent rate, and total reserves at a 7 percent pace, the monetary base is projected to grow at a 7 percent rate over the period.

Much of the higher money growth over coming months relative to alternative B would reflect stronger expansion of M1.

With issuance of managed liabilities weak, growth in M3 would be boosted only slightly as compared with alternative B, and that aggregate would remain below its provisional target range in March.

With issuance of managed liabilities weak, growth in M3 would be boosted only slightly as compared with alternative B, and that aggregate would remain below its provisional target range in March. (14) M2 is projected to expand at only a 1 percent rate from November-to-March under alternative C and M3 would decline at a 1 percent rate.

