Under alternative B, the trading range for the federal funds rate would remain centered at 3 percent, in conjunction with an initial assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $75 mil- lion.   The policy ease envisaged under alternative A would trim the 2 percent.

Technically, though, the lower federal funds rate of alternative A could be achieved by reducing the borrowing assumption 25 million with an unchanged discount rate.

Thus, market par- ticipants would be unlikely to react to the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B, especially if incoming data conform to the Greenbook assessment of moderately expanding real activity in the fourth quarter.

In capital markets, yields could edge down on balance as the readings that trickle in over the intermeeting period indicate a modest pace to the economic expansion and imply further progress toward price stability. At the same time, concerns about the prospects for fiscal stimulus and uncertainties about the economic policies of the new administration more generally, which may not be resolved for some time, will continue to weigh upon market sentiment.  Under alternative B, the growth of M2 is projected to slow somewhat from its pace of the last two months.

Thus, the growth of total debt should pick up appreciably in the first quarter of 1993, to around 5-1/2 percent, so that the debt aggregate moves somewhat above the lower bound of its tentative monitoring range. (20) Against a backdrop of public readings that suggested some firming in economic activity, market participants would be sur- 2 point decline in the funds rate under alternative A. Most short-term interest rates would match the decrease in the federal funds rate.

Such a decline would be limited, however, should the easing engender market fears that the lagged effects of the monetary stimulus, reinforcing a boost provided by a prospective fiscal policy package in 1993, would undercut the downward tilt to in- flation. (21) While the impetus to the monetary aggregates imparted by choosing alternative A would be barely discernible in 1992, the lower market interest rates embodied in that choice would push up both M2 and M3 to the lower end of their current tentative ranges for 1993 by March.

