Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with adjustment plus seasonal 50 million. Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would move up to 3-1/2 percent and the borrow- 75 million. In the case of alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2-1/2 percent and borrowing would 25 million.

In the case of alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2-1/2 percent and borrowing would fall, perhaps to $25 million.  Alternative B is consistent with the policy assumptions underlying the staff economic forecast.

Relative to the staff forecast, market participants appear to be anticipating a bit more strength in aggregate demand through next year, and have built into interest rates substantial odds that policy will begin to tighten in the first part of the year to keep inflation from increasing. Nonetheless, market interest rates are unlikely to move down much on balance under the steady funds rate of alternative B in coming months, since the market would continue to expect a tightening before long.

Relative to the staff forecast, market participants appear to be anticipating a bit more strength in aggregate demand through next year, and have built into interest rates substantial odds that policy will begin to tighten in the first part of the year to keep inflation from increasing. Nonetheless, market interest rates are unlikely to move down much on balance under the steady funds rate of alternative B in coming months, since the market would continue to expect a tightening before long. The foreign exchange value of the dollar under alternative B should stay around current levels.

In addition, amounts and patterns of tax payments, and associated adjustments in money hold- ings, could be atypical, given the uncertain effects of the new tax  Under alternative B, M3 would advance at a 1 percent annual rate over the November-to-March period; by March this aggregate would be 1-1/4 percent above its fourth-quarter 1993 base, well within its 0 to 4 percent provisional range for 1994.

Total debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to increase at a 5-3/4 percent pace from the fourth quarter of 1993 to March, well above the lower end of its provisional 4 to 8 percent range for next year.  The rise in the federal funds rate under alternative C, to 3-1/2 percent, would come sooner than now anticipated by market participants and built into markets interest rates.

M3 would expand under alternative C at only a 3 March period.

M3 would expand under alternative C at only a 3/4 percent pace over the November-to- March period.  Alternative C might be preferred if there were concerns about the inflation outlook.

A timely firming in policy now could obviate a more aggressive tightening later to keep inflation from picking up, involving perhaps even higher real interest rates if delays permitted inflation expectations to deteriorate.  The easing of policy under alternative A would come as a surprise to market participants, and short-term interest rates would fall by about the 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate.

Under alternative A, M2 would expand at a 2-1/4 percent pace, close to that evident since midyear, buoyed partly by less of a slowdown in M1 than under alternatives B and C, 4 percent pace from November to March.

Under alternative A, M2 would expand at a 2-1/4 percent pace, close to that evident since midyear, buoyed partly by less of a slowdown in M1 than under alternatives B and C, M3 would grow at a 1-1/4 percent pace from November to March.  Alternative A might be favored if the current strength in the economy were seen as likely to give way to a significant weak- ening in the pace of expansion next year, considering the greater fiscal restraint in train and the backup in long-term interest rates and the dollar since mid-October.

