Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with the allowance for 50 million.

Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2 percent area.

This alternative could be implemented through a 1/2 percentage point drop in the discount rate, holding the initial borrowing allowance at the same level as in alternative B, or by lowering the initial borrowing allowance to $25 million and leaving the discount rate unchanged. Alternative C, involving a rise in the federal funds rate to 3-1/2 percent, could be implemented through a boost in the 75 million.

Thus, under alternative B, short-term interest rates would stay around current levels.

The dollar would be expected to fluctuate around current levels under alternative B, but could firm somewhat if rate declines in Europe prove to be faster and larger than now expected.

The dollar would be expected to fluctuate around current levels under alternative B, but could firm somewhat if rate declines in Europe prove to be faster and larger than now expected.  The easing of policy under alternative A would surprise market participants and would lead to a decline in short-term rates, including the prime rate, commensurate with the 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal funds rate.

Conversely, the tightening of policy under alternative C, which also would come as a surprise to market participants, would induce a rise in short-term rates comparable to the hike in the federal funds rate.

A Alt Growth from February to June M2 3 2-1/2 2 M3 1-1/4 1 3/4 M1 11 9-3/4 8-1/2 Implied growth from 1992:Q4 to June M2 3/4 1/2 1/4 M3 -1 -1 -1-1/4 M1 9 8-1/4 7-1/2  Under alternative B, M2 is expected to resume growth over the February-to-June period.

Such growth would place this aggregate in June 5-1 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base and about 3/4 percentage point above the lower bound of its monitoring range.  Under alternative A, M2 would strengthen to a 3 percent rate over the February-to-June period.

M3 would 4 percent pace over February to June under alternative A, but would remain below its fourth-quarter base even by June.

Under alternative C, M2 would expand at a 2 percent rate over the February-to- June period, as wider opportunity costs would discourage inflows to more liquid deposits, especially M1 balances.

