Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in combination with an initial allowance for 250 million.

Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 3-1/2 percent in association with a boost in the initial borrowing allowance.

Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 3-1/2 percent in association with a boost in the initial borrowing allowance.  Alternative B is consistent with the staff's economic forecast.

Market participants apparently believe that the federal funds rate will remain at 3 percent, at least for the next several months, and under alternative B, money market interest rates would remain around current levels.

Including the federal government, the debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a bit more than a 4 percent pace over the final five months of the year, leaving its growth for the year at 4-1/2 percent, a little above the lower bound of its annual range.  As shown in the table below, M2 under alternative B is projected to grow at a 2 percent average rate over the final four months of this year.

Under alternative B, M3 would grow at a 3 percent rate over the remainder of this year, leaving this aggregate just above both its fourth-quarter 1992 level and the bottom of its 8.

Moreover, the RTC, with new funding author- ity, is expected to begin working down its backlog of resolutions in coming months, leading to more rapid shrinkage of thrift institutions and the substitution of Treasury financing for deposit financing to carry acquired assets.  Under alternative A, money market interest rates would drop by the full 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate.

Alternative A might also be chosen if the Committee saw economic activity and inflation as possibly coming in below the staff forecast; market perceptions that the Committee was signalling an expectation that the outlook for real activity had deteriorated and for disinflation had improved could result in sub- stantial declines in bond yields.

Some of the more rapid growth in M2 would show through to M3 under alterna- tive A, but expansion of this aggregate would remain quite weak as borrowers continued to direct their credit demands toward long-term markets.  Under alternative C, interest rates would rise and the dollar would strengthen on foreign exchange markets.

However, lower prospective inflation might decrease far- ahead forward rates, limiting advances in nominal bond yields.  Alternative C might be favored if the modest degree of price deceleration in the staff forecast were viewed to be unsatis- factory.

These growth rates would place both aggregates near the bottom of their annual ranges for this year, and on a lower trajectory going into 1994  alternative B, partly reflecting damped income growth.

