Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with an allowance for adjustment 250 million.  Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2-1/2 percent, either through a drop in the borrowing allowance to $225 million or a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points in combination with an unchanged level of borrowing.

Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3 percent in association with an allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $250 million.5 Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2-1/2 percent, either through a drop in the borrowing allowance to $225 million or a cut in the discount rate of 50 basis points in combination with an unchanged level of borrowing. Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 3-1 accompanying a boost in adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to $275 mil- lion.

Thus, under alternative B, short-term interest rates should remain around current levels in the weeks ahead.

interest rates being balanced by projected reductions in rates abroad.  The interest rates under alternative B are consistent with those of the staff Greenbook forecast, which has the federal funds rate around current levels through 1994 and long-term rates edging lower.

Under these circumstances, the unemployment rate does not de- cline from its current level, while core inflation slows only modestly. With this configuration of income and interest rates, broad money ag- gregates are projected to expand sluggishly while total nonfinancial debt increases around the pace of nominal GDP. (9) Over the balance of 1993, M2 is projected to grow at about 2 percent pace under alternative B, and, as shown in the table below, to finish the year around the lower bound of its new annual range.

Growth rates in the table are based on the assumption that the federal funds rate is held for the remainder of the year at the level established under each of the alternatives. is expected to increase at a 3 percent rate in the second half of the year, only a little less than the 4 percent rate of the first half.7 M3 under alternative B is projected to bottom out in August and to edge higher over the remainder of the year.

As a consequence, growth of the total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to slow slightly from the first half of the year to 4-1/2 percent over the second half, implying an increase of 4-3/4 percent for the year as a whole.  The easing under alternative A would come as a surprise to market participants, and short-term rates would decline by the full 50 basis point drop in the funds rate.

However, unless the easing itself prompted a more downbeat market assessment of the underlying strength of spending, the drop in real capital market rates might be muted to some extent by questions about how long the reduced federal funds rate could be sustained, given its already low level in real terms. (12) In light of the likelihood of some decline in an array of real interest rates, as well as the real foreign exchange value of the dollar, alternative A might be favored if economic growth in the staff forecast were seen to be unsatisfactory and the Committee were willing to accept little or no further disinflation.

The lower interest rates of this alternative would tend to boost money growth relative to alternative B and, under the spending propensities incorporated in the staff forecast, would give a little more assurance that the broad aggregates would finish the year at or above the lower bounds of their ranges for 1993.

Faster growth in M2 under alternative A owes both to more growth in nominal income later in the year than under alternative B and to the improvement in the attrac- tiveness of assets in M2 relative to money market instruments.

M3 under alternative A would expand slowly over the final four months of the year as bank credit growth remained damped in the context of continued heavy financing in the securities markets.

M3 under alternative A would expand slowly over the final four months of the year as bank credit growth remained damped in the context of continued heavy financing in the securities markets.  The tightening of policy under alternative C would come much sooner than is now envisioned by market participants.

In any case, the dollar would move higher on foreign exchange markets.  Alternative C might be favored if the Committee saw a need to move sooner, rather than later, to contain or reduce future inflationary pressures.

With the staff's outlook for spending propensities, M2 would expand at only a 1 percent pace over the final five months of this year under alternative C, ending the year about 3 quarter 1992 level.

