Under alternative B, the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would be retained at $50 million, in association with trading in federal funds continuing to be centered around 3 percent.  Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would drop to 2-1/2 percent; this could be achieved either through a reduction in the borrowing allowance to $25 million or by a half per- centage point cut in the discount rate with unchanged borrowing.

Under alternative B, the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would be retained at $50 million, in association with trading in federal funds continuing to be centered around 3 percent.6 Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would drop to 2-1/2 percent; this could be achieved either through a reduction in the borrowing allowance to $25 million or by a half per- centage point cut in the discount rate with unchanged borrowing. 2 percent under alternative C in 25 million boost to the borrowing allowance.

Under alternative B, the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would be retained at $50 million, in association with trading in federal funds continuing to be centered around 3 percent.6 Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would drop to 2-1/2 percent; this could be achieved either through a reduction in the borrowing allowance to $25 million or by a half per- centage point cut in the discount rate with unchanged borrowing. Federal funds would trade around 3-1/2 percent under alternative C in combination with a $25 million boost to the borrowing allowance. (21) The markets appear to have built in an unchanged policy in the period just ahead and thus interest rates would be expected to remain near current levels under alternative B. Longer-term rates might come under a little downward pressure if, consistent with the staff greenbook forecast, news on prices continues to be good, and economic indicators point to a little less momentum in the economic expansion than in the second half of last year.

The dollar would fluctuate around current levels under alternative B, moving up on any news of unexpected eco- nomic weakness or policy easing abroad, or down should the news about the U.

economy prove to be softer than expected (22) Short-term interest rates--including the prime rate-- would decline by the half-point drop in the federal funds rate under alternative A. Availability constraints on business credit at banks might ease more noticeably should bankers come to see lower rates as improving the outlook for business profitability and lessening strains in this sector.

The dollar would move lower on foreign exchange markets. (23) Although market participants seem to believe that some tightening of monetary policy over the next year will be forthcoming, they do not see this happening soon and thus would be surprised by the election of alternative C. Short-term rates would rise by about 1 percentage point.

A Alt Growth from December to March M2 -1/2 -1 -1-1/2 M3 -2-1/4 -2-1/2 -2-3/4 M1 4-1/2 3-1/2 2-1/2 Growth from 1992Q4 to March M2 -1/4 -1/2 -1 M3 -2-1/4 -2-1/4 -2-1/2 M1 6-1/4 5-1/2 4-3/4  Under alternative B, M2 would be about flat on average over February and March.

Federal borrowing which has been held down in January and February by unexpected tax inflows, will strengthen substantially in March, boosting growth in domestic nonfinancial debt to a 5-1/2 percent rate over February and March and expansion from the fourth quarter of 1992 through March to 5 percent.  Under alternative A, growth in M2 would pick up to a 1 percent annual rate over February and March, returning this aggregate to its fourth-quarter 1992 level in March.

A buildup of institution-only money funds, as holders responded to more attractive rate relationships, would buoy M3 over February and March under alternative A, and hold down the net declines in this aggregate over these two months.

Nonetheless, the level of M3 in March would remain well below that of the fourth quarter of 1992, and the firmer path of this aggregate in subsequent months still would not be sufficient to return it to its fourth-quarter level until July.  Under alternative C, M2 would decline over February and March as larger opportunity costs act as an additional drag on this aggregate.

