Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 4-1/4 percent in association with re- taining the $450 million allowance for adjustment plus seasonal bor- rowing.  Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would be raised to 4-1/2 percent and the initial borrowing allowance to $475 million. Under alternative D, the funds rate would be moved to 4-3 percent, either through an increase in the initial borrowing allowance to $500 million or a hike in the discount rate to 4 percent and un- changed adjustment plus seasonal borrowing.

The Greenbook rate assumption does not necessarily entail a tightening at the August FOMC meeting itself, but it does imply that the upward trajectory of short- term rates will be resumed fairly promptly.  Alternative B might be preferred if it were thought that there would be less strength in the economy than in the staff fore- cast.

The question in these circumstances would be how large an increase in the federal funds rate should be sought.  Alternative C embodies a move of 25 basis points.

As noted above, alternative C is about what is built into the structure of market interest rates, and neither interest nor exchange rates are likely to react very strongly to such an action.

Markets could become somewhat more unsettled and volatile, especially if the rise in short-term rates were perceived as less than needed and therefore likely to be followed by another increase but of uncertain timing.  The more forceful move of alternative D might be chosen if the Committee viewed the economic situation as highly likely to require substantial additional monetary tightening, for example, of the scope embodied in the steep tilt to the yield curve over the next few years.

In this regard, the 50 basis points of alternative D would imply more assurance of this outcome than alternative C and, therefore, would be more likely to be followed by a period of stability of short-term rates.

With federal debt growth firming a bit in the months ahead, total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at nearly a 5 percent pace over the remainder of the year--placing annual growth in this aggregate at 5-1/4 percent, in the lower half of its 4 to 8 percent monitoring range. (14) Growth of the monetary aggregates over July to December  alternatives B and D.

Alternative D assumes a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.

Alternative D assumes a 50 basis point increase in the funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.9  (Money growth under the reserve conditions of alternative C would lie half way between alternatives B and D.

B Alt Growth from July to December M2 1-1/2 1 M3 3/4 1/2 M1 3 2-1/4 Implied growth 93Q4 to 94Q4 M2 1-1/2 1-1/4 M3 1/2 1/2 M1 4 3-1/2 (15) M2 would grow at a 1-1/2 percent rate over the July-to- December period under alternative B, down from the July pace but quicker than that over the first six months of the year.

Although these money growth rates are roughly the same as those projected for alternative D, the higher year-end level of rates assumed in the Greenbook implies slower growth of money and income in the first half of 1995 than would alternative D.

Abstracting from the effects of FIN 39, we expect a little more growth in bank credit over the second half of the year-- though not a persistence of the unusually rapid increase in July. Moreover, with short-term rates unchanged under alternative B, insti- tution-only money funds should be stable after large runoffs through the spring.

Abstracting from the effects of FIN 39, we expect a little more growth in bank credit over the second half of the year-- though not a persistence of the unusually rapid increase in July. Moreover, with short-term rates unchanged under alternative B, insti- tution-only money funds should be stable after large runoffs through the spring.  Under alternative D, M2 would grow at a 1 percent rate over the July-to-December period.

M1 would expand at about a 3 percent rate over the July-to- December period under alternative B. Continued rapid currency growth would account for this expansion, as higher opportunity costs reached earlier this year and slow mortgage refinancing activity hold transaction deposits about flat.

