Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would continue to trade around 4-3/4 percent, consistent with retaining an allowance of $475 million for adjustment plus sea- sonal borrowing.  Alternative C envisages raising the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, to 5 percent, in conjunction with an 500 million.

Over the intermeeting period, seasonal borrowing should trend down, as is the norm for this time of year, necessitating technical reductions in the borrowing assumption.  Alternative B, which would retain current reserve condi- tions, is not inconsistent with the staff assumption of policy firm- ing, provided that firming resumes some time soon.

Nonetheless, maintenance of existing reserve conditions under alternative B might elicit little reaction in rates beyond the very shortest maturities because market participants would assume that tightening had simply been postponed.

The 50 basis point firming of alternative D is the most likely of the three policy options to keep the Federal Reserve "ahead of the curve" of inflation pressures and consequently to limit the extent to which policy might later need to tighten.

If the Committee were uncertain about how much tightening would be required but wanted to respond to recent data, the more modest 25 basis point move of alternative C might be considered appropriate.

If the Committee were uncertain about how much tightening would be required but wanted to respond to recent data, the more modest 25 basis point move of alternative C might be considered appropriate.  The 25 basis point tightening of alternative C is con- sistent with the current structure of market rates, and this policy action might well trigger only muted interest rate reactions.

How- ever, since most market participants expect either no action or a 50 basis point tightening, alternative C could raise questions about System intentions, potentially unsettling markets.

A considerable portion of the 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate under alternative D would pass through to other short-term rates.

Despite some- what faster expansion of federal debt late in 1994, growth for the year--projected at 5-1/2 percent--would be the slowest in fifteen years. (13) Growth of the monetary aggregates over the September-  alternatives B and D.

For illustrative purposes, the path under alternative B was derived assuming that the funds rate would hold at its current level for the remainder of the year.

The path for the aggregates under alternative D assumes that the funds rate moves up to 5-1/4 percent at this meeting and stays there for the balance of the year.

B Alt Growth from September to December M2 1-1/2 1/2 M3 1-1/4 3/4 M1 2-1/2 1-1/2 Implied growth from 93:Q4 to 94:Q4 M2 1-1/4 1 M3 3/4 3/4 M1 3-1/4 3 (14) Over the September-to-December period, M2 would expand 2 percent rate under alternative B. The staff has assumed that deposit rates will continue to adjust sluggishly to market rates.

M3 growth should pick up a bit over the remainder of 1994, reflecting somewhat reduced reliance of banks on nondeposit sources of funding.  Under alternative D, M2 would grow at a 1 rate over the September-to-December period.

M3 would grow at a 3 the remaining months of the year, pulled down by a runoff of institu- tion-only money funds as their yields lag behind the increase in money market rates that would be in train under alternative D. 6.

As a result, under alternative B, the monetary base should expand at about a 8-1/4 percent rate, while total reserves should grow at a 1-3/4 percent rate over the September-to-December period.

