Alternative B would keep the intended federal funds rate unchanged at 4-3/4 percent, in association with retaining an allowance of $225 million for adjustment plus sea- sonal borrowing at the discount window.   Alternative C embodies a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate to 5-1/4 percent, accomplished either by an equal rise in the discount rate to 4-1/2 percent with the borrowing allowance kept at $225 million or by an increase in the borrowing allowance to $275 million at the current discount rate of 4 percent.

A still larger increase in the federal  alternative C is also discussed.

In contrast to the staff assumption, however, rates further out the term structure can be read as suggesting expectations of additional tight- ening.  Choice of the unchanged policy of alternative B might be based on the judgments that most of the effects of previous increases in interest rates are still in the pipeline, that convincing signs of higher inflation have not yet appeared, and that under these circum- stances the Committee can await evidence indicating whether the effects of previous monetary tightening will be sufficient to restrain spending adequately.

The resulting real federal funds rate would be a bit above its long-run average, but restraint of at least this magnitude might be appropriate in light of the current pressure on capacity and the stimulative effects of the drop in the dollar and the easing of terms and standards of bank lending. (12) With market participants generally appearing to have built in a move of at least this size, interest rates could exhibit little initial reaction to the implementation of alternative C. The receipt of information on output and price developments over the intermeeting period along the lines of the relatively robust Greenbook forecast might reinforce the market's perception that additional System tightening is required, and interest rates could edge higher later in the period.

Anecdotal reports of recent resistance by banks to pressures for further reduc- tions in lending spreads, along with concerns about credit quality expressed by regulators, suggest that credit terms and standards may not be easing quite so rapidly over coming months. (15) Forecasted growth rates of the monetary aggregates from October to March and from the fourth quarter of this year through March under both policy alternatives are shown below.5  (More detailed data appear on the table and charts on the following pages.) Under alternative B, offering rates through the first quarter would continue to adjust upward in the face of steady money market rates.

Because no further policy moves are presumed to occur under alternatives B and C after the November FOMC meeting, these growth rates are stronger than those consistent with the Greenbook forecast.

M1 is projected to decline at a 1 percent rate from October to March under alternative B, as currency flows abroad remain robust but demand and other checkable deposits continue to decline.

Rapid issuance of large time deposits will continue to fill some of the gap left by still-sluggish retail deposits, and thus M3 is projected to outpace M2 from October to March, likely 2 percent rate under alternative B. Alt.

B Alt Growth from October to March M2 1 0 M3 2-1/2 2 M1 -1 -2 Implied growth from 1994:Q4 to March M2 1-1/2 1/2 M3 2-1/2 2-1/4 M1 0 -1-1/4 (16) Under the 50 basis point increase in the funds rate of alternative C, both M2 and M3 would record slower growth over the next five months than under alternative B.

