Under alternative B. federal funds would continue to trade around 3-3/4 percent, in association with the al- lowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing remaining initially at 175 million.   Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would move up 1/4 percentage point (one-half the usual adjustment shown in previous bluebooks for "alternative C") to 4 percent, effectuated by 200 million.

Under alternative D, the federal funds rate would be raised to 4-1 cent, either by increasing the initial borrowing allowance to $225 million or by raising the discount rate to 3-1/2 percent, while keep- ing the initial allowance for discount window borrowing at $175 mil- lion.

Very short-term rates might thus increase slightly under alternative D. The behavior of rates on instruments of a few months' maturity or longer would depend importantly on whether the market interpreted the larger increase of alternative D as indicating a steeper trajectory of future policy actions, and perhaps the need for greater cumulative tightening.

Bond yields could still back up somewhat in the aftermath of an announce- ment of the Federal Reserve's choice of alternative D, but these other influences should limit any increase and work to reduce yields over time.

provided incoming data on the economy indicate a moderate path for activity, in line with the staff forecast. (13) The case for increasing the intended federal funds rate only 25 basis points as under alternative C would seem to hinge on the judgment that financial market participants have exaggerated the like- ly strength of future spending relative to the economy's potential and hence of prospective inflation pressures.

In this context, market participants might be more inclined to interpret the smaller move as sufficient to counter coming inflation pressures and to project a lower trajectory of short-term rates, which would pass through to lower longer-term rates.  The case for standing pat, alternative B, is a more extreme version of the rationale for alternative C: In this case, the market assessment, and even that of the staff, of the strength of aggregate demand would be judged to be seriously off the mark, perhaps because the rise in long-term rates, along with the decline in house- hold wealth, will have a more significant restraining influence on aggregate demand. Choice of alternative B would come as a consider- able surprise--and disappointment--to financial markets; very short- term interest rates would be likely to fall appreciably, but this alternative risks a significant sell-off in the bond market before weakness in aggregate demand becomes apparent.

Business borrowing should remain well above last year's meager pace, as corporate capital spending rises appreciably further relative to internally generated funds. Households too are likely to continue taking on consumer debt more quickly than they did on average last year, although with recent in- creases in mortgage rates restraining housing activity, mortgage debt expansion is not anticipated to outpace last year's performance. (16) Projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates from April to September under alternatives B and D are shown on the table below.

The recent increases in opportunity costs on liquid retail deposits aris- ing from the previous tightenings in the stance of monetary policy, and under alternative D from an additional firming move as well, will serve to hold back growth of M1 and some of the other components of M2 and M3.

