Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 3-1/4 percent in association with ad- 75 million.

Under alterna- tive C, the federal funds rate would increase 50 basis points, to 3-3/4 percent through an increase in the initial borrowing allowance to $100 million. (9) With market participants expecting appreciable increases in the federal funds rate in coming months, including 25 basis points at the March FOMC meeting, interest rates could tend to drift lower under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B. Rate de- clines would be quite small initially if market participants still believed that the next tightening step was imminent but had merely been delayed, perhaps by the unsettled market conditions of late.

The scope for any rate decreases, especially at the long end of the market, could be quite limited, however, if the hiatus in tightening were to call into question the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary resolve.  Alternative B might be favored if most of the increase in intermediate- and long-term real rates over recent months were thought likely to persist and be sufficient to restrain demand and 8.

Even if long-term rates were expected to decline appreci- ably, alternative B might be selected were the economy nevertheless seen as remaining below its long-term potential and inflation pres- sures contained.

Such an assessment could be based on a sense that recent data suggested less momentum in the economy or on a judgment that the behavior of costs and broad price indexes has been indicating a greater degree of slack in the economy than embodied in the staff forecast.  Alternative C involves a larger immediate tightening than now built into the structure of market rates.

Port- folios have been adjusted to an environment of rising short-term interest rates; moreover, if such a decisive action were seen as leaving the funds rate reasonably close to policy neutrality, uncer- tainty about the magnitude and timing of future tightening actions might be reduced. (12) In addition to possibly contributing to more settled market conditions, alternative C might be preferred if the Committee saw significant risks of greater inflation going forward.

B Alt Growth from February to June M2 2-1/2 2-1/4 M3 1-1/2 1-1/4 Ml 6 5-1/4 Implied growth from 1993:Q4 to June M2 2 1-3/4 M3 1/2 1/4 M1 6 5-3/4 (16) Growth in M2 would average 2-1/2 percent at an annual rate over the February-to-June period under alternative B, up from only 3/4 percent over January and February, even as growth in nominal income continues to slow.

Nonetheless, M2 velocity would con- tinue to rise in the second quarter under alternative B, but its 2-3/4 percent annual pace of expansion would be well below that of the two previous quarters. Under alternative C, M2 would grow at a 2-1/4 percent rate over the February-to-June period, restrained by weaker inflows to liquid components as opportunity costs widen more.

Under alternative C, M2 would grow at a 2-1/4 percent rate over the February-to-June period, restrained by weaker inflows to liquid components as opportunity costs widen more. Still, by June, M2 would have grown at a 1-3/4 percent rate from its fourth-quarter 1993 base under alternative C, above the lower end of its 1994 annual range.

Under alternative C, M2 would grow at a 2-1/4 percent rate over the February-to-June period, restrained by weaker inflows to liquid components as opportunity costs widen more. Still, by June, M2 would have grown at a 1-3/4 percent rate from its fourth-quarter 1993 base under alternative C, above the lower end of its 1994 annual range. (17) The pickup in M2 is projected to show through to M3. Under alternative B, this aggregate would expand at a 1-1 pace over the February-to-June period.

By June, M3 would stand 1 rate above its fourth-quarter base under alternative C, only a little above the lower end of its annual growth cone.

