Alternative B involves a continuation of feder- al funds trading around 3 percent and of adjustment plus seasonal 50 million.

Alternative B involves a continuation of feder- al funds trading around 3 percent and of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaging initially about $50 million.12  Under alterna- tive C, the federal funds rate would increase to around 3-1/2 percent in association with a rise in the borrowing allowance to $75 million. Alternative A embodies a downward adjustment of the federal funds rate 25 million.

Alternative B involves a continuation of feder- al funds trading around 3 percent and of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaging initially about $50 million.12  Under alterna- tive C, the federal funds rate would increase to around 3-1/2 percent in association with a rise in the borrowing allowance to $75 million. Alternative A embodies a downward adjustment of the federal funds rate to 2-1/2 percent and of the borrowing allowance to $25 million. (25) Market participants now anticipate continuation of the money market conditions implied by alternative B over the near term, and FOMC choice of this alternative would not engender any immediate reaction in security markets.

The exchange value of the dollar would tend to move higher with the more attractive real returns on U.S. versus foreign financial assets.  The easing of policy under alternative A would come as more of a surprise to market participants.

With demand deposits most affected by mortgage refinancing activity, M1 growth from January to June will be depressed by around 4 percentage points by this special factor under alternative B. Growth of M1 is projected at 6-3/4 percent over this period, implying growth of total reserves and the monetary base of 4-3/4 and 9-1/2 percent, respectively.

Even so, the underlying trend of M2 growth is likely to remain below that of nominal spending, as some of the anomalous weakness relative to historical patterns that surfaced in the 1990s is assumed to persist. (30) M3 is projected to expand at a 1-1/4 percent rate from January to June under alternative B. The growth of debt of domestic nonfederal sectors from December to June is projected at a 5-1/4 per- cent rate, sustaining the faster growth rate recorded during the fourth quarter of last year.

