15 The federal funds rate would be boosted 1 2 percent under alternative C, and the borrow- 350 million. Alternative D would 4 percent.

Alternative B might be chosen by the Committee if it wished to await confirmation of the strength of aggregate demand, perhaps because there were questions about whether that strength would in fact be forthcoming.

Accordingly, short-term interest rates are likely to move down a little after the meeting under alternative B. Long-term rates are not likely to decline, however, under this alternative; the dollar 15.

Under all of the alternatives, increases in the borrowing allowance would likely be needed over the intermeeting period to accommodate rising demands for seasonal credit. might remain under some downward pressure, and the markets might continue to focus on the potential for greater inflation, especially if data confirm brisk growth.  The Committee could see alternative C as appropriate if it believed that sufficient evidence had accumulated to warrant a continued gradual tightening of policy to prevent the economy from overheating.

With market portfolios now generally aligned to expectations of gradually rising money market interest rates, the move seems unlikely to prompt further increases in actual and implied volatility in bond markets. (29) Concerns that the recent behavior of the dollar and commodity prices might imply rising prices more broadly and might be associated with a ratcheting up of inflation expectations could moti- vate the Committee to select alternative D. The 50-basis-point hike in the funds rate would be seen by market participants as motivated importantly by a desire to bolster the dollar, which might well recover some of its recent losses, especially if the action were implemented through a hike in the discount rate.

M1 is expected to increase at only a 3-1 from June to September under alternative B.17 (32) Expansion of M3 is projected to pick up only slightly in the next few months.

Under the staff forecast, bank credit expands at about a 4 percent rate over the second half of the year, with total loan growth rising a little while securities acquisitions fall off; the expansion of thrift balance sheets picks up only slowly. Institution-only money fund shares are likely to continue to decline in response to increasing yields on direct money-market holdings,  alternatives C and D.

