Under alternative B, federal funds trading would continue around 6 percent, in association with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $75 mil- lion.  Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would be in- creased to 6-1/2 percent by raising either the borrowing allowance to 125 million or the discount rate by 50 basis points. Alternative A, involving a reduction of the intended funds rate to 5-1/2 percent, could be effected by lowering either the borrowing allowance to $50 million or the discount rate by 50 basis points.

If the Committee believes such an outcome were both likely and acceptable, then it may be inclined to leave the current level of the federal funds rate in place, as under alternative B, unless and 6.

Consequently, there would likely be little change in interest rates in response to the choice of alternative B. While sentiment in foreign exchange markets has proven difficult to predict, no clear rationale presents itself for signifi- cant further dollar depreciation over the intermeeting period.

While sentiment in foreign exchange markets has proven difficult to predict, no clear rationale presents itself for signifi- cant further dollar depreciation over the intermeeting period. (10) A case for the 1/2 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative C could be made on the grounds that, with economic activity having already overshot its potential and the persistence of the slowdown in economic growth not yet firmly estab- lished, more insurance should be taken out against a serious deterior- ation in inflation trends.

Judging from the alternative simulations in the Greenbook, even a 50 basis point in- crease in the federal funds rate would leave the core CPI inflation rate in 1996 above that in 1994 and might not be sufficient to restore a downward tilt in subsequent years. (11) With financial markets having built in no near-term monetary policy tightening, choice of alternative C would come as a surprise.

In effect, choice of alternative A would imply a view that not only have longer-term interest and exchange rates not overshot on the downside, but that policy may still be too tight to allow markets to compensate fully for oncoming economic weakness.

In effect, choice of alternative A would imply a view that not only have longer-term interest and exchange rates not overshot on the downside, but that policy may still be too tight to allow markets to compensate fully for oncoming economic weakness. (13) The 50 basis point easing of the federal funds rate  alternative A also would surprise market participants.

Although the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary credibility has apparently increased over the last few months, it could begin to erode if incom- ing data were to indicate that inflation pressures were not abating, prompting the market to judge that the easing had been unwarranted. Under those circumstances, long-term rates would begin to retrace their initial declines, particularly if the dollar came under persist- ent, intense downward pressure. (14) The table below shows staff projections of money and debt aggregates through September under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alternative B. growth rates under alternatives A and C, are shown in the table and charts on the following pages.

Somewhat slower growth in the monetary aggre- gates would result from the higher opportunity costs of alternative C, while somewhat faster growth would occur under alternative A.

-- 1100 I I I I I I II I I I I I '''''' Chart 5 Billions of Dollars 1 14200 Actual Level S Projected Level - 14000 -- 13800 --1 13600 13400 - 13200 -- 13000 -- 12800 - 12600 Aug Dec SI I I I l-I I II L the growth of the broader aggregates be expected to breach the upper or lower bands of their annual ranges, although M3 is virtually at the upper end of its range under alternative A. (15) Consistent with the forecasted moderation in nominal spending, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to slow to around a 4-3/4 percent pace from February to September, bring- ing its rate of growth from the fourth quarter of last year to 5 per- cent--the mid-point of its monitoring range.

