Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 5-1/2 percent, in association with keeping 75 million.

Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 5-1/2 percent, in association with keeping the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at $75 million. Under the tighter alternative C, the federal funds rate would be raised 1/2 percentage point, to 6 percent, either by an equivalent rise in the discount rate to 5-1/4 percent with the same borrowing allowance or by an increase in the borrowing allowance to $125 million with the same discount rate.

Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 5-1/2 percent, in association with keeping the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at $75 million. Under the tighter alternative C, the federal funds rate would be raised 1/2 percentage point, to 6 percent, either by an equivalent rise in the discount rate to 5-1/4 percent with the same borrowing allowance or by an increase in the borrowing allowance to $125 million with the same discount rate.  Choice of alternative B might be viewed as appropriate if the Committee desired additional readings on the extent of the economy's forward momentum and of underlying inflationary pressures to provide a firmer basis for judging whether incremental restraint will be required to damp aggregate demand sufficiently.

price reports may also be signalling that pressures on domestic productive capacities are not as intense as conventionally estimated, so that a slowing in economic growth even along the lines projected by the staff could keep inflation in check. (27) While market participants currently anticipate a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting, their response to the Committee's selection of alternative B would depend on how the decision were interpreted.

If market participants viewed the delay as unwarranted by the domestic economic situation and as signalling a possible change in Federal Reserve priorities, heightened inflation concerns could cause an adverse reaction in the fixed income and foreign exchange markets. Such a reaction could be compounded by data suggesting continued strength in employment and a pickup in inflation--both of which are expected over the near term in the Greenbook forecast. (28) Concern about the possibility of an adverse market reaction, combined with a view that the economic situation still pointed to significant risk of accelerating inflation, would argue for the 50 basis point firming in the federal funds rate associated with alternative C. In a situation in which the economy already has over- shot its potential, the robust advance of economic activity through last quarter might well signify the likelihood that monetary policy still has not put in place sufficient restraint to slow the growth of future aggregate demand enough to forestall a sustained upward drift in inflation.

Even if slower real GDP growth emerges than in the staff economic forecast, which assumes unchanged short-term interest rates, such an outcome would aid in bringing resource use over time back to less potentially inflationary and, hence, more sustainable levels. (29) The 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate embodied in alternative C, by matching current financial market expec- tations, would have few initial repercussions on market interest rates or exchange rates against our other G-10 trading partners.

Nonfederal debt likely would continue to grow near the 5 percent pace of last year, with some slowdown in consumer credit expansion offsetting a probable cessation of the runoff of state and local debt.  Under alternative C, the 1 funds rate would induce less rapid expansion of M2 and M3 than under alternative B as opportunity costs resumed their upward movement.

Nonfederal debt likely would continue to grow near the 5 percent pace of last year, with some slowdown in consumer credit expansion offsetting a probable cessation of the runoff of state and local debt. (32) Under alternative C, the 1/2 percentage point higher funds rate would induce less rapid expansion of M2 and M3 than under alternative B as opportunity costs resumed their upward movement. Growth rates of 1-1/2 percent and 2 percent, respectively, from January to June are anticipated by the staff under alternative C. 11.

