Despite the lack of a downward tilt to the inflation projection, the Committee still might favor the unchanged stance of policy in alternative B if it viewed the benefits of further disinflation as insufficient to justify a more restrictive policy stance that pushed the economy below its potential. The case for alternative B would be even stronger if the Committee viewed the staff inflation forecast as too pessimistic-- either because spending would be weaker or because the price-output relationship would be more favorable than the staff assessment.

Such circumstances could reinforce the desire to stand pat, awaiting clarification of the outlook. (10) Earlier expectations of the possibility of easing at the November FOMC meeting have largely been erased and, thus, the choice  alternative B should have little impact on market interest rates.

Although market attention over the intermeeting period is likely to remain focused on the budget deliberations, evidence of persistent strength in private final demands along the lines of the staff forecast might cause markets to begin to question their expecta- tions about the path of interest rates going forward, and intermedi- ate- and long-term rates could edge higher.  The choice of easing under alternative A might be favored if it were thought that some information about spending--for example, soft industrial commodity prices and a sluggish manufacturing sector or slowing growth of broad money and credit--was suggesting a weakening in aggregate demand not yet evident in more general statis- tics.

In effect, the downward slope to the near-term yield curve and narrow spread of the entire curve could be signalling that real short-term rates are above those consistent with moderate growth, especially in the face of impending fiscal restraint. (12) The cut in the federal funds rate of 50 basis points under alternative A would come sooner and be larger than now expected in the market.

The sustainability of any decline in bond rates would depend on whether market participants similarly saw the easing to be called for or rather viewed it to be premature and unsustainable, as might become the case if indicators in the period just ahead were broadly in line with the staff forecast.  The choice of alternative C might be favored to the extent that the Committee wished to have greater assurance that infla- tion would continue to edge down.

A more restrictive policy to accomplish this objective might be seen as all the more needed in light of recent strength in broad measures of output and labor input. Furthermore, intermediate- and long-term interest rates have declined substantially in recent months, potentially providing considerable further impetus to spending. (14) A move to tighten policy by 50 basis points as under alternative C would especially surprise market participants, who con- tinue to hold the view, supported by statements from some Committee members, that the next policy move will be to ease.

The dollar would tend to strengthen on foreign exchange markets, and intermediate- and long-term interest rates would retrace some of their recent declines as a higher path for real short- term rates came to be built into market expectations. (15) The table below presents expected growth of money and debt under the unchanged reserve conditions of alternative B. In credit markets, supply conditions are expected to remain generally favorable.

The rebound in M2 growth, combined with still-brisk issuance of large time deposits to fund bank credit, would result in about 2 percent M3 growth under alternative B. As a consequence, M3 velocity would continue to decline over the fourth quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year, albeit at a slower pace.

