Thus, the choice of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B should have little immediate impact on market interest rates.

To date, interest rates appear to have been unaffected by the possibility of such a disruption, and over the intermeeting period, which ends before the new fiscal year, markets will probably remain of the view that in the end some com- promise will be reached to avert the most dire consequences.  Alternative B might be favored to the extent that the staff forecast were seen to be credible and the outcome to balance acceptably Committee concerns about expansion in output with those of the containment of inflation.

In any event, an unchanged stance of policy would buy time for more in- formation to accumulate to determine whether the economy is indeed on track to a sustainable pace of expansion.  A further easing of policy, as under alternative A, could be supported if recent price and wage news were read as suggest- ing that the underlying determinants of inflation were more favorable than in the staff forecast.

Such risks might be viewed as height- ened by the recent increases in longer-term interest rates and in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, if the Committee thought that markets had overreacted to stronger data, especially in light of on- coming fiscal restraint. (11) The drop in the federal funds rate of 1/2 percentage point contemplated under alternative A would be much larger and sooner than market participants currently expect.

In any case, the dollar likely would fall as System action reduced real interest rates.  The choice of the higher rates of alternative C would seem to rest on concerns about the longer-term inflation outlook.

The need for a tightening of policy - reestablish a disinflationary trend might seem all the more pressing if the firmer spending data of late and the brisk pace of broad money growth, with the economy already producing around its potential, were seen as suggesting risks on the side of more inflation than in the staff forecast.  Alternative C would come as a surprise to market par- ticipants, and money market interest rates would rise at least 50 basis points and the dollar would strengthen further on foreign ex- change markets.

Growth rates based on alternative B. (15) Growth rates of the broad monetary aggregates are ex- pected to continue to slow from their recent very rapid pace, but to remain relatively strong.

For the year, M2 is expected to remain below the 5 percent upper bound of its annual range, even under alternative A.4  The projected softening in M3 owes primarily to lower growth in institutional money funds as their yields become better aligned with market rates.

