Whether an adjustment to the stance of policy itself might be warranted by such developments might be seen as best determined on the basis of information available at the time. (10) The case for keeping the funds rate at 5-3/4 percent as under alternative B could rest on an assessment that the current funds rate may well provide the appropriate monetary impulse, at least for the time being.

Thus, choice by the Commit- tee of alternative B's unchanged funds rate likely would engender just a minor increase of short-term rates.

Of course, markets may be buffeted by developments in the legislative process suggesting shifting odds on the extent of deficit reduction. (12) If the Committee saw reasonably high odds of more restrictive effects on the economy than the staff forecast, it might favor an easing of the funds rate, as under alternative A. Such effects would come at a time when the economy already is expected to be expanding at a rate less than the growth rate of its potential and with monetary policy possibly seen as also on the restrictive side.

On the basis of relationships embodied in the Greenbook alternative simulation, a policy tightening of the dimensions of alternative C would nudge economic growth to below 2 percent over the next two years, opening up enough slack in labor and product markets to make more noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and beyond.

On the basis of relationships embodied in the Greenbook alternative simulation, a policy tightening of the dimensions of alternative C would nudge economic growth to below 2 percent over the next two years, opening up enough slack in labor and product markets to make more noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and beyond. (15) The 1/2 percentage point hike in the funds rate of alternative C would catch market participants off guard.

to1  1994-Q4 1995 December to 1995-Q4 Ranges M2 5.7 4.9 1 - 5 M3 6.0 6.7 2 - 6 M1 -1.6 -1.0 Total debt 4.0 5.2 3 - 7 Nonfederal 4.3 5.4 Note: Growth rates based on alternative B. 1.

Under alternative B, M2 is projected to 4 percent rate over the final three months of the year.

M1 is expected to continue to decline over the remainder of the 2 percent rate under alternative B, as still more banks introduce sweep accounts that transfer funds automatically from NOW accounts to MMDAs to reduce reserve requirements.

Actual M1 over the four quarters of this year is now projected to edge down by 1 percent under alternative B. Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates Alt.

