This reading from market quotes is broadly in line with the outlook of professional forecasters, as represented by the Blue Chip survey. (9) In these circumstances, adoption of the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B could prompt a small backup in market interest rates.

Accordingly, in the staff forecast, alternative B keeps policy on a path that produces results for economic growth and inflation over 1996 closely in line with the Committee's expectations for next year that were reported in July.

Accordingly, in the staff forecast, alternative B keeps policy on a path that produces results for economic growth and inflation over 1996 closely in line with the Committee's expectations for next year that were reported in July. (11) Although market participants expect monetary policy to be eased over the next few months, a reduction of 50 basis points in the federal funds rate implemented at this meeting, as called for  alternative A, would be larger than generally expected.

Thus, the smaller cut is less likely to spark major changes in market rates.  Under the staff forecast, alternative A would risk fostering greater inflation pressures, and the move would eventually need to be reversed.

In the absence of policy action, real longer-term interest rates and exchange rates would be pushed higher, and an easing could be based on concern that these higher real rates risked an unduly sluggish economy in the future. Indeed, the favorable inflation-output mix of the second half of 1995 might be seen as indicating that the economy is capable of operating on a sustained basis at a higher level of output and hence lower levels of real interest rates than in the staff forecast. (13) With market participants expecting an easing rather than a tightening of policy, the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate under alternative C would lead to a sharp jump in other money market interest rates.

The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would increase appreciably.  The FOMC might select alternative C if it saw the risks to inflation at current interest rates as reasonably well balanced and wished to gain more assurance of making longer-term progress toward price stability.

Given the demand and inflation relationships incorporated in the staff forecast, the rise in the federal funds rate under alternative C would tilt the inflation rate down slightly in 1997.

With the economy already operating in the neighborhood of its potential and aggregate demand possibly bolstered by the sharp declines in interest rates of the past year, an increase in inflationary pressures cannot be ruled out. Although growth of the standard monetary aggregates has been slow recently, the broad aggregates have expanded fairly briskly for 1995 as a whole, and credit through intermediaries and in the securities markets remains readily available. (15) The table below presents staff forecasts for money and credit growth for the November-to-March period under the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B.7 Broad measures of money 7.

Expansion of M3 picks up to a 5-3/4 percent annual rate over the November-to-March period under alternative B. M2 growth also firms from its unexpectedly weak pace so far in the fourth quarter.

