Under alternative B, the intended federal funds rate would be maintained at 6 percent.

Under the easier policy stance of alternative A, the intended federal funds rate would be reduced by 2 percent.

Under the easier policy stance of alternative A, the intended federal funds rate would be reduced by 1/2 percentage point to 5-1/2 percent. (26) The decision to leave reserve market conditions un- changed, as under alternative B, might be favored if the staff economic forecast, which assumes a constant federal funds rate through early 1996, were viewed as both a reasonable and desirable outcome.

Against this back- drop, and with very recent indicators suggesting a limit to near-term weakness, the Committee may wish to see macroeconomic data accumulate that call the staff forecast into question before deciding to ease policy. (27) Over the past few days, markets have come to view policy action at this meeting as much less likely, and interest and exchange rates probably would change little with the choice of alternative B, though a further small backup in yields cannot be ruled out with the disappointment of some residual expectations of prompt easing.

In these cir- cumstances, market participants likely would continue to see inflation risks as more muted and an intermediate-term policy ease as still a possibility. (28) A reduction in the federal funds rate, perhaps of the 2 percentage point size embodied in alternative A, could be favored as a form of insurance against the downside risks in the economic outlook.

If so, holding the real federal funds rate at its current somewhat elevated level, especially when the long-run sustainable rate may be depressed by fiscal restraint, might no longer be appropriate. That is, the financial market conditions associated with the unchanged policy of alternative B, including the backup in long-term rates in the staff forecast, might be seen as unnecessarily risking weak spend- ing.

Even in the staff forecast, unemployment in the latter part of 1996 is slightly above its natural rate: if the Committee were willing to see inflation level out at something over 3 percent rate--as in the easier scenario--rather than aim to tilt it down, it might be more disposed to consider a policy easing. (29) Immediate implementation of the 1/2 percentage point cut in the federal funds rate of alternative A would represent a considerably more aggressive policy action than currently is priced into financial markets.

