Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around 6 percent. Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would be boosted 1/2 percentage point, to 6-1/2 percent. Alternative A would reduce the intended trading level of the 2 percent.

If the Committee sees the staff forecast as the likely and desired outcome and the risks around it to be reasonably well-balanced, then selection of unchanged reserve market conditions, as under alternative B, would be favored.

To accommodate rising demands for seasonal credit, the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowings would be raised initially to 225 million under alternative B. Further increases would likely be necessary during the intermeeting period under all of the alterna- tives. Alternative C could be accomplished through an increase in the borrowing allowance to $275 million, while alternative A could be implemented by leaving the allowance for borrowing unchanged at $175 million in the face of seasonally elevated demand.

Thus, market rates would not be expected to react to selection of alternative B by the Committee.

In addition, financial asset prices may be sensitive to progress through the Congress of the various fiscal policy initiatives currently under discussion.  The fifty-basis-point firming of alternative C might be favored by the Committee if it wished to provide more assurance that pressures on resources would soon diminish, so as not to perpetuate the recently elevated rate of inflation and, over time, to return the economy toward a disinflationary path.

Markets seem to have reacted strongly to what could prove to be only a moderate downshift in underlying demand conditions, and current financial conditions may therefore provide excessive stimulus to an economy already operating around its potential. (11) With markets apparently having concluded that rates are unlikely to rise significantly further, the response in the financial markets to the 50 basis point increase of alternative C could be sub- stantial.

The dollar probably would strengthen noticeably, extending the firming evident over the past week or so. (12) The Committee might consider the easing of monetary policy under alternative A appropriate if it saw substantial risks that the recent sluggish growth of final demand and the associated inventory correction could develop into a prolonged period of growth below potential.

To cushion the fiscal restraint adequately, how- ever, declines in long-term rates might need to be reinforced through an easing in monetary policy.  Short-term market rates under alternative A would like- ly drop close to one-half percentage point.

The foreign exchange value of the dollar would decline. (14) Growth of the monetary and credit aggregates under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alternative B is presented in the table below.

under alternatives A and C, are shown on the table and charts on the following pages.

Nonetheless, M3 is projected to remain above the upper end of its current 0-to-4 percent annual range through September under alternative B, and even the tighter reserve market conditions of alternative C would not likely be adequate to bring M3 within its range by September.

Nonetheless, M3 is projected to remain above the upper end of its current 0-to-4 percent annual range through September under alternative B, and even the tighter reserve market conditions of alternative C would not likely be adequate to bring M3 within its range by September. (17) M2 growth, by contrast, is projected to edge up slight- ly from that of the previous four months, to a 2-1/2 percent pace over April through September; this aggregate would remain in the lower half of its l-to-5 percent annual range under alternative B. Although slower growth of nominal income over the second and third quarters will damp the demand for money, opportunity costs of holding M2 assets have leveled off and begun to fall; as the depressing effects of earlier increases in opportunity costs diminish, M2 should grow more closely in line with income.

