In these circumstances, the Committee may wish to keep alternative B), awaiting more information to assess how markets may evolve and how the other uncertainties may be resolved.

In these circumstances, the Committee may wish to keep policy unchanged (alternative B), awaiting more information to assess how markets may evolve and how the other uncertainties may be resolved. (9) With market participants almost universally expecting policy to be on hold for a time, the Committee's selection of alternative B would prompt little response in financial markets.

However, signs of significant progress in the political process in resolving budget and entitlement controversies probably would spark a rally in bond and stock markets. alternative C) might be favored if the Committee wished to move promptly to stem the rise in underlying inflation in the staff forecast and increase the odds on making some headway on its longer-run objective of price stability.

Such concerns might be accentuated if the Committee saw the run-up in share prices as likely to persist, boosting spending above that in the staff forecast, and as indicative of an accommodative monetary policy that would eventually show through to the prices of other assets and goods and services.  The choice of alternative C would surprise market participants and perhaps lead them to reconsider their view on the Federal Reserve's longer-term objectives.

The resulting drop in equity values would be an important channel for reducing the excessive aggregate demand that presumably would motivate policy tightening. alternative A) would seem to require a judgment that the upward pressure on prices is less than in the staff forecast at current interest rate levels.

In addition, the extraordinary slowing in consumer credit growth could be interpreted as indicating a developing problem in credit markets that will have greater implications for consumer spending than the staff has allowed, despite the recent uptrend in retail sales and favorable anecdotal reports on Christmas spending. (13) Because the market is not expecting a change in policy, a 50 basis point funds rate reduction, as in alternative A, would show through completely to other short-term rates.

The decline in nominal yields on longer-term instruments might be - 10- somewhat muted, or ultimately even reversed, were incoming data to turn out more consistent with the staff outlook.  Under alternative B and the staff forecast, both debt and money should expand at moderate rates in coming months, in line with projected nominal GDP.

