Indeed, the rise in the core inflation rate from 2-3/4 percent this year to 3 percent in each of the next two years would be larger still were it not for technical changes in the index. (6) If the Committee views the staff forecast as both likely and acceptable, it presumably would favor standing pat--alternative B. Even if the Committee found unacceptable the forecasted upcreep in core inflation (abstracting from technical CPI adjustments), it might want to wait for more evidence that such an outcome is in train before taking action.

Similarly, the dollar should trade on foreign exchange markets around its recent levels. (8) A policy tightening, such as the 50 basis point firming of the federal funds rate under alternative C, might be favored should the Committee wish to move promptly to counter the updrift in underlying inflation embedded in the staff outlook.

Or spending might snap back more forcefully than envisioned by the staff--especially in light of the recent rallies in bond and stock markets--and intensify pressures on resource utilization.  The choice of alternative C would come as a surprise to market participants.

Financial prices could be volatile for a time as market participants reappraised the economic outlook and the likely path for monetary policy, and appreciable declines in equity values cannot be ruled out. (10) A 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate, as under alternative A, might be favored if the Committee viewed the recent softness of final sales as likely to persist.

A 50 basis point reduction in the funds rate, as under alternative A, would most likely be read as evidence that the Committee has serious reservations about the prospects for spending.

This implies growth for 1996 at around the 5 percent midpoint of its annual range. (13) In coming months, offering rates on M2 accounts are not expected to change much under alternative B, maintaining opportunity costs at around their recent levels.

As a result, M1 is anticipated to decline at a 9 percent rate over the October-to-March period under alternative B; adjusted for sweeps, M1 would increase at a 3-3 percent rate over that span.

