The outcomes for real GDP growth and CPI inflation envisioned by the staff for 1996 are at the high end of the central tendencies of the forecasts pro- vided by Board members and Reserve Bank presidents at the time of the last meeting.  An unchanged policy stance, as in alternative B, would probably be preferred if the Committee concurred with the staff's as- sessment of the economy, viewed potential risks as about evenly balanced, and was willing to accept the possibility of a slight inten- sification of price pressures.

Moreover, in light of the unusual number of temporary disruptions and distortions to economic activity in the last few months and the difficulties in understanding the implications of the recent movements of stock and bond prices, a pause might be favored to allow sufficient time to establish a firmer bearing on the likely course of spending and inflation, even if the Committee saw the risks to the outlook as possibly tilted to one side or the other. (9) With market participants apparently expecting no policy action over the next few months, maintenance of current reserve condi- tions, as under alternative B, would elicit little reaction in credit markets.

Absent such a develop- ment or unanticipated changes in policy abroad, the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would remain around its current level. (10) Given the staff's assessment of the economy, the 1/2 percentage point easing in reserve market conditions offered under alternative A would boost the economy marginally further beyond its potential and tilt the inflation rate up a bit more noticeably.

Under all these scenarios, the foreign exchange value of the dollar would weaken, and especially so if inflation expectations deteriorated. (12) A 1/2 percentage point tightening in reserve conditions, as under alternative C, might be favored if the Committee agreed with the staff forecast but viewed its outcome for inflation as undesir- able, particularly if the Committee wanted to make some progress to- ward price stability.

Relative to the staff forecast, a 1 firming in reserve conditions would take a little pressure off re- source markets, raising the odds that the inflation rate would not tend to drift higher.  The 50 basis point tightening of alternative C would catch market participants unawares and show through to instruments at the shortest maturities.

