Nonetheless, there are reasons why the Committee might choose the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B for the upcoming intermeeting period.

If so, inflation is more apt to be kept within acceptable bounds without policy adjustment. (9) With market participants apparently placing greater than even odds on policy tightening at this meeting, interest rates would likely decline and the dollar weaken on foreign exchange markets if  alternative B were adopted.

Even before the discount rate story earlier this week, markets had built in close to 50 odds of a slight policy tightening, and alternative B probably would trigger rate declines that not only reversed the increases associated with the story, but some of those registered earlier in the intermeeting period as well.

Given uncertainties about the outlook and the perceived lack of a policy consensus within the Federal Reserve, markets are likely to remain highly sensitive to new economic data and to indications of Committee members' inclinations. (10) A tightening of policy at this Committee meeting, whether by 50 basis points, as assumed in alternative C, or by only 25 basis points, would improve the chances that price pressures would be contained and inflation outcomes would be consistent with the Commit- tee members' expectations in July.

M2 is now expected to increase at a 4-1 4 percent rate under alternative B, somewhat below the upper ends of their growth ranges for the year.

M2 is now expected to increase at a 4-1 rate this year and M3 at a 5-3/4 percent rate under alternative B, somewhat below the upper ends of their growth ranges for the year. Over the August-to-December period, the expansion of M2 is projected to pick up to about a 4-3/4 percent pace, broadly in line with GDP growth under alternative B. The pickup in M2 should show through to M3, and growth in the latter is forecast to strengthen to a 6 percent rate over the final four months of this year, abetted by a strengthen- ing of the expansion of bank credit.

