Or, if the Committee accepts the relationships embedded in the staff forecast, this alternative could seem attractive if the Committee did not contemplate downward pressure on inflation this year through either a deliberate or opportunistic strategy. Short-run Policy Alternatives  The unchanged funds rate of alternative B is consistent with the staff Greenbook forecast.

Not only might alternative B be seen as attractive if the Committee concurred with this outlook and found the results acceptable, but it also might have appeal as a "wait and see" strategy because delays in data have curtailed the new infor- mation available to the Committee since it eased policy in December.

Thus, rates could edge higher under alternative B.16 However, the extent of any rise in such rates likely would be tempered in the near term by the perception that the Committee had merely postponed easing pending the availabi- lity of more information.

Reserve management may continue to be complicated to a degree for the next few weeks by the very low level of required reserve balances resulting from the ongoing introduction of deposit sweep arrangements interacting with seasonal lows in reserve balances. These developments may in turn be associated with greater volatility in the federal funds market. fiscal prospects, and if potential default on Treasury debt still looms in late February, markets could become skittish, given that the Treasury has indicated that its scope to maneuver to avoid default will be exhausted by the beginning of March. (25) Justification for a quarter-point reduction in the federal funds rate under alternative A would seem to rest on a belief that the economy is weaker than in the staff outlook, as might be inferred from the tone of some anecdotal reports and recent data, or that the prospects for disinflation are brighter.

An easing in the next few months, although not necessarily at this meet- ing, is consistent with expectations both of market participants, as embodied in the yield curve, and, as suggested by the Blue Chip sur- vey, of many outside forecasters whose inflation outlook on average nonetheless does not differ significantly from the staff's. (26) Money market interest rates would fall by less than a  alternative A, given current expectations.

Against this background, incoming economic data suggest- ing a more buoyant economy could cause a sharp reversal of the inter- est rate declines. (27) If the Committee agreed with the staff outlook for spending and inflation and wanted to make deliberate progress toward price stability, the choice of a quarter-point increase in the federal  alternative C might be favored.

With the direction of interest rates here and abroad beginning to diverge, the dollar could well strengthen further on foreign exchange markets. (28) The table below shows money and credit growth under alternative B for the January-to-June period.

