The staff projections of output growth and inflation in both 1997 and 1998 are near the lower ends of the central tendencies of FOMC members' projections made last month. (6) With the risks apparently still tilted toward higher inflation, this document presents the two basic policy options discussed in recent bluebooks: no change and tighter. Under alternative B, the intended federal funds rate would be kept at its current level of 5-1 percent. Under alternative C, it would be boosted to 5-3 provision of nonborrowed reserves or a hike in the discount rate.

Indeed, whether the structure of the economy has changed in ways that make it somewhat less inflation-prone, at least for a time, than allowed for by the staff projection remains an open question. (8) Market participants uniformly do not expect a near-term policy move by the Federal Reserve, and selection of alternative B by the Committee should elicit little imme- diate market reaction.

If the Committee wants more insurance against the possibility that inflation will begin to pick up, and especially if it wishes to tilt the odds a little in the direction of further progress toward price stability over coming years, it may wish to raise the intended federal funds rate at this meeting, perhaps by the 25 basis points of alternative C. With strong demand over the past year and a half propelling the economy beyond the level of its estimated potential, real short-term rates might be seen as having been below their equilibriums.

In those circumstances, delaying policy action ultimately could turn out to be costly in terms of economic performance. (10) With no near-term tightening expected, the market response to implementation  alternative C could be sharp.

In either case, equity prices almost certainly would fall, as real interest rates rose, and the decline could be considerable if capital losses spurred investors to reexamine their assumptions regarding the risks of equity investments.  Under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B, M2 is projected to grow at a moderate 4-1/2 percent rate on average over the remaining months of the year, around the expected rate of expansion of nominal GDP, leaving this aggregate a little below the upper limit of its 1 to 5 percent growth range for the year.

