Under alternative B, the intended federal funds rate would be maintained at its current 2 percent level. Under alternative C, it would be raised 1 percent.

For 1998, with the unemployment rate holding at around a 4-1/2 percent rate during the year, the staff forecasts that inflation will pick up and be poised to increase further in 1999; a partial reversal over the next year of recent increases in the exchange value of the dollar removes one source of downward pressure on inflation.  The Committee may favor the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B if it thinks that chances are that the staff has not gone far enough to incorporate a more favorable tradeoff between resource use and inflation into the outlook.

No change in the stance of monetary policy at this FOMC meeting is built into the structure of market interest rates, so financial market prices would react little to the Committee's choice of alternative B. Over the upcoming intermeeting period, some firming in Treasury bill rates should accompany the return to positive net issuance of bills, while early signs of a pickup in economic growth after a pause in the second quarter could well induce some upward pressures on bond yields.

In the context of evidence of a widening trade deficit, these interest rate increases are not expected to contribute to upward pressure on the dollar. (35) The 1/4 percentage-point increase in the federal funds rate embodied in alternative C might seem appropriate if the Committee sees the likelihood of intensifying inflation pressures, as in the Greenbook, and wishes to impart some resistance to the anticipated acceleration of prices.

The Committee might well view it as a favorable outcome if the economic expansion were to proceed at a slightly slower-than-projected pace but with a declining path for inflation that better conformed to the Federal Reserve's long-run goal of stable prices.  The 25 basis point firming in alternative C would catch market participants off guard, inducing an immediate selloff in securities markets and an appreciation of the dollar in exchange markets, with short-term interest rates jumping by virtually the same amount as the intended funds rate.

A 50 basis point firming would, of course, represent an even greater surprise to market participants and would induce a still sharper backup in interest rates and drop in equity prices. (37) The staffs projections of money and debt growth this year, assuming main- tenance of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B, were described in the previous section.

Maintenance of the slightly higher short-term interest rates of alternative C would lower these growth rates only slightly over this year.

