However, inflation picks up noticeably in 1998 and presumably beyond. (7) Nonetheless, a number of considerations regarding the outlook might induce the Committee to forgo tightening at the March meeting, as under alternative B. The fact that resource utilization rates have been close to current levels for several quarters, with no sign that the underlying trend of price inflation is moving higher, might suggest that the economy may not in fact have overshot its long-run potential.

Finally, the enthusiasm of international investors for the dollar may prove more lasting than anticipated by the staff, restraining inflation pressures in 1998 and beyond relative to the staff forecast. (8) With market participants apparently placing high odds on a 25 basis point tightening in the federal funds rate at the March meeting, interest rates probably would fall  alternative B were adopted.

Indeed, if data in the weeks ahead come in as the staff projects -- strong real GDP growth and the unemployment rate declining -- both short- and long-term interest rates would back up, with long-term rates possibly more than reversing any initial rally. (9) The Committee might choose to increase the federal funds rate, perhaps by the 50 basis points of alternative C, in order to lean against the likely buildup of inflation pressures.

Based on the pattern of prior Committee actions, markets could soon begin to build in at least one more 25 basis point firming, a tendency that would be amplified if incoming data are as strong as in the staff forecast.  Under alternative B and the staff forecast, debt is expected to continue to grow around its recent pace in the months ahead, while money growth tends to moderate as the expansion of nominal GDP slows.

For households, although credit is likely to become somewhat harder to obtain for marginal borrowers, overall consumer debt should remain on its recent moderate growth path.  M2 growth from February to June under alternative B is projected to slow to a 2 percent rate, reflecting the deceleration in nominal GDP.

