Although over time aggregate demand should be restrained by the effects of the past appreciation of the dollar, as well as an assumed rise in long-term rates and tightening in the stance of monetary policy next year, the unemployment rate stays at that low level through the end of 1998. These strains on resources contribute to an increase in inflation over the next year and a half. The outcomes for the unemployment rate and inflation in the staff forecast are near the lower ends of the central tendencies of the projections of Committee members provided at the July meeting for 1997 but a shade below those for 1998. (6) The staff assessment of the pressures on resources implies that policy restraint is in order at some point to check an upcreep in inflation, but the Committee may, nonetheless, prefer to hold the federal funds rate at its current level of 5-1/2 percent at this meeting, as in alternative B. Over the past few quarters sustained high levels of resource utilization have been associated with flat or, by some measures, even declining inflation.

With scant indications of pipeline pressures that normally presage a pickup in inflation, and with business profit margins perhaps ample enough to absorb a portion of any speed up in cost increases, the Committee may well have time to act before an incipient increase in inflation becomes firmly embedded in inflation expectations. (7) If the Committee were confident that the staff had correctly identified the threat that inflation would pick up, or wanted some greater assurance of further progress toward price stability, it would likely favor raising the federal funds rate promptly, perhaps at this meeting by the 25 basis points of alternative C. The need for prompt action might be seen as elevated because the vigor of final sales threatens to add to pressures on resources, and the longer the economy operates beyond its sustainable potential, the more disruptive may be the correction needed to contain inflation.

Even worker insecurity may be expected to erode in a strong labor market marked by reduced layoffs. With those beneficial forces likely to wind down, the Committee may fear that the effects of strains on resources may show through more forcefully to the prices of goods and services than in the staff forecast, perhaps more in line with traditional relationships. (8) Virtually no one in the market anticipates action at this meeting, so that yields across the term structure are not likely to budge much and the dollar should continue to trade around its current level on foreign exchange markets immediately following the adoption of the unchanged policy stance of alternative B. Treasury bill rates have been depressed of late by low issuance, and the turnaround in bill sales in the fourth quarter prompted by the seasonal bulge in the federal deficit may roll back some of the decline in rates on those securities.

Against this backdrop, nominal yields would likely edge higher, with both their real and inflation compensation components rising, and equity prices would likely decline.  The Committee's choice of alternative C at this meeting would catch market participants completely unawares.

In these circumstances, incoming data bearing on the strength of spending and inflation pressure would be especially scrutinized, and large swings in financial prices might become even more common. - 10-  Under the unchanged policy stance of alternative B, the growth of the monetary aggregates should slow significantly.

Under alternative C, even though opportunity costs would likely rise with the imposition of monetary restraint, M2 might be bolstered to some extent in the near term should a correction in the stock and bond markets induce investors to favor money market over bond and stock mutual funds.

