Even if the Committee is concerned about the pressures on labor resources and finds the eventual uptrend in underlying inflation unacceptable, it may be willing to keep the funds rate constant at this meeting, as under Alternative B. In the staff forecast, the emergence of inflation has been pushed back enough to suggest that delaying possible firming to await further information about global and national economic developments runs minimal risk of embedding higher inflation and inflation expectations in economic decisionmaking.

Under alternative B, the Committee would be buying time to assess the extent to which developments abroad restrain aggregate demand, depress oil prices, and support the dollar, as well as the degree to which recent momentum in the economy might be sustained.

More data might also be seen as especially useful in sorting out some of the questions about underlying pressures on labor compensation and the extent to which productivity behavior might damp the feed-through of higher compensation to profit margins and prices. (10) The markets expect no policy action over the next few months and would react little, if at all, to the choice of alternative B. Apart from year-end effects, interest rates-- especially Treasury yields--should fluctuate close to recent lows over the intermeeting period.

Moreover, they should be easily absorbed into markets benefiting from demands for safer assets and from reduced borrowing by Asian financial institutions to the extent they repay dollar liabilities with the proceeds of their asset sales.  The 25 basis point tightening of Alternative C might be favored if the Committee wanted to lean against the inflationary bias that may well be inherent in the current and prospective tautness of labor markets.

The stock market likely would come under substantial selling pressure, especially if the move were seen to be only the first in a series of tightenings.  The 25 basis point easing of Alternative A might be favored if the Committee were concerned that turmoil abroad might have an even greater impact on the U.

M2 growth is projected at around a 4 percent annual pace over the November-to-March period under alternative B, leaving this aggregate near the upper end of its provisional 1998 range.

