As a consequence, inflation should be a little faster through the end of the forecast period than in the previous Greenbook and would be poised to pick up further in 2000.  The unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B might be favored if the Committee saw the staff forecast as a likely outcome and one that appropriately balanced the goals of restraining inflation and sustaining expansion over the next few years, or, at a minimum, if it viewed the risks of substantially different and less desirable outcomes on either side of the staff forecast as about equal at the current federal funds rate.

Conversely, in the event of greater drag from Asia than anticipated in the staff forecast, the underlying strength of domestic demand appears to be strong enough to sustain economic expansion for a while until an easier policy is adopted and has time to take hold. (9) Because financial markets are placing very low odds on a change in policy in the near term, the choice of alternative B would likely have little immediate impact on domestic financial markets or the exchange value of the dollar.

But any added volatility in the funds rate would be temporary and should have little, if any, effect on interest rates further out the yield curve. (10) If the Committee saw substantial risks of a significantly weaker economy than in the staff forecast, it might want to move promptly to ease policy, perhaps by lowering the 4 percentage point, as in alternative A. Such a risk to aggregate demand might arise not only from greater Asian effects than currently anticipated, but also from weaker domestic demand.

The dollar could fall on foreign exchange markets, and lower interest rates would help the stock market hold close to its recent record level.  Alternative C would tend to be favored to the extent that the Committee saw the risks as more heavily weighted toward a pickup in inflation.

With the unemployment rate already likely below its sustainable level, this additional demand could lead to a steeper upward track for underlying inflation that would require more substantial and disruptive restraint the longer it is delayed. (13) Short-term rates would rise by the full amount of the 25 basis point tightening  alternative C, which is unanticipated in the market.

Most likely, financial markets in troubled emerging economies would not be greatly affected if the action were seen as limited and not portending a more generalized upward movement in rates in industrial economies.  Under the conditions of alternative B, the moderating pace of spending in the staff forecast should be accompanied by considerably slower growth in debt and money.

By September, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to have grown at a 5-1/2 percent rate from its fourth quarter 1997 base, above the midpoint of its 3 to 7 percent annual range. (15) The moderation in the growth of the broad monetary aggregates under alternative B owes in part to a slowdown in GDP and bank credit as business lending and acquisitions of securities slacken and banks become less aggressive in seeking funding.

