Overall prices are anticipated to rise considerably faster in 1999 and 2000 than in 1998; the pickup largely reflects the effects of a turnaround in oil prices, with core CPI inflation over the next two years remaining at about the level of 1998. (10) If the Committee views the Greenbook forecast as acceptable and the most likely outcome, it presumably would maintain the intended federal funds rate at 4-3/4 percent, as under alternative B. The announcement just after the last Committee meeting indicated that the cumulative easing since September had appropriately positioned policy to promote sustained growth and low inflation.

As a consequence of the mix of incoming information and the wording of the November announcement, market participants do not expect a policy move in either direction at this meeting, and, absent an especially compelling case for policy action, the Committee may wish to avoid surprising them-particularly before year-end when thin markets and a reluctance to put capital at risk could magnify the effects of any policy action.  Against this backdrop, the choice of alternative B should have little effect on domestic interest rates or dollar exchange rates.

In addition, the foreign exchange value of the dollar against the major currencies has fallen 6 percent since mid-July. Finally, the surprise easing of monetary policy in continental Europe may indicate an increased willingness there to respond to signs of demand weakness, which would facilitate easing in other countries and reduce the risk of a slackening in global economic activity. (13) The case for easing further at some point, as in the 1/4 point reduction in the federal funds rate at this meeting of alternative A, might rest on the view that there are substantial risks of a shortfall in global demand and of more downward pressure on prices than the Committee might find desirable.

Reactions to a tightening would be greater than to an easing, because the former would reverse recent trends in policy and would be inconsistent with the direction of policy currently built into the yield curve.  Under alternative B, conditions in credit markets could well improve after the turn of the year, but lenders should stay on the cautious side as the growth of economic activity slows and profits and incomes soften further.

Overall nonfinancial debt should slow to a 5-1/4 percent annual rate from November to March, around the center of its 3 to 7 percent provisional range for 1999.  alternative B, M2 and M3 are likely to decelerate substantially.

Under alternative B, M2 and M3 are projected to expand over the November-to-March period at annual rates of 7-1/2 and 9 percent, respectively.

