The staff projects that the overall CPI will rise about 2 percent during 1999, a tad below its forecast for the June/July meeting and around the lower end of the Committee members' central tendency range. (6) If the Committee found the staff forecast, with inflation and unemployment both staying relatively low, to be both a reasonable expectation and a desirable outcome, it 2 percent federal funds rate, as under alternative B. The Committee could still favor alternative B even if it saw higher inflation eventually, but was rather uncertain about its expectation of the eventual pickup in inflation, given the surprisingly favorable price performance of recent years.

The greater fragility of these markets evident over the intermeeting period may suggest that the potential for adverse effects of a tightening of U.S. monetary policy on other economies has risen further. (7) With inflation low, aggregate demand apparently decelerating, and the outlook for Asia quite uncertain, market participants anticipate no policy action at this meeting, and market interest rates are likely to be little affected by selection of alternative B. Under the Greenbook forecast, information about prospective corporate earnings is likely to disappoint investors, keeping equity prices from rebounding and possibly precipitating a further decline.

In either case, it may prefer to apply additional monetary restraint at this meeting, as in the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative C. A prediction of worsening inflation pressures might be based in part on unambiguously tight labor market conditions and the uptrend already evident in wages and compensation.

Delayed but greater tightening could be even more disruptive to financial markets, since economies abroad may not be sufficiently improved and markets sufficiently settled to absorb the heavier blow. (9) Markets would be somewhat unsettled by the 25 basis point firming action of alternative C at this meeting, which would come as a surprise.

Credit- risk spreads on domestic private debt, as well as on the obligations of a number of foreign governments and firms, likely would widen noticeably. (10) In view of recent developments in global financial markets, the Committee might be inclined to consider a 25 basis point easing of monetary policy, as in alternative A. Aggregate demand in the United States apparently has already decelerated appreciably, and Committee members may believe that the staff forecast does not give enough weight to ongoing deflationary forces coming from developments abroad.

On balance, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at about a 5 percent annual rate over the remainder of the year, leaving this aggregate on a track to expand at about a 5-3/4 percent rate over 1998 as a whole, somewhat above the midpoint of its 3 to 7 percent annual range. (12) M2 and M3 are forecast to expand at 5 and 7-3/4 percent annual rates, respectively, from July to December under alternative B. The moderation in money reflects the expectation of slightly slower growth in nominal GDP over the second half of the year.

