Further technical corrections will help to hold down published inflation, but a number of economic forces are also at work: Non-oil import prices are projected to continue to decline, though at a diminishing rate, capacity utilization is seen as easing noticeably, the rate of increase in unit labor costs is projected to slip back next year to below a 2 percent pace, and inflation expectations should continue to edge lower. (8) If the Committee views the Greenbook forecast as both likely and acceptable, it might be inclined to maintain its current 5-1/2 percent intended federal funds rate, as under alternative B. Although that forecast has an underlying upward tilt to inflation in 1999 as labor markets remain quite tight, that tilt is gradual and starts from a lower inflation rate in 1998 than the Committee had anticipated only a few months ago, judging from the central tendencies of members' CPI projections in February.

Although that forecast has an underlying upward tilt to inflation in 1999 as labor markets remain quite tight, that tilt is gradual and starts from a lower inflation rate in 1998 than the Committee had anticipated only a few months ago, judging from the central tendencies of members' CPI projections in February.2 Even if the Committee were troubled by the underlying uptrend of inflation in the staff forecast, it might still be willing to adopt the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B. The vulnerable state of many financial markets in Asia, which could react adversely to an increase in U.

Moreover, market participants appear to be anticipating economic events over the intermeeting period along the lines of the Greenbook forecast, so market interest rates should vary around current quotes. The exchange value of the dollar against major currencies also is not expected to break out of its recent trading range. (11) The Committee instead may prefer to raise its intended federal funds rate by 25 basis points at the May meeting, as under alternative C. The Committee was concerned about the inflation outlook at its last meeting, and in some respects that outlook may have - 10- worsened.

Although a tightening of U negative impacts on financial conditions in Asian, and perhaps other, emerging market economies, the Committee would need to weigh those effects against the possibility that delay would necessitate more substantial actions later.  Under the stable money market conditions of alternative B, the staffs projected 2-1/2 percentage point moderation in the pace of nominal GDP from the first to the third quarter of this year should be associated with a noticeable slowdown in the expansion of the debt and monetary aggregates.

From April to September, the growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is foreseen as slowing to a 4-1/2 percent annual rate, bringing its average advance from the fourth quarter to 5-1/2 percent, somewhat above the midpoint of its annual range.  Under alternative B, M2 growth is expected to slow significantly to a 3 percent average rate over the April-to-September period, with a little more than 1 percentage point of the slowdown from the first four months of 1998 representing the projected unwinding of the previous artificial boost related to special tax and mortgage-refinancing factors.

Looking a little further out, the staff now envisions growth of this aggregate for the year at a 5-1/2 percent rate, putting it above the 1 to 5 percent annual range judged by the FOMC to be consistent with conditions of price stability and stable velocity behavior; this projection embodies a 1 percent decline in velocity in 1998.  Projected M3 growth under alternative B would dip to a 5-1 April through September, reflecting some expected reduction in the growth of depository funding needs associated with the anticipated marked slowing in depository credit expansion - 13 - over that interval.

