Consequently, core CPI inflation is anticipated to step up 3 point to about 2-3/4 percent by 2001, while total CPI inflation remains flat at just under 2-1/2 percent owing to a drop in energy prices. (9) Even if the Committee, like the staff, sees forces at work tending to raise core inflation over time, it may be sufficiently uncertain about that outcome that it still would wish to leave the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting at 5-1/4 percent, as under alternative B, and to retain the tilt toward firming to convey a sense of the risks.

There is a wide range of uncertainty in predicting financial market conditions as the century date change approaches; market liquidity may continue to improve and spreads narrow some more, but most financial markets are likely to be unusually illiquid as participants pare back their activity until the new year. (11) The Committee instead may favor a 25 basis point increase in its intended federal funds rate, as under alternative C. Although the staff has adopted the view that structural productivity is growing along a higher and steeper trajectory over the forecast period than previously thought, it still predicts an increase in core inflation over the next two years that the Committee may find both likely and unacceptable.

If the Committee wanted to be sure that market uncertainties about near-term policy action did not unduly contribute to strains in the runup to year end, the announcement could convey a disinclination to act in December. (13) While financial markets are somewhat illiquid, confidence about Y2K preparedness and procedures to contain systemic problems has been growing, suggesting 4 percentage point firming at this meeting under alternative C--although a bit of a surprise--would be unlikely to create undue strains.

Even so, at an anticipated 5 percent pace over the first quarter, debt growth would still be on a slower track than the one laid down so far this year. Although financial conditions should ease a little early next year after the passage of the century date change, lenders and investors are expected to be a bit more cautious on balance in extending credit over the forecast period as economic expansion moderates and profit margins erode.  Under alternative B, the staff expects that M2 will grow 6 percent this year and M3 7-1/4 percent, compared with the 5 and 6 percent upper bounds of their respective annual ranges.

