Mainly owing to the higher trajectory for resource utilization, the staff forecast now sees stronger inflation pressures than in the December Greenbook; spurred in part by a turnaround in prices of oil, other commodities, and many other imports, key measures of inflation pick up about 1 percentage point between 1998 and 2000. (19) Even if the Committee agreed with the Greenbook analysis that inflation could well move higher, it might choose to keep the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting, as in alternative B. The situation in global financial markets remains somewhat unsettled, and the Committee may see that as posing a continued risk of further global contagion that ultimately could jeopardize the U.

Finally, the ongoing string of favorable wage and price reports might suggest that, despite tight labor markets, inflation risks are somewhat less than embodied in the staff forecast. (20) If, by contrast, the Committee saw increasing inflation as the primary threat to sustained economic expansion, it might choose the 25 basis point hike in the funds rate of alternative C at this meeting.

The Committee might even be concerned that inflation could accelerate more sharply than envisioned in the staff forecast, perhaps because faster-than-projected economic growth would put greater pressure on labor markets or because the staff had earlier underestimated the role of temporary factors in damping inflation, so that when these factors turn around the underlying tautness of labor markets will show through forcefully to wages and prices.  The 25 basis point easing contemplated in alternative A might be seen as appropriate if the Committee remained concerned about the possibility that economic and financial weakness abroad might prove deeper and more widespread than now expected.

In light of the slack conditions in global economic activity, such an action would be unlikely to prompt a significant increase in inflationary pressures for some time to come, even if the downside risks did not materialize. (22) Investors place high odds on monetary policy being left unchanged at this 4 percent, as under alternative B, short- and long-term interest rates should hold near their current levels, as would the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets.

Under the anticipated conditions of solid economic growth, concerns about credit quality should abate further, and bond market spreads should edge down a little from their current high levels. (23) In light of prevailing expectations about monetary policy, financial markets would react sharply to the tightening of alternative C. Unless the policy announcement hinted strongly that the FOMC saw the move as a limited action, say intended to reverse some of the extra "insurance" against adverse financial developments that was put in place with the last easing, the backup in interest rates could be particularly large.

The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets could rise appreciably. (24) In view of the strength of recent economic activity, investors might be puzzled by implementation of alternative A, but they likely would conclude that the shift represented another small, and perhaps final, adjustment of policy to turbulence abroad designed to ensure that U.

Under the unchanged funds rate of alternative B and the economic conditions foreseen in the Greenbook, M2 is projected to expand at a 5-1/2 percent 2 percent rate over the January-to-June period.

