Even so, taut labor markets begin to lift core inflation next year in the staff forecast, and the FOMC is assumed to firm the nominal funds rate a little next year, which keeps the real funds rate about unchanged. (8) If the Committee believes that inflation pressures could well be damped for some time, it might prefer to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting, as in alternative B. The staff forecast shows only a gradual pickup in core inflation to a relatively low level, at least through 2000.

The Committee might also be encouraged by the behavior of bond rates over recent weeks, which suggests that investors respond promptly to signs the economy might begin to overheat and, by anticipating future monetary policy firming, impart some restraint to spending before the Federal Reserve takes action. (9) The response of financial markets to the continuation of an unchanged policy stance, as under alternative B, would depend importantly on whether the Committee announces a change in the tilt of the directive.

Also, with the Committee seen as more inclined to act, markets could well become more sensitive to information bearing on the price outlook. (10) If the Committee saw a pickup in underlying inflation as likely, it might favor the 25 basis point firming of alternative C. Even with what would seem to be a generous allowance for expected productivity growth and with relatively restrained pressures on nominal and real wages at projected labor resource utilization rates, the staff still foresees a gradual uptrend in core inflation.

As a consequence, the immediate 25 basis point increase in the funds rate of alternative C would trigger a similar rise in short-term interest rates.

After softening substantially in May owing to the clearing of tax checks, M2 growth is projected to pick up in the months ahead under alternative B, extending the trend decline in velocity evident since mid-1997, and leaving growth of this aggregate for the year at about 6 percent, somewhat above its annual range of 1 to 5 percent.

