As a result, inflation is expected to trend higher, with core consumer prices projected to expand around 2 percent over the four quarters of this year and 2-1/2 percent next year. (8) Despite the pickup in underlying inflation in the staff forecast, the Committee may nonetheless prefer to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting, as under alternative B. The projected pickup in inflation, if realized, would be gradual and not likely for some time to foster an appreciable increase in inflation expectations that could destabilize financial markets or materially increase the ultimate cost to economic activity of containing price pressures.

And the Committee may see the wage and cost data as sufficiently ambiguous to reserve judgment on whether the current level of tautness in labor markets will produce accelerating prices, especially since trends in core consumer inflation and longer-run inflation expectations remain flat. Moreover, recent developments may indicate that global financial markets are fragile, with the potential for further deterioration as year-end approaches even absent a firming in policy.  News that the Committee was standing pat, as under alternative B, would come as a considerable surprise in the market, triggering a rally in capital markets and putting further downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

The former could be alleviated by immediate action combined with an announcement suggesting little likelihood of subsequent policy moves, while the latter might suggest that--because the Committee may feel increasingly uncomfortable in tightening as the year wears on--action delayed now may wind up being delayed for some time to come. (11) Given the high odds market participants put on action at this meeting, the announcement that the Committee was raising the intended federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, as under alternative C, should produce little response in key financial prices if no surprises are in store from the wording of the press release.

Under alternative B, M2 is expected to grow at a 6-1 percent pace over the five months from July to December.

The firming in policy under alternative C occurs late enough this year to impart only slight restraint on the aggregates in 1999.

