Indeed, this was an important reason for the upward adjustment in the federal funds rate path assumed in the Greenbook. (7) The Committee may agree that the risks to the inflation outlook are on the upside, but still wish to stand pat on policy for the time being, as in alternative B. Such a choice could allow it to better judge whether more near-term tightening is needed or whether the restraining effects on aggregate demand of previous tightening actions will prove to be sufficient to bring growth in aggregate demand into reasonable balance with that of potential supply.

In these circumstances, the Committee's assessment of the inflation risks may be such that it favors an immediate tightening of policy, perhaps by raising the federal funds rate another 1/4 percentage point as in alternative C. The Committee might believe it especially important to provide continuing evidence of its vigilance as the effect on inflation of the recent surge in oil prices plays out in coming months.

Even if the Committee anticipates that considerably more policy firming will be needed eventually to contain inflation pressures, it may still favor the gradual approach embodied in alternative C in light of the considerable uncertainty about aggregate supply and about the effect of the substantial run-up in short- and long-term interest rates in recent quarters on aggregate demand.

Such gradualism also may hold appeal because financial markets have been edgy and are potentially vulnerable to an unexpectedly large policy move.  If the Committee were to choose alternative C, it presumably would also want to convey to market participants that the balance of risks remains tilted toward inflation.

Moreover, a steeper path for the real funds rate might be seen as necessary to counter a risk of a ratcheting up of longer-term inflation expectations owing to the recent surge in oil prices. Even if the Committee only wanted to ensure that it was preserving the upward path for the real federal funds rate that a number of Committee members seemed to have been contemplating in February, the possible effects of the further jump in oil prices on short- term inflation expectations suggest that something more than a 1/4 percentage point rise in the nominal rate might be needed. (12) The monetary aggregates are projected to accelerate a little from their growth rates early this year, when they were depressed by the unwinding of Y2K effects. Nonetheless, expansion of the aggregates, particularly M2, should be restrained by the influence of earlier policy tightenings, even under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B. Growth rates of M2 in coming months are likely to be erratic, owing to the effects of the shifting timing of tax refunds and the likely surge in payments, but on average this aggregate is projected to expand at a rate of 6-1/4 percent over the February-to-June period under alternative B.

