Core consumer inflation is flat over the forecast period, albeit at a rate a bit above the average pace of the past couple of years, as the indirect effects of lower oil prices offset the effects of a weaker dollar and, over the first part of the period, still notable pressure on resources. (8) If the Committee shares the staffs assessment of the economic fundamentals and views a period of subpar economic growth as not only likely but also necessary to stabilize core inflation, it might prefer the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B. In addition, recent substantial revisions to the near-term outlook may suggest that the economic situation is quite fluid and that the degree of conviction about any particular outcome is relatively low.

Given these expectations, the choice of alternative B with a statement of balanced risks should have little effect on financial markets.

With the Federal Reserve seen as alert for signs of economic weakness, the response of markets to incoming data that pointed in that direction might be accentuated. (11) If the Committee thinks that output growth is likely to slow appreciably more than envisioned in the staff forecast, then it might choose the 25 basis point easing of alternative A. Such an assessment of growth prospects might reflect concern that the reduced pace of economic expansion, additional financial difficulties, and weaker earnings growth could be in the process of eroding consumer and business sentiment and tightening financial conditions more than in the Greenbook.

An even larger effect could be expected if the Committee instead announced that risks appeared to be weighted toward economic weakness, as investors came to expect a greater cumulative easing of policy. (13) If the Committee judges that core inflation already has moved above the range consistent with effective price stability, and that the prospects for a reversal given the current stance of policy are small, then it might be inclined to tighten policy 25 basis points, as in alternative C. Such a move might appear more attractive if output growth were seen as unlikely to slow by as much as in the staff forecast, perhaps because the Committee believes that equity investors have already taken reduced earnings prospects into account, and so views equity prices as more likely to resume at least a gradual uptrend than to be flat as in the staff forecast.

