Two basic alternatives are presented for consideration by the Committee: Alternative C, under which the target federal funds rate would be raised 25 basis points, and alternative D, under which it would be increased 50 basis points.

Two basic alternatives are presented for consideration by the Committee: Alternative C, under which the target federal funds rate would be raised 25 basis points, and alternative D, under which it would be increased 50 basis points. (8) Even if the Committee's assessment of the outlook is such that a substantial firming of policy ultimately will be necessary to prevent underlying inflation from rising, it still may favor a continued gradual approach, as under alternative C. Signs of an actual acceleration in prices are quite recent, and the Committee may require further evidence that inflation is on the upswing before firming policy more aggressively.

And, to the extent that market participants extrapolate the gradual approach to policy tightening into the future, expectations of further policy restraint will remain embedded in the structure of market interest rates, still bringing forward in time the effects on spending of future policy firming.  The 25 basis point move of alternative C would be somewhat smaller than is incorporated in financial market prices.

If a sense that the Committee had fallen behind the curve of requisite policy firming became prevalent, which would be made more likely by a disquieting CPI release, longer-term rates could back up, equity prices weaken, and the dollar come under downward pressure. (10) If the Committee were persuaded by recent data that the financial conditions produced by continuing its gradual approach would be insufficient to keep underlying -11 - inflation contained, it might well support the 50 basis point increase in the intended federal funds rate of alternative D. Further gradual moves might be seen as likely allowing aggregate demand to grow more rapidly than potential supply for long enough to induce an intensification of pressures on resources that would noticeably boost underlying inflation.

Such an increase in nominal interest rates would be more likely to contain inflation expectations going forward and thereby diminish slightly the amount of cumulative tightening ultimately needed to keep inflation in check.  The reaction of asset prices to the adoption of alternative D would probably depend on the Committee's decision about the balance of risks.

The increase in rates on Treasury securities, however, could be more limited if demands for safety and liquidity were to increase in an environment of more aggressive policy tightening. - 12-  If alternative D instead were accompanied by a statement that the risks were now seen as balanced, the market reaction would be more difficult to predict.

On average, investors appear currently to expect another 100 basis points or so of monetary policy tightening over the next twelve months, rather than just the 50 basis points at this meeting embodied in alternative D. Most would infer from such a balance-of-risks statement that monetary policy would be on hold for a while.

