interest rates flatten out and swelling volumes of dollar-denominated debt associated with a high and rising current account deficit weigh on international investment portfolios. (29) This bluebook proposes three short-run monetary policy alternatives for the Committee's consideration at this meeting: an unchanged stance of monetary policy alternative B); a 25 basis point firming of the federal funds rate .

interest rates flatten out and swelling volumes of dollar-denominated debt associated with a high and rising current account deficit weigh on international investment portfolios. (29) This bluebook proposes three short-run monetary policy alternatives for the Committee's consideration at this meeting: an unchanged stance of monetary policy (alternative B); a 25 basis point firming of the federal funds rate (alternative C); and a 50 basis point tightening (alternative D). (30) Despite the significant inflation risk embodied in the staff forecast and identified in the Federal Reserve's announcement following the December meeting, the Committee might not yet be convinced that policy action is necessary and hence might be inclined to choose alternative B. Even though labor markets have remained tight for some time, readings on core prices generally have been well behaved, excepting the pickup in various NIPA inflation measures for the fourth quarter reported today.

In these circumstances, implementation of the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B, even if accompanied by a statement that the balance of risks remains tilted to the upside, would confuse investors.

If anything, the upside risks to the economy and inflation seem to have intensified over the intermeeting period, perhaps inclining the Committee toward the 25 basis point firming of policy of alternative C. Indeed, those risks would mount should financial markets rally as a result of policy inaction.

There is a good chance that market participants would read the announcement as suggesting that another firming could well be in the offing, but such an expectation is already consistent with current readings on federal funds futures rates, which imply a near-certainty of another 25 basis point move at the March meeting. (34) If the Committee sees recent data as tending to confirm that substantial monetary restraint will need to be applied over the next year or so to keep inflation in check, as implied by the staff forecast, it might choose the 50 basis point tightening of policy contemplated in alternative D. In this circumstance, the Committee might see advantages to moving well along in the process relatively quickly, to minimize the odds that inflation expectations begin to rise and to reduce the probability that a protracted period of tightening will be required.

Hence, bond and stock markets would probably sell off, and the dollar would appreciate on foreign exchange markets.  Under the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B, M2 growth is projected to pick up a bit, to a 6 percent annual rate over the December to June period, from the 5-1/2 percent rate from September to December, despite a small drag from the unwinding of Y2K effects.

