Under Alternative A, the existing federal funds rate target would be maintained at this meeting.  Alternative B would raise the target 25 basis points, to 1¾ percent.  Under Alternative C, the funds rate would similarly be raised 25 basis points, but the language of the statement would be consistent with the possibility of more rapid firming than is currently built into financial prices.

In such circumstances, the Committee might find it appropriate to validate those expectations by tightening 25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  Even with the two tightening steps that the Committee has taken to date, the real federal funds rate is still close to zero and near the bottom .

Such a low real Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

And recent news on spending for high-tech equipment has been less upbeat.  With regard to the announcement of Alternative B, the Committee could again repeat the themes that the stance of policy remains accommodative even after the policy move and that this stance, combined with strong trend productivity growth, is supporting economic activity.

Accordingly, an action and an announcement along the lines of that proposed in Alternative B should have little immediate effect in financial markets.

If the Committee finds this to be undesirable, it may consider leaving the funds rate target unchanged at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  The resulting easing of financial conditions would presumably better ensure satisfactory growth in aggregate demand.

Indeed, a pause at this time might be seen as having the benefit of ensuring that market participants do not come inappropriately to view the “measured pace” language as a promise to firm policy at every meeting.  In announcing Alternative A, the Committee might wish to state that “Even though output appears to have regained some traction after moderating earlier this year, the pace of improvement in labor market conditions remains modest.

This wording is broadly similar to that proposed for Alternative B but puts more stress on the limited improvement in labor market conditions and less stress on energy price movements as the source of earlier economic weakness.

As part of the rationale for leaving rates unchanged, the Committee could employ the language for describing inflation developments that is proposed for Alternative B, that is, “Despite the rise in energy prices, inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months.

If the Committee put much weight on the possibility that growth will rebound sharply, it may believe that the scope of its future action is constrained on the upside by the “measured pace” language and may prefer to drop the last two sentences from the statement, as is considered in Alternative C.  Monetary policy has been highly accommodative for an extended period, and as noted, the real federal funds rate is currently about zero and may well be considerably below its equilibrium level.

The appropriate risk  Alternative C poses a difficult issue.

Adoption of Alternative C would surprise market participants and, given the precedent of the marked reaction when the “considerable period” sentence was modified in January, could prompt significant swings in financial prices.

