Under Alternative A, the existing stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting.

Alternative B would raise the target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 1½ percent.  Alternative C would boost the funds rate 50 basis points to 1¾ percent.

Alternative C would boost the funds rate 50 basis points to 1¾ percent Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement June FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Alternative C, however, offers a substantial departure from the form and substance of recent announcements.

Paragraph 18 discusses a hybrid of Alternatives B and C in which the funds rate would be increased 25 basis points while some of the language proposed for Alternative C would be incorporated in the announcement.

If that report comes in about as the staff expects, the Committee might wish to indicate, as under Alternatives B and C, that “labor market conditions continue to improve.

However, if the report is again on the soft side, as in June, the Committee might wish to cite “some slowing in the pace of improvement in labor market conditions,” as in Alternative A. (9) Although the recent pace of economic growth has been less vigorous than projected in the June Greenbook, the Committee may still judge that the economy is poised for significant expansion going forward, as in the current staff forecast.

If the Committee subscribes to such an outlook, it may find it appropriate to continue paring the degree of monetary policy accommodation and thus be attracted to the 25-basis-point firming at this meeting of Alternative B.  Policy likely will need to be firmed considerably over time:  The real federal funds rate, measured as the difference between the nominal funds rate and lagged four-quarter core PCE inflation, remains negative and below the .

Estimated policy rules generally suggest that a such a tightening at this meeting would be consistent with the Committee’s past policy conduct (Chart 6).  In announcing implementation of Alternative B, the Committee would presumably want to modify its previous statement that “output is continuing to expand at a solid pace” to acknowledge both the softness in economic activity in the past few months and the potential effects on economic prospects of energy price developments.

However, the mention of crude oil prices as a factor potentially influencing future economic growth could prompt investors to focus more closely on evolving energy price developments in revising their expectations for monetary policy. (12) If the Committee is concerned by the slow pace of progress in reducing resource slack projected in the Greenbook or is worried that the forecasted rebound in growth could fail to materialize, it may prefer the unchanged policy stance of Alternative A.  The sluggish consumption spending of late and the still-limited pickup in capital investment—even ahead of the expiration of the partial-expensing tax provisions at year-end—might be read by policymakers as suggesting that aggregate demand could remain soft for some time.

The inflation sentence could well be similar to that under Alternative B.  If FOMC members are especially concerned that the recent weakness in spending might prove persistent, they might consider an assessment that risks to sustainable growth are weighted to the downside.

Consistent with its motivation for selecting Alternative A, the Committee might also wish to note that policy will be adjusted as appropriate to promote “sustainable growth” as well as price stability in the last sentence of the risk assessment section.

The declines in market interest rates and in the dollar would likely be even more pronounced, and a fall in equity prices more likely, if the FOMC provided an assessment of net downside risks to sustainable growth or otherwise communicated concern about prospective economic weakness. (15) If the Committee sees the recent slower growth of aggregate demand as likely to be transitory but suspects that the pickup in core inflation could well be more durable than the staff anticipates, it might choose to raise the funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  FOMC members may consider inflation already to be close to the top of an acceptable range and see several reasons to question the decline in inflation in the staff forecast.

In light of these considerations, the FOMC may judge a 25-basis-point move at this meeting—which would leave the real funds rate in negative territory—as insufficient, whereas a 50-basis-point move would at least bring the real rate to around zero. (16) With market participants interpreting a “measured pace” as implying at most 25-basis-point moves, policymakers probably would want to alter that phrase significantly or drop it from an announcement of Alternative C.  While some policymakers might prefer not to provide guidance about the likely pace of policy change, they may be comfortable giving an indirect indication of its probable direction.

To underscore its concerns about the effect of energy price increases on the inflation outlook, the Committee might want to say: “Although a portion of the rise in inflation this year appears to have been due to transitory factors, continuing and substantial increases in energy prices are putting persistent upward pressure on costs and overall prices.” (17) Unless the employment report for July turns out to be exceptionally strong, market participants would be quite surprised by the combination of a 50-basis- point move and the announcement proposed under Alternative C.  The assessment of upside risks to growth and inflation and the deletion of the “measured pace”  language would reinforce the sense that the trajectory of policy would be steeper than previously anticipated.

Market interest rates would likely increase sharply, while stock prices would drop and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would rise. (18) If the Committee favors only a modest firming in policy at this time but wishes to move away from the “measured pace” language before long, it might wish to combine the 25-basis-point firming action and rationale of Alternative B with the conditional assessment of upside risks proposed for Alternative C. That assessment would imply a need for continued policy tightening and thus could facilitate dropping the measured pace language, perhaps even at this meeting.

If that language were dropped on Tuesday, the market reaction to the announcement of conditional upside risks could be fairly sharp, approaching that expected under Alternative C, as market participants would probably conclude that the FOMC no longer believed that policy tightening was likely to be gradual.

