Under Alternative B, the federal funds rate would rise 25 basis points, but the statement would imply that the Committee saw a distinct possibility of a pause in tightening at an upcoming meeting.  Alternative C also envisions a 25-basis-point tightening, but the accompanying statement would give no indication that a pause was likely.

In Alternative A, the federal funds rate would remain at 2 percent.

Should the Committee also  expect that substantial further tightening will be desirable fairly soon, then it might  want to issue a statement such as that in Alternative C, which does not hint at a possible pause in tightening at coming meetings.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement  November FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Alternative C would also seem appropriate if members were concerned that longer-term inflation expectations could move higher were the Committee not seen as responding sufficiently to inflationary impulses emanating from the decline in the dollar and the previous rise in oil prices.

The statement in Alternative C could be quite similar to that released following the November meeting.

As a result, an announcement like that in Alternative C would likely have little effect on financial markets.

If the Committee held such a  view, it might want to couple a 25-basis-point move at this meeting with a statement  like that in Alternative B, which is intended to signal the possibility of a pause in the adjustment of policy before long.

5 Another option under Alternative B would be for the Committee to indicate that “The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 2¼ percent, bringing the cumulative increase in the target rate over the past several months to 1¼ percentage point.

- 11 -  The release of the announcement for Alternative B would likely lead to some easing of financial conditions.

(16) If the Committee were concerned that maintenance of current financial  conditions could risk a return to subpar economic performance, it might want to  consider a pause in the tightening cycle at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Recent data and anecdotal reports suggest that businesses remain unusually cautious in expanding payrolls.

The announcement of Alternative A could look much like the one released following the November meeting.

