The rationale paragraph has been  updated to reflect recent readings on the economy as well as the passage of time,  Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement  September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternative A, the federal funds rate target would be maintained at 1¾ percent at this meeting.  Alternative B would raise the target 25 basis points to 2 percent, but the language of the announcement would signal that the Committee might now be more inclined to pause in the process of removing policy accommodation.  Under Alternative C, the funds rate would also be raised to 2 percent, but the language of the announcement would be consistent with a firming of policy at least as rapid as currently embodied in market expectations.

If  the Committee regarded the outlook for economic activity and inflation given these  financial conditions as striking an appropriate balance between reducing slack and  limiting inflation risks, it might wish to validate those expectations by tightening  25 basis points and issuing a statement similar to that of Alternative B in the table, which includes language intended to signal a possible pause in the removal of policy accommodation.

Regarding the announcement of Alternative B, the Committee might signal the possibility of a pause by noting that the firming brings “the cumulative increase in the target rate over the past several months to 1 percentage point.

The market reaction to the announcement for Alternative B is difficult to gauge precisely.

Faced with these developments, the Committee might  wish to tighten policy a quarter-point and adopt the firmer statement language shown  for Alternative C.  Even if the Committee found the staff forecast of a gradual decline in inflation to be both likely and generally acceptable as a modal assessment, it might be concerned about upside risks to the outlook.

The announcement of Alternative C could cite the increase in the target rate to 2 percent with no intimation of a pause any time soon.

In  that circumstance, the Committee might see less need to continue removing policy  accommodation at this meeting and choose to keep the funds rate at 1¾ percent and  issue a statement like that shown in Alternative A.  Even if the Committee judged the staff forecast as likely, it might consider the projected progress in working down slack as too slow to be acceptable, especially given that core PCE inflation runs at 1½ percent—only a shade above the level prevailing in the summer of 2003 when concerns about disinflation were acute.

The announcement of Alternative A would indicate an unchanged target federal funds rate but otherwise might look fairly similar to the announcement for the September meeting.

Given the  actual pause in policy adjustment, the “cumulative increase” wording employed in  Alternative B would not seem necessary.

The revised table eliminates alternative A and incorporates a new variation on alternative B that is labeled alternative B’.

As a result, the language of alternative B’ incorporates only minimal changes to the wording of the September FOMC statement.  Alternatives B and C in the revised table are slightly revised for clarity, with material struck out in rows three and four.

Alternatives B and C in the revised  table are slightly revised for clarity, with material struck out in rows three and four. Exhibit 1 MMS Survey Expectation: 180 Released    Value * Thursday close Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement (Revised)  September FOMC Alternative B Alternative B’ Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

