Under Alternatives A and B, the federal funds rate would be boosted another 25 basis points at this meeting.

Apart from updating the description of the  current economic situation, the announcement associated with Alternative B is little changed from that issued after the May meeting.

The announcement accompanying  Alternative A would indicate that policy accommodation had been substantially reduced and would hint at less tightening going forward.  Under Alternative C, the Committee would raise the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting, eliminate all forward-looking language, and make other significant changes to the announcement.

(13) The Committee may see little reason to diverge at this point from its  established precedent of measured policy firming and thus be attracted to  Alternative B.  Although aggregate spending and output growth evidently slowed in early spring, the economy appears to remain reasonably robust.

Meanwhile, although recent inflation readings have proven reassuring, further  increases in energy prices and diminishing slack in the economy may be read by  Table 1: Alternative Language for the June FOMC Announcement  May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

The announcement associated with Alternative B would update the wording of the May statement in view of incoming data on spending, output, and employment but would leave the rest of the statement unchanged.

In this case, the FOMC may be attracted to Alternative A’s combination of a 25-basis-point hike in the funds rate at this meeting and statement wording that hints that the Committee could soon pause, at least for a time, in its process of policy firming.

The draft statement associated with Alternative A could be explicit that “The Committee believes that the degree of monetary policy accommodation has been substantially reduced.

Accordingly, a statement  employing the draft wording shown in Alternative A would likely produce a noticeable downward shift in money market futures quotes, a rally in bond and equity markets, and some depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

(19) If the Committee, by contrast, has become more concerned about the  potential for an upcreep in inflation in response to developments over the  intermeeting period, then it may favor the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds  rate of Alternative C.  The staff forecast for inflation has been revised up since the April Greenbook in response to data pointing to a narrower output gap, higher labor costs, a narrower price markup, and—most importantly—substantial further increases in crude oil prices.

(20) A number of modifications to the Committee’s statement would be required  to accommodate the selection of Alternative C.  For instance, the FOMC might wish to delete the reference to “robust underlying growth in productivity,” given that actual productivity growth appears to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.

(21) With nary a hint heretofore of an upshift in the pace of policy tightening,  market participants would be shocked by the combination of a 50-basis-point increase  in the funds rate at this meeting and the announcement suggested for Alternative C. The statement would likely lead investors to conclude that the FOMC expected to continue to tighten policy for some time—and, with the elimination of the measured pace language, to anticipate that at least some future policy moves could come in additional 50-basis-point increments.

The pairing of the language of  Alternative C with a 25-basis-point move would also catch investors unawares, probably leading them to ratchet up their expectations of policy firming considerably and prompting a sell-off in fixed-income markets.

