Under Alternative A, the Committee would leave its target for the federal funds rate unchanged at 3¾ percent at this meeting; the statement emphasizes uncertainties surrounding the economic dislocations of the hurricanes and associated effects on consumer and business confidence, but still signals that remaining monetary policy accommodation could likely be removed at a measured pace.  Under Alternatives B and C, the Committee would raise the target federal funds rate 25 basis points.

If the  Committee believes that a continued measured pace of policy firming will prove  sufficient to contain these inflationary pressures, it might be inclined to raise the target  funds rate another 25 basis points at this meeting and choose language as in  Alternative B.  As seen in Chart 5, a 25 basis point increase in the target funds rate would move the real funds rate into the range of rates estimated by the staff to be broadly consistent with closing the output gap over the next few years.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement  September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

With most measures of labor  compensation posting moderate gains and some reversal of the runup in energy prices  in prospect, members may believe that remaining firming can be done gradually,  consistent with the measured pace language of Alternative B.  While a policy hike at this meeting would place the funds rate at the high end of the prescriptions of several policy rules that are based on a 1½ percent objective for core PCE inflation, that is only a matter of timing because those rules indicate a need for an even higher funds .

(11) The Committee may wish to begin the rationale portion of the statement  for Alternative B by reaffirming the view that adverse effects of the hurricanes will probably slow the pace of the expansion only temporarily.

Therefore, market prices  would likely be essentially unaffected by a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate and  the statement language as under Alternative B. (13) If the Committee wished to convey greater concern about upside risks to inflation, it might prefer to combine a 25 basis point increase in the target funds rate with the language included under Alternative C.

With a 25 basis point move and the  language proposed under Alternative C, short-term interest rates and the exchange value of the dollar would likely rise, while stock prices would fall.

Committee members may wish to consider Alternative A if they think that the recent moderate rates of core inflation are likely to continue and if they see the outlook for the economy as especially uncertain because of the effects of the hurricanes and elevated energy prices.

