Alternative B makes the balance-of-risks assessment explicitly conditional on “appropriate policy” and uses a more forceful verb phrase, “should be kept,” to underscore that it may take policy action to preserve balance.

To allow for a  broader range of policy options, under Alternatives A and C, the measured-pace language is replaced with a sentence emphasizing economic prospects as the principal factor that will determine the pace at which policy accommodation is removed.

Under  Alternative A, the funds rate also would be raised 25 basis points, but the 3 The Committee has accompanied its six prior tightenings with assessments that the risks to both of its goals were balanced, which indicates that those assessments have implicitly been conditioned on an appropriate path of policy.

However, explicitly stating that conditionality,  as in Alternative B, will probably limit the usefulness of this form of the risk assessment in signaling the likely direction of future policy moves.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the March FOMC Announcement  February FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternative C, the funds rate would be boosted 50 basis points, and the accompanying statement would give more emphasis to the perception of upside inflation risks.

These alternatives may contain elements of statement language that  the Committee might find more appealing than the wording of Alternative B or may be helpful in informing potential changes in the policy announcement over the next few meetings.

(11) If the Committee found the Greenbook forecast for output and inflation  conditional on continued gradual removal of policy accommodation both plausible  and acceptable, it might choose to raise the target federal funds rate ¼ percentage  point at this meeting and issue a statement like that shown for Alternative B in Table 1.

As a result, it seems likely that the market reaction to Alternative B would be fairly muted.

In this case, the Committee may wish to raise the target federal funds rate  by 50 basis points and issue a statement like that described for Alternative C.  This option might be viewed as particularly appealing if the Committee thought that underlying productivity growth had slowed substantially or that output was already approaching, or had even outstripped, potential.

(14) If the Committee instead views recent higher inflation readings as largely  transitory, it may wish to firm policy by a quarter point at this meeting and issue a  statement like that described under Alternative A.  With longer-term inflation expectations well-contained and resource slack apparently being worked down slowly, the Committee may see relatively little cost in continuing along a path of gradual removal of policy accommodation.

Under either Alternative A or C, the Committee may judge that the measured-pace language is no longer consistent with the likely future course of policy.

For Alternatives A and C, the Committee could then indicate that it is “more likely than not” that the growth of output would exceed its sustainable pace and that inflation pressures would pick up.

Although the risk assessment paragraphs in Alternatives A and C are similar, the characterizations of the economy and prices in the rationale paragraphs are quite different.  Under Alternative A, the rationale paragraph would suggest that the Committee sees the stance of monetary policy as “somewhat” accommodative and regards the recent uptick in inflation readings as transitory, with underlying inflation and inflation expectations remaining well-contained.

In contrast, the language for Alternative C would suggest that output growth is proceeding at a pace that seems likely to eliminate resource slack in the near term and would note that inflation pressures have intensified, signaling a pickup in the pace of firming.

(17) Market participants would be caught off guard by the 50 basis point  tightening of Alternative C.   Moreover, investors could infer from the concerns expressed about inflation and the removal of the measured-pace language that further half-point policy tightenings could well be forthcoming.

The market reaction to the  language of Alternative C would be somewhat attenuated if the Committee boosted rates at this meeting by only a quarter point.

The market reaction to adoption of Alternative A is more difficult to gauge, but the mention of cumulative firming, upbeat assessment of inflation prospects, and the characterization of the stance of policy as only “somewhat” accommodative in the rationale paragraph should tend to put some downward pressure on yields.

