Given the absence  of major surprises in the economic and financial environment during the intermeeting  Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement  November FOMC Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternative B, the form of the assessment of risks would be modified notably, with the Committee indicating explicitly a judgment that some further tightening would be necessary to keep the risks to both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.

By  contrast, Alternative C retains much of the form as well as important elements of the content of the November FOMC statement, including the characterization of policy as accommodative and the “measured pace” language.

However, the rationale section  of Alternative C would convey greater concerns about inflation than the comparable portion of Alternative B.

Alternative B   The Committee may favor the statement language of Alternative B if it thinks that somewhat higher federal funds rates are likely to prove necessary to limit pressures on resources and promote price stability but also believes that this tightening phase could be ending fairly soon.

The rationale portion of the statement for Alternative B notes that the expansion in economic activity appears solid despite elevated energy prices and disruptions related to the hurricanes.

The assessment of risks portion of the statement for Alternative B resolves some of the complications and tensions that have arisen in the current language.

Given the extent of the changes proposed for  Alternative B, it is difficult to be confident of how the new statement will be interpreted by investors.

Alternative C  (15) Should the Committee be particularly concerned about the inflation outlook  and still see the stance of policy as accommodative, it may prefer Alternative C.  While energy prices have eased this fall, they remain much higher than a year ago, and other commodity prices have increased as well.

The  reference to the relatively high levels of resource utilization, in contrast to the  concerns about possible increases in resource utilization expressed in Alternative B, would indicate greater concern about pressures on inflation arising from this source and might suggest that monetary policy now would be oriented particularly toward slowing growth in aggregate demand to a pace at or below that of potential output.

Release of the statement for Alternative C would lead market participants to boost noticeably their expectations for policy tightening.

