With some economic slack  remaining, import prices rising less rapidly, and energy prices falling back somewhat  as margins shrink, core PCE inflation is forecast to slow a little over the next two  Table 1: Alternative Language for the May FOMC Announcement  March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternatives A and B, the target federal funds rate would be increased 25 basis points at this meeting.

Apart from  updating the description of recent economic conditions, the statement under  Alternative B could be quite similar to that issued following the March FOMC meeting.  Alternative A would suggest that a near-term pause in the process of tightening could be in the cards.  Under Alternative C, the federal funds rate would be boosted 50 basis points, and the language would be modified substantially.

(11) Although recent economic data have pointed to noticeably less strength in  spending and output in the first half of 2005 than anticipated at the time of the  March meeting, the Committee may still be inclined to tighten policy another  25-basis-point notch at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  The Committee might share the view of the staff that, even after additional policy firming, growth in economic activity will exceed, albeit only slightly, the rate of expansion of potential output in coming quarters.

The draft statement associated with Alternative B updates the wording of the March release in light of recent information on spending, employment, and inflation.

In view of the elevated CPI  figures for the past couple of months, and more generally in recognition of  increased uncertainty about the interpretation of recent inflation news, the draft  wording for Alternative B also suggests that the Committee omit the view expressed in March that “the rise in energy prices, however, has not notably fed through to core consumer prices.

Assuming that  those differing interpretations about offset each other, there is little reason to  suspect that the market reaction to the adoption of Alternative B would be significant.

may wish to combine a 25-basis-point firming of policy at this meeting with  statement language that strongly suggests the possibility of a pause in firming at the  June meeting, as in Alternative A.  True, the Committee has repeatedly conveyed in its minutes that the “measured pace” language is consistent with a pause in the process of tightening, and market participants have priced in high odds of such a possibility later this year.

The statement accompanying selection of Alternative A could employ virtually the same text on aggregate spending and labor market conditions suggested for Alternative B—but omitting the word “somewhat”—as follows:  “Recent data suggest that the solid pace of spending growth has slowed, partly in response to the earlier increases in energy prices.

Regarding inflation, the sentence offered under  Alternative B could be modified under this alternative by saying, “While pressures on inflation have picked up in recent months and pricing power is more evident, longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained.

(16) Market participants would not likely miss the hints in the announcement   Alternative A of a higher likelihood of a pause in June.

(17) Should the Committee be particularly concerned that underlying inflation  pressures may be intensifying, it might be attracted to the 50-basis-point increase in  the federal funds rate of Alternative C.  Members may be more inclined than the staff to assign signal, rather than noise, to the jump in the March CPI.

The words of Alternative C an appeal even if the Committee chose to firm 25 basis points at this meeting.

(18) As indicated in Table 1, the Committee could consider a number of  alterations to its statement in association with the selection of Alternative C to convey a heightened concern about inflation prospects.

(19) The selection of the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate of  Alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.

