Under Alternative A, the Committee would leave its target for the federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this meeting; the statement would emphasize hurricane-related uncertainties and suggest that this was just a pause in the tightening process.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would boost the target 25 basis points to 3¾ percent; the statement would note that the longer-term macroeconomic effects of the hurricane are likely to be limited.

Because uncertainty  surrounding the economic outlook has risen considerably, this Bluebook also  considers ways of shading the language under Alternatives A and B to project more distinct paths for policy.

Paragraph 13 considers changes to the statement language   Alternative B) that could express more concern about inflation.

In  contrast, paragraph 16 suggests wording changes to Alternative A that would be consistent with an expectation of a more prolonged pause in firming.

Lastly, the box  at the end of this section entitled “Opening Up the Statement” examines fundamental   Alternative A or B.

(10) If the Committee remains particularly concerned about heightened inflation  pressures and sees little chance that Hurricane Katrina will have lasting and sizable  adverse effects on aggregate spending and production, it may wish to tighten policy   25 basis points at this meeting, as under Alternative B.  The Committee may view the downward revision to monetary policy expectations and the associated easing of Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Policy Decision 1.

The announcements proposed for Alternatives A and B are consistent with this pattern, citing “the tragic toll” of Hurricane Katrina.

(11) As shown in Table 1, the proposed announcement associated with  Alternative B would indicate that “Output appeared poised to continue growing at a good pace before the tragic toll of Hurricane Katrina.

If the Committee saw this inflation outcome as unacceptable or believed that  such an expectation was likely to prove optimistic, then it might view the words of  Alternative B as too timid about the prospects for additional policy tightening.

The  likelihood of more tightening than currently built into financial market prices could be  conveyed to the public by shortening the wording for Alternative B that appears in Table 1.

accepting the economic outlook discussed under Alternative B, members may harbor the reservation that there is a small probability that the disruption to economic activity in the Gulf region and sapping of consumer and business confidence nationwide could have serious consequences for the broader economy.

Under Alternative A, the Committee would keep the target federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this meeting and use the statement to explain that it was merely deferring firming in light of the elevated uncertainties, and likely not ending the tightening cycle.

As in  Alternative B, the Committee could note the adverse near-term effects of the hurricane on spending, production, and employment, but not include the sentence suggesting that the effects will be temporary.

The text on inflation in Alternative B  could also be used in Alternative A. (15) Short-term market interest rates would likely decline noticeably following announcement of this alternative.

Such a view could be conveyed to the public by striking sentence 2 from  the draft statement for Alternative A.  The statement could also drop the word “action” that now appears in row 5 in order to suggest that appropriate monetary cont.

