The federal funds rate would be boosted 25 basis points at this meeting   Alternatives A and B, and 50 basis points under Alternative C.

Apart from  updating the description of the current economic situation, the proposed  announcement associated with Alternative B is little changed from that issued after the June meeting.  In contrast, the announcement accompanying Alternative A would hint at a near-term slowing in the pace of policy tightening, in part by noting that policy accommodation has been substantially reduced.

The proposed announcement  for Alternative C emphasizes the strength of aggregate spending, suggests that pressures on business costs and inflation could be increasing, and eliminates all forward-looking language.

(10) If the Committee agrees with the staff’s assessment that a small amount of  slack remains in the economy and that the current configuration of financial asset  prices is likely to prove consistent with the expansion of aggregate spending coming  into line with potential output growth before long, it may be attracted to the 25-basis- point firming and statement language of Alternative B.  Investors currently anticipate a quarter-point move at this meeting followed by several additional firmings— expectations that should be largely preserved by the combination of policy action and language proposed under this alternative.

Although the stance of  monetary policy evidently remains accommodative, the gap between the actual real  funds rate and current estimates of its equilibrium value has narrowed considerably  Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement  June FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

As shown in Table 1, the statement for Alternative B updates the wording employed in June in light of incoming data on spending, output, and employment by noting that “Aggregate spending, despite high energy prices, appears to have strengthened since late winter, and labor market conditions continue to improve gradually.

Thus, the market reaction to an  announcement along the lines of Alternative B should be relatively modest, although rates could back up a little in response to the changes in the wording suggesting that the FOMC was focusing on the strength in spending and inflation pressures.

In view of such an assessment as well as the subdued readings on core inflation  in recent months, the FOMC might opt for Alternative A’s combination of a 25-basis-point hike in the funds rate at this meeting and a statement that hints that the Committee could soon slow the pace of policy firming.

The draft statement associated with Alternative A could indicate that “The Committee believes that the degree of monetary policy accommodation has been substantially reduced,” while again acknowledging that the expansion remains firm and that labor market conditions continue to improve gradually.

Accordingly, a statement employing the draft wording  shown in Alternative A would likely produce a noticeable downward shift in interest rates implied by money market futures quotes, as investors priced in a slower pace of policy action and probably also revised down the likely extent of cumulative tightening.

(16) If the Committee has become significantly more concerned about inflation  pressures of late, it may favor the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate of  Alternative C.  Greater worries about inflation prospects could have been prompted by the brisk growth in aggregate demand apparently in train in the current quarter, which could be read as suggesting that asset prices are not exerting sufficient restraint on spending to keep actual output from overshooting its potential before long.

(17) The Committee could consider a number of modifications to its statement  in conjunction with the selection of Alternative C.  For instance, the FOMC might wish to delete the reference to “robust underlying growth in productivity.

(18) Market participants would no doubt be taken aback by the combination of a  50-basis-point increase in the funds rate at this meeting and the announcement  suggested for Alternative C.  Investors might infer that policy firming in the current cycle would likely bring the funds rate appreciably above 4¼ percent, the peak funds rate that seems to be currently incorporated in market prices.

If the FOMC were particularly concerned about inflation pressures but was  not prepared to hike rates 50 basis points at this meeting, it could couple a quarter- point move with some of the changes in the statement suggested for Alternative C. Such a pairing would temper the surprise to market participants, but it would probably still lead them to mark up significantly their expectations of policy firming.

