Under Alternative A, the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting and indicate that it would likely stay its hand for at least one more meeting before deciding whether further tightening was necessary.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would tighten 25 basis points and signal that an additional tightening in August was possible.

Alternative C combines a 50 basis point increase in the target with a statement suggesting that additional firming was likely.

(14) If the Committee finds the staff forecast both probable and as desirable as  can be achieved in current circumstances, it may choose to tighten policy 25 basis  points at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  A 25 basis point firming would raise the real federal funds rate somewhat above most of the staff’s estimates of the equilibrium federal funds rate (Chart 8), a moderately restraining stance of policy that might be viewed as appropriate given the worsening of the inflation outlook.

Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph could indicate that economic growth appears to be moderating.

The Committee could list the developments adding  Table 1: Alternative Language for the June FOMC Announcement  May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(16) Market participants are somewhat more confident that the Committee will   Alternative B suggests.

(17) The Committee might instead desire a more forceful policy response to the  deterioration in the inflation outlook and find some appeal in the 50 basis point  tightening of Alternative C.  Although measures of inflation expectations have edged lower on balance in recent weeks, they have risen since earlier this year, potentially adding momentum to actual inflation.

The rationale paragraph under Alternative C could place more emphasis on the recent unwelcome pickup in inflation while noting that productivity gains and contained inflation expectations are restraining inflation.

The announcement of Alternative C would lead market participants to revise upward their outlook for the path for policy, and short- and intermediate-term interest rates would rise as a result.

(20) If, in contrast, the Committee is particularly concerned by the soft tone to  the incoming data on spending, it might feel that the best course of action at this  meeting would be to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in Alternative A.  With news on spending and prices pointing in different directions, the Committee could combine such a policy move with statement language implying that policy would likely be on hold in the near term to await additional information, although policy firming was likely at some point down the road.

