Under Alternatives A  Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement  August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

[Unchanged]  [Unchanged]  and B, the Committee would again leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at  this meeting; Alternative A would suggest that the Committee now sees the risks to growth and inflation as balanced, while Alternative B would repeat the indication from August that the Committee is concerned predominantly with inflation risks.

Under Alternative C, the Committee would firm policy 25 basis points and, as in Alternative B, would highlight upside inflation risks.

Alternative B in Table 1 is designed to signal that policy remains more likely to tighten than ease by repeating the sentiment of the August statement.

The rationale wording for Alternative B could note that the moderation in economic growth appears to be continuing.

In particular, the  Committee could strike the reassuring phrase “on balance” about recent inflation  readings in row 2 of Alternative B and add an explicit characterization of the odds of future action in row 4.

If so, the Committee  may be attracted to Alternative A, under which the stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting and the statement would no longer suggest a predilection to firm policy going forward.

The rationale for Alternative A could be similar to that for Alternative B, except that the Committee may wish to note explicitly that recent inflation readings have been slightly more favorable than those of previous months.

(18) If the FOMC expected stronger growth or higher inflation than the staff, or  if it saw the Greenbook forecast as credible but was unhappy with the forecast path  for inflation, it might wish to take another firming step at this meeting, as in  Alternative C.   The Committee’s concerns about the inflation outlook may have been exacerbated by recent compensation and productivity data.

An announcement associated with Alternative C could, as in the August statement, indicate that growth “has moderated” and, as in the other alternatives, drop the word “gradual” in characterizing the cooling of the housing market.

The tightening of policy and the statement shown under Alternative C of Table 1 would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.

