The target funds rate would be raised 25 basis points under  Alternatives B and C but left unchanged under Alternative A.

The assessment of risks under both Alternatives A and B is intended to soften that to tighten in the future.

(14) If the Committee believes that a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting  may be sufficient, at least for a time, to keep both inflation and inflation expectations  contained in the face of increased energy prices and diminishing resource slack, it may  prefer Alternative B.  While the staff has penciled in an assumed additional tightening after this meeting, it also assumes that the move will be reversed next year.

While the  Greenbook projections for economic growth and inflation have been revised up for  this year, the current level of the output gap is slightly wider owing to a greater-than- Table 1: Alternative Language for the January FOMC Announcement  December FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Although the proposed wording for Alternative B suggests greater uncertainty about future policy moves, it continues to indicate that the risks are tilted toward the possibility of further policy firming.

Therefore, selection of this policy move coupled with the language  of Alternative B likely would not result in substantial changes in financial market prices.

(17) If the Committee believes that appreciable further policy firming will likely  be needed to address upside risks to inflation―which include the potential pass- through of higher prices of oil and other commodities and a lower foreign exchange  value of the dollar―it may prefer to associate a ¼ percentage point increase in the  target funds rate at this meeting with the language in Alternative C.  A firmer tone might also seem appropriate in light of the longer-run scenarios discussed earlier.

Under Alternative C, the wording proposed for the inflation outlook, line 3, would indicate slightly greater concern about the potential for “increases in resource utilization as well as energy and other cost pressures” to “boost underlying inflation.

Markets would probably see the language under Alternative C as indicating a greater probability of future policy tightening than they had expected.

(19) If members see sizable odds that the target funds rate has already been  raised sufficiently to check inflationary pressures, the Committee would presumably  choose to forego a policy move at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  With the real funds rate now well within the range of estimates of its equilibrium, it might be desirable to pause at this meeting before deciding whether to move to a position that could entail policy restraint.

The proposed wording of inflation concerns for Alternative A, in row 3 of Table 1, is basically a reordering of the sentences employed in the last announcement.

