Under Alternatives B and C, the federal funds rate target would be raised 25 basis points at this meeting and the risk assessment would remain asymmetric.  Alternative A envisions leaving the funds rate target unchanged and switching to an assessment that the risks to the Committee’s objectives are balanced at the current level of the funds rate.

The statements under all three alternatives would  continue to emphasize that future policy action will depend on incoming economic   Alternative A makes that more explicit.

(10) If the Committee agrees with the staff forecast and views the outcomes in  this projection to be acceptable, then it may wish to raise the target rate a quarter  point at this meeting and signal the possibility of some subsequent tightening, as in  Alternative B.  The Committee may believe that it has already brought the real federal funds rate near its equilibrium level, a perception consistent with the range of staff estimates shown in Chart 5.

The rationale paragraph of Alternative B begins by observing that the economy appears to have bounced back from the deceleration in the fourth quarter of Table 1: Alternative Language for the March FOMC Announcement January FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

The discussion of inflation risks in Alternative B is similar to that employed in the last statement, but goes into a little more detail.

If so,  members may not be content with simply validating existing expectations for  monetary policy tightening, as in Alternative B, preferring instead to hint at a firmer path of policy by adopting a more hawkish rationale paragraph, as in Alternative C.

The rationale paragraph in Alternative C does not directly refer to the slowing of growth in the fourth quarter of last year, observing only that economic growth has now rebounded to a solid pace.

The discussion of inflation risks does not  reference the limited pass-through of cost pressures or ongoing productivity gains, as  in Alternative B, and instead simply concludes that “As yet, however, inflation expectations remain contained.

(15) With its more hawkish rationale paragraph and balance of risks language,   Alternative C would cause short-term interest rates to firm.

(16) The nominal federal funds rate already lies at the top end of the range of  recommendations from policy rules provided in Charts 6 and 7, and given the  substantial cumulative tightening of monetary policy to date and the long lags in the  effects of policy on the economy, members may be inclined to signal that the firming  cycle has likely drawn to a close, as in Alternative A.  Committee members may prefer this alternative if they see the current level of core inflation as roughly consistent with price stability or believe that the staff has overestimated the NAIRU or understated the degree to which inflation expectations are anchored, as discussed in alternative simulations in the Greenbook.

(17) This alternative employs a rationale paragraph similar to that in  Alternative B.  However, it points to possible moderation in the housing market as potentially slowing growth to a “more sustainable pace.

Alternative A also switches to an assessment that risks are balanced at the current federal funds rate.

Elements of the table could be mixed and matched in  different ways, if the Committee wanted to convey a policy position to the public that  is somewhat less restrictive than currently built into financial markets but somewhat  less accommodative than Alternative A.  For one example, the Committee could tighten a quarter-point as under Alternative B, but move its assessment of risks to balanced as in row 4 of Alternative A, thereby signaling the likely end of the process of tightening.

For another, the Committee could leave the funds rate unchanged, as  under Alternative A, but keep the risk assessment tilted toward the likelihood of additional firming, as in Alternative B, which market participants would likely interpret as indicating a probable pause in, rather than an end to, the tightening cycle.

