Under Alternatives A  and B, the Committee would again leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at  this meeting; Alternative A would indicate that the Committee has no clear view as to the likely future direction of policy, whereas Alternative B would repeat the statement from September that further policy tightening may prove necessary.

Under  Alternative C, the Committee would increase the target rate 25 basis points at this meeting and continue to stress upside risks to inflation.

(17) If the Committee judges that the news since its decision to hold the funds  target unchanged in September has not significantly altered the outlook for inflation  and activity, it might be attracted to Alternative B.  A combination of below-trend growth and an edging lower in core inflation, as in the staff forecast, may be viewed as the best attainable outcome.

Despite those upside inflation risks, the Committee may want to refrain from  tightening in light of the downside risks to economic growth, including the possibility  Table 1: Alternative Language for the October FOMC Announcement  September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

The release  of a statement along the lines of alternative B, therefore, would not prove a surprise, and the market reaction would likely be limited.

If so, Alternative A might find some support.

(22) In order to point out the downside risks to growth, the statement  accompanying Alternative A could note that “there is a risk that the slowdown in economic growth may become more pronounced.

(24) If the Committee expected higher inflation than the staff, or if it thought  the Greenbook forecast was broadly plausible but viewed inflation as remaining  unacceptably high, it might wish to raise the target federal funds rate to 5½ percent at  this meeting, as in Alternative C.  This alternative might be favored if the factors underlying the increase in core inflation in the first half of this year were viewed as likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff’s projection, perhaps reflecting an increase in inflation expectations as illustrated in the “Higher expected inflation” simulation presented in the Greenbook.

In the statement accompanying Alternative C, the discussion of growth could be identical to that proposed for Alternative B.

If, despite the  firming in policy, the Committee continued to be predominantly concerned with  inflation risks, it presumably would want to leave the risk assessment tilted as was  proposed for Alternative B.  However, that sentiment could perhaps be conveyed more strongly to market participants by adopting the language in paragraph 20 earlier in this Bluebook noting that the Committee “both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in inflation.

The tightening of policy envisaged under Alternative C would catch market participants unawares.

