Under Alternatives A  and B, the Committee would leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this  meeting; Alternative A would imply that the risks to economic growth and inflation were now judged to be broadly balanced, whereas Alternative B would again indicate that the risks to inflation remained of greatest concern.  Under Alternative C, the Committee would increase the target rate 25 basis points at this meeting and continue to emphasize the presence of upside risks to inflation.

(11) If the Committee views a combination of near-trend growth and a gradual  ebbing of core inflation over the next two years as the best attainable outcome in  current circumstances and continues to judge that the current stance of policy is  broadly consistent with achieving such an outcome, it might be attracted to  Alternative B.  With the real federal funds rate at the upper end of the range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium value and a bit above the Greenbook- consistent measure, policy might be viewed as applying slight restraint on economic activity, helping to foster a reduction of inflation.

Moreover, the current tightness of the labor market evidenced both by the low unemployment rate in October and by widespread reports  Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement  October FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(12) In light of the recent data and the revision to the staff’s projection for near- term growth, the Committee may wish to make two changes to the discussion of  economic growth in the policy statement accompanying Alternative B.  First, the extent of the decline in housing activity in recent quarters means that it may now be more appropriate to refer to the cooling of the housing market as “substantial.

An announcement along the lines of Alternative B is unlikely to prompt a significant market reaction.

Although the statement proposed for Alternative B does not explicitly recognize risks to growth, it seems consistent with the broad thrust of these expectations.

(14)  If the data released over the intermeeting period have caused members to  revise their assessment of the distribution of possible outcomes for inflation and  economic growth such that the risks are now thought to be more balanced, the  Committee may prefer the policy choice and wording of Alternative A.  The sharper adjustment in residential investment implied by the incoming data, combined with the continuing high level of inventories in the auto sector and the softer tone of recent spending and production indicators more generally, might be seen as increasing the downside risks to economic growth.

(15) To acknowledge the downside risks to growth, the statement accompanying  Alternative A would note that the ongoing adjustment of the housing market could have a “more pronounced effect on growth in coming quarters than anticipated.

(17) In contrast, the Committee may now see it as unlikely that inflation will  decline at an acceptable pace should the current stance of policy be maintained and  hence judge it necessary to take further policy action, as in the 25 basis point firming  of Alternative C.  In particular, members may believe that the tightness in labor markets means that inflation may fail to decline, and could even rise, as illustrated in the “Greater wage acceleration” scenario presented in the Greenbook.

(18) The description of the prospects for growth in the statement associated   Alternative C could be identical to that suggested for Alternative B.

The firming of the stance of policy envisaged under Alternative C and the accompanying statement would come as a considerable surprise to the markets.

