Under Alternatives A  and B, the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting,   Alternatives C and D it would tighten policy another 25 basis points.

In  Alternatives B and D, the accompanying statement would indicate that risks to inflation remain to the upside and signal that additional tightening might still be forthcoming, depending on incoming information.  In contrast, Alternatives A and C would imply that the tightening cycle may well have come to a close.

If so, it might be inclined to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at             5¼ percent at this meeting while indicating in the statement that some additional  firming might prove necessary, as in Alternative B.  The Committee may agree with the staff assessment that core inflation is likely to decline gradually in coming quarters as the forces that have temporarily boosted inflation begin to unwind and the moderation in economic growth fosters an easing of resource pressures.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement  Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph in the statement would indicate that economic growth has moderated, noting the role of the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices and of the continuing cooling of the housing market.

(14) Investors see about a one-third chance of a policy firming at this meeting  and appear to anticipate a statement similar to that under Alternative B.  As a result, the market reaction to implementation of this alternative would likely be fairly small.

(15) If the Committee judges that the risks to the attainment of its objectives are  now roughly in balance, it may be attracted to the policy choice and wording of  Alternative A.  The Committee may see greater downside risks to economic growth than it did in June.

The rationale presented for Alternative A in the post-meeting statement could be similar to that for Alternative B, since both alternatives would keep the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting.

As in Alternative B, shorter-term interest rates would fall a little in response to an announcement along the lines of Alternative A.

(18) The Committee may judge instead that an additional 25 basis point increase  in the federal funds rate at this meeting, as in Alternative C, is needed to bring the risks to the outlook for inflation and economic growth into better balance.

The Committee  might see Alternative C as bringing the risks to the attainment of its growth and price stability objectives roughly in balance and believe that, after implementation of such a policy choice, an easing and a tightening of policy are about equally probable.

Under Alternative C, the paragraph on economic activity in the rationale section could be identical to that proposed for Alternatives A and B.

In the risk assessment sentence of the  announcement, the Committee could merely point to the dependence of future policy  adjustments on incoming information, as in the assessment proposed for     Alternative A.  Market participants would likely interpret such an announcement as suggesting that the Committee no longer had a significant inclination to continue firming policy.

(20) With market participants placing less than fifty-fifty odds on a policy move  at this meeting, short-term interest rates would likely jump in response to  implementation of Alternative C.  However, the effect on intermediate-term interest rates would be considerably more muted, and long-term rates could even decline a little should the announcement persuade investors that inflation pressures were less intense than they had appreciated or that the Committee was seeking a slightly lower long-term rate of inflation than they had previously perceived.

(21) If members were dissatisfied with the gradual and limited reduction in  inflation in the staff forecast and favored a trajectory of policy that would foster a  steeper decline, they might wish to adopt the action and language of Alternative D. The optimal policy path simulations of the FRB/US model (Chart 7) and the first- difference rule (Chart 6), with a long-term inflation objective equal to 1½ percent, would both call for additional firming of policy even following a 25 basis point tightening at the August meeting.

Deviations from Baseline (in percentage points)  2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 -0.25 1.00   Optimal Policy With Perfect Foresight Optimal Policy With Gradual Learning Empirical Outcome-Based Rule Federal Funds Rate 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 -0.25 0.50   Five-Year Real Interest Rate 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 0.50  Civilian Unemployment Rate 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Four-quarter average 0.75  Core PCE Inflation under Alternative D could emphasize that several factors have the potential to sustain inflation pressures.

The policy choice and announcement of Alternative D would come as a considerable surprise to market participants and lead to an upward revision of their outlook for the path of policy.

