Under Alternative A, the Committee leaves the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting.

Under Alternative B, the target for the federal funds rate is raised another 25 basis points at this meeting, and the risk assessment suggests that the Committee may pause in June.  Under Alternative C, the target for the funds rate is raised 50 basis points and the risks are described as balanced without mention of additional policy action.

(13) If the Committee believes that the outcome projected by the staff in the  Greenbook forecast is both likely and best balances the Federal Reserve’s dual  objectives, then it may wish to couple another 25 basis point firming at this meeting  with a risk assessment that hints that the tightening cycle may be coming to a close, as  in Alternative B.  A quarter-point move at this meeting would bring the cumulative tightening since June 2004 to 4 percentage points.

Indeed, under the staff forecast, the maintenance of the nominal funds rate at  5 percent through 2007 would foster financial conditions that would slow output  Table 1: Alternative Language for the May FOMC Announcement  March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph could indicate that spending is likely to slow because of a cooling of the housing market and the restraint imparted by increases in energy prices and interest rates.

The  statement accompanying Alternative B would likely maintain or slightly increase these odds.

If so, the combination of a half-point action at this meeting and the words presented   Alternative C might be appealing.

Reasserting that “inflation expectations  are contained” might be problematic, and, as in Alternative B, rising inflation expectations could be cited as a factor that could add to inflation pressures.

The policy action and statement associated with Alternative C would catch market participants unawares.

(19) The likely reaction in financial markets, which could be sizable, to a 50 basis  point increase in the target for the federal funds rate might diminish the appeal of  Alternative C for the Committee.

For instance, the Committee could combine the   Alternative C with the risk assessment of Alternative B.

To  make it more likely that market participants price in an additional move, the  Committee could strike the sentence characterizing additional firming as likely to be  “modest” in row 4 of Alternative B.  This might be favored if the Committee was impressed by the resilience of aggregate demand in the face of the substantial increase in energy prices and concerned that the momentum of spending could push the level of output well above the economy’s potential.

(20) In contrast, the Committee may believe that further policy tightening at this  meeting is not necessary or desirable and that, at least for now, maintaining the  current stance of policy is appropriate, as in Alternative A.  As noted previously, the cumulative firming of policy to date has been significant, and the real federal funds rate is now well within the range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium value.

(21) The rationale section of the Committee’s statement associated with  Alternative A could begin like that in Alternative B but soften the characterization of the outlook for growth to “likely to moderate to a sustainable pace.

It could use  essentially the same paragraph discussing inflation as that for Alternative B, but retain the assertion that “inflation expectations remain contained” and emphasize the expectation that core inflation will remain “well contained.

(22) Both the absence of policy action and the statement associated with  Alternative A would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.

