Under Alternative A, the Committee lowers the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent.  Alternative B maintains the target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.  Alternative C envisions the Committee tightening by 25 basis points, to bring the target rate to 5½ percent.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the June 2007 FOMC Announcement  May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(17) If the Committee continues to view the current policy stance as likely to  foster a return of output to potential and sustain the recent moderation of inflation, as  in the staff forecast, then it may wish to choose Alternative B, under which the federal funds rate is maintained at 5¼ percent.

The draft statement accompanying Alternative B reiterates the view that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.

The revisions to the   Alternative B would likely garner considerable attention.

If the Committee is especially concerned by this risk, it might prefer to tighten  25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  Raising the funds rate at this meeting might be seen as the best way to mitigate the risk of an updrift in inflation expectations and reassure markets that the Committee will indeed tighten as necessary to keep inflation contained.

The statement accompanying Alternative C could reiterate the assessment that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace while reordering the clauses in order to underscore the view that the adjustment in the housing sector appears unlikely to derail the economic expansion.

If so, the Committee might wish to lower the target  federal funds rate by 25 basis points as in Alternative A.  The Committee might view the recent backup in long-term yields as owing mainly to an exogenous rebound in term premiums from an abnormally low level.

The statement in Alternative A would continue to note that the economy seems most likely to expand at a moderate pace.

