Alternative A lowers the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4½ percent, while Alternatives B and C leave the target rate unchanged at 4¾ percent.

Alternative A alludes to the possibility that the tightening of credit conditions since earlier this year could restrain economic growth, and Alternative B makes that point more directly.

Because recent inflation readings have continued to be relatively  benign but have not shown signs of further moderation, Alternatives A and B maintain the language regarding inflation used in the September statement.

In  contrast, Alternative C states that the high level of resource utilization and recent increases in energy prices may put renewed upward pressures on both overall and core inflation.

Alternatives A and C characterize the downside risks to growth as roughly balancing the upside risks to Table 1: Alternative Language for the October 2007 FOMC Announcement September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

inflation, while Alternative B identifies the downside risks to growth as the greatest policy concern.

(19) If the Committee judges that the current stance of policy is likely to be  consistent with sustainable growth and an acceptable trajectory for inflation over time  but sees appreciable downside risks to growth, it may wish to choose Alternative B. The economy seems to have expanded at a brisk pace in the third quarter, boosted primarily by personal consumption and business expenditures, suggesting considerable underlying strength of spending prior to the recent financial turbulence.

(20) Given that the economy likely expanded at a pace noticeably above that of  potential in the third quarter, the draft statement for Alternative B describes recent growth as “solid.

(22) If the Committee has a modal outlook similar to the Greenbook projection  that growth will return to potential in a few quarters and sees the risks around that  forecast as relatively balanced, it might be inclined to choose Alternative C.  Under this alternative, there would be no change in the target federal funds rate, and the statement would indicate that downside risks to growth are balanced by upside risks to inflation.

The proposed statement for Alternative C indicates that economic growth was solid in the third quarter despite the ongoing housing correction.

Market participants would be quite surprised by the combination of no policy action  at this meeting and the statement proposed for Alternative C.  They would likely conclude that the Committee has no inclination to lower rates in the near term.

Either view might incline the Committee to choose Alternative A, which lowers the target federal funds rate 25 basis points.

The draft statement for Alternative A, like those for Alternatives B and C, begins by noting the solid economic performance in the third quarter and the easing of strains in financial markets.

The paragraph regarding inflation  is unchanged from September, as in Alternative B.  If the Committee believes that, after this move, the risks to growth would still be tilted somewhat to the downside while some upside inflation risks would remain, it could characterize the risks as balanced and continue by stating its intent to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects as in Alternative B.

Thus, very short-term interest rates would likely change little in  response to an announcement along the lines of that proposed under Alternative A. However, because market participants expect more than 25 basis points of easing over the next few quarters, the balanced risk assessment, which would likely be seen as suggesting that further policy easing may not be forthcoming, could prompt a modest increase in intermediate- and longer-term interest rates.

