Alternative A lowers the target federal funds rate 50 basis points to 4 percent, Alternative B lowers the target 25 basis points to 4¼ percent, and Alternative C leaves the target unchanged at 4½ percent.

The alternatives also note that the  stance of monetary policy should promote moderate growth over time, but  Alternatives A and C point to increased downside risks to growth.

Alternative A characterizes the downside risks to growth as roughly balancing the upside risks to inflation, repeating the assessment of risks from the October statement.  Alternative B avoids an explicit assessment of the balance of risks and instead states that recent developments have increased the uncertainty regarding the outlook.  Alternative C concludes that the risks to growth are the predominant policy concern and notes that “future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the December 2007 FOMC Announcement  October FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(17)  If the Committee judges that tighter financial conditions, higher oil prices,  and soft incoming data point to a weaker economic outlook than previously  anticipated, then it may deem a more accommodative stance of policy to be  appropriate and ease policy 25 basis points, as in Alternative B.  The real federal funds rate is nearly half a percentage point above its downwardly revised Greenbook- consistent equilibrium value and a touch above the upper end of the range of model- based estimates (Chart 5), suggesting that a reduction in the target funds rate may be required to keep output near its potential.

(18) After noting that “economic growth is slowing” and that “strains in  financial markets have increased,” the statement for Alternative B suggests that the 25 basis point reduction in the target funds rate, together with the two previous policy actions, is likely to help promote moderate growth over time.

As a result, short-term interest rates would likely  rise modestly in response to Alternative B.  However, judging from the Desk’s survey of dealers, the statement under Alternative B would likely be read as broadly consistent with market expectations for additional policy easing.

(20) If the Committee views the renewed deterioration in financial markets and  the sharper contraction in the housing sector as presenting a particularly severe threat  to the economic expansion, it might want to lower the target funds rate 50 basis  points, as in Alternative A.  A 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate would put the real funds rate close to the Greenbook-consistent measure of its equilibrium value (Chart 5) and thus, under the baseline projection, would be consistent with output returning to its potential in the medium term.

The draft statement for Alternative A begins with a reference to the further intensification of the housing correction and recent weakening in business and consumer expenditures, and it also mentions increased strains in financial markets.

It  then notes that the outlook for economic growth has weakened somewhat and, unlike  Alternative B, adds that the downside risks to growth have increased.

But if the Committee  believes that, even after such a move, recent developments in financial markets have  increased the uncertainty around the outlook for growth and inflation to such an  extent that an assessment is not meaningful, it may wish instead to employ the risk  assessment language used in Alternative B. (22) Investors attach significant odds to both a 50 basis point easing and a 25 basis point reduction in the target funds rate at this meeting, and so the larger move would push very short-term interest rates lower.

economy (23) If the Committee judges that the current stance of policy is likely to foster  sustainable growth and acceptable inflation over time, then it might be inclined to  choose Alternative C.  Members might read the incoming macroeconomic data as broadly consistent with the outlook underlying its October policy decision, including the expectation for a period of relatively slow growth late this year and early next year.

The proposed statement for Alternative C acknowledges that economic growth appears to be slowing but indicates explicitly that the softening is broadly in line with what the Committee had anticipated.

