Chart 7 The Policy Outlook in an Uncertain Environment 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Percent Note: Appendix B provides background information regarding the specification of each rule and the methodology used in constructing confidence intervals and near-term prescriptions.  FRB/US Model Simulations of Estimated Outcome-Based Rule Current Bluebook      Previous Bluebook 70 Percent confidence interval 90 Percent confidence interval Greenbook assumption 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Percent Information from Financial Markets Expectations from forward contracts      Previous Bluebook 70 Percent confidence interval      Previous Bluebook 90 Percent confidence interval      Previous Bluebook Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules 2007Q3 2007Q4 2007Q3 2007Q4 2007Q3 2007Q4 1½ Percent Inflation Objective 2 Percent Inflation Objective                           Taylor (1993) rule 4.3 4.2  4.1 4.0       Previous Bluebook 4.5 4.5  4.2 4.2 Taylor (1999) rule 4.6 4.3  4.3 4.1       Previous Bluebook 4.7 4.7  4.5 4.4 Taylor (1999) rule with higher r* 5.3 5.1  5.1 4.8       Previous Bluebook 5.5 5.4  5.2 5.2 First-difference rule 5.2 5.1  5.0 4.6       Previous Bluebook 5.4 5.5  5.1 5.0                                                                          Estimated outcome-based rule  5.2 4.9                                                   Estimated forecast-based rule  5.2 4.8                                                   Greenbook assumption  5.2 4.9                                                   Market expectations  5.2 4.7                          Table 1: Alternative Language for the September 2007 FOMC Announcement                    Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D Policy Decision 1.

Alternative A would characterize the downside risks to growth as outweighing upside risks to inflation, while Alternative B would not provide an assessment of the overall balance of risks.  Under Alternative C, the policy rate would be lowered 25 basis points to 5 percent, and the statement would indicate that the downside risks to economic growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation.  Alternative D would leave the target rate unchanged at 5¼ percent and report that the risks to growth and inflation are roughly balanced.

As for the rationale portion of the statement,  Alternatives A, B, and C substantially modify the August 7 assessment of the outlook for growth and of the risks around that outlook in light of credit and housing market developments, using some of the wording from the August 17 statement.

In contrast,  Alternative D recognizes the deterioration in financial conditions but repeats the judgment that moderate growth is likely over coming quarters.

In Alternative D, the inflation assessment is unchanged from the August 7 statement.

With such an outlook, and with inflation data  continuing to be benign, members might see it as appropriate to counter the effect of  tighter financial conditions by easing policy by 50 basis points at this meeting, as in  Alternative B.  If members judge that evolving circumstances will likely warrant easing policy by 50 basis points or more over the next several months, as in the staff forecast, then they might think it prudent to implement a half-percentage-point cut at this meeting.

The draft language of Alternative B repeats the observation from the August 7 FOMC statement that economic growth was moderate in the first half of the year.

Alternative B refrains from making any explicit characterization of the balance of risks, stating that “The Committee will continue to closely follow timely indicators of economic prospects and will act as needed” to attain its dual objectives.

If members find Alternative B attractive, but wish to adopt an explicit statement of balanced risks, then they might insert the sentence “After today’s action, the Committee judges that the downside risks to economic growth are now roughly balanced by the upside risks to inflation” at the start of the assessment of risk paragraph.

With  Alternative B putting 50 basis points of easing in place and suggesting at least some possibility of further rate cuts, this alternative would likely prompt a modest decline in short-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar might edge lower.

(23) If members are particularly pessimistic about the growth outlook, or see  the downside risks as especially large, then they may prefer to both ease 50 basis  points and explicitly point to downside risks in order to maximize the scope for  further near-term policy action, as envisioned in Alternative A.  Members might view the current configuration of asset prices and credit spreads as possibly presaging a sharp slowdown in growth or even a recession.

The draft statement for Alternative A is similar to that for Alternative B, but with four main differences.

Finally, the draft for Alternative A is explicit that the downside risks to growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation.

(25) A 50 basis point rate cut and the adoption of the statement language in  Alternative A would cause short-term interest rates to decline appreciably, as investors would be somewhat surprised by the magnitude of the policy action and would also infer that policy probably would be eased further.

As with Alternative B, the effect on equity, credit and term funding markets is ambiguous, but the negative growth outlook in this alternative might well spook investors and cause stock prices to fall and risk spreads to rise.

If the  Committee finds the staff forecast to be both plausible and likely to be the best  attainable outcome under the current difficult circumstances, then it may choose to  ease policy 25 basis points at this meeting and issue a statement pointing to downside  risks to the outlook, as in Alternative C.  Members may judge that the growth outlook has deteriorated, but might not be convinced that the downside risks are sufficient to justify a 50 basis point easing at this meeting.

In the draft statement accompanying Alternative C, the assessment of the outlook for growth and inflation would be identical to that in Alternative B, but the balance of risks would point to the downside.

(28) With investors placing considerable weight on a 50 basis point cut at this  meeting, the adoption of Alternative C would probably cause short-term interest rates to rise somewhat, even though the downside balance of risks would suggest that further easing could well be forthcoming.

An unchanged stance of policy, coupled with an assessment that the risks  have moved into balance, as envisioned in Alternative D, would allow the Committee more time to gauge the need for policy adjustments while leaving the flexibility for policy to be eased at the next meeting, if such a move appears necessary at that time.

The draft statement accompanying Alternative D retains the observation that economic growth was moderate during the first half of the year.

(31) Although investors do not completely rule out an unchanged target funds  rate at this meeting, the adoption of Alternative D would come as a considerable surprise.

