Under Alternative A, the Committee would lower the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 5 percent.

Alternative B would leave the target for the federal funds rate unchanged.

Under  Alternative C, the Committee would tighten policy 25 basis points, bringing the target to 5½ percent.  The statement associated with Alternative A mentions factors that suggest upside risks to inflation and retains the phrase “some inflation risks remain;” it also mentions factors that suggest downside risks to growth and offers an explicit assessment that the risks to growth are tilted to the downside.

Alternative B, too, notes factors that suggest downside risks to growth as well as factors that suggest upside risks to inflation, but states explicitly that the risk that inflation will fail to moderate remains the Committee’s principal concern.  Alternative B also adopts more symmetric language regarding future policy adjustments.  Language for Alternative C not only states that the risk that inflation will fail to moderate remains the Committee’s predominant concern, it does not mention downside risks to growth and retains directional language referring to “the extent and timing of any additional firming.

With the  report on consumer prices in February to be released on Friday, after the Bluebook  closes, the rationale portion of Alternative B includes language in brackets that may be appropriate if inflation is disappointingly high.

Moreover, the current target for the funds rate  is very close to prescriptions for near-term policy from the optimal policy path  Table 1: Alternative Language for the March 2007 FOMC Announcement  January FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

If the  Committee sees the combination of gradual convergence to potential output and a  2 percent inflation rate by the end of 2008 as a reasonable and desirable outcome,  given current conditions, it might favor no change in policy, as in Alternative B.  In that regard, the central tendency of the forecasts submitted by the Governors and Reserve Bank presidents around the time of the January FOMC meeting suggested that the Committee was more optimistic than the staff about potential output, perhaps implying that keeping the funds rate constant is likely to generate both brisker growth and a larger decline in core inflation than the staff projects.

The language associated with Alternative B could point to gains in personal income and consumer spending as helping to sustain output in the face of weakness in housing and business investment.

The assessment of risk language for Alternative B contains no explicit judgment about the balance of risks.

On balance, the language for Alternative B seems likely to elicit little reaction, but with markets apparently skittish, this judgment should be viewed as more tentative than usual.

If so, members might prefer the quarter-point policy easing in  Alternative A.  This alternative offers an explicit judgment that risks to growth would remain tilted to the downside even after this policy action, thereby conveying greater concern about those risks than Alternative B.

The rationale for Alternative A points to sluggish business investment and ongoing weakness in housing as likely to exert a drag on growth, thus supporting a judgment that risks to growth remain tilted to the downside even after a quarter- point rate cut.

By also pointing to remaining inflation risks and adopting a symmetric  characterization of possible future adjustments in the policy rate, the assessment of  risk in Alternative A is meant to convey that this policy action will not necessarily commence a sequence of rate cuts.

(22) Although investors apparently expect the Committee to begin easing by  mid-year, the immediate quarter-point rate cut envisioned in Alternative A would be a considerable surprise and likely would lead to a significant easing of financial conditions.

But markets might read an announcement  along the lines of Alternative A as an indication that the Committee is willing to forego a medium-term moderation in inflation in order to sustain economic growth.

Especially if Friday’s inflation report proves markedly  higher than expected, the Committee may be less confident than the staff that core  inflation will decline from its uncomfortably high level with no further increase in the  federal funds rate, inclining members toward the quarter-point policy firming of  Alternative C.  A judgment that tighter policy is appropriate might be buttressed by concerns about the extent to which the labor market currently is stretched thin and the slow pace at which those pressures lessen in the staff forecast.

The rationale for Alternative C could indicate the Committee’s fundamentally unchanged outlook for growth by stating that the economy “appears to be expanding at a moderate pace and likely will continue to do so in coming quarters, supported by solid growth in consumer spending” without mentioning areas of weakness.

A decision to adopt Alternative C would come as a complete surprise to the financial markets, likely leading to a sharp upward revision of investors’ expectations for the federal funds rate over the next few quarters and thus an increase in short- term interest rates.

