Under Alternatives A  and B, the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting,   Alternative C it would tighten policy by 25 basis points.

In Alternatives B and C, the accompanying statement would continue to indicate that inflation is the predominant risk, suggesting that additional firming is still more likely than policy easing in the near term.

If  so, the Committee may be attracted to Alternative B, under which the federal funds rate would remain unchanged at 5¼ percent and the statement would continue to highlight concern about inflation.

Although the Committee may view inflation running at or above  Table 1: Alternative Language for the January FOMC Announcement  December FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

Consequently, implementation of Alternative B is unlikely to elicit significant market reaction.

(18) In light of the improvement in the outlook for inflation during the  intermeeting period and the persistence of downside risks arising from the substantial  cooling of the housing market, the Committee may now judge that the risks to the  attainment of its dual objectives are roughly balanced, as in Alternative A.  Removing the bias toward further tightening would leave the Committee better positioned to respond to the adverse effects of a possible further deterioration in residential construction or spillovers to consumer spending, along the lines of the “more extensive housing correction” alternative Greenbook scenario.

The rationale portion of Alternative A reflects the improved readings on economic growth but notes that the substantial cooling of the housing market remains a drag on the expansion.

(20) Shorter-term interest rates would likely fall in response to an announcement   Alternative A, and longer-term yields might follow suit.

If so, the Committee might judge that an additional 25 basis point increase   Alternative C, is warranted.

Under Alternative C, the paragraph on economic activity in the rationale section notes the improvement in economic growth and observes that the housing market may be stabilizing.

The choice of Alternative C would stun market participants, leading to an upward revision of their short-term outlook for the path of policy and a significant rise in short- and intermediate-term interest rates.

