Under Alternative B, the target federal funds rate would be maintained at 2 percent at this meeting, while Alternative C involves a 25 basis point tightening to 2¼ percent.

Alternative B leaves the stance of policy unchanged, but the statement places somewhat greater emphasis on inflation risks than the Committee’s statement in June.  Alternative C, after noting the possibility that inflation may not moderate as the Committee anticipates, states that the policy action was intended to better balance the risks to its goals.

(27) If the Committee views the staff forecast, which is conditioned on an  unchanged target federal funds rate through the end of the year, as reasonable and  sees the outcome as acceptable in the circumstances, it may wish to leave the policy  rate unchanged at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  The Committee, like the staff, may expect financial conditions and the sharp contraction in the housing market to exert considerable restraint on aggregate spending over the next year or so, and thus may view a relatively low real federal funds rate as necessary to promote moderate economic growth.

But, with  oil prices having stepped back down in recent weeks and with economic slack likely to  Table 1: Alternative Language for the August 2008 FOMC Announcement  June FOMC Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

In the statement under Alternative B, most of the discussion of the outlook for growth is little changed from June.

The statement under Alternative B would differ from the one in June by moving the sentence stating that past policy easing and Federal Reserve liquidity facilities should “promote moderate economic growth” from the assessment of risks paragraph to the economic rationale paragraph.

As a result, the language envisioned under Alternative B might lead investors to conclude that policy tightening may commence sooner than currently thought.

(30) If the Committee sees the economy as growing more robustly than the staff  does and has fairly high confidence in the resilience of financial markets, it may prefer  to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting as in Alternative C.  Members may view the current stance of policy as too accommodative, providing substantial impetus to aggregate demand at a time when the economy apparently retains an unexpected degree of momentum and when inflation expectations may be less tightly moored than previously.

(31) The discussion of economic activity in the statement proposed in  Alternative C is similar to that in Alternative B.

However, unlike Alternative B, Alternative C cites the “accommodative stance of monetary policy” rather than just the past policy easings as a factor that should support growth in the future.  The inflation paragraph in Alternative C, like that in Alternative B, notes that “inflation has been high.

Accordingly, they would be quite surprised by the adoption of  Alternative C.  The expected trajectory for the federal funds rate would be marked up, perhaps substantially.

