Alternative C includes a 25 basis point tightening.

Apart from these changes,  Alternative B is little different from the Committee’s statement in August.

Alternative A indicates greater confidence that inflation will moderate and suggests that downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation are now roughly balanced.

(23) If the Committee views the staff forecast, which is conditioned on  unchanged policy through the middle of next year, as reasonable and acceptable in the  circumstances and sees no compelling reason to change the statement materially, it  may wish to leave the policy rate unchanged and issue a statement along the lines of  that in Alternative B.  Although inflation is currently high, the Committee may expect inflation to decline to acceptable levels given the recent appreciation of the dollar, the decline in oil prices, and the outlook for persistent economic slack.

Indeed, the optimal policy  simulations based on a 1½ percent inflation goal has the target federal funds rate just   Table 1: Alternative Language for the September 2008 FOMC Announcement  August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

In the statement under Alternative B, the rationale begins by noting that “Incoming information suggests that growth in economic activity has slowed in recent months,” which is changed from “Economic activity expanded in the second quarter” to shift the discussion to the current quarter and reflect the significant, albeit expected, deceleration that appears to be under way.

Investors read the statement released in August as consistent  with an outlook for unchanged policy, so Alternative B, which is very similar, would probably not lead them to revise their views.

In sum, short- and longer-term interest rates, equity  prices, and the exchange value of the dollar would probably be little changed in  response to an announcement along the lines of Alternative B. (26) If the Committee both thinks that it is important that it be seen to be responding to the continued high levels of inflation and has fairly high confidence in the resilience of financial markets and economic activity, it may prefer to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting as in Alternative C.

(27) The discussion of economic activity in the statement proposed in  Alternative C is similar to that in Alternative B.

The inflation paragraph in Alternative C indicates that “inflation has remained high.

(28) Market participants are very confident in their outlook for no change in  policy at this meeting and would be quite surprised by the adoption of Alternative C. The expected trajectory of the federal funds rate for the next several months would likely be marked up at least 25 basis points, and might move up further if investors thought the Committee was more likely to raise rates going forward.

(29) If the Committee sees recent developments as pointing to a weaker  economic outlook and less pronounced inflation pressures, members may instead be  attracted to the statement language of Alternative A.  The substantial decline in energy prices in recent months, if not reversed, will pull down top-line inflation, which may prevent elevated inflation rates from becoming embedded in expectations.

The statement under Alternative A differs from that under Alternative B only in its discussion of the inflation outlook and the assessment of risks.

Despite the changes in the statement language in Alternative A, the market reaction may not be very large.

