Under Alternative A, the Committee would reduce the federal funds rate target by 25 basis points to 1¾ percent, and its statement would suggest that the further easing of policy was motivated by a relatively downbeat assessment of the growth outlook.  Under Alternative B, the target would be maintained at 2 percent, but the statement would point both to somewhat diminished downside risks to growth and increased upside risks to inflation. Alternative C envisions a 25 basis points tightening to 2¼ percent; its statement expresses continued concern about inflation, but does not strongly suggest that further policy firming is in train.

(23) If the Committee reads the incoming information as pointing to growth  risks that are a bit less skewed to the downside than in April and inflation risks that  are a bit more tilted toward the upside, then it may wish to couple an unchanged  stance of policy at this meeting with the statement proposed for Alternative B.  In Table 1: Alternative Language for the June 2008 FOMC Announcement April FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(24) The discussion of the growth outlook in the statement proposed for  Alternative B replaces the assessment in the April FOMC statement that economic growth remains weak by noting instead that overall economic activity continues to expand, and the firming in consumer spending data is cited as providing some support to aggregate demand.

The  combination of an unchanged funds rate and the slight implicit tilt towards upside  risks envisioned under Alternative B seems broadly consistent with these expectations, though it may cause investors to push back their expectations for the onset of policy tightening a bit.

(26) If, in view of recent developments, the Committee judges that the  growth outlook has improved appreciably or that inflationary pressures have risen  significantly, then it may prefer to tighten policy by 25 basis points at this meeting,  as in Alternative C.  Also, members may see prompter firming than assumed in the Greenbook as appropriate if they are more optimistic than the staff about growth prospects in the second half of the year―as they were in their economic projections in April.

(27) The discussion of economic activity in the proposed statement for  Alternative C is identical to that in Alternative B.

However, the inflation paragraph in Alternative C points to the elevated level of headline inflation and acknowledges that some indicators of inflation expectations have increased further―referring to the increase in short-term inflation compensation and in some short-term survey measures of inflation expectations over the intermeeting period.

The final paragraph of Alternative C has no balance of risks assessment, but simply notes that “future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth.

(28) Investors place only small odds on a rate hike at this meeting, and thus  they would be surprised by the adoption of Alternative C.  The expected path of policy over coming quarters would likely be marked up somewhat, notwithstanding the relatively pessimistic growth paragraph and the absence of any explicit mention of inflation risks.

(29) If the Committee remains particularly worried about downside risks to  the outlook for economic activity, then it may prefer to ease policy by another  quarter point at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  The unemployment rate has increased sharply in recent months; in the past, such sharp increases have always been accompanied by recessions.

(30) The discussion of recent developments and the outlook for economic  activity and inflation in the draft statement accompanying Alternative A is not much changed from the April FOMC statement.

Alternative A gives no explicit assessment of the risks to either growth or inflation, but simply repeats the risk assessment paragraph from the previous statement, pointing to liquidity measures and the cumulative easing of policy as providing support to growth.

(31) With investors expecting the funds rate to be increased this year, the   Alternative A would surprise financial markets.

