Under Alternative A  the federal funds rate target is cut 50 basis points to 1 percent; under Alternative B the federal funds rate target is cut 25 basis points to 1¼ percent; and under Alternative C the federal funds rate target is left unchanged at 1½ percent.

Alternatives B and C note the plethora of recent policy actions around the world, suggesting that these actions will help to promote a return to moderate economic growth; Alternative A includes no language to soften its negative view of the outlook for economic activity.  With respect to inflation, Alternatives A and B express confidence that inflation will moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent with price stability, whereas Alternative C retains the phrasing from the statement following the intermeeting cut on October 8, which acknowledges reduced upside risks to inflation without commenting on its likely future path.

(34) If the Committee believes that further monetary policy accommodation is  appropriate given the deterioration in the economic outlook, but wishes to adjust  policy relatively gradually, it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 25 basis  points at this meeting as in Alternative B.  Even if members have not revised down their forecast for economic activity as much as the staff, they may still believe that easing is called for.

At the same time, members may be less pessimistic about  Table 1: Alternative Language for the October 29 FOMC Announcement   October 8 Statement Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative B would begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity, pointing specifically to the softening in consumer spending.

Interpretation of Price Stability Language.”)  The change in wording, from reduced  upside risks in the October 8 statement to an expected moderation of inflation in the  language for Alternative B, suggests that Committee members have become much more confident that inflation will decline.

As a result, our best estimate is that adoption of  Alternative B would have only small effects on prices of financial assets.

(37)  If the Committee, like the staff, has marked down significantly its  assessment of economic prospects and now sees an immediate and substantial policy  response as appropriate, it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 50 basis  points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Recent economic data releases have been almost all weaker than anticipated, with consumer outlays down sharply.

The rationale section of the statement for Alternative A highlights the recent deterioration in financial and economic conditions, with specific references to weak consumer spending and industrial production and to the slowdown in foreign economic growth.  As under Alternative B, the section also points out the likely future spending restraint implied by the further tightening of financial conditions.

The  discussion of inflation would be identical to that under Alternative B, noting the reasons to expect a moderation of inflation to levels consistent with price stability.

(40) If the Committee believes that the economic outlook has not deteriorated as  much as in the staff forecast or that there is still a significant risk that inflation will not  moderate as expected, it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in  Alternative C.  Although recent readings on real activity have been very weak, a wide range of monetary and other policy measures have been implemented recently, and members may feel that a gradual improvement of financial conditions could be in train.

(41) The first part of the rationale portion of the statement associated with  Alternative C would acknowledge the recent deterioration in economic and financial conditions.

Finally, the risk assessment under Alternative C begins by stating that the balance of risks has shifted toward downside risks to growth.

(42) Given the high odds embedded in financial market prices of at least a 25  basis point cut at this meeting, a decision to adopt Alternative C would surprise market participants, leading to an appreciable upward revision of their short-term outlook for the path of policy and probably an increase in short-and intermediate- term interest rates.

