Under Alternative A, the Committee would reduce the target federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1¾ percent, under Alternative B the federal funds rate target would be cut by 25 basis points to 2 percent, and under Alternative C the Committee would maintain the federal funds rate target at 2¼ percent.

In contrast to the FOMC statement in March, the risk  assessments in Alternatives A and B no longer emphasize the downside risks to growth and so convey a more neutral policy stance.  Alternative B indicates that the pace of interest rate reductions may need to slow in order for the Committee to assess better the effects of policy actions taken to date, whereas Alternative A reiterates that the Committee stands ready to act in a timely manner.

(23) If the Committee judges that the target funds rate is nearing a level that  would appropriately balance the risks to its dual objectives of fostering maximum  employment and price stability, it may wish to reduce the target federal funds rate  by 25 basis points, as in Alternative B, a relatively modest action compared with those taken over the past several months.

Table 1: Alternative Language for the April 2008 FOMC Announcement  March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Policy Decision 1.

(24) The discussion of the outlook for economic activity and inflation in the  proposed statement accompanying Alternative B is little changed from the March FOMC statement.

Alternative B would likely be viewed by market participants as being broadly consistent with their expectations.

Taken at face value, these financial market quotes suggest that  the reaction of financial asset prices to Alternative B is likely to be relatively muted.

However, respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers expected a  notably lower path for the federal funds rate than that implied by futures prices,  and this divergence makes the reaction to Alternative B somewhat harder to predict.

(26) If the Committee believes that the substantial easing of monetary  policy to date together with the fiscal stimulus package is likely to provide  considerable support to economic activity and is concerned that inflation might  not moderate at an acceptable pace, it may prefer to keep rates unchanged at this  meeting, as in Alternative C.  With the real federal funds rate close to historically low levels, the Committee may anticipate that the economy will avoid a pronounced downturn.

(27) The discussion of economic activity in the proposed statement for  Alternative C is identical to that in the statement suggested for Alternative B.

And, as in Alternative B, the draft inflation paragraph continues to indicate that inflation seems likely to moderate in coming quarters.

Alternative C would come as a surprise to market participants, who appear fairly confident that the funds rate target will be cut by at least 25 basis points at this meeting.

(29) In contrast, if the Committee continues to view the outlook for  economic activity as unacceptably weak, it may prefer to reduce the target funds  rate by 50 basis points at this meeting, as proposed in Alternative A.  The Committee might judge that financial headwinds could continue to exert a significant drag on economic growth through much of next year and thus policy may eventually have to be eased by more than envisaged by the staff, a possibility explored in the “Greater Financial Stress” scenario in the Greenbook.

(30) The discussion of the outlook for economic activity and inflation in the  draft statement accompanying Alternative A is identical to that proposed for Alternative B.  The draft risk assessment also follows Alternative B in omitting the judgment from the March FOMC statement that “downside risks to growth remain,” and so indicates that policy has moved to a more neutral stance.

(31) With investors attaching little weight to the possibility of a 50 basis point  cut in the target funds rate at this meeting, Alternative A would come as a considerable surprise to financial markets.

