Alternative A cuts the federal funds rate target by 75 basis points to 2¾ percent, Alternative B cuts the target 50 basis points to 3 percent, Alternative C cuts the target 25 basis points to 3¼ percent, and Alternative D leaves the target unchanged at 3½ percent.

All four alternatives note that the current stance of policy should help promote  moderate growth over time; Alternatives A and B also indicate that these policy actions should help mitigate the risks to economic activity.  Alternative A states that downside risks “may well remain” and that incoming information will determine “whether further action is needed to address those risks.   Alternative B states that “downside risks to growth remain” whereas Alternatives C and D reiterate the January 22 assessment that “appreciable” downside risks remain; all three of these alternatives indicate—as in the January 22 statement—that policymakers “will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks.

(17) If incoming information in recent weeks has led policymakers to mark  down their assessment of the modal outlook for aggregate demand relative to  aggregate supply by an amount similar to that of the staff, then the Committee may  prefer to reduce the target funds rate by 50 basis points at this meeting, as in  Table 1: Alternative Language for the January 30, 2008 FOMC Announcement  Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D Policy Decision 1.

Alternative B.  The staff forecast’s assumes that the funds rate is cut to 3 percent at this meeting and then maintained at that rate through 2009; with that stance of policy, the unemployment rate remains about ½ percentage point above the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU while core inflation edges just below 2 percent at the end of next year.

The statement under Alternative B largely reiterates the rationale portion of the January 22 statement, including references to “considerable stress” in financial markets, tightening of credit conditions, deepening of the housing contraction, and some softening of labor markets, as well as restating the Committee’s assessment of the prospects for inflation.

Alternative B would likely be seen by market participants as broadly consistent with their current expectations for the funds rate, because a 50 basis point easing of the target funds rate at this meeting appears to be their modal expectation and because the risk assessment would probably be read as indicating a substantial probability of further easing.

(20) If policymakers would prefer to move more aggressively to promote growth  and mitigate downside risks, then they might choose to reduce the funds rate target   by 75 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Even after the funds rate cut on January 22, the real federal funds rate exceeds the Greenbook-consistent estimate of short-run r* by about 60 basis points; thus, this degree of easing would be desirable if policymakers share the staff’s outlook but would prefer to bring the unemployment rate back to the NAIRU more quickly than in that outlook, an approach that might leave inflation close to 2 percent at the end of the decade.

The first portion of the rationale for Alternative A is identical to that of Alternative B, but this alternative elaborates further about the prospects for inflation, pointing out that the projected moderation of inflation reflects “well-anchored inflation expectations, a projected leveling out of energy prices, and easing pressures on resource utilization,” and noting that “further increases in energy and commodity prices, as well as other factors, could put upward pressure on inflation.

As in Alternative B, the risk assessment states that the stance of policy should help promote moderate growth and mitigate the downside risks to economic activity.

(23) If members are concerned that the stance of policy remains somewhat  restrictive but would prefer a more incremental approach in responding to incoming  information, then the Committee could choose to reduce the funds rate target by   25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  This alternative might be viewed as most consistent with the typical pattern of gradual funds rate adjustment in response to changes in resource utilization and core inflation.

The first portion of the rationale for Alternative C is identical to that of Alternatives A and B, but this alternative notes that upward pressure on inflation could result from “further increases in energy, commodity, and other import prices.

Thus, Alternative C would probably induce a rise in short- term interest rates; however, intermediate-term yields might rise less or perhaps even decline if investors concluded that a sluggish near-term pace of policy adjustment implied that even more easing would be needed down the road.

(26) In view of policy actions to date, policymakers might prefer to wait   for additional economic and financial information before taking any further policy   action, as in Alternative D.  Some policymakers may judge that the current softness in the economy is likely to be transitory and that ongoing financial developments are likely to have less effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff and other forecasters.

The statement under Alternative D reiterates several elements of the rationale portion of the January 22 statement—including references to considerable stress in financial markets, tightened credit conditions, and deepening of the but does not cite recent developments in labor markets.

This alternative reaffirms the Committee’s expectation that inflation will moderate   in coming quarters, but adds the same explanation as in Alternative C regarding the factors that could put upward pressure on inflation.

Moreover, with no change   in policy and few economic data releases on the calendar between January 22   and January 30, the assessment of risks in Alternative D is identical to that of the January 22 statement.

Alternative D could surprise and confuse market participants, who are virtually certain that the funds rate target will be cut at least 25 basis points at this meeting.

