Alternative A cuts the federal funds rate target 75 basis points to 2¼ percent; Alternative B cuts the target 50 basis points to 2½ percent; Alternative C lowers the target 25 basis points to 2¾ percent; and Alternative D leaves the target federal funds rate at 3 percent.

Moreover, economic and financial news  Table 1: Alternative Language for the March 18, 2008 FOMC Announcement  Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D Policy Decision 1.

The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative B would begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity, pointing specifically to the softening in consumer expenditures and labor markets.

As a result, adoption of  Alternative B would likely cause near-term policy expectations to move somewhat higher.

(29) If the Committee judges that the news on economic activity and financial  markets since the January meeting has appreciably undermined the outlook for the  economy and is reasonably confident that inflation will moderate, it might prefer to move  more aggressively to promote growth and mitigate downside risks by cutting the funds rate  75 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Despite the five policy moves over the past six months, the substantial downward revision to the Greenbook forecast suggests that significantly more easing than previously foreseen may be required to stave off a severe deterioration in macroeconomic conditions.

(30) The two paragraphs in the rationale portion of the statement associated with  Alternative A are identical to those in Alternative B.

However, the assessment of risks  differs from that in Alternative B by noting explicitly the risks to both growth and inflation.  Alternative A also indicates that the Committee “judges that the downside risks to growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation” and that the FOMC is prepared to act in a timely manner as needed to “promote sustainable economic growth and price stability.

(31) With market participants putting significant odds on both 50 basis point and 75  basis point cuts at this meeting, selection of Alternative A would likely leave short- and intermediate-term interest rates a little lower.

(32) If the Committee believes that the economic outlook has weakened but is  concerned that aggressive further policy easing amid unfavorable inflation readings could  increase the likelihood of a rise in longer-term inflation expectations, it may wish to lower  the funds rate target by just 25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  In particular, this alternative might be favored if the factors underlying the recent increase in inflation were viewed as likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff’s projection.

The statement accompanying Alternative C would explicitly acknowledge that the upside risks to inflation have increased by pointing to recent unfavorable readings on inflation and by emphasizing the factors that could potentially exert upward pressure on inflation going forward.  As under Alternative B, the statement would point out that members expect “inflation to moderate in coming quarters,” but would conclude that “the upside risks to the outlook for inflation have increased.

A decision to adopt Alternative C would come as a significant surprise to the financial markets.

(35) If the Committee believes that economic growth is likely to resume an  acceptable pace before long and that inflation is on a higher trajectory than in the  Greenbook, it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in  Alternative D.  Although measures of consumer and business sentiment have declined, the Committee might view the data on final demand as only a bit weaker than expected and judge that financial turmoil, while posing significant risks, is likely to have less of an effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff.

(36) The first paragraph of the rationale portion of the statement associated with  Alternative D would acknowledge that economic activity has been weak and that financial markets remain under considerable stress.

The risk assessment section in Alternative D would stress that the Committee “will act in a timely manner as needed to promote price stability and sustainable economic growth.

(37) Given the expectations embedded in financial market prices of further  substantial policy easing at this meeting, a decision to adopt Alternative D would stun market participants, leading to a sharp upward revision of their short-term outlook for the path of policy and a significant increase in short-term interest rates.

