Regarding the prospects for economic recovery, Alternative A indicates that in the absence of further monetary policy stimulus, “the sharp rise in some longer- term interest rates over recent months” could undermine the economic recovery.

Alternative B reiterates the language from the April FOMC statement indicating that the Committee anticipates that economic activity “is likely to remain weak for a time” but that the policies now in train, together with market forces, “will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of price stability.

These two alternatives are not specific about the likely timing of the recovery, whereas  Alternative C indicates that a gradual recovery “is expected to begin later this year.

In elaborating on this outlook, Alternatives   A and B make reference to “substantial resource slack here and abroad,” while  Alternative C does not refer to the degree of resource slack.

Following the language of the April statement, Alternative A indicates that the Committee still sees some downside risks to the inflation outlook, whereas Alternatives B and C do not comment on the risks to inflation.

Alternative A includes an option under which the Committee would specify that the funds rate will likely remain exceptionally low “at least through mid-2010.   Alternative C states that the funds rate is likely to remain at exceptionally low levels “until late this year.

Alternative A expands the total size of the LSAP program by specifying that the Federal Reserve will purchase up to $750 billion in Treasury securities and indicating that those purchases will be conducted through the end of this year.

Alternatives A and B indicate that any additional purchases beyond the announced amounts will be evaluated in view of “the necessity of assuring that policy accommodation can ultimately be withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time,” thereby underscoring the importance of the exit strategy in the Committee’s decision-making process.  In contrast, Alternative B´ does not include this additional phrase.  Alternative C indicates that the Committee expects that the pace of LSAPs “will taper off gradually by the end of this year” and hence that this program is unlikely to be expanded or prolonged.

Alternative B´ 1.

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B  If policymakers judge that the monetary policy stimulus already in train is likely   to foster economic and financial conditions that improve at an acceptable pace, then   the Committee could choose to reiterate its previous forward policy guidance and   to continue implementing the previously announced LSAPs while providing further  clarification of its strategy for these purchases, as in Alternative B.  The Committee’s modal outlook may be broadly similar to that of the Greenbook, in which this policy stance contributes to a gradual acceleration in economic activity and to an unemployment rate trajectory that peaks later this year and then moves lower next year.

Finally, policymakers may wish to underscore the importance of maintaining a viable  exit strategy by indicating that the Committee will take careful account of the need   for policy accommodation to be withdrawn “at the appropriate time” in evaluating  any securities purchases beyond the amounts that have already been announced.9  Financial markets are likely to react only modestly to an announcement like that  of Alternative B in which the Committee reiterates its forward policy guidance and maintains the LSAP program at the previously announced amounts.

Nonetheless, the market reaction to a statement like that of Alternative B might also depend on how investors interpret the new language describing the Committee’s evaluation of further adjustments to the LSAP program.

If members’ assessment of the current outlook and the appropriate stance of  policy matches that of Alternative B, but they see a significant risk that the associated statement could cause confusion on the part of financial market participants, then the Committee might wish to follow the language of the April FOMC statement .

The financial market reaction to the publication   of a statement like Alternative B´ would likely be muted, with little change in yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A  If policymakers judge that a protracted period of substantial resource slack  continues to pose downside risks to inflation and if they are concerned that the recent  increase in some longer-term interest rates could undermine the economic recovery,  then the Committee may wish to expand the total amount of purchases of Treasury  securities and to extend the timeframe for conducting those purchases, as in  Alternative A.  Even if participants generally agree with the contours of the staff’s modal outlook, they may not view that outcome as acceptable and may see compelling grounds for providing increased monetary policy stimulus to promote a more rapid pace of recovery and to help keep inflation from falling persistently below rates consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.

Since market participants reportedly see only small odds that the Committee   will announce an expansion of its securities purchases at this meeting, it is likely   that longer-term yields would fall substantially following the release of a statement   like that accompanying Alternative A.  Although considerable uncertainty surrounds any assessment of the effects of LSAPs on asset prices, recent experience suggests that an expansion of $450 billion in purchases of Treasury securities would induce a decline of about 20 to 45 basis points in Treasury yields and other longer-term rates immediately following the announcement.

next year, as in Alternative C.  Given the recent behavior of inflation expectations, the somewhat smaller margin of projected resource slack, and the rises in the prices of energy and other commodities, the Committee may now see the risks to the inflation outlook as roughly balanced, with significantly diminished odds of excessive disinflation.

An announcement like that of Alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to financial market participants and would likely lead many investors to expect a significantly less accommodative path of monetary policy than they had previously anticipated.

Thus, the publication of a  statement like Alternative C would likely push up short- and long-term yields and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, while equity prices would likely fall.

This baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in the Policy Alternatives section.

The second scenario is an expanded purchases scenario, which  corresponds to Alternative A in the Policy Alternatives section, where purchases of Treasury securities are increased by $450 billion to $750 billion, and the purchases continue through the end of this year.

