Under Alternative A, the Committee would expand its purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to as much as $750 billion and would lengthen the time period over which these purchases would take place to the end of the year.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would instead maintain the course of policy announced in March and not make any changes to the planned purchases of long-term assets.  Under Alternative B´, the Committee would also stay the course, but in the Committee’s statement the purchases would be translated into both an approximate dollar amount per month and an average monthly percentage growth rate of the System’s holdings of these assets through the end of the year.

Alternative B′ 1.

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B    If policymakers believe that the Committee has already put in train a substantial  amount of monetary stimulus and think that the Federal Reserve’s policies, coupled  with the effects of the fiscal stimulus approved by the Congress and the  implementation of the financial stability plan, will likely suffice to return the economy  reasonably promptly to a path of sustainable growth, they could decide to reaffirm the  course of policy announced in March, as in Alternative B.  Mortgage rates have declined substantially since the Committee first announced its intention of purchasing large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities.

The statement suggested for Alternative B begins by noting that recent information indicates that the economy has continued to contract and that, although the outlook has improved modestly, economic activity is likely to remain weak for a time.

If so, Committee members may want to adopt a slightly different   Alternative B´.

This statement is  identical to the one for Alternative B, except that it adds two sentences in the middle of the third paragraph to specify that the Committee expects that the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities will increase at an average pace of about $160 billion per month over the reminder of 2009, which would be equivalent to an average monthly growth rate of around 20 percent from the end of March through the end of the year.

Accordingly, the market reaction to the release of a statement  such as that suggested for Alternatives B or B term yields, stock prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar all should change little.

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A  If the Committee is concerned that the near-term outlook for economic activity  might be worse than that presented in the staff forecast and that the subsequent  recovery might be unduly sluggish, it may prefer to apply additional monetary  stimulus by expanding its purchases of long-term assets at this meeting, along the lines  of Alternative A.  The Committee may judge that the signs of economic and financial stabilization that were seen over the intermeeting period were quite tentative and that significant uncertainties remain as to the timing and extent of the economic recovery, perhaps along the lines of the “False Dawn” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.

The first paragraph of the statement that accompanies Alternative A is similar to the one for Alternative B, but its description of the economic outlook is more downbeat.

The rest of the statement  is identical to that for Alternative B, including language to communicate the possibility of future adjustments to the timing and overall amounts of purchases of long-term assets in light of the evolving economic outlook and financial market conditions, the maintenance of the current range for the federal funds target rate, the expectation that short-term rates will remain exceptionally low for an extended period, and the references to other liquidity programs and the Committee’s intention to monitor the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet carefully.

Since market participants reportedly see only small odds that the Committee will  announce a further expansion of its securities purchases at this meeting, it is likely that  asset prices would move substantially following the release of a statement like that  accompanying Alternative A.  Treasury and private yields dropped significantly on March 18 after the announcement that the Federal Reserve would purchase $300 billion of Treasury securities and an additional $850 billion in agency debt and mortgage-backed securities.

The baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in the Policy Alternatives section.

In the expanded purchases scenario, which corresponds to  Alternative A in the Policy Alternatives section, purchases of U.

