The draft statements for Alternatives A and B incorporate a new organizational structure in which the statement begins not by referring to the federal funds rate target but by characterizing the Committee’s outlook and then goes on to describe the Federal Reserve’s policy strategy.  The draft statement for Alternative C uses the same structure as in the January FOMC statement.

(40) All three alternatives maintain an unchanged target range of 0 to ¼ percent  for the federal funds rate and provide forward policy guidance; as in January,  Alternatives B and C indicate that the funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low “for some time” whereas Alternative A signals a somewhat longer duration by substituting the phrase “for an extended period.

In characterizing the outlook for economic activity, Alternatives A and B indicate that the economy is undergoing “a severe contraction” and that financial conditions “have generally worsened.

In contrast,  Alternative C characterizes the incoming information as indicating that economic 12 These alternatives do not include any expansion in Federal Reserve purchases of agency debt, because the benefits from further purchases of such securities seem limited.

Alternatives A and B indicate that inflation is likely to remain subdued in light of “the growing margin of economic slack here and abroad,” and both alternatives make note of the risk that inflation could remain persistently below rates consistent with the dual mandate.  As in January, Alternative C refers to last fall’s drop in energy and commodity prices and to “prospects for considerable economic slack” as factors explaining the outlook for inflation, which is expected to remain subdued “in coming quarters” before returning to rates consistent with the dual mandate; this alternative does not give an assessment of risks to the inflation outlook.

Alternative A indicates that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet will be expanded further this year by the purchase of $500 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and by the acquisition of an additional $500 billion of agency 1 trillion.

Alternative A indicates that the Federal Reserve’s balance  sheet will be expanded further this year by the purchase of $500 billion in longer-term  Treasury securities and by the acquisition of an additional $500 billion of agency  mortgage-backed securities (MBS), bringing total MBS purchases to $1 trillion.12   Alternative B expands agency MBS purchases by acquisition of Treasury notes or bonds; as in the January statement, this alternative indicates that the Committee is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities “if evolving circumstances indicate that such transactions would be particularly effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.   Under Alternative C, no new policy actions would be taken at this meeting; instead, as in January, this alternative states that the Federal Reserve stands ready to expand its purchases of agency debt and MBS and is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities in light of evolving circumstances.

The Case for Alternative B  (44) If policymakers judge that the economy is undergoing a severe economic  contraction and that the subsequent recovery is likely to be feeble, and if they believe  that a further increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would   provide additional monetary stimulus and thereby improve the economic outlook,   the Committee could decide at this meeting to expand its purchases of agency   MBS and to reiterate the possibility of purchasing longer-term Treasury securities  depending on evolving circumstances, as in Alternative B.  Incoming information over the intermeeting period may have led policymakers to mark down their projections for economic activity and inflation and hence to anticipate a deeper recession and a weaker recovery—perhaps lasting five years or more—in the absence of any additional policy stimulus.

The Case for Alternative A  (48) If policymakers judge that a substantially greater degree of monetary  stimulus is warranted to help promote a resumption of sustainable economic growth,  the Committee could decide at this meeting to initiate large-scale purchases of   $500 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and to expand purchases of   agency MBS, as in Alternative A.  Committee participants may concur that the Federal Reserve’s current liquidity and credit facilities are crucial for stabilizing the financial system and providing the prerequisites for economic recovery, but they may nonetheless view the monetary and fiscal policy measures currently in train as unlikely to foster an acceptably rapid pace for that recovery.

(51) In an environment of exceptionally high uncertainty, policymakers may   judge that Alternative A provides the most appropriate balance between downside risks to the economic outlook over the next several years and the risk that excessive expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could hamper the conduct of monetary policy at longer horizons.

The Case for Alternative C  (52) If policymakers anticipate a more robust economic recovery than in the  staff outlook and perceive that further expansion in the size of the Federal Reserve’s  balance sheet would be associated with substantial risks to the future conduct of  monetary policy, they may prefer not to initiate any new policy measures at this  meeting, as in Alternative C.  Committee participants may foresee that government actions to stabilize the financial system, together with the monetary and fiscal policies already in train, are likely to foster a stronger pace of economic activity later this year and in 2010, as in the Greenbook’s “Faster Recovery” scenario.

An Alternative Structure for the FOMC Statement   The draft statements for Alternatives A and B begin by characterizing the outlook for economic activity and inflation, and the draft statement for Alternative C starts by indicating the Committee’s decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate.

However, participants may instead prefer that   the FOMC statement begin by pointing to new policy measures that the Committee  has approved, as illustrated in Alternatives A' and B' below, or to reaffirm the existing policy strategy, as in Alternative C'.

The substance of these three alternatives is   Alternatives A, B, and C, respectively.

Alternative A' 1.

Alternative B' 1.

Alternative C' 1.

Directive Wording  Alternative A:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative B:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative C:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

