The description of the economic outlook in Alternative A highlights the weaker-than-expected incoming data, and Alternatives A and B note that global demand is slowing significantly.  Alternatives B and C state that the economic outlook “remains weak.   Alternative A announces either a Reserve’s commitment to purchase mortgage-backed securities or the establishment 250 billion of longer-term Treasury securities.

Alternative B states that the Committee is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities or to increase purchases of mortgage-backed securities, but makes no specific commitment on the timing or amount of such purchases.  Alternatives A and B state that the Committee will continue to “assess whether expansions of or modifications to lending facilities would serve to further support credit markets and economic activity.   Alternative C omits all mention of possible increases in open market purchases or liquidity programs other than the TALF.

(40) If the Committee agrees that current economic conditions are very weak but  suspects that there is a significant possibility that policy actions already announced or  likely to be adopted will have a larger effect on economic activity than is assumed in  the staff’s forecast, it may wish to choose Alternative B.  In many ways, the current circumstances are unprecedented, and we lack reliable metrics for gauging the effectiveness of nontraditional policies.

Alternative B states that additional actions will be taken as needed, and so would allow the Committee to introduce new policies quickly if it concluded that they were appropriate.

(41) If the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that policies already  announced or expected will not suffice to prevent considerable economic slack and a  heightened risk of deflation, and if it believes that additional policy measures could  help to improve the economic outlook, it may opt for Alternative A.  The output gap in the Greenbook remains larger than 5 percent over the next two years and core inflation falls below 1 percent, which is lower than the rates of inflation that most FOMC participants would view as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.

(42) If the Committee has a relatively optimistic view of the underlying  economic situation and outlook, it may be inclined to favor Alternative C.  Members may anticipate a more rapid unwinding of financial strains than assumed by the staff, leading to a more pronounced rebound in activity (as in the “Faster Recovery” .

Finally, as in  Alternative B, the Committee may be concerned that exiting from the existing facilities could prove challenging and prefer not to take the risk of adding to such difficulties.

The language in Alternative C makes clear that existing Federal Reserve policies and programs are viewed by the Committee as helpful, but it does not hint at any expansion of existing programs or the introduction of new programs.

Although  market expectations for the statement overall are difficult to judge, the message of  Alternative B seems most consistent with current market views.

Directive Wording  Alternative A1:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative A2:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternatives B and C:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

