The drafts offer paragraphs on reinvestment strategy and in Alternative C, on asset sales in its statement.

The wording of Alternative A is more tentative than that of Alternative B. Alternative C offers the most upbeat summary of current conditions by omitting the list of factors that are restraining household spending, a list that Alternatives A and B carry over from the March statement.

Alternative B repeats the words of the March statement:  “With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.

Alternative C highlights recent increases in energy prices but notes that inflation has remained subdued.

Alternative A observes that longer-term inflation expectations have been stable but also notes that recent data suggest inflation has been trending down in response to substantial resource slack; moreover, Alternative A indicates that the Committee expects inflation to remain “quite subdued.

Alternative B says, as in recent FOMC statements, that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions “are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.

Alternative C modifies the final words to “for some time,” signaling an earlier increase in the funds rate.  Alternative A sharpens the conditionality in the extended period language and suggests that an increase in the federal funds rate is likely to come later than markets now expect.

After observing that inflation has been trending down in  response to substantial slack, Alternative A says:  “To promote a more robust economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee anticipates maintaining the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent for an extended period—until economic conditions such as appreciably higher rates of resource utilization, increasing inflation pressures, or rising inflation expectations warrant a less accommodative monetary policy.

The fourth paragraph of Alternative A brackets) illustrates language that the Committee might add to its statement if it wished to announce a more permanent adoption of that approach.

The fourth  paragraph of Alternative B roll over maturing Treasuries or stopping.

Or they might prefer to indicate such a decision in the directive fourth paragraph of Alternative C Committee could use to announce that it will no longer roll over maturing Treasuries and that—to further reduce the size of the balance sheet and return it to a more normal composition—the Committee anticipates that it will soon begin gradual sales of agency debt and MBS.

THE  CASE  FOR  ALTERNATIVE  B   If policymakers expect the pace of economic recovery to be moderate and  inflation to be subdued for some time, as they did at the time of the Committee’s  March meeting, and if they still judge that the potential benefits of further purchases  of longer-term assets would not outweigh the costs, then they might choose to  maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate and reiterate that economic  conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for  an extended period, as in Alternative B. FOMC participants may see economic and financial developments during the intermeeting period as broadly consistent with their assessments of the outlook at the time of the March meeting; they, like the staff, may have made only modest revisions to their forecasts for economic activity and inflation.

Alternative B offers a choice between the two approaches.

As noted earlier, the Committee might conclude  that the statement should contain neither version of the fourth paragraph of  alternative B; policymakers may judge it better to communicate reinvestment policy in the minutes or in the directive.

Language along the lines of that proposed in Alternative B—if it did not include an announcement that the Committee will stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities—probably would result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

THE  CASE  FOR  ALTERNATIVE  C   If policymakers are confident that a sustainable economic recovery is now   under way and see substantial upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook—or   significant risks that financial imbalances could emerge—in the absence of prompt  monetary policy adjustments, then they might choose to issue a statement such as that  proposed in Alternative C. In particular, if participants anticipate that it might well be appropriate to begin removing policy accommodation this summer, they may prefer to modify the forward guidance now to indicate that exceptionally low levels of the funds rate are likely to be warranted “for some time” rather than “for an extended period.

If so, they may choose to announce those decisions by issuing a statement like that in Alternative C. The adoption of Alternative C would surprise financial market participants, who appear to expect only small changes in the statement at this meeting, in part because the minutes of the FOMC’s March meeting emphasized the conditionality and flexibility of the existing language and noted that it would not limit the Committee’s ability to commence monetary policy tightening promptly if necessary.

Alternative C would surprise investors on several fronts.

Investors likely would read the statement of Alternative C as signaling earlier policy firming than they had previously anticipated and hence short-term interest rates would increase.

If so, policymakers may want to issue a  statement like that in Alternative A in an effort to bring market expectations for the federal funds rate into closer alignment with their own.

If policymakers see a significant risk   of such outcomes, they may judge it appropriate to signal, as in Alternative A, that monetary policy will remain unusually accommodative until measures of resource utilization increase appreciably or inflation pressures rise.

A statement like Alternative A—with or without paragraph 4 surprise to financial market participants, who appear to anticipate only minor updating of the language.

The  directive for Alternative C directs the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasury and agency debt as well as payments on MBS.  Alternative C does not direct the Desk to begin asset sales during the intermeeting period, so the directive for Alternative C does not mention asset sales.

